@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2095030?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
Because of the quality and the quantity of
time spent in the dwelling (Merton, 1951;
Chapin, 1974), the home has been de-
scribed as a ‘‘primary environment’’
where intimate and important actions may
be thwarted when density is too high
(Stokols, 1976). High density in the home
supposedly increases opportunities for
disagreements, aggression, frustration,
and general dissatisfaction among house-
hold members. Several recent researchers
(Galle et al., 1972; Gove et al., 1979; Gas-
parini, 1973) have stressed the detrimental
effects of household density. However,
others (Mitchell, 1971; Booth and Ed-
wards, 1976; Freedman, 1973) have been
less convinced of its significance for the
individual and the family.

I have argued elsewhere (Baldassare,
1978, 1979) that some. individuals and
households can adjust to high density,
while others have special problems with
this situation. Ethnographic evidence sug-
gests that adjustments to household
crowding are common within Chinese
families (Anderson, 1972) and premodern
societies (Morgan, 1881; Mitchell, 1975).
Morris and Winter (1975), without offering
empirical information, emphasize that
coping strategies exist for some North
American households. Guidelines con-
cerning the definition and use of space
within the home, which are enforced by
household members with authority, are
central to these accounts of adjustments
to high density.

One interpretation of the moderate and
sometimes inconsistent effects of density
which are often reported is that individu-
als within any given sample vary in their
abilities to manage successfully their
dense home environments. I examine the
possibility that these variations are sys-
tematic. In other words, the social char-
acteristics of households or their inhabi-
tants may create either unique difficulties
or opportunities for adjusting to high den-
sity (see also Lym, 1975; Lyman and
Scott, 1971). Dissatisfaction with the
dwelling, family interactions, social life,
and personal well-being may, therefore,
be more pronounced in high-density
homes within certain social contexts.
in some social contexts than in others—
depending upon the characteristics of the
household unit as a whole or the relative
circumstances of a particular individual
within the household.

The social composition of the house-
hold may facilitate or inhibit social ad-
justments to high density (see also
Greenfield and Lewis, 1969). For exam-
ple, homes with young children may be
more difficult to control than others. The
behavior of young children, which is
often noisy and disruptive, is of consider-
able annoyance to adults in high-density
homes. In addition, their activities can
also be characterized as unpredictable and
uncontrollable and are a known additive
to personal difficulties of adjustment to
high-density settings (Sherrod, 1974;
Rodin, 1976; Rodin and Baum, 1978;
Sherrod and Cohen, 1979). Because young
children may not be mature enough to
learn rules about the use of space—and
because it may not be possible for parents
to adequately control their actions, nor-
mal means of adjusting to high density are
usually not available. Adults in the home
may thus be under stressful or, at least,
unpleasant conditions. The high levels of
residential mobility among families with
young children (Rossi, 1955; Chevan,
1971) may be explained by the fact that the
only reasonable solution for these individ-
uals is to purchase more household space.

Social position within the dwelling
should also lead to different experiences
with high density. People with ownership
or jurisdiction of the dwelling are more
likely to control space and conduct activi-
ties of their choosing. Individuals with
less authority in the home, in contrast,
may be more deprived of household space
and more inhibited in their actions than
others. Even when adjustments are made
in dense. dwellings, those individuals who
have less legitimate rights-of-way to the
available space also usually lack influence
in the decision-making about how to use
what space there is. They would, thus,
have to rely upon others with more status
to implement and enforce these rulings.
Such conditions of powerlessness may
lead individuals of a lower social position
within the household to believe that
events occurring within the high-density
dwelling are also out of their control. For
them, living conditions may in and of
themselves become undesirable on those
psychological grounds. Other evidence
suggests that children in dense homes may
be even more prone to personal and social
problems than are their parents (Davis et
al., 1974; Rodin, 1976; Booth and
Johnson, 1975; Lewis, 1971). In addition,
while tightly knit and authoritative kinship
structures do manage to adjust to house-
hold overcrowding (Anderson, 1972),
further information suggests that individ-
uals who share household space with non-
relatives experience stress because of a
lack of consensus about legitimate au-
thority (Mitchell, 1971). Thus, persons
with low status (i.e., nonrelatives, living
with the older generation, living with the
younger generation) in dense dwellings
may complain more because they lack
both access and definite rights to house-
hold space.

Finally, certain role positions within the
dense home may allow less control over
personal disruptions to the individuals in
those roles. For example, expectations for
behaviors require that some be more ac-
cessible to family members than others
(Smith, 1971). Thus, they may be unable
to reduce the level of unwanted interac-
tions or to claim household space for their
private use in high-density homes. Despite
social adjustments made by high-density
families, this occurs because some indi-
viduals with authority are given the re-
sponsibility of assuring that rules for
space use and activities are followed. Ex-
pectations for role behaviors, in this re-
gard, seem to place mothers in a more
difficult position than fathers—for exam-
ple, their differences in the amount of time
spent in the dwelling, their concerns with
the specific details of child rearing, and
their ease of ability to escape the home. If
mothers are in a more demanding position
along these and other dimensions, they
should experience even more dissatisfac-
tion in higher-density homes (see also
Chombart de Lauwe, 1961; Gove et al.,
1979).

Based upon these discussions, survey
data is used to test the following hypothe-
ses. People within certain social contexts
in higher-density homes—specifically
The source of data is the ‘‘Quality of
Life’’ national survey conducted by the
Institute for Social Research, University
of Michigan during 1971. Eligibles were at
least eighteen years old and living within
households in the 48 contiguous states. A
multistage probability sampling procedure
was used and, in all, 2,164 individuals
completed the interview (see Campbell et
al., 1976).

All respondents designated by the origi-
nal researchers as living within Standard
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (N=1325)
were involved in this analysis. The mea-
sure of household density, persons per
room, was available because two items in
the interview schedule asked about the
number of persons making up the house-
hold and the number of rooms within the
housing unit. The decision regarding how
to dichotomize the measure of residential
crowding is complicated both by the de-
gree of positive skewness in the variable
and by the absence of conclusive research
on density thresholds. A dividing point of
.6 persons per room is used. This number
is roughly equivalent to the mean score
and reasonably close to the median for
the total sample. Using the census defini-
tion of 1.01 or more persons per room,
less than 7% of the sample would be
classified as ‘‘overcrowded.’’ We could
thus not rely upon this standard. It is im-
portant to note that we have labeled our
groups as being of either ‘‘lower’’ or
‘thigher’’ density. This is because most of
our sample—and most Americans
today—do not live in conditions which
historically or cross-culturally would be
considered as overcrowded. Nonetheless,
relative differences should be strong
enough to test the interactive model.

When conducting analyses concerned
with household density, the metropolitan
sample is divided along three dimensions.
(1) Household Social Position is divided
into low status—individuals living with
either the younger generation (e.g., par-
ents with their adult children), the older
generation (e.g., adults with their
nonadult children), or nonrelatives; and
high status—which includes all others not
living alone (i.e., parents and spouses). (2)
Parental Role merely divides into the
categories of mother and father those mar-
ried respondents with nonadult children
presently living at home. Finally, (3)
Family Life Cycle differentiates married
respondents into three categories:
youngest child in the home is under six;
youngest child is over six; no child is liv-
ing in the household (i.e., either childless
couples or parents with children who do
not live in the dwelling).

Measures of residential satisfaction—
social relations, family relations, and
well-being—are chosen from the interview
schedule because past research and
theorizing have claimed that detrimental
effects of household crowding are found in
these realms. Fourteen items in all are
selected. Five of them (Family Life, Mar-
riage, Health, Leisure Time, Friendships)
contain seven-point scales ranging from
“completely satisfied’? to ‘‘completely
dissatisfied.’ Three contain five-point
scales: one (Dwelling Livability) ranges
from ‘‘very good’’ to “‘not so good,”’ an-
other (Parenthood Enjoyable) from ‘‘al-
ways” to ‘thardly ever,’’ and the last
(Children a Problem) from ‘‘a lot’ to
‘‘haven’t given any problems.’’ Four have
three-point scales: one (Household Space)
scaled from ‘‘too large’’ to ‘too small,”
one (Feel Rushed) from ‘‘always’’ to
“never,” another (Number of Friends)
from ‘‘a good many”’ to ‘‘not too many,”
and the last (Interest in New People) from
‘very interested’? to ‘‘not very in-
terested.’ Finally, one question on
whether the person wishes to stay in the
dwelling and another on whether the per-
son worries about a nervous breakdown
are two-point scales (yes or no).

The statistical approach is guided by a
concern with the interaction of household
crowding and certain social circum-
stances. We first review the mean scores
Table 1 reports the distributions of house-
hold densities within each of the sub-
groups. Regarding household social posi-
tion, which excludes persons living alone,
there is a similar proportion of individuals
of high status within higher- and lower-
density households. Individuals of low
status make up about one-fifth of the sam-
ple, and equivalent numbers are present in
higher-density and lower-density: condi-
tions. The data concerning parental role
indicate that a substantial number of par-
ents live in the higher-density homes, with
mothers and fathers found in similar pro-
portions. Finally, family life cycle is
linearly associated with household den-
sity. Respondents with a young child are
the most likely to live in the higher-density
homes, followed by those with only older
children present; respondents with no
children in the dwelling are more likely to
live in the lower-density homes.
Individuals of low status who are living
in the higher-density homes have more
dissatisfaction than other subgroups for
eight of the fourteen items (see mean
scores in Table 2). These involve com-
plaints about the dwelling, family life, and
friendships. Results of the analysis of
variance tests reported in Table 3 indicate
significant associations for problems in
controlling their children and enjoying
parenthood. The number of individuals
answering these two questions is ap-
proximately half the total low-status sub-
sample, or 50 at the lower density and 50
at the higher density. They are parents
with children present in the dwelling who
are living with the older generation or
nonrelatives. These results remain signifi-
cant after controlling for age, education,
home ownership, length of residence, and
family income (Children a Problem: F =
6.43, P < .01; Parenthood Enjoyable: F=
7.14, P < .01) while all other results con-
tinue to be statistically insignificant.
Next, mothers are compared with fa-
thers to determine if parental role in
higher-density homes influences reported
dissatisfaction. In Table 2, the mothers in
the higher-density homes had the least re-
ported satisfaction for nine of the fourteen
items, including the following domains:
the residence, family relations, social re-
lations, and some aspects of well-being.
There are few instances where the fathers
in the higher-density homes seem disad-
vantaged in comparison to mothers. The
quality of the mothers’ health and mental
health in higher-density homes, however,
is not worse. Table 3 reports that none of
these trends is significant. Analyses of
covariance (i.e., controlling for age, fam-
ily income, education, length of residence,
home ownership) also found no interac-
tion effects—which would suggest that
mothers in higher-density homes have
significantly more problems than fathers.
The family-life-cycle variable is de-
signed to consider the combined impact of
higher density with the presence of young,
old, or no children in the homes of married
respondents. The mean scores in Table 2
indicate the most dissatisfaction among
Mental Health*
Lower Density 4.58 4.51 4.79 4.38 4.54 4.58 4.59
Higher Density 4.46 4.20 4.44 4.40 4.32 4.55 4.82

 

* More dissatisfaction is reflected in lower scores for starred items only.
Table 2. Mean Scores for Survey Items by Subgroups

 

 

Family Life Cycle

 

Household
Social Position Parental Role
High Low
Status Status Father Mother

Young Old No
Child Child = Child

 

Dwelling Livability
Lower Density 1.50 1.90 1.52 1.57
Higher Density 1.98 2.06 1.97 1.98

1.57 1,53 1.47
2.10 1.81 1.96
Table 3. F Scores and Significance for Main Effects and Interaction Effects*

 

 

 

 

Household Family
Social Parental Life
Position Role Cycle
F Sig F Sig F Sig
Dwelling Livability
Main.Effect: Density 60.67 001 26.00 001 20.29 001
Main Effect: Other Factor 1.80 .00 9.57 002
Interaction Effect .00 03 2.01
Id
Parental
n Role

Sig F Sig
higher-density households with young
children for eight of the fourteen items.
These include measures of residential
attitudes—family life, social relations, and
well-being. Two significant findings
emerge in Table 3. They are in regard to
reported dissatisfaction with leisure and
health. As is the case in the mean scores,
the most dissatisfaction with leisure time
is found among the higher-density respon-
dents living in homes with older children,
and the most satisfaction is among the
lower-density respondents in homes with
older children. It is important to note,
however, that the most dissatisfaction
with leisure is found among lower-density
residents with young children. A signifi-
cant interaction effect is also present in an
analysis of covariance, when controlling
for family income, education, home
ownership, and length of residence (F =
3.12; P < .05). When satisfaction with
health is considered, higher-density
homes with young children present have
more health complaints than lower-
density homes with young children pres-
ent. It should be considered, however,
that, although this difference exists within
the ‘‘young child present’’ category, the
largest amount of dissatisfaction with
health is not found among respondents in
these higher-density situations. That is, all
but the individuals with a young child ina
lower-density home complain more about
health than those respondents who have
both the young-child and higher-density
conditions. While the results of the
analysis of variance point to a marginally
significant interaction effect, the analysis
The effects of household density on sub-
groups’ reports about the dwelling, family
life, social relations, and well-being are
considered. The mean scores indicate that
more dissatisfaction usually occurs within
higher-density homes with young chil-
dren, mothers, or low-status individuals.
When examining these trends more
closely, it is obvious that the interaction of
social context and household density has
the most impact upon both the relation-
ships within the home and the attitudes
toward the dwelling. The expected re-
lationships are found in three-fourths of
these cases, but only about half as often
for the other two measures—social life
and well-being. Higher density in con-
junction with social characteristics which
limit adjustments are thus most conse-
quential for actions and attitudes within
the dwelling. Further, none of the three
subgroups experiencing the denser condi-
tion is more disadvantaged or affected in a
unique way. The results support the basic
proposition that the ability to control
household space and its uses (which var-
ies systematically in the general popula-
tion) has consequences for adjustments to
high density and the expressed degree of
satisfaction by household members.
The analyses of variance and
covariance offer some evidence for the
statistical significance of hypothesized
relationships. Deficits in both household
space and social position seem to affect
parental attitudes. This result may be be-
cause parents living with other adults
find it more difficult to control their chil-
dren’s actions and use of space because
they lack autonomous authority. A lack of
significant differences is found between
mothers’ and. fathers’ complaints in more
dense conditions. Concerning family life
cycle, adults in higher-density homes with
young children present report more health
complaints than do adults with young
children present in the less dense settings.
However, the significance of this finding
diminishes when accounting for extrane-
ous factors. An unexpected pattern is
found in that persons with older children
in higher-density homes indicate more
dissatisfaction with their leisure time than
do persons with older children in lower-
density homes. Whether or not this prob-
lem involves special difficulties associated
with controlling activities and interrup-
tions among adolescents would, of course,
be important to examine in further re-
search. .

There are several reasons why trends in
the mean scores are considered as support
for the hypotheses, despite the fact that
only some of the findings are significant.
First, the dichotomy of the independent
variable, persons per room, includes indi-
viduals in the higher-density category who
may not have experienced serious spatial
constraints. More importantly, the sub-
groups may not have been precise enough
to find significant differences in adjust-
ment difficulties among different social
categories. Considering parental role first,
mothers who work may have fewer
household strains, thus reducing the over-
all dissatisfaction among the subgroup of
mothers in higher-density settings. For the
family-life-cycle subgroups, homes with
young children present were actually
more likely to have fewer children than
homes with older children present. This
intervening factor, then, reduces dif-
ferences among these groups inasmuch as
the number of children in the dwelling in-
creases complaints (Baldassare, 1979).
Anderson, E. N.

1972 ‘‘Some Chinese methods of dealing with

crowding.’’ Urban Anthropology 1:141-50.
Baldassare, M.

1978 ‘*Human spatial behavior.’’ Annual Review
of Sociology 4:29-56.

1979 Residential Crowding in Urban America.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Booth, A. and J. Edwards

1976 ‘‘Crowding and family relations.’ Ameri-

can Sociological Review 41:308-21.
Booth, A., and D. Johnson

1975 ‘Effects of crowding on child health and
development.’’ American Behavioral Sci-
entist 18:736-49.

Campbell, A., F. Converse, and W. Rodgers

1976 The Quality of American Life. New York:
Russell Sage.

Chapin, F. S.

1974. Human Acti
York: Wiley.

Chevan, A.

1971 ‘‘Family growth, household density, and

moving.’’ Demography 8:451-8.
Chombart de Lauwe, P. H.

1961 ‘‘The sociology of housing methods and
prospects of research.”’ International Jour-
nal of Comparative Sociology 2:23-41.

Davis, D., K. Bergin, and G. Mazin

1974 ‘* ‘When the neighbors get noisy we bang
on the walls’: a critical exploration of den-
sity and crowding.’’ Paper presented at the
American Sociological Association Meet-
ing, Montreal.

Freedman, J.

1973 ‘The effects of population density on hu-
mans.’’ Pp. 209-38 in J. Fawcett (ed.), Psy-
chological Perspectives on Population.
New York: Basic Books.

Galle, O., W. Gove, and J. McPherson

1972 ‘Population density and pathology: What
are the relations for man?’’ Science
176:23-30.

Gasparini, A.

1973. *‘The influence of the dwelling on family.”’

Ekistics 216:344-78.

 

ity Patterns in the City. New
Lym, G.
1975

Images of Home at Peabody Terrace. Un-
published doctoral dissertation, Depart-
ment of Social Relations, Harvard Univer-
sity.

Lyman, S. and M. Scott

1971

Merton,
1951

Mitchell,

1971

1975

‘‘Territoriality: a neglected sociological di-
mension.” Pp. 51-7 in D. Davies and K.
Herman (eds.) Social Space: Canadian Per-
spectives. Toronto: New Press.

R. K.

“The social psychology of housing.’’ Pp.
163-217 in W. Dennis (ed.) Current Trends
in Social Psychology. Pittsburgh: Univer-
sity of Pittsburgh Press.

R.E.

“Some social implications of high density
housing.’ American Sociological Review
36: 18-29.

“Ethnographic and historical perspectives
on relationships between physical and
sociospatial environments.’’ Sociological
Symposium 14:25-40.

Morris, E. W., and M. Winter

1975

“A theory of family housing adjustment.”’
Journal of Marriage and the Family
37:79-88.
Morgan, L. M.

1881 Houses and House Life of the American
Aborigines. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office.

Nie, N., C. Hull, J. Jenkins, K. Steinbrenner, and D.
Bent

1975 SPSS: Statistical Package for the Social

Sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rodin, J.

1976 ‘‘Density, perceived choice and response to
controllable and uncontrollable outcomes.”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
12:564-78.

Rodin, J., and A. Baum

1978 ‘*Crowding and helplessness: potential con-
sequences of density and loss of control.’
Pp. 389-401 in A. Baum and Y. Epstein
(eds.) Human Response to Crowding. Hills-
dale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
