@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2087968?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
ADISON, the capital city of Wiscon-
M sin and seat of the state univer-
sity, has for several decades had
the lowest sex ratio and the largest percent-
age of single women of all Wisconsin cities.
The 1940 census showed, in the age class
15-49, 100 unmarried women for each 77
unmarried men. The surplus of females be-
gan in the 15-19 age class, reached a peak
in the 20-24 age group, declined sharply at
ages 25-29, and then increased erratically
among the older groups. The city has grown
at a comparatively rapid rate, due mainly
to the incoming of young people. More
young women? than young men have come
to Madison, because of the predominately
institutional and commercial nature of the
city.
The mating demand and supply situation
in Madison, however, is not adequately de-
scribed in terms of an average sex ratio. More
significant are the several sex ratios of the
specific “marriage markets” created by vari-
ous religious, ethnic, and socio-economic
groups. Unfortunately, statistics were not
available for classifying the marriageable
Madison population according to religious af-
filiation, nativity and nationality, occupation,
education, and the like, which seemed to
define the really effective mating groups. But
our data show that girls who come to Madi-
son to work in offices and factories seldom
marry any of the thousands of young men who
attend the University of Wisconsin, an appre-
ciable number of whom do marry while in
Madison, although they are a very small
proportion of the total. We found that many
young women who lived for a while in Madi-
son eventually returned to marry the “man
back home” in a rural community with a
high sex ratio.

The criticism by Eldridge and Siegel of
the sex ratio as an important influence on
the marriage rate seems valid in general,
but we are unable to discount it entirely in
attempting to explain the rush of marriages
between Madison women and air force and
naval trainees located in or near Madison
during World War II. In a single year, 1943,
at least 350 Madison women married mili-
tary trainees from other parts of the nation.
Among these women, clerical workers, wait-
resses, and factory employees were over-
represented, and their fathers also tended to
be employed in the “lower” occupations. As
would be expected, a larger proportion of
them than of other contemporary Madison
brides had parents in the city. This situa-
tion was partly because girls in the lower
socio-economic groups were most disadvan-
taged by the unbalanced sex ratio, due to
Madison’s occupational structure. Yet in
spite of the generally lower social status of
Catholics in Madison, it is interesting that
there were noticeably fewer marriages of
local Catholic women to military trainees
than would have occurred if such young
women had married military trainees and
local men in a purely random fashion. This
suggests, of course, that the Catholic mores
with respect to marriage exercised a restrain-
ing influence. Moreover, that these differ-
ences were only a matter of degree is indi-
cated by the fact that several daughters of
prominent Madison citizens also married
trainees stationed at the nearby military
bases.

Number of Marriages. Every effort was
made in this study to identify each Madison
resident who married during three twelve-
month periods, spaced about three years
apart, viz., a comparatively prosperous pre-
war year, 1937; a national defense period,
embracing the last six months of 1940 and
the first six months of 1941; and a war year,
1943.4 In the first period, there were about
550 Madison grooms, in the second approxi-
mately 825, and in the third about 640.
Passage of the draft law was the signal for
the first sharp increase in the marriage rate
in Madison, as well as in the nation as a
whole. Marriages involving Madison resi-
dents of both sexes increased from 96 in
July to 167 in August of 1940, which was
contrary to the usual seasonal pattern. The
age characteristics of the grooms also
changed from one of these periods to the
other. The increase in number of grooms in
1940-41 occurred almost entirely among
those under 28, with nearly a doubling of
those under 23 years of age. The Selective
Service Act was a particularly strong stim-
ulus to marriage among those in the younger
ages. In 1943 there was a further striking
increase in the proportion of Madison grooms
under 23, and, for the first time, also in the
proportion of men over 35 years of age. It
is likely that the decline in number of grooms
in the intervening ages in 1943 was due to
the high marriage rate among them in the
preceding years.

Brides increased in numbers relatively
more than grooms in Madison from peace
to wartime, the numbers running from about
620 in 1937 to 960 in 1940-41 and to 1,030
in 1943. This was because single women were
more numerous than single men in the resi-
dent population, and because wartime popu-
lation movements gave them greatly in-
creased marriage opportunities. The general
age pattern of brides was similar to that of
grooms described above. Because the total
numbers of men and women exposed to
marriage in these three periods were not ob-
tainable, except roughly for 1940-41, it is
hazardous to attempt any further interpreta-
tion of these data.

Age of Grooms. The considerable litera-
ture on marriage reveals little interest in age
distributions of grooms and brides.> The
following statistics on age distributions at
the time of marriage, although the popula-
tion exposed is not known, provide a rather
unusual opportunity for analysis of age at
first marriage. Detailed age distributions of
previously unmarried grooms drawn into the
three samples of marriages, to represent
roughly pre-war, national defense, and war-
time conditions, are presented in Table 1.
One of the most striking facts is the wide
age range within which these first marriages
were contracted. The distributions are statis-
tically different according to the Chi-square
test, because of the varying forces operating
on marriage in the three periods. However,
the age distributions are not independent,
that of one period being affected by that of
another. While the sample for 1937-1938
has a larger proportion of men over 28 years
of age than the others, it does not follow
that older single men showed less tendency
than younger men to marry during the war-
time period. It is more probable that there
were simply fewer older men, as compared
with younger men, left to be “exposed” to
first marriage in the two later years.

An effort was made to explain some of the
variability shown in Table 1 in terms of
various indices of socio-economic status,
particularly occupation. Table 2 shows the
percentage distribution of grooms, by occu-
pation, for two sample periods.’ The proprie-
tor, manager and public official group had
proportionately more young and also more
older men marrying for the first time, in
both sample periods, than did the profes-
6 These represent marriages in which at least
one of the spouses was a Madison resident. Mar-
riage certificates filed at the Wisconsin State Board
of Health were the primary source of the data.
The samples include all cases that could be located
of Madison residents who married within the state.
These totals should not be confused with the esti-
mates, given previously, of the total numbers of
Madison men and women who married in the three
selected periods, which included both in-state and
out-of-state marriages.

7It was not possible to distinguish reliably be-
tween the business executive group and small busi-
nessmen, or between semiskilled and unskilled
workers.

Data for 1943 were omitted because a majority
of the grooms were in the military services, and
the occupation of a large proportion of these could
not be obtained from secondary sources. City
directories and the newspaper write-ups of the
marriages were used to check the occupation re-
ported on the marriage certificates For certain
occupational groups, but not generally, the certifi-
cates were quite unreliable.
sons of professional men, proprietors, and
clerical workers, and overrepresented among
the sons of skilled, semiskilled, and unskilled
workers. This is in accord with the usual
finding. It also appeared that sons of profes-
sional men married at a more uniform age
than did others.

Comparisons between the age distribu-
tions of grooms by birthplace, residence of
parents, and religious affiliation showed that
in each sample period grooms born in Madi-
son were substantially younger than those
born elsewhere but claiming Madison resi-
dence at the time of marriage. These age
differences according to residence of parents
were especially great for grooms in the
semiskilled and unskilled classes. Young men
who came to Madison and entered lower
similar. The median age of brides marrying
for the first time was 23.9 years in 1937 and
1938, decreasing to 23.6 in 1940-41, and to
22.9 in 1943.8 The total age distribution in
1943 was quite different from those for the
other years, with a large increase in the
percentage of brides under 20 years of age
but also an increase in the proportion of
older brides.

Table 3 shows that there were striking
differences in the ages at which young
women in the various occupational groups
tended to marry. Professional and business
women were substantially older than other
brides, regardless of the period, although
in the number of marriages in the age group
under 23. In the semiskilled and unskilled
groups the median age at marriage actually
increased slightly over the three-year period,
and little change in percentages was regis-
tered. The greatest rise in the proportion of
very young grooms occurred in the skilled
worker group. The pattern of change was
accordingly irregular. Nevertheless, it can be
said that the great bulk of very youthful
war marriages was found at the clerical,
skilled, and unskilled occupational levels,
where a considerable number of youthful
marriages was customary; and that the rea-
son for no relative increase of such marriages
at the unskilled level was probably that they
were already at a maximum. Surprisingly
enough, in each occupational group men and
women who belonged to local families tended
to marry at somewhat earlier ages than
those whose parents did not live in Madison.
reveals that the increase in number of mar-
riages which was brought about by World
War II was greater among women than men,
apparently because of a low sex ratio among
single persons, and the bringing in of thou-
sands of men to a nearby military camp.
The net effect of the war on age at mar-
riage was to reduce it. The relative drop in
median age at marriage between 1937 and
1938 and 1940-41 was greatest among
grooms of the professional and skilled groups,
but in the former it was due chiefly to an in-
crease in the number of marriages in the age
group 23-28, and in the latter to an increase
Age. It has often been shown that in our
culture there is usually a one to five year
difference in the ages of spouses, the groom
being the older. The age differentials of
Madison grooms and their brides are given
in Table 4.1° It will be seen that a consider-
able percentage of grooms in each sample
period (an average of 17.4 per cent) were
younger than their brides.11 Among grooms
who married in 1943, compared with those
who married in the two earlier periods, there
was an increased proportion that married
women four or more years older than them-
selves, although grooms below 23 years old

® For example, see Burgess and Locke, The Fam-
ily, Chapter 13, for a recent thoroughgoing classifi-
cation of the factors in mate selection.

10The correlation coefficients between age of
groom and age of bride were .76 in 1937 and 1938
and 1940-41, and .78 in 1943.

11 Studying a large number of marriages in Phil-
adelphia, Bossard found that 10.1 per cent of the
brides were older, 10.5 per cent were the same age
as the groom, and 79.4 per cent younger. See “The
Age Factor in Marriage,” American Journal of So-
ciology, 38 (1933), 536-547.
women older than themselves showed nothing
significant.

Occupation. The relationship between the
occupations of spouses has elsewhere been
shown to be relatively close,!? but this may
have been more a reflection of similar socio-
economic status than of contacts in the work
situation, which we were able to study only
indirectly. Table 5 indicates the extent to
which marriage was occupationally selective
for the three periods combined. The first row
shows simply the percentage distribution of
brides by occupation; if matings were ran-
dom, the grooms in each occupational group
would have married females in these propor-
tions. It can be seen at a glance, however,
that the selection was not random. For ex-
ample, more than 25 per cent (two and one-
half times the “expected” number) of pro-
fessional men married women in professional
and business occupations, but very few mar-
same occupation tended to be thrown to-
gether, and that this often led to marriage.
This impression is supported by more de-
tailed analysis outside the table. Thus, al-
most 30 per cent of the brides of doctors
were found to be nurses or medical techni-
cians, whereas only about 1234 per cent of
all professional men and a little over 7 per
cent of all grooms married nurses or tech-
nicians; more than one-third of the male
teachers married women who were teachers;
and a striking number of brides and grooms
worked in the same factory. Lawyers, how-
ever, tended to marry local daughters of
relatively high-status families, who were not
in the labor force. The marked tendency for
college students to marry “co-eds,” and for
clerical men to marry stenographers, is
evident from the table.

The data on mate selection from the spe-
ing the distribution of clerical women to
know that, although a slight majority of
them came from the lower socio-economic
groups, they were actually recruited from a
wide range of social statuses.

While it is recognized that occupations are
an imperfect index of status, it was felt that
our data might provide some test of the
hypothesis that wartime influences led to
some loosening of the usual status barriers to
marriage. Studies of the changes from period
to period, using both detailed and broad
occupational groups, failed to reveal such a
tendency. Actually, the ratios of observed to
expected marriages involving persons in the
various occupational groups were almost
identical from one of our sample periods to
another.

An investigation of the relation between
the occupation of the groom and of the
Occupation of Groom

 

 

Occupation Profes- _Propri- = Student Clerical Skilled Semi-and Farmer or
of sional etor (College) Unskilled farm laborer
Bride

All Groups: 17.8 6.4 11.2 20.8 15.3 24.8 3.7
Professional and

Business 44.4 11.1 12.3 18.9 9.5 2.5 1.2
Nurse and Tech-

nician 30.8 8.6 20.6 16.6 12.0 9.7 1.7
Student (College) 25.8 3.8 54.7 7.5 2.5 5.0 0.6
Clerical 17.0 8.2 8.7 30.2 13.8 19.7 2.4
Operative (etc.) 5.2 3.1 3.4 18.2 17.7 46.9 5.5
Domestic 1.5 1.5 10.5 29.0 47.5 10.0
“At Home” and

Unknown 14.6 5.7 6.5 16.7 19.8 31.5 5.2

 

Note: Marriages involving men in the armed forces are excluded, since the peacetime occupation of
many of these men was not obtainable.
the same or similar ecological areas in Madi-
son, using the ecological classification de-
veloped by John Teter in his unpublished
Ph.D thesis, The Ecology of Residential
Areas in Madison, Wisconsin, University of
Wisconsin, 1947. The proportion of brides
and grooms that resided in the same eco-
logical area before marriage was 39 per
cent of the 1,438 marriages included in
this tabulation. If mate selection were com-
pletely random with respect to ecological
areas, the bride and groom would have
resided in the same district in about 16 per
cent of the cases. Thus, it appears that there
was some tendency to marry a person living
in a similar socio-economic environment.
We do not know to what extent this was due
to nearness in the physical sense and to what
extent to likeness in certain socio-economic
respects.!4

As compared with the sample for 1937 and
1938, that for 1940-41 showed a decidedly
smaller proportion of grooms and brides re-
siding in the same ecological area. More-
over, persons with parents in Madison were
intermarrying with those from unlike neigh-
borhoods to a greater extent in 1940-41
than before. This suggests some loosening of
the conventional barriers to marriage during
the selective service period; but the fact that
the distribution for 1943, the wartime period,
was much like that for the prewar period
raises some question about this interpreta-
tion.

When the marriages were classified ac-
cording to whether the parents of both bride
and groom were living in the city or not, it
appeared that persons who had lived in
Madison with their parents were slightly
more likely than others to pick spouses
from dissimilar parts of the city. This did
not confirm what was expected, on the theory
that those with parents in the city would be
more firmly “located” according to status.

Distance Apart. Additional information
was obtained on the physical distance be-
tween bride and groom in terms of the
number of blocks between their residences
in Madison. This factor has been studied by
Bossard and Abrams, who pointed out the
limitations likely to be found in such data.'5
Together with Davie and Reeves (Ken-
nedy),‘© they noted in recent decades a
trend toward relatively more marriages be-
tween persons living rather close together.
Reeves, in particular, stressed the idea that a

14See Maurice R. Davie and Ruby Jo Reeves,
“Propinquity of Residence Before Marriage,” Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology, 44 (Jan., 1939), 510-
517; and Ruby Jo Reeves Kennedy, “Premarital
Residential Propinquity and Ethnic Endogamy,”
American Journal of Sociology, 48 (March, 1943),
580-585.

15 James H. S. Bossard, “Residential Propin-
quity as a Factor in Mate Selection,” American
Journal of Sociology, 38 (1932), 219-224; Ray H.
Abrams, “Residential Propinquity as a Factor in
Mate Selection; Fifty Year Trends in Philadelphia,”
American Sociological Review, 8 (June, 1943),
288-294.

16 See footnote 14.
the city resided farther from their brides, on
the average, than did other grooms. This is in
keeping with the finding for ecological areas,
noted above, and might be explained if the
men who lived with their parents had a
wider acquaintance over the city.

A tabulation was made to determine
whether men in the higher occupations lived
farther from their brides than the other men,
on the theory that they would have a wider
choice. As expected, semiskilled and un-
skilled workers tended to live nearest their
brides, about 12 per cent reportedly even
living at the same address before marriage;
but clerical and skilled workers, rather than
professional men and proprietors, resided at
the greatest average distance from their
brides. This differs somewhat from the find-
ings of Koller, who reports for his Columbus,
Ohio, samples that without exception the
lower the occupational position the greater
Index of Bride

 

 

Index of All Under $1500- $2500— $3500- $4500— $5500 &
Groom groups $1500 2499 3499 4499 5499 over
All groups 998 67 464 279 101 47 40
Under $1500 75 17 32 17 5 2 2
$1500-2499 434 29 250 112 31 8 4
$2500-3499 298 15 124 111 24 13 11
$3500-4499 118 5 34 28 30 13 8
$4500-5499 42 1 14 8 8 7 4

$5500 & Over 31 - 10 3 3 4 11
17 Marvin R. Koller, “Residential Propinquity of
White Mates at Marriage in Relation to Age and
Occupation of Males, Columbus, Ohio, 1938 and
1946,” American Sociological Review, 13 (October,
1948), 613-616.

18 Study of the birthplace data given on the
marriage certificates showed that sons of Madison
residents tended to enter the ranks of clerical
workers and skilled workers to a greater extent than
the other occupations. A large proportion of the
professional and managerial men were recruited from
distant places. Young men from the farms and vil-
lages near Madison supplied much of the need for
workers in the lower occupations.

19 The index was developed by Louis Bultena in
his unpublished doctoral thesis, A Study of 18
Protestant Churches of Madison, Wisconsin, Uni-
versity of Wisconsin, 1945.
with some college education intermarried on
the average even less with non-college
spouses, probably because in Madison the
supply of college men was large relative to
that of college women. However, in the war
year, 1943, college women married a signifi-
cantly larger percentage of non-college men
than they had done before, whereas there
was no corresponding tendency among col-
lege men. Men who were still enrolled at the
University of Wisconsin when they married,
married “co-eds” to a much greater degree
during the war period than before. In con-
trast, the percentage of University of Wis-
consin “‘co-eds” enrolled at the time of mar-
riage who married college men dropped from
92.7 in 1940-41 to 69.8 in 1943. The records
show that in these war years a large number
of college women and “co-eds” in the Madi-
son community married military trainees
without college education stationed in the
Madison area.

Fraternity and Sorority Membership. At-
tention was also given to intermarriage be-
tween present or former students of the
University of Wisconsin who were members
of fraternities or sororities. Approximately
30 per cent of the university women drawn
in the total sample were or had been members
of a sorority, but 57 per cent of the brides of
fraternity men were sorority members. Sim-
ilarly, although less than 27 per cent of the
university men were fraternity members, in
the three sample periods combined, about
61 per cent of the sorority women married
fraternity men. The figures for 1940-41,
however, showed a sharp decline from those
for the other two periods, and suggest that
the young fraternity men rushing into mar-
riage during the national defense period put
less stress than usual on the Greek letter
status of the bride. It is also interesting to
note that, regardless of the distractions of
war, fraternity and sorority members mar-
ried spouses with no college education less
than half as often as did other college men
and women.

Previous Marital Status. A final item in-
vestigated had to do with the intermarriage
of the single, the divorced, and the widowed
in the Madison community. It was found
that, for the three sample periods taken
together, the single clearly tended to marry
the single, the divorced the divorced, and
the widowed the widowed. Marriages involv-
ing couples each of whom had been married
and divorced once were more than four times
as frequent as they would have been under
a system of random mate selection; and
marriages in which both parties had been
widowed were twelve times the number ex-
pected on an assumption of randomness. It
is clear that the “marriage market” for such
persons had some special biases.

Review. In this study of marriages in
Madison, Wisconsin, a strong tendency was
noted for men to marry women who were in
the same general occupational class as them-
selves; and this tendency was not lessened
by World War II. Evidence indicated that
such marriages were often fostered by con-
tacts in the same office, factory, or military
group.

Although grooms and their brides both
residing in Madison lived in neighborhoods
with about the same economic rating to a
much greater extent than could be explained
by chance, the majority, and especially those
with parents in Madison, were located in
somewhat different ecological areas of the
city. It cannot be stated with certainty that
the war was responsible for any change in
this regard.

At the time of their marriage, a little more
than half of the grooms and brides both
living in Madison resided less than 12 blocks
apart, the grooms who resided nearest their
brides being semi- and unskilled workers.

College men and women showed a marked
disposition to marry one another, and, fur-
thermore, fraternity men preferred sorority
women. In the war year of 1943, however, a
much larger proportion of college women
married men without a college education,
usually soldiers or sailors from outside the
community, probably because few men were
left on the college campus; and, in 1940-41,
fraternity men, for unknown reasons, married
fewer sorority girls, but not fewer college
girls.

In all three of the sample periods covered
by the study, the divorced were likely to
HIs paper will report a part of the re-

I sults of an experimental design which

attempted to measure some of the ef-
fects of Intercultural Workshop experiences
upon the ethnic distance reactions of the
members of the workshop. The experimental
group was selected from the graduate stu-
dents who had enrolled for a summer session
at the University of Southern California in
1948, and who after careful screening had
been admitted to an education course con-
ducted as an Intercultural Workshop that
continued for six weeks. This research was
based on a pilot experiment conducted in
1947 and it included a follow-up study made
in May 1949. The persons admitted to the
workshop had given tangible evidence of
their interest in ethnic and racial problems,
in fact, most of them had creditable records
as teachers in interracial schools and neigh-
borhoods.

The control group was selected from the
graduate students who were enrolled at the
same time not in the Intercultural Workshop
but in other education courses, such as the
methods, history, and principles of educa-
tion in which racial questions did not con-
stitute the subject matter.2 The members
of the experimental group and the control
group were matched on the following points:
(1) level of university education, (2) type
of occupation, (3) years of occupational
experience, (4) income level, (5) age, (6)
sex, (7) race and ethnic backgrounds, (8)
urban and rural backgrounds, and (9)
religious backgrounds.

While it was not feasible to follow the
identical, individual matching method, thirty-
two members of the Workshop group were
fairly well matched as a group with thirty-
two members of the non-Workshop graduate
students as a group. In other words, here
were two groups of similar graduate students
enrolled for the same period of time in the
same Summer Session in education courses.
Presumably both groups were primarily
interested in improving their methods of
teaching. The experimental group experi-
enced special workshop methods, while the
control group experienced the standard edu-
cation course methods.

One hypothesis of this study was that
participation in an intercultural workshop
for six weeks would result in a measurable
decrease in ethnic distance reactions on the
part of the members toward ethnic groups.
A second hypothesis was that this decrease
in ethnic distance reactions would not be
temporary but would have lasting charac-
teristics. A third hypothesis was that two
groups of graduate students in two different
workshop groups in two different Summer
Sessions would experience somewhat similar
changes in ethnic reactions.

At the beginning of the six-weeks’ Summer
School in 1948 both the experimental group
