@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089335?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
HE investigation of the internal dif-
[ serntiation of urban population has

been concerned chiefly with economic
rank and ethnic diversity, and with the dif-
ferences which accompany variations in these
factors. Such studies throw little light upon
the broad, non-ethnic, cultural differences
generated in the metropolitan environment,
ie., upon “urbanism as a way of life.” While
there has been much concern, theoretically,
with the effects of the metropolitan ambit
upon all social relationships, most of the
empirical basis of urban theory has been the
study of small “natural areas” or the study
of gross regularities in census data, arranged
spatially for analysis.

Perhaps the best evidence bearing upon
this larger question of “urbanism” has been
the study of urban neighborhoods. The work
of Donald Foley, for example, indicates that
in a sample of Rochester residents (1) the
neighborhood pattern still exists to some
degree, but, (2) many individuals do not
neighbor and do not consider their local area
to be a social community. Such studies
approach the propositions that urban society
is functionally rather than spatially organ-
ized and that urbanites are mobile, anony-
mous, and lacking in identification with their
local area.

To gauge the generality of Foley’s con-
clusions, however, one needs to know where
the neighborhoods he studied fit in an array
of neighborhoods. Because wide variation
exists, the relation between the area studied
and others is crucial for the hypothsis tested;
most of Rochester may be much more neigh-
borhood oriented, or much less so, than the
area studied.

The Shevky-Bell typology of urban sub-
areas is useful in this connection, for it
allows any census tract to be located in three
different arrays by means of three indices
constructed from census data.? It is hypothe-
sized that these represent three dimensions
within urban social space, each statistically
unidimensional and independent of the
others. The dimensions are social rank,
segregation, and urbanization? The last
largely measures differences in family
structure, and, it is assumed, indicates
corollary differences in behavior. Thus,
when social rank and segregation are
controlled, differences in the index of
urbanization for specific tract populations
should indicate consistent variations in social
behavior. One purpose of the present re-
search was to determine the nature of such
corollary differences, and particularly differ-
ences in social participation.

This report is based upon a pilot study of
differences in social participation between
sample populations in two Los Angeles areas
(census tracts 35 and 63).* The two tract
populations are nearly identical with respect
to two of the indices (social rank and segre-
gation) and differ on the third, urbanization.
For simplicity in presentation the tract with
the higher urbanization index score (tract
63) will hereafter be called the high-urban
tract, the other (tract 35) the low-urban
tract.

The two sample tracts compare as follows.
History: the low-urban tract is in an area
that thirty years ago was separately incor-
porated for a brief time; the high-urban tract
has always been a part of Los Angeles proper.
Location: the low-urban tract is approxi-
mately fifteen minutes from the city center
by auto; the high-urban tract is about half
as far. (The low-urban tract is adjacent to
the competing centers of Glendale and Pasa-
dena.) Social rank: both tracts fall within
the large middle range, being slightly above
the median for the County. The social rank
index for the low-urban tract is 68, for the
high-urban tract, 66, as of the 1950 census
of population, based upon the standard
scores developed by Shevky with 1940
census data. Ethnicity: in neither tract does
the foreign-born and non-white population
amount to more than 5 per cent. Urbaniza-
tion: the two tracts represent the extremes
of the middle range of the urbanization in-
dex, within which a majority of the Los An-
geles County census tracts lie. The low-urban
tract had an urbanization index of 41, the
high-urban tract, 57. There are much more
highly urban tracts at middle rank, and
much lower ones, in the County. The sample
is weighted against the instrument, so that
if striking and consistent variations appear
in this middle range, they probably indicate
more extreme variations at the poles.
veloped for a similar population in Palo Alto,
California.> The scale assumes that neighbor-
liness is unidimensional and can be measured
by a small battery of questions referring to
the degree of interaction with neighbors. The
reproducibility for the present sample has
not yet been determined. Cultural events
were recorded and categorized in the manner
devised by Queen, in his studies of social
participation in St. Louis.® Individuals were
asked about their attendance in the past
month at movies, classes and study groups,
athletic contests, lectures and speeches, mu-
seums and exhibits, musical events, and stage
shows. They were also asked the location of
the event and who accompanied them. Special
schedules of questions were developed for the
purpose of describing participation in formal
organizations of various sorts, definitions of
the local area, domestic participation, neigh-
borhood play of children, and other aspects
of participation which will not be reported
here.

An area random sample was interviewed
in each tract, with 161 respondents in the
low-urban tract, 150 in the high-urban tract.
These households represented approximately
7 per cent of the populations of the two
census tracts chosen. The housewife was the
respondent, and the response rate was over
85 per cent, being higher in the low-urban
area. Interviewers were advanced and gradu-
ate students at Occidental College, and the
average interview time was approximately
one hour.

The two samples of households compare
as follows:
Such differences are not great but seem
to indicate a consistent tendency towards
somewhat more heterogeneity in the high-
urban sample. It includes a slightly higher
proportion of low-income, low-education per-
sons, and also a slightly higher proportion
of high-income, high-education persons. The
high-urban sample is also more heterogeneous
with respect to ethnicity. Although the per-
centage of non-white and foreign-born is
similar in the two samples (9 for the low-
urban sample, 11 for the high-urban) dif-
ferences in religious affiliation indicate more
ethnic diversity in the high-urban sample.

The low-urban area sample is much more
homogeneous and Protestant in affiliation
and preference. The high-urban sample, how-
ever, includes sizeable representations of the
minority American religious beliefs: Jews
and Roman Catholics are, together, only 20
per cent of the low-urban sample; they are
37 per cent of the high-urban sample. This
heterogeneous and non-Protestant popula-
tion in the high-urban sample is probably,
to a large degree, made up of second and
later generation ethnic individuals. Since the
census tracts with high indexes of segrega-
tion in middle economic ranks are usually
found in the more highly urbanized areas of
the Shevky-Bell grid, it is likely that “later
generation ethnics” (not identified in census
data) are also concentrated in the more
highly urbanized tracts of the middle social
rank.

Such a correlation between second and
later generation ethnic populations and
Table 1 gives differences in participation
between two areas with respect to the local-
ization of community. The low-urban sample
differed sharply and consistently in the direc-
tion of more participation in the local com-
munity. Their neighboring score was higher,
they were more apt to have friends in the
local area, and these constituted a larger pro-
portion of all close friends, i-e., those visited
at least once a month. They were more apt
to go to cultural events such as movies, ath-
letic contests, stage shows, and study groups,
in the local area, and they were more apt to
use local commercial facilities of certain
types.

The low-urban sample had a higher rate
of membership and participation in formal
organizations other than church, and, more
important, a larger proportion of their or-
ganizations were local in nature. A large
majority of the respondents’ organizations
held meetings in the local area, and although
the husbands’ organizations usually met out-
side the area, still a much larger proportion
met locally than did in the high-urban
sample. Furthermore, the members of formal
organizations to which the low-urban sample
belonged were more apt to live in the imme-
diate local community. In the high-urban
sample other members were most apt to be
scattered over the metropolis as a whole.

Further indication of the differential im-
portance the local based organization had for
these two somples is the greater familiarity
of the low-urban sample with local com-
munity leaders. (See Table 2.)

While the samples were equally able (and
unable) to name Los Angeles leaders, there
was a significantly higher proportion who
Per cent of respondents’ formal
organizations with the ma-
jority of members residing in:

Local area

Other area

Scattered over the city
No response

N of organizations

Per cent of husbands’ formal
organizations (as reported by
respondent) which meet in:

Local area

Other areas

No response

N of husbands’ organizations

Per cent of husbands’ formal
organizations (as reported by
respondent) with the ma-
jority of members residing in:

Local area

Other area

Scattered over the city

No response

N of husbands’ organizations

57
18
23

(126)

21f
73

(104)

25

23

45

7
(104)

33,
18
45

(67)

5st
86

9
(37)

10
12
77

1

(87)

*P (x?) <.01, with exceptions noted below.
+P (x?) slightly above .05 level: x2=3.77.
+P (x?) between .01 and .02 levels.
whole, but definite variations in their interest
and involvement with respect to local affairs.

It is sometimes stated, almost as an
axiom, that the urban milieu results in the
extreme attrition of kin relations. The present
study indicates this to be questionable. The
most important single kind of social rela-
tionship for both samples is kinship visiting.
A large majority of both samples visit their
kin at least once a month, and half of each
sample visit their kin at least once a week.
These data, reported in Table 3, are con-
sistent with the findings of Bell in his com-
parable study of social areas in the San Fran-
cisco Bay Region.”
where “people are friendly and neighborly.”
The high-urban sample, on the other hand,
most frequently mentioned the “convenience
to downtown and everything,” and spoke
often of the “nice people” who “leave you
alone and mind their own business.” The
high-urban sample seemed less committed to
remaining in their present area—a higher
proportion stating that there were other
neighborhoods in the city in which they
would rather live.

A tendency toward differential association
with populations at a similar level of urban-
ization is indicated in the visiting patterns
of the two samples outside their local areas.
The residences of close friends and the meet-
ing places of social circles are almost mutu-
ally exclusive for the two samples. Further-
more, when the census tracts in which are lo-
cated the homes of the friends they visit are
categorized by urbanization scores, clear
differences appear. The low-urban sample is
more apt to have friends in other low-urban
areas, while the high-urban sample is apt to
visit in other high-urban areas. (See Table
4.)
In order to investigate empirically the
complex of notions surrounding the nature
of urban social behavior, the Shevky-Bell
typology, applied to sub-areas in Los Angeles
County, was used to select two neighborhoods
which differed clearly on the index of urban-
ization. Social rank was not used as the chief
factor accounting for differential social par-
ticipation, as was the case in the studies of
Komarovsky, Goldhamer, and others.’ In-
stead, rank was controlled, and the urban-
ization dimension was tested for broad
differences in social participation.

It should be noted that this study investi-
gates the effects of urbanization at a par-
ticular level of rank and segregation; at
other levels, the effects of urbanization re-
main problematical. It is hoped that future
studies will clarify, for example, the effects
of differential urbanization at higher and
lower social ranks, as well as in segregated
populations. The Shevky-Bell typology,
based upon a three dimensional attribute-
space model of urban society, calls attention
not only to three separate factors, but also
to the possibility that the particular effects
of one may be transformed as either or both
of the others vary.

However, the urbanization dimension
was the focus of the present study. It was
not identified with the older notion of urban-
ism which implies that all city populations
are changing in the direction of atomistic,
mass society.® Instead, it was assumed that
there is a continuum of alternative life-
styles at the same economic level and that
these are concentrated in different urban
sub-areas. In this framework, the low-urban
areas are just as characteristic of modern
urban society as are the high-urban areas.
Both types continue to be alternatives in
the urban complex. In this view, the Shevky-
Bell index of urbanization is a putative
means of identifying such variations in
“ways of life.” Instead of concentrating on
urbanism as @ way of life, the present study
was focused upon the variations possible.

Two social aggregates, inhabiting tracts
with similar economic rank and ethnicity
but varying with respect to the urbanization
index, were sampled. The sample popula-
tions were then studied by means of reported
social participation.

The findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that, where rank and ethnicity
are equal, differences in the urbanization
index will indicate differences in social be-
havior. Had the index identified popula-
tions not significantly different, doubt would
have been cast upon its utility at the level
of individual social behavior, for the urban-
ization dimension of modern society, as
conceived by Shevky in his theoretical
structure, implies such differences in social
behavior.1° However, the present study indi-
cates that the index, constructed primarily
with items related to family structure, does
identify differences in social participation
which are associated with variations in
family structure but not derived solely from
them. The general validity of the hypoth-
esis must rest upon further studies in Los
Angeles and other urban complexes.
Although this study and that of Bell indi-
cate the urbanization dimension does affect
social participation to an impressive degree,
the regularity with which these differences
form a continuum at this intersection of
social rank and segregation, and the nature
of the hypothesized continuum, remain to
be spelled out. Still, in the interpretation of
1, The local area in the contemporary
American metropolis may be viewed as at-
tracting population, not only by the economic
rank and ethnic composition of the population
already in the area, but also by the degree of
urbanization characteristic of the area—the
way of life common to the older inhabitants.

2. Such areas may attract populations on
at least two different functional bases: (1)
the demographic and the cultural character-
istics of the older settlers, who give the area
its “tone,” may attract people, as seems true
in the low-urban sample, or, (2) the area as
a socially neutral, but convenient, base of
operations for various segmental interests,
may attract people as in the high-urban
sample. Such different principles of attrac-
tion would tend to produce greater homo-
geneity of background and interest in low-
urban areas, and from this similarity a higher
degree of community-type behavior and of
conformity would be expected.

3. A continuum is hypothesized for non-
segregated, middle-rank areas. At one pole
lie the local areas which select a predomi-
nantly “old American” population with similar
jobs, aspirations, incomes, who wish to raise
children, neighbor, participate in local com-
munity groups, and, in brief, carry on a life
in many ways similar to that of the small
towns described by Warner and his associ-
ates.11 At the other pole lie those areas of
the city which are more heterogeneous, with
fewer children and little interest in the local
area as a social arena. Such areas may ap-
proach, in many ways, the ideal type of
urban environment hypothesized by Wirth.12

4. In this perspective, the local area is
important as a framework for interaction, as
a “social fact,” just where it is least repre-
sentative of the total urban society. The
small community, as studied by Warner and
others, is a very poor example of the urban
complex, since it will include the fewest ele-
ments of urban society as a whole. At the
same time, the high-urban tract as a sample
of urban society is only slightly less biased,
for in it the local area as a social fact dis-
appears altogether. Thus it is not possible to
use either the model of a small, spatially en-
closed community or the stereotype of the
continually more atomistic mass society in
There are, however, certain common struc-
tural threads running through the fabric
of modern society. As Paul Hatt noted, the
indices developed by Warner and others to
measure social status may be generalized
to the total society, since the various
methods correlate highly with one universal
attribute—occupation.13 The present ap-
proach is, then, to ask: How does this
attribute become defined and organized, how
does it influence participation, in different
sub-areas of the metropolis?

A tentative answer is that the individual’s
social position is defined differently and his
social participation is patterned differently
as the focus shifts from the low-urban
populations to the high-urban populations.
One may envisage the low-urban areas as
somewhere between the small town and
the conventional picture of metropolitan
living. Where the local area is a social fact,
where common interests and associations ob-
tain, generalizations derived from small com-
munity studies may have validity. For here
the individual’s status will result, in part,
from participation in a known and used local
organizational structure and from family ties
that are publicly understood.

When, however, high-urban populations
are considered, social participation is organ-
ized around position in other organizational
contexts, as for example, the corporation,

13 Paul K. Hatt, “Stratification in the Mass
Society,” American Sociological Review, 15 (April,
1950), pp. 216-222.
politics, the labor union, or perhaps, as
Riesman has suggested, categories derived
from the popular culture of the mass media.!4
Here also are many individuals whose life,
aside from work, is ordered by participation
in small informal groups, and informal groups
only, floating within the vast culture world
of the market and the mass media. In such
populations the locally defined community is
largely irrelevant to status and participation.
Associations are spread geographically, but
ordered and concentrated in terms of selected
interests. Family, in this context, is still im-
portant. It is slightly more important in the
high-urban sample described. But it is prob-
ably much more private in its reference. In
fact, kin relations may be seen as growing
in importance just because of the diminished
reliance placed upon neighborhood and local
community.

What has been sketched above is a tenta-
tive model which will allow the use of con-
tributions from earlier research, (studies of
small cities, natural areas, the apartment
house family, the suburban fringe) within a
framework which integrates and orders them
in relation to one another. Such a frame of
reference also relates, eventually, to the in-
creasing importance of large-scale organiza-
tions in a society which allows many alterna-
tive life patterns for individuals at the same
functional and economic level.
