http://www.jstor.org/stable/2091281?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
IVEN the inclusive nature of the con-
G cept, it is not surprising that a variety

of disciplines are concerned with eco-
nomic development, nor is it surprising that
they differ in their emphases. Whereas econ-
omists traditionally have stressed the pe-
cuniary aspects of economic development,
like capital formation, terms of trade and
income differentials, sociologists and espe-
cially human ecologists have concerned
themselves more with non-monetary vari-
ables, such as technology, urbanization, edu-
cation, and the structure of the labor force.?

* The research reported in this paper was carried
out in the Population Research Center, The Uni-
versity of Texas.

1 For a sample of works on economic develop-
ment and related phenomena from a sociological
perspective see Robert M. Dinkel, “Population
These sociological studies have contributed
to our understanding of economic develop-
ment largely because they focus on phe-
nomena which are taken for granted in eco-

Growth and Economic Development,” Social Forces,
43 (May, 1965), pp. 461-470; Nathan Keyfitz,
“Age Distribution as a Challenge to Development,”
American Journal of Sociology, 70 (May, 1965),
pp. 659-668; John H. Kunkel, “Values and Be-
havior in Economic Development,” Economic De-
velopment and Cultural Change, 13 (April, 1965),
pp. 257-277; Phillips Cutright, “Political Structure,
Economic Development, and National Security Pro-
grams,” American Journal of Sociology, 70 (March,
1965), pp. 537-550; Edward G. Stockwell, “Fer-
tility, Mortality, and Economic Status of Under-
developed Areas,” Social Forces, 41 (May, 1963),
pp. 390-395; Wilbert E. Moore and Bert F. Hoselitz
(eds.), Industrialization and Society, Paris: Unesco,
1963; Neil J. Smelser, The Sociology of Economic
Life, Engelwood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,
nomic models, particularly of the classical
variety. The division of labor is a case in
point. Its importance never has been ques-
tioned by economists since Adam Smith’s
perceptive observations on the subject,? but
it receives surprisingly little attention in the
current literature of economics, even in pub-
lications on economic development. This is
not to say that economists completely ignore
the division of labor; rather, consistent with
Smith’s original pronouncements, they con-
sider it to be a function of the size of the
market.

By comparison, human ecologists are less
prone to take the division of labor as given
and more predisposed, belatedly following
Durkheim’s classic study,? to seek the cor-
relates of the division of labor through sys-
tematic comparative research. In certain re-
spects their endeavors have been successful.
Progress has been made in the conceptual
treatment and measurement of the division
of labor, and several of its postulated corre-
lates have been confirmed by systematic re-
search.* But just as the economist’s treat-

 

1963; Jack P. Gibbs and Leo F. Schnore, “Metro-
politan Growth: An International Study,” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology, 66 (September, 1960),
pp. 160-170; Thomas O. Wilkinson, “Urban Struc-
ture and Industrialization,” American Sociological
Review, 25( June, 1960), pp. 356-363; Bert F.
Hoselitz, Sociological Aspects of Economic Growth,
Glencoe, Illinois: Free Press, 1960; Reinhard Ben-
dix, “Industrialization, Ideologies, and Sociai Struc-
ture,” American Sociological Review, 24 (October,
1959), pp. 613-623; William F. Ogburn and Francis
R. Allen, “Technological Development and Per
Capita Income,” American Journal of Sociology,
65 (September, 1959), pp. 127-131; Philip M.
Hauser, “Demographic Indicators of Economic De-
velopment,” Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 7 (January, 1959), pp. 98-116; and Fred
Cottrell, Energy and Society, New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1955.

2An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations, New York: The Modern Li-
brary, 1937, Chps. 1-3.

8 Emile Durkheim, The Division of Labor in
Society, trans. by George Simpson, Glencoe, Illinois:
The Fress Press, 1949.

+See eg., Jack P. Gibbs and Walter T. Martin,
“Urbanization, Technology, and the Division of
Labor: International Patterns,” American Sociologi-
cal Review, 27 (October, 1962), pp. 667-677; San-
ford Labovitz and Jack P. Gibbs, “Urbanization,
Technology, and the Division of Labor: Further
Evidence,” Pacific Sociological Review, 7 (Spring,
1964), pp. 3-9; Stanley Udy, Jr., Organization of
Work, New Haven: HRAF Press, 1959; and Stan-
ley Lieberson, “The Division of Labor in Banking,”
ment of the division of labor is limited, the
same may be said of its ecological treatment.
For one thing, most of the research has done
little more than confirm long-established be-
liefs concerning the correlates of the division
of labor. Since the “obvious” is often illu-
sory, confirmation by systematic research is
not to be belittled. Nevertheless, these stud-
ies have discovered few unforeseen or un-
recognized correlates of the division of labor.

Another criticism of these studies is that
typically they do not show “how” the divi-
sion of labor comes to be associated with its
correlates. In other words, the demonstration
of significant statistical relationships does
not in itself reveal mechanisms or interven-
ing variables. Thus, although there is evi-
dence to indicate that a very efficient level
of technology is accompanied by a high de-
gree of division of labor,> this observed rela-
tion does not reveal the process by which
technological development gives rise to the
division of labor or vice versa.

Even when mechanisms or intervening
variables are recognized at the conceptual
level, they do not enter into the empirical
variables employed to demonstrate a rela-
tion between the division of labor and its
various postulated correlates. Moreover, the
theoretical constructs reflect an inordinate
concern with traditional ecological variables,
e.g., the friction of space, or population con-
centration, to the exclusion of the organiza-
tional component in the division of labor,
particularly the role of formally organized
productive associations. Sustenance activities
often take place in such associations, and
these associations may be a link between the
division of labor and some of its demon-
strated correlates.®
investigation of formal organizations themselves.
See Otis Dudley Duncan, “Human Ecology and
Population Studies,” in Philip M. Hauser and Otis
Dudley Duncan (eds.), The Study of Population,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1959, pp.
678-716; and Otis Dudley Duncan and Leo F.
Schnore, “Cultural, Behavioral, and Ecological
Perspectives in the Study of Social Organization,”
American Journal of Sociology, 65 (September,
1959), pp. 132-146, with “Comment” by Peter H.
Rossi, pp. 146-149, and “Rejoinder” by Duncan
and Schnore, pp. 149-153.

7¥For the sake of completeness, goods and serv-
ices are mentioned here, but with the acknowledg-
ment that the analysis is most pertinent to goods.
The whole problem of services has received com-
paratively little attention by economists or others
and for good reasons. Limits to the division of
labor in this sector, as well as to the expansibility
of economies through the introduction of technol-
ogy, are much less evident than they are for goods.
The fact that both output and productivity are
often extremely difficult to quantify doubtless has
discouraged research on services. For example, much
work is needed to determine the reasons for lower
productivity in the services sector. The U.S. De-
partment of Commerce reports real output per man
in the services sectors increased 0.7 per cent per
annum between 1929 and 1961 as compared to 2.4
per cent per annum for the goods sector. For a
preliminary report of a study on this subject, see
Victor R. Fuchs, Productivity Trends in the Goods
and Service Sectors, 1929-1961, A Preliminary Sur-
vey, New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research, Occasional Paper 89, 1964.

8 The producer in this mode of production is an
individual, but under certain conditions the family
may qualify, especially if the participation of wives
and children is of an irregular and little differenti-
ated character.
essity, i.e, Z cannot create the wheel by
assembly without the component parts. How-
ever irrational or improbable it may be in
practice, Z may have no control as to where,
when, and how much X and Y will produce.
True, X, Y, and Z are functionally interde-
pendent; but their production is organized
on a symbiotic basis, in much the same way
as the term applies to plant and animal com-
munities, that is, with mutual dependence
but with no formal coordination.®

The third mode of production results
when individuals are formally coordinated
so as to constitute productive associations.
The coordination of the division of tasks
cannot transcend physical necessity without
each participant making continuous predic-
tions as to what the other participants will
do. Such predictions are sufficiently reliable
only when the participants are obligated to
act in a certain way toward each other.
Thus, once the interdependency of X, Y,
and Z takes on an obligatory and sanctioned
quality, i.e., each participant ought to per-
form in an agreed-upon manner or face a
sanction, production is truly formally coor-
dinated. Implicit in this argument is the
existence of a hierarchy of positions and espe-
cially the increasing separation of ‘“manage-
ment” or “administration” as a distinctive
activity in and of itself. Obviously, the
amount of hierarchical differentiation and
the nature and extent of managerial func-
tions are dependent to a degree upon the
number of persons within the productive as-
sociation, a point to be discussed later on.

Since the obligatory coordination of acts
involved in producing goods or services is
the only essential element in defining produc-
tive associations, some very diverse human
groups qualify under the definition. This in
turn probably accounts for the different con-
ceptions in the literature of productive
associations and formal organizations in gen-
eral.!° Confronted with the diversity of pro-
ductive associations, writers have attempted
to restrict the term by incorporating other
definitional attributes, but they fail to agree
on what these additional attributes should
be. Furthermore, attempts to restrict the use
of the term often results in conceptual an-
swers to what should be treated as empirical
questions, e.g., why obligation is based on
reciprocity in some associations but is im-
posed by coercive sanctions in others.

In industrialized countries most of the
labor force is constituted into productive as-
sociations. This does not mean, however,
that all economic activity is formally coordi-
nated. Individuals or productive associations
may or may not have formally constituted
relations with each other. In certain “mar-
ket” activities, for example, sellers and buy-
ers are not obligated to buy and sell, even
though out of physical necessity the market
may be the only source or outlet. True,
there may be a loss occasioned by refusal to
participate in the market, but it is hardly
a sanction and certainly not one which is
externally imposed. The person or associa-
tion imposes the loss on themselves by re-
fusing to participate in the market.

The link between obligations and sanc-
tions further restricts the meaning of pro-
ductive associations. If sanctions are im-
posed for failure to conform to an obligation,
the question arises as to who is and who is
not subject to the obligation, i.e., a boundary
problem. This question is answered by the
introduction of criteria of membership, which
makes associations distinctive social enti-
ties.11
could be produced autonomously. Thus, a
person may grow cotton and transform the
raw material into garments either for him-
self or for others. Similarly, one may ad-
minister to the medical or health needs of a
population without any assistance. But,
apart from the quality of these autonomously
produced goods and services, such a mode of
organization cannot generate and sustain a
high degree of division of labor. First and
foremost, there are numerous goods and serv-
ices that cannot be produced by the “aver-
age” man alone, and the reasons for this are
obvious. While he may master all of the
technical knowledge and skills necessary to
construct a wagon, the same is not true for
an automobile and certainly not true for an
aircraft. Numerous other examples can be
given of units which simply cannot be pro-
duced autonomously in any appreciable vol-
ume. Since the variety of goods and services
produced is itself a conceptual component of
labor, it follows that a limited number of
different types of goods and services (which
is inherent in the autonomous organization
of production) sets limits on the division of
labor. Further, the number of full-time oc-
cupations in any system is a function of the
efficiency of production. Thus, if the effi-
ciency of production in agriculture is such
that no person can produce a surplus over
and beyond his own needs and those of his
dependents, there can be no full-time non-
agricultural occupations.!? The crucial point
is that the production of goods and services
is not and cannot be efficient in the autono-
mous mode of production.!® Consequently,

12 This kind of argument is often made, but
actually no study has determined the “empirical”
validity of this assertion. In other words the ob-
servation seems to be true only inferentially or,
more exactly, by definition. See George Dalton, “A
Note of Clarification on Economic Surplus,” Amer-
ican Anthropologist, 62 (June, 1960), pp. 483-491,
for a discussion of the “tricky” notion of economic
surplus.

18 Chipman holds that one of the two “pillars”
of economic activity is “the law of economies of
production, according to which it is possible for
people, by co-operating together and by combining
their labor with natural resources and capital, to
produce more of any one commodity than could be
produced by any persons or resources alone.” John
S. Chipman, “The Nature and Meaning of Equi-
librium in Economic Theory,” in Don Martindale
(ed.), Functionalism in the Social Sciences, Phila-
delphia: The American Academy of Political and
Social Science, Monograph 5, 1965, p. 35.
even if autonomous production makes pos-
sible full-time occupations, their number is
limited by the efficiency of production.

Since the symbiotic mode of production is
identified in terms of the differentiation of
tasks, it escapes the limitations imposed on
the division of labor in the autonomous sys-
tem. However, where the problem of coordi-
nation of work is solved by the individual
in the autonomous system, the only basis for
coordination of activities among persons in
the symbiotic system is physical necessity.
Lacking any basis for controlling what others
do, it is not likely that one will even attempt
to coordinate his productive activities with
those of others, and certainly not success-
fully. Thus, whereas the autonomous system
limits the division of labor, the symbiotic
system makes the development of the divi-
sion of labor highly irregular and problem-
atical.4#

The formally coordinated mode of produc-
tion adds to the division of tasks an obliga-
tory element which is essential to the suc-
cessful execution of activities.1> However,
while a productive association provides the
degree of regulation necessary for the segre-
gation of tasks into full-time occupations,
the number of occupations obviously is lim-
ited by the number of members of the asso-

14 The “putting out” system (domestic industries)
of the textile industry in the early stages of the
Industria] Revolution in England is a case that
approximates the symbiotic mode of production. Its
demise was hastened not only because of power
looms but also because of the irregular and prob~-
lematical organization of production. The gradual
introduction of the factory system clearly repre-
sented an attempt to overcome these deficiences.
See Neil J. Smelser, Social Change in the Industrial
Revolution: An Application of Theory to the Brit-
ish Cotton Industry, Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1959.

15 The three modes of production can be consid-
ered in terms of an evolutionary sequence through
which societies pass in the process of economic
development. As a generalization this holds only for
the dominant mode of production. Theoretically
and empirically, all three modes may be present to
some degree in any society, no matter what its
level of development. There is no intrinsic reason
why the formally coordinated mode of production
cannot exist in pre-industrial societies. The Inca
Empire, for example, had many political and social
characteristics conducive to the development of a
formally coordinated mode of production. What it
lacked, however, was a technology sufficiently ad-
vanced to take full advantage of its organizational
scope.
The line of reasoning pursued above is
formally summarized in three postulates.

Postulate 1: The greater the average de-
gree of division of labor within productive
associations, the greater the average size of
the productive associations. This generaliza-
tion is designated as a postulate because the
data requisite for determining the average
degree of division of labor within productive
associations are not available for a large
number of countries. This is due primarily to
the fact that industrial censuses are neither
as common nor as comparable as population
censuses. Furthermore, few if any reports of
an industrial census give occupational data
for individual productive associations. On
the other hand, population census reports
often contain data on the industry and occu-
pation of the economically active, and these
data enable one, as we shall see, to test the
above postulate indirectly.

16 Number of members is an important charac-
teristic of all associations, but it has proved sur-
prisingly refractory to any simple interpretation.
The relationship, for instance, between change in
the size of productive units and change in their
administrative component has not been clearly
established. For the recent investigation see Amos
H. Hawley, Walter Boland, and Margaret Boland,
“Population Size and Administration in Institutions
of Higher Education,” American Sociological Re-
view, 30 (April, 1965), pp. 252-255.
Productive associations can be grouped
roughly in terms of predominant type of
product or service, which is the crucial vari-
able in classifying the economically active as
to industry. Accordingly, the diversity of oc-
cupations within a given industry is indica-
tive of the degree of division of labor within
the production associations pertaining to that
industry. This relation is stated formally in
Postulate 2: The greater the average degree
of division of labor within productive asso-
ciations, the greater the intra-industry divi-
sion of labor among occupations.

Population statistics on the industries of
the economically active, without regard to
their occupations, are also relevant. As ob-
served earlier, the amount of goods and serv-
ices produced within a given industry is,
other things being equal, a function of effi-
ciency of production. The latter variable,
again other things equal, varies inversely
with the number of persons engaged in the
industry. Thus, if the efficiency of produc-
tion is generally low, the economically active
will be concentrated in only a few industries,
and that signifies a low degree of division of
labor among industries. However, if effi-
ciency of production determines the degree
of division of labor within productive asso-
ciations, then the latter variable should be
related to the degree of division of labor
among industries, as stated in Postulate 3:
The greater the average degree of division
of labor within productive associations, the
greater the degree of division of labor among
industries.

None of the above postulates is directly
testable because in each case the first vari-
able is not subject to measurement. How-
ever, when considered together, they gen-
erate three theorems, each of which is
directly testable.
The prospects for truly comparative so-
ciological studies have always been ham-
pered by the fact that only rarely can data
be gathered directly by sample surveys at
the cross-cultural or international level. For
the most part, comparisons at the macro-
scopic level must be based on published data,
the scope and quality of which are beyond
the control of the investigators who make
use of them. In the case of demographic and
ecological studies, researchers must rely al-
most entirely on census and vital statistics
publications; all too often, one finds that
only a few countries report the type of cen-
sus data or vital statistics needed. Even
when such data are reported they may not
be reported in a comparable way for a large
number of countries. Comparability has been
improved considerably by the efforts of such
agencies as the United Nations and the Pan
American Union, both of which make an ef-
fort to report the results of national censuses
in a standard manner. However, these agen-
cies cannot gather all kinds of information
for all countries, because their reports are
necessarily restricted to what the national
census agencies are able and willing to pro-
vide.

In the present research, data were needed
to compute measures of three variables at
the national level: (1) average size of pro-
ductive associations; (2) the degree of the
division of labor among industries; and (3)
the intra-industry degree of division of labor
among occupations. As subsequent observa-
tions indicate, measures of these three vari-
ables at the national level must be based on
census statistics pertaining to: (1) class of
worker (employer, employee, worker, self-
employed and unpaid family worker); (2)
the nine-group International Standard Indus-
try Classification (ISIC); and (3) the inter-
nationally accepted ten-group occupational
classification cross-tabulated by the ISIC in-
dustry classification. To avoid the difficulties
created by the important differences among
countries in the classification of women ac-
cording to labor force status, all data are
restricted to males.

It proved difficult to obtain the above
data for a large number of countries, espe-
cially the cross-tabulation of industry by
occupation. Fortunately, the Pan American
Union’s Instituto Interamericano de Esta-
distica has reported the statistics for twelve
countries of the Western Hemisphere, as
Taste 1. Size or Propuctive Assoctations, DecREE oF Division or LaBor AMONG INDUSTRIES,
Intra-InpustRY DecrEE oF Division or LaBor AMONG OCCUPATIONS, AND TECHNOLOGICAL
Errictency By CouNnTRIES, cIRCA 1950

 

 

Intra-industry

 

 

 

Indicator of Degree of Degree of

Average Size Division of Division of Indicator of

of Productive Labor Among Labor Among Technological

Associations* Industries? Occupations*® Efficiency *
Country, Year Value Rank Value Rank Value Rank Value Rank

qa) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Canada, 1951 3.09 3 +8197 1 «495 2 6.47 2
Chile, 1952 3.26 2 +7977 3 +218 3 0.76 4
Colombia, 1951 1.39 8 6624 8 +032 8 0.27 7
Costa Rica, 1950 2.74 4 6565 9 .040 7 0.24 8
Cuba, 1953 2.67 5 +7420 5 164 4 0.48 5
Ecuador, 1950 0.97 10 -6793 7 +022 say 0.12 10
El Salvador, 1950 1.83 6 +5689 10 028 10 0.09 11.5
Guatemala, 1950 0.88 By 5086 12 -031 9 0.14 9
Nicaragua, 1950 1.33 9 -5140 11 -007 12 0.09 11.5
Panama, 1950 0.74 12 -6956 6 -060 6 0.30 6
United States, 1950 3.63 1 +8130 2 -605 1 7.74 1
Venezuela, 1950 1.44 7 .7597 4 «155 5 0.77 3

 

*Ratio of number of male employees and workers to number of male employers and self-employed.
Source of data: Instituto Interamericano de Estadistica, La Estructura Demografica de las Naciones
Americanas, Washington, D.C.: Union Panamericana, Volumen 11, Tomo 2, Cuadro 22-05.

? 1,.0000—[2X?/(2ZX)?], where X is the number of economically active males in each of 9 industry cate-
gories. Source: American Sociological Review, 27 (October, 1962), pp. 667-677.

*1,000—[25 (2X15) /2;(2X13)"J, where X is the number of economically active males in the jth oc-
cupation within the ith industry, for a total of 10 occupational categories within 9 industry categories.
Source of data: Instituto Interamericano de Estadistica, La Estructura Demografica de las Naciones
Americanas, Washington, D.C.: Union Panamericana, Volumen 11, Tomo 2, Cuadro 21-05. See text for
occupation and industry categories.

*Commercial consumption of energy expressed in metric tons of coal per capita. Source: American
Sociological Review, 27 (October, 1962), p. 671.
employment data are used rather than data
for productive associations themselves. Sec-
ond, since both employers and self-employed
enter into the denominator of the estimation
formula, the latter actually are treated as
though they are “one-man” productive asso-
ciations, which means that as the number of
self-employed increases the estimated size
of productive associations decreases.17 Con-
sequently, the estimate reflects both partici-
pation in and size of productive associations.
Third, as the number of governmental em-
ployees and/or state-owned industries in-
creases, the estimate of the average size of
productive associations becomes increasingly
questionable.1®

The possible range of the indicator of size
is from 0 to the total gainfully employed
less one. In the former case all persons would
be self-employed and there would be no rep-
resentation in the numerator. In the latter
case all persons in the labor force would be
found in just one productive association
headed by one individual, i.e., only one em-
ployer and no self-employed.

Division of labor among industries. The
degree of division of labor among industries
is a function of two variables—the number
of industries and the distribution of eco-
nomically active among the industries. It is
manifestly impossible to work with every
identifiable industrial activity; therefore
some form of grouping into industrial cate-
gories is required. Census data on “detailed”
industry classification (for example, 154
categories in the U.S.A.) is preferable but it
is not reported in a comparable way for the
countries under consideration. Therefore the

17 The twelve countries vary considerably in the
relationship of employers to self-employed. In
Costa Rica, for example, there is one employer for
each self-employed person, whereas in Guatemala
the ratio is 1:19. The combination of employers
and self-employed is one more by necessity than
choice. Of the countries in the sample, two (Ecua-
dor and the United States) did not report em-
ployers and self-employed separately, and a third
(Cuba) reported no persons in the employer cate-
gory.

18 The estimate would not be at all applicable in
a truly socialist or communist economy because of
the proportion of the labor force who are nominally
employees of the state. All of the twelve countries
in this study are quasi-capitalist, but the number
of government employees in some of the countries
makes the estimates questionable, apart from other
deficiences.
generally accepted ISIC categories were
used, namely: (1) agriculture, forestry,
hunting, and fishing; (2) mining and quarry-
ing; (3) manufacturing; (4) construction;
(5) electricity, gas, water, and sanitary
services; (6) commerce; (7) transport, stor-
age, and communication; (8) services; (9)
not classifiable elsewhere.

With the number of industries held con-
stant, i.e., limited to nine, the degree of the
division of labor among them is a function
of the distribution of the economically ac-
tive among the industries. Specifically, if all
the economically active are concentrated in
one industry, the division of labor is at a
minimum, and if they are evenly distributed
throughout the industry categories it is at a
maximum.

As demonstrated in a recent study,?® a
systematic description of the distribution of
the distribution of the economically active
among industries can be obtained by the
following formula: D=1—[3X?/(3X)?],
where D is the degree of division of labor
among industries and X is the number of
persons in each industry. Where persons are
evenly distributed throughout the industries,
the D value is at a maximum, the value of
which depends on the number of industry
categories; 2° and where everyone is in the
same industry, D is at a minimum, which is
always zero. In other words, the D value
shown in column 3 of Table 1 reflects the
degree to which persons are evenly distrib-
uted throughout a given industry structure.

Two obvious inadequacies characterize
the above measure of the degree of division
of labor among industries. First, as sug-
gested earlier, the measure does not reflect
the number of industries, but rather the dis-
tribution among industry classes. Second, it
does not indicate the amount of functional
interdependence which accompanies industry
differentiation. It is generally assumed that
interdependence varies directly with differ-
entiation,”! but the assumption has yet to be
tested in a rigorous way, largely because of
the paucity of data on interdependence.

Intra-industry division of labor among oc-
cupations. Where everyone in a particular

19 Gibbs and Martin, of. cit.

20The maximum value is 1—(1/Ni), where Ni
is the number of industries, in this case, 0.8889

21 Hawley, op. cit., chp. 11.
industry has the same occupation,” the de-
gree of the division of labor within that in-
dustry is at a minimum; and where persons
are evenly distributed throughout the occu-
pations within an industry, the division of
labor within that industry is at a maximum.

The over-all measure of intra-industry de-
gree of division of labor among occupations
can be expressed mathematically as follows:
Di=1—[33X2/3(2X)2], where Di is the
intra-industry degree of division of labor
among occupations and X is the number of
persons in the jtk occupation of the ith in-
dustry. The minimum Di value is always
000 and the maximum value depends upon
the number of occupations within the indus-
tries, in this case, .900. Table 2 illustrates
the computations that enter into a Di value.
To conserve space, the illustration employs
a hypothetical population with a small num-
ber of industries and occupations.

Measures of the intra-industry degree of
division of labor among occupations are
shown in the fifth column of Table 1 for
each of twelve countries. The measures are
based on ten occupational categories within
each of the nine industry categories previ-
ouly described. The occupations are: (1)
professionals and technicians; (2) managers;
(3) office workers; (4) salesmen; (5) agri-
cultural and other primary workers; (6)
miners; (7) transportation; (8) artisans
and skilled workers; (9) unskilled workers;
(10) services.
the first column and those in the fifth
of Table 1. The rho coefficient of +-0.71 is
consistent with the theorem. The exceptions
to the anticipated relation are significant
in two respects. First, there are only four
countries (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Nica-
ragua, and Panama) for which the ranks
on the two values differ by more than two.
Second, whereas none of the four extreme
exceptions are in the upper quartile of the
degree of division of labor among occupations
(col. 5), no country in the upper quartile is
more than one rank removed from that pre-
dicted. This pattern suggests that large pro-
ductive associations are certain to be present
in societies with a very high degree of divi-
sion of labor, and in that sense the size of
productive associations may operate only as
a limiting factor on the division of labor
once it reaches a certain level.

The prediction in the case of Theorem 2
is a direct relation between the values in
column 1 and the values in column 3 of
Table 1. Rho in this instance is -+-0.63.
Values for five of the countries (Costa Rica,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Panama, and Vene-
zuela) are more than two ranks removed
from that predicted; and, as in the case of
Theorem 1, none of the five are in the
upper quartile of the division of labor
values.

Consistent with Theorem 3, there is a very
close direct relation between the values in
column 3 and the values in column 5 of
Table 1. The ro coefficient in this instance
is +0.88. Only two countries (Guatemala
and Ecuador) are more than two ranks re-
moved from that predicted.

Technology. Prior discussion has indicated
that the division of labor is affected not only
by the modes of organizations but also by
the efficiency of technology.”* Specifically,
if the proportion of the labor force which
is “needed” in a given industry or occupa-
tion is a function of efficiency of technology,
then technology rather than the organization
of production is the primary determinant
of the division of labor. Consequently, the
central question in this instance is whether
technological efficiency is more closely re-
lated to the division of labor than is the
size of productive organizations.

As with the other measures, there are

23 See also Labovitz and Gibbs, op. cit.
many problems in estimating technological
efficiency at the national level.24 A com-
monly used indicator is per capita com-
mercial consumption of energy, as shown
in column 7 of Table 1. Rank-order coeffi-
cients of correlation between this indicator
of technological efficiency and the other
variables are as follows: size of productive
associations, +0.60; degree of division of
labor among industries, +0.91; and intra-
industry degree of division of labor among
occupations, +0.96.

Other Findings. Clearly, technological ef-
ficiency is much more closely related to
both dimensions of the division of labor
than is size of productive associations. Is
this a consequence simply of the measures
used in this study or does it reflect a gen-
uine difference? No definitive answer can
be given, but a detailed examination of the
data in Table 1 is illuminating. Most of the
countries show little range in rank position
from one of the four measures to the next.
Five countries (Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Cuba and the United States) have a differ-
ence among the four measures of no more
than two ranks, while for Guatemala and
Nicaragua it is three ranks. Given the na-
ture of rho as the measure of correlation,
these countries cannot account for the dif-
ferential relations among the four variables.
It is Ecuador and Venezuela, each with a
range of four ranks, and especially the three
Central American countries (Costa Rica, El
Salvador and Panama) with a range of five
to six ranks, that produce most of the differ-
ences in the rho values.

Of the three countries with largest rank
difference, Panama is the most striking, both
because it represents the greatest rank differ-
ence (6) and because the ranks on the three
measures other than productive associations
are exactly the same. That Panama should
rank last on the productive association vari-
able is particularly puzzling because of the
known importance of a large association, the
Panama Canal, in the country’s economy.
To explain this anomaly it is necessary to
consider the nature of agricultural employ-

24 Ibid. In their study of the division of labor
in the United States, 1900-1950, Labovitz and Gibbs
considered five indicators of technology—produc-
tivity, energy supply, energy input, work output,
and horsepower—and found all five to be highly
intercorrelated over time.
ment in Panama. For ten of the countries
in our sample (the data not being available
for Guatemala and Nicaragua) the measure
of the size of productive associations in
agriculture alone shows great variation,
ranging from a high of 2.66 (Chile) to a
low of 0.17 (Panama).?° In 1950 there were
only 13,024 male workers and employees in
agriculture in Panama compared to 78,297
self-employed males. When non-agricultural
employment is used to compute the measure
of size of productive associations and the
countries are than ranked (with estimates
for Guatemala and Nicaragua), only one
country changes more than two ranks in
position. That country is Panama, which
vaults from twelfth to third in rank. The
non-agricultural ranking produces signifi-
cantly higher correlations with the other
three measures: these rise from +0.63 to
-+0.71 for division of labor; from +0.71
to +0.78 for the intra-industry degree of
division of labor among occupations; and
from +0.60 to +0.67 for technology effi-
ciency.

Panama’s anomalous position in rank for
the total economically active can be inter-
preted, but no explanation can be given for
the lack of congruence in ranks of Costa
Rica and El Salvador. Venezuela, which is
eighth in rank on the non-agricultural meas-
ure of the size of productive associations, is
third in rank on technology. Since technology
in this case is defined as the per capita com-
mercial consumption of energy, Venezuela’s
high ranking probably is due to its impor-
tance as a producer of petroleum.

Even with these revised figures, however,
the organizational measure is still inferior
to technological efficiency as a predictor of
the two measures of the division of labor.
While the above correlations clearly suggest
that technology is the “prime mover,” the
role of organization should not be dismissed
as superfluous. As earlier suggested, large
productive associations may only permit a

25 Interestingly enough, this agriculture measure
has a negative relation (—0.32) to that of technol-
ogy, principally because the United States (0.37)
and Canada (0.41) rank so low. This reflects the
pattern of independent farming characteristic of
these countries. Because employment in agriculture
occupies only a small part of the labor force in
both countries, the impact upon the total measure
is not large.
TABLE 3. MEASURES OF THE DIVISION oF LaBorR WITHIN INDUSTRIES AMONG OCCUPATIONS,
EconoMicatty AcTIvVE MAtts, By CouNTRIES, cIRcA 1950*

 

 

 

Col. 9
Range
Col. 1 Col.3  Col.4. Col.5— Col.6 = Col. 7 of Ranks
Agri- Col.2 Con- Manu- Electric- Com- Transpor- Col.8 within
Country, Year culture Mining struction turing ity&Gas merce tation Services Rows
Canada, 1951 087 = .590 = 567 = 633 789 = 793.638 = 777 1-9
Chile, 1952 091? 569 = 495 = 378 6585 7458 744 = 732 2-8
Colombia, 1951 20119 439 314 257 468% 640 = 689 757 6-11
Costa Rica, 1950 016% = .140 506 = .130 = 733 = 644 = 697 694% 2-12
Cuba, 1953 -049 698 = 490.387 671.690.671.807 2-8
Ecuador, 1950 +0030 62140? 441 075% 680 5790 687.761 4-12
EI Salvador, 1950 019 549 503 = 144 = 626 = 670 = .719 = 706% 3-11
Guatemala, 1950 024 = 373 455 1289 1537 5820 700.751 4-10
Nicaragua, 1950 -002% 345% 152% .osse? 1316 599 65299) 71.200 9-12
Panama, 1950 035 649 = 514 391 5359 759 55109 722 3-10
United States, 1950 085 = 559 = 560% = 595” = 702 = 307.784 810 1-6
Venezuela, 1950 092 755M 2809? 362 = 559 527 446% 935 1-12
Rho Coefficient

with Indicators

of Technological +.84 +.68 4.47 +.86 4.39 +.54 4.04 +.70
Efficiency in

Col.7 of

Table 1

 

* The number in parentheses after each value indicates the rank within each column. See Table 1 for
source of data.
high degree of division of labor. Whether
or not the possibility is actually realized is
contingent on the efficiency of technology.
Nonetheless, the organizational component
may set limits on the division of labor, and
through the latter, the efficiency of tech-
nology itself.

Comparison of Particular Industries. Of
the four variables considered, intra-industry
division of labor among occupations is cor-
related most highly with the other three,
and especially with technology. The meas-
ure is, of course, a composite value for all
industries and all occupations. It can, how-
ever, be computed separately for each of
the nine industries in the ISIC classification;
the results of this calculation are presented
in Table 3. The large differences in rank
order for industries within the same country
clearly demonstrate that economic develop-
ment is not unidimensional. While some
sectors of the economy may be advanced
(a high degree of division of labor among
occupations within the related industry),
the others may lag far behind. Observe in
column 9 of Table 3 that some countries
may rank high with regard to the division of
labor in one industry but low with regard
to another industry. Indeed, in no case is
Consistent with expectations, the esti-
mated size of productive associations varies
directly by countries with the degree of
division of labor among industries and among
occupations within industries. However, the
division of labor variables are more closely
related to indicators of technological effi-
ciency than to estimated size of productive
associations. The differential relation sug-
gests that large productive associations may
only permit a high degree of division of
labor; whether or not a high degree is real-
ized depends upon technological efficiency.

Technological efficiency is also relevant
for the finding that the degree of division
of labor among occupations is not uniformly
high or uniformly low in all of a country’s
industry categories. Whereas the measure of
general technological efficiency is closely re-
lated to the degree of division of labor in
all industries combined, it is more closely
related to the division of labor within some
industries than in others. The general con-
clusion is that a major change in general
technological efficiency does not have the
same influence on all industries, at least as
far as the division of labor is concerned.

For two reasons, the results of the research
must be regarded as exploratory. Above all,
the measures employed are crude at best.
The statistics which enter into an analysis
of the division of labor should be based on
detailed industries and occupations rather
than the gross categories considered in this
paper. Perhaps more serious, “class of
worker” statistics provide only an estimate
of the average size of productive associations.

Apart from the questionable quality of
the statistics, it should also be noted that
the study has considered only one aspect of
productive associations and the organization
of production generally. Data on technology
are also limited to one type of statistic—per
capita commercial consumption of energy—
and it is improbable that it is a reliable
gauge of over-all technological efficiency.
Finally, the comparisons in the present re-
search do not reveal anything about the
temporal relations among the variables,
which may be crucial in an attempt to un-
ravel the causal sequence.

With continued advances in the scope
and quality of census data at the national
level the relations considered here can be
examined much more thoroughly. In the
meanwhile, the statistics on a few countries
are such as to permit observations on the
temporal relations among the variables.
