@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2087964?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
oLe theory has suffered since incep-
R tion from lack of a satisfactory ac-
count of motivation. It is all very
well as far as it goes to state that a person
learns to recognize standard situations and
to play expected roles in them according to
the status defined for him in each. But this is
not enough when the person encounters
alternatives and must resolve conflicting def-
initions of his appropriate behavior. Nor is
it enough to account for the emergence of
new roles in his conduct, nor for his more or
less unique variations upon conventional
roles. A striking revelation of the need for
some theory of motivation to back up situa-
tional analysis? is disclosed by apathy in the
performance of conventional roles, when
these are on the verge of abandonment or
are accepted only under duress. Roles as
such do not provide their own motives.
Most of the recent writers on role theory®
have recognized this deficiency and have
endeavored to make it up through the ex-
pedient of eclecticism. Like a Ford car
with a Chevrolet motor, each of these “‘inte-
grators” puts on the road his own model of
role theory, one powered by psychic energy,
another by a system of tensions or a drive-
reduction apparatus, a third by some hier-
archy of innate and derived needs. Also, a

* Paper read at the annual meeting of the
American Sociological Society held in Denver,
September 7-9, 1950.

1 Leonard S. Cottrell, Jr., “The Adjustment of
the Individual to His Age and Sex Roles,” Ameri-
can Sociological Review, 7 (Dec., 1942).

2Leonard S. Cottrell, Jr., “The Analysis of
Situational Fields in Social Psychology,” American
Sociological Review, 7 (June, 1942).

8 Walter Coutu, Emergent Human Nature, New
York: Knopf, 1949; Gardner Murphy, Personality,
New York: Harper, 1947; Theodore M. Newcomb,
Social Psychology, New York: Dryden, 1950; S. S.
Sargent, Social Psychology, New York: Ronald,
1950.
number of models on the road are said to
run through some tendency-to-run estab-
lished through experiences of the early years,
these early years being made to do the work
of instincts. Despite the unscientific effort
of each writer to achieve uniqueness, their
theories all share the postulation of motives
as predispositions, purportedly inferred from
behavior. As many critics have contended,
this either pushes the problem back into an
infinite regress or leads circularly to the
pseudo-explanation of behavior by inferences
from itself.

Only two or three writers, such as Sherif
and Cantril* or Lindesmith and Strauss®
come close to dispensing with the effort to
sustain a system of predispositions. After
much stretching of “frames of reference,”
however, Sherif and Cantril emerge with an
ego consisting of “ego-attitudes,” which un-
like some other attitudes are not traceable
to basic drives, and they promise another
work on motivation. Lindesmith and Strauss
are far more daring in describing motives,
like Mills,® as rationalizations of acts, where-
by one relates his acts to previous experi-
ence and to the values of the groups to
which one feels he must justify his behavior.
Their analysis correctly calls attention to
the function of language in motivation, but
leaves the reader with the uncomfortable
feeling of an unanalyzed hiatus between
words and acts, of mystery as to just how
language does in fact motivate. It is this
hiatus which the concept of identification
seems adequate to fill.
So that we may ignore non-motivated be-
havior, motivation or motivated behavior
has to be defined. We are inclined to scoff
at those medieval souls who ascribed pur-
pose to the shape of stones, the falling of
water or the absence of beards among
women, although remnants of such thinking
are common. It is likewise easy to make
jokes about Lundberg’s assertion that there
is no more justification scientifically to seek
out the motives of a man who runs down the
street than those of a piece of paper which
blows down the street, although Lundberg
brings strong arguments to support his ex-
treme position. It is far less easy to specify
where between these extremes a line can be
drawn to differentiate motivated from non-
motivated human behavior.

The growing of whiskers we take to be
non-motivated; the shaving of them off,
motivated. Going to bed is motivated, sleep-
ing is not. Physiological functions like
growth, digestion, circulation, metabolism,
are clearly non-motivated, but there are
marginal activities of the organism, like
elimination, over which conscious control is
only slowly won and may be lost under
stress. While we may not gain similar direct
control over the former functions, there
are almost none which cannot be disrupted
by psychic stress or modified by manipula-
tion of their physical conditions.

To approach the dividing line from the
opposite side, we go from conscious, ra-
tional actions involving choice among alter-
natives to those which seem compulsive or
“unconsciously” motivated, but are not uni-
versally so, and thence again to those which
seem to be physiologically autonomous.

To generalize, motivated behavior is dis-
tinguished by its prospective reference to
ends in view, by being more or less subject
to conscious control through choice among
alternative ends and means. All kinds of
human behavior are characterized by direc-
tion (or form), intensity, frequency and
duration; all literally require expenditure of
energy. But only motivated behavior exhib-
its the fluidity of organization, the paradoxi-
cal combinations of phenomenally-experi-
enced choice and compulsion (“I don’t
want to but I have to because . . .”), the
dependence upon learning and the content of
previous experience, and, above all, the sym-
bolic structuring which must be taken into
account even to begin to understand, for
example, the prodigies of effort and self-
sacrifice put forth by our representatives in
Korea. In a sentence, we take motivation to
refer to the degree to which a human being,
as a participant in the ongoing social process
in which he necessarily finds himself, de-
fines a problematic situation as calling for
performance of a particular act, with more
or less anticipated consummations and con-
sequences, and thereby his organism releases
the energy appropriate to performing it.
Even the behavior consequent to an irritat-
ing organic condition, e.g. heat or hunger,
has to be defined according to its meaning
in the situation and is so defined, often
fallibly. Organic irritations, which may or
may not be anterior to definition of an act,
contrary to some predispositionalists have no
direct and uniform connection with organic
mobilizations, which are always posterior to
definition of an act.

To the extent that we find the term atti-
tude useful, it is as a synonym for these
mobilizations. Definitions of the situation
account for attitudes, not the reverse. And to
avoid predispositionalist connotations, we
prefer not to speak of particular motives,
but only of motivated acts. If we were to
speak of motives, it would be as rationaliza-
tions of acts, in the sense of Mills and Linde-
smith—that is, as symbolic constructs which
not only organize these acts in particular
situations but make them recognizably re-
current in the life-history of any person or
group. This pattern of recurrence constitutes
what is often reified as “personality” or
“culture.” But what is it that makes culture
and personality in action different from cul-
ture and personality in abstraction? We are
back where we began.

Consider the game. For brevity’s sake, we
must assume reader familiarity with Mead’s
analysis of play, the game and the general-
ized “other.” Let eighteen strangers, familiar
with the rules of baseball and having nothing
to do, be told to choose up sides and play a
game. At the moment the choosing begins, it
makes not the slightest difference to any
potential player which side he is on—or
which side wins, though if competitively in-
doctrinated, he might want to be on the
winning side. The groups, if such they may
be called—the two teams—have no identity.
If they could go ahead and play under such
conditions—of no identity—the game would
be almost pointless. True, people would play
the roles appropriate to their positions on
the teams, when at bat or in the field, and
any physiological needs defined by them as
satisfied through exercise might be met.
Here would be role theory in action, as
Mead left off in describing it’—a sort of
empty bottle of behavior and formal rela-
tions, without motive or incentive save the
undifferentiated physiological necessity to
dispense energy and kill time. There would
be no more reason to obey the rules than to
cheat, but the game might proceed by un-
imaginative observance of them. Since its
progress would offer no more interest or
involvement to the players than to a specta-
tor ignorant of the rules, it is inconceivable
how the observer could ever get them to
play it, unless by offering them a reward,
such as money, whose value was extraneous
to the game itself. Some jobs are like that,
but we do not call them games.

Now by contrast consider a ball game like
last year’s World Series, when the Dodgers
came up against the Yankees. The roles and
the statuses are the same, as are the rules of
the game. But what a difference! And what
is the nature of the difference? It is in the
fact that the empty bottle of role and status
suddenly has a content. That content is not
drives, tensions, energy or needs; it is iden-
tity, Yet remember that it is still a game;
for all the frenzied involvement of players
and spectators, of winners and losers, the
gain and loss are purely symbolic. Except for
the special identity which gives value to
their ensuing activity, the behavior of the
players would be mere rote—a perfect
example of anomie.
As Mead has shown, one learns many more
roles than he ever plays overtly. To interact
intelligently with another, he must learn
correctly to anticipate the responses of that
other—that is, to empathize. But implicit
role-taking is no metaphysical transmigra-
tion of consciousness. It requires playing
sub-overtly the role appropriate to the iden-
tity of the other in the situation, as accu-
rately as one can read off that identity. In
play or in role-playing experiments, a person
may disclose the great range of his latent
repertoire. The reason he limits his real or
realistic behavior to a selected few of all the
roles he has learned is that he knows and
defines only these certain ones as his own.
And he can only ascertain which role is his
in each situation by knowing who he is.
Moreover, he must know who he is with
considerable conviction and clarity, if his
behavior is to exhibit definiteness and force,
which is to say, degree of motivation.

All of which thus far may seem so patent
as to preclude the raising of more analytical
questions about the nature of identity and
identification. Is it not altogether obvious
that the chairman of this meeting, for in-
stance, is Edward Rose, the one who exists
at such and such a time and place and per-
forms largely as others hereabout expect
him to? Yet it is just this simple and obvious
fact that has to be broken down analytically,
like the atom, into its various constituents.
And as the analogy suggests, the process of
analyzing the self into its parts may go on
indefinitely.

Intrusion of the concept of self here, how-
ever, permits mention of what we take to be
the misplaced abstractness of much use of it
by social psychologists. Just this wrapping
of all the particular constituents of a per-
son’s identity into one round bundle and
labelling it “the self” have long delayed the
analysis of the self and of identity. Too-
ready generalization of the identities of any
given self into indefinitely extensible statuses
has led many social psychologists to feel
that they must look “behind” the self for
the “underlying” motives of the particular
kinds of behavior which spring out of it—
even to perpetrate such super-generalities as
a “drive for self-actualization.”

We mean by identification appropriation
of and commitment to a particular identity
or series of identities. As a process, it pro-
ceeds by naming; its products are ever-
evolving self-conceptions—with the emphasis
on the con-, that is, upon ratification by
significant others. If space permitted, it
would be valuable to show in detail how
much this concept of identification owes to
Freud’—where it differs from his concept,
and where it supplements. Being more psy-
chologist than sociologist, Freud tends to
ignore the functions of language; for all his
discussion of identification, he never speaks
of identity or common identity. We are not
concerned here to kick the dead horse of
Freudian instinct theory, nor to appreciate
the leads he gave to the study of empathy,
but only to affirm that his concept of identi-
fication is inadequate as a basis for a situa-
tional theory of motivation. Neither is it the
missing link of social psychology—a de-
scription of the specific tie which unites
individuals with their fellows. Yet expansion
and reinterpretation in interactional terms
of his concept of identification provides
both.

In surveying the multitude of predisposi-
tional theories of motivation which have
been set forth, one is struck not only by their
regular failure. Equally striking and sug-
gestive is the seductive—not to say sinister,
as Burke® charges—appeal which is exerted
by the hope of reducing human behavior to
some permanently definitive order through
finding certain elemental imperatives to
underly its bewildering variety. Criticism
has negated every specific naming of “the
mainsprings of human action.” If we now
boldly draw the indicated conclusion and
deny wholesale the scientific validity of all
such attempts, it remains illuminating to
ask why their great continuing appeal in
the face of repeated collapse or supersession.
Where Dewey’s tree, stone or leather is inert
and its properties unchanging throughout the
known past, his man, however, is not. A rose
by any other name may smell as sweet, but
a person by another name will act according
to that other name. The regularities in our
behavior toward him are necessarily based
upon our expectation of regularities in his
behavior. The regularities in his behavior
toward us are in turn based in the same way
upon his sharing our conception of his iden-
tity and his expectation that we share his
conception of our identity. Naturally there
is many a slip!

The common man is always classifying
thus. And to make things harder for the
social psychologist, his classifications vary
with time and place, as identities are elabo-
rated and re-determined. Moreover, the
common man assumes that categories ap-
plied to his fellows immediately indicate the
motives to be imputed to them. “I dislike
Communists because I am a Catholic and
they are atheistic” is an example of such
common-sense explanation (rationalization)
of behavior. It is enough for him when impu-
tation suffices for investigation, and extrapo-
lation for prediction—enough, that is, to
make possible a more or less orderly social
life. Likewise, his identities give common
meaning, stability and predictability to his
own behavior as long as he clings to them.
Possibly the predictions of social scientists
will never excel their apprehension of the
categories of identity and motive employed
among the groups they study; but predictive
power is certainly lost when, in place of
these, psychologists substitute simpler and
less relevant categories of their own—their
lists of predispositions.

If the regularities in human behavior are
organized responses to situations which have
been classified more or less in common by
the actors in them, then names motivate
behavior. It is by analysis of the function
of language, and especially of names as-
cribed to categories of people, that we can
dispense with predispositions and yet main-
tain a theory of motivation subject to empiri-
cal testing—not throwing out baby with
bath, as the positivists do.14

Establishment of one’s own identity to
oneself is as important in interaction as to
establish it for the other. One’s own identity
in a situation is not absolutely given but is
more or less problematic. Many expositions
of interpersonal behavior omit this point,
and describe only the process of ascertaining
the position of the other, as if that could be
read off like a set of labels. Labels are there,
to be sure, but the important fact is what
these labels mean in a unified definition of
the situation embracing both parties. In
abstraction one can consider statuses analyt-
ically, as the anthropologists do, but in ac-
tion it is the unique concatenation of relevant
statuses at this one time and place—in this
situation—which constitutes identity.

Social situations always contain standard
elements, and always some unique elements,
if only a different position in time and
space. When one enters a new situation, he
attempts to relate it to old ones by familiar
signs, and his response may be automatic.
Or the preponderance of new elements may
make the situation too problematic for a
habitual response to be appropriate. For its
definition, nonetheless, he must approach it
from some fixed point of reference. He must
start from what is most definite, find some
given elements in it. His capacities are
given, but they constitute only inert limits
to his potential behavior, so they are not
definitive enough. Although some pressing
organic irritation may be quite definite,
again his physical condition helps create the
situation he confronts, but does not alone
dictate what his response will be. The iden-
tity of the others involved is dependent
upon his own in the familiar reciprocal
manner. So inevitably the elements which
have to be “taken as given” are his identi-
ties or, more exactly, his special pattern
of identity.

In most situations our identity is so com-
pletely habitual and taken for granted that
we virtually ignore its presence or relevance
in our reactions, concentrating only upon
the stimulating environment. Researchwise,
it is strategic to focus observations upon
those situations where identity itself is
acutely problematic in order to observe its
determining effect upon behavior (although
study of the opposite type of situation—the
teacher who insists she was cut out only for
fifth-grade math, the fifth-grader who insists
he was never cut out for it—is also illuminat-
ing).12 When doubt of identity creeps in,
action is paralyzed. Only full commitment to
one’s identity permits a full picture of moti-
vation. Faith in one’s conception of one’s
self is the key which unlocks the physiologi-
cal resources of the human organism, re-
leases the energy (or capacity, as Dewey
would say) to perform the indicated act.
Doubt of identity, or confusion, where it
does not cause complete disorientation, cer-
tainly drains action of its meaning, and thus
limits mobilization of the organic correlates
of emotion, drive and energy which consti-
tute the introspectively-sensed “push” of
motivated action. We are reminded of James
Michener’s!* heroes in the South Pacific
who were plagued by the question, “What
am I doing here?” Also, of William James’s
contention that only he who has played ser-
iously with the idea of suicide has plumbed
the phenomenon of self.

At this moment we can only speculate on
how one acquires and gets committed to
particular identities. Unless we assume a
heaven of unborn souls, the process is ob-
viously a matter of experience. We are lim-
ited to the experience available to us from
birth, although these limitations become
more flexible as we gain in variety of experi-
ence. That is, the richer our experience, the
more possible it becomes to exercise con-
scious direction over its further accumula-
tion. Nevertheless, limitations continue, and
few persons ever reach the point of consider-
ing such a deliberate and drastic shift of
identity as to change their names or pass
the color line. Primarily then the compulsive
effect of identification upon behavior must
arise from absence of alternatives, from un-
questioned acceptance of the identities cast
upon one by circumstances beyond his con-
trol (or thought to be). From the point of
view of the experiencing individual, however,
the process is bound to seem much less like
a process of limitation to a few among in-
finite possibilities than a process of dis-
covery. His accruing conceptions of who he
is are usually taken as something verging
upon ultimate reality rather than as ulti-
mately arbitrary ascriptions by others. Of
course as soon as he encounters alternatives,
he is released from such pre-conscious bond-
age to any particular conception of himself.
Thenceforth his identities accrue from more
conscious choice and pursuit of the values
he has discovered in his experience.

Value, we would insist, is discovered in
experience, not conferred upon it from with-
out. The concepts by which we may name
our various ends-in-view, and through ma-
nipulation of which we are enabled to judge
among alternatives, should not—in value
theory or motivation theory—be allowed to
obscure the concrete consummations to
which they refer. Once experienced, these
appear permanently registered in the or-
ganism. If the concepts have no concrete
reference for a person, or if through faulty
communication the connection between the
abstract values and the actual experience is
not made, the abstractions are not motivat-
ing to him, as every parent finds out daily.
Our learning is immensely expedited through
being directed by means of these names for
experienceable values to undergo and ac-
quire them. Also, if through identification
with more experienced mentors upon whose
judgment we depend, we hold to the expecta-
tion of realizing recommended values eventu-
ally, experiential confirmation may remain
lacking indefinitely. Nevertheless, all signals
pointing to where value may be found in
experience probably must be corroborated
by its actual discovery, at least by some
members of any group which shares them,
or these signals become empty shibboleths
and lingering memorials of an extinct value
community.

If we insist that prior experience is neces-
sary to motivation, however, have we not
fallen back once more into predispositional
thinking? Not if we are correct in assuming
that a predisposition denotes more than a
mere statistical tendency, some active thrust
which constantly presses like a coiled spring
to set off a particular line of action. Meta-
phorically put, the operation of values in
the formulation of responses to situations is
advisory, not executive. While we can only
mobilize for our next act when it or its ele-
ments can be construed as similar to acts
which have gone before, the determination of
the appropriate act is made in the situation,
not prior to it. Experience is continually be-
ing recombined in new patterns; and even
the most habitual act must be defined as
appropriate to its immediate context to be
launched overtly. In place of predisposition,
therefore, it is necessary and sufficient to
put memory (memory plus mobilization
equals motivation), by virtue of which we
can call up in the present images of past
consummations of acts.1* We set these before
us as ideal futures, to be achieved again
when we have reconstructed the present
situations so as to put us—if this is possible
to one of our identity—into an imagined
new position where that remembered good
will be actually re-experienced. Because we
have the capacity through language for con-
ceptualizing these remembered goods as val-
ues, and the ingenuity to devise new schemes
of relations under which they may be revived
in the same or fuller measure, we can invent
new roles or deviate from conventional ones.
Also, we simultaneously inherit thereby the
constant possibility of conflict—both inter-
nal and external—which characterizes mem-
bers of human society.

Because our learning has more often than
not been perfected to the point where cogni-
tive judgments in standardized situations
are made instantaneously, and the energy for
performing the appropriate behavior is re-
leased immediately, it has been an easy mis-
take for many observers to suppose that the
organic correlates came first and even ac-
count for the definition of the situation,
rather than the reverse. Also, it has often
led them to ignore or depreciate the long,
historical accumulation of experience, or-
ganized by our shared conceptual apparatus,
which brings our whole past to bear upon
our behavior in the momentary present. Yet
if past and future did not figure in the deter-
mination of the present, would we logically
have a phenomenon of motivation or valua-
tion to ponder?

Without the binding thread of identity,
one could not evaluate the succession of situ-
ations. Literally, one could say there would
be no value in living, since value only exists
or occurs relative to particular identities—at
least value as experienced by organisms
which do not live in the mere present, as
animals presumably do, devoid of self and
unaware of impending death. Moreover, it
is only through identification as the sharing
of identity that individual motives become
social values and social values, individual
motives.

Fuller recognition of these functions of
identity should increase the scope, power
and precision of situational analysis in so-
cial research, while in turn research oriented
to identification should contribute to the
elaboration and clarification of its working.
It is only because one conceives of himself,
via a certain identity, as a member of a
class which includes certain others, that he
can enjoy or suffer the successes and failures
of a group. It is only commitment to his
identity which makes him subject without
physical compulsion to the control of the
groups to which he belongs, or arouses his
antagonism to members of a category con-
strued as inimical to his category. In fact,
we will carry this so far as to say that only
full commitment to identities shared with
others makes possible the grand human
phenomena of love and grief. This is not
tautological, because it calls attention to
language in general and names in particular
as the mediating links among individuals.
It enables us to rephrase such imponderable
speculations as “What are the psychological
functions of love?” into definitely research-
able form, such as “How did this person
acquire his identity?” or “How does he get
committed to particular identities which tie
him constitutionally as a self to other per-
sons?” Also, in reverse, “What kinds of new
experience are sufficient to free him from the
compulsion of certain old identities?”

This paper must end where it ought to
begin. Originally it described some proposals
for research on various types of acutely
problematic identity, and some suggestions
for experimentation with the methods every
propagandist—which includes each of us
part of the time—uses to motivate others.
Space permits only mention of studies of
identification among adopted and illegitimate
children, the effects of ambiguous identity
upon the motivation of “marginal men,” the
psychological consequences of name-chang-
ing, and problems of self-conception among
divorced women who keep their husbands’
names. Much understanding is already com-
ing from observation of marked effects upon
behavior from identification with Alcoholics
Anonymous and other therapeutic groups.
Regarding the techniques by which the prop-
agandist succeeds in invoking identification
of listener with speaker, Kenneth Burke
gives the experimenter many leads in his
valuable recent book, A Rhetoric of Mo-
tives.15 Would practical successes as a recipe
for motivating others be too stringent a test
of the validity of a theory of motivation?
We have set forth that (1) role theory
needs to be supplemented with an account of
motivation consistent with its main premises,
(2) a proper definition of motivated and
non-motivated behavior makes clear how to
avoid both dissolution of the concept of
motivation and unchecked imputation of
motives, (3) identification is the process
whereby individuals are effectively linked
with their fellows in groups, (4) predisposi-
tional theories, being oblivious to the func-
tion of language in motivated behavior,
ascribe metaphysical reality to what are
actually only the verbal categories whereby
human beings regularize their doings, (5)
these categorizations of experience motivate
behavior through the necessary commitment
of individuals to particular concatenations of
identity in all situations, (6) commitment
to particular identities arises through a limit-
ing and discovering process of acquiring
conceptions of self, which are confirmed,
revised or elaborated partly by instruction
from significant others and partly through
direct experience, and (7) the compelling or
inhibiting effect of identifications upon the
release of varying kinds of behavior can be
studied empirically.

In conclusion, let it be emphasized that
the title of this paper offered expansion of
the concept of identification only as the
basis for a situational theory of motivation,
not as a full theory itself, even though it
helps dispel certain false theories. By its use
are avoided the fallacies of both biological
detérminism—the person impelled from
within—and of cultural determinism—the
person driven from without. It also avoids
the ingenious pretensions by which some
theorists, through the invention of such
terms as “bio-social,” have resolved a puta-
tive opposition between biology and culture
which never existed to begin with. When
theorists can do no better in explaining con-
flict and change than to make the environ-
ment the enemy of the organism, or give no
better explanation of personality organiza-
tion than as a meeting of protoplasm and
society, it is puzzling to note that Cooley
was insisting as early as 1902 that individual
and social are two sides of the same phe-
nomena.1® They do not have to be joined
together by integration in textbooks. In the
concept of identity we can see this clearly:
One has no identity apart from society; one
has no individuality apart from identity.17
Only by making use of this concept can we
account for motivation in terms consistent
with the only social psychology that truly
deserves the name “social.”
