@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
This paper reports development of an integrated framework for studying status. The
framework provides models and methods for addressing long-standing, unresolved
issues, such as (1) the emergence of status, (2) distinguishing between the status of
individuals and the status of characteristics, and (3) measuring and understanding
the status gap between subgroups (between men and women, or between races). The
framework, which covers both small groups and large societies, and both task and
nontask groups, utilizes ideas and insights from several literatures to identify three
types of status, linked in precise ways to two kinds of personal characteristics
(quantitative and qualitative). The three types of status are mathematically specified,
and initial theoretical development is presented for all three, including, for each,
formulation of measures, derivation of testable implications, and analysis of how to
change status and the status structure. Testable implications cover such phenomena
as status differences between group members, status gaps between subgroups, over-
all status inequality, and status gains and losses from discrimination — all under
varying conditions, including the number and intercorrelation of status-conferring
personal characteristics and the proportions in the subgroups. The new status theory
also identifies two mechanisms involved in the phenomenon of “internalized oppres-
sion.” The framework thus opens many avenues for future work, both theoretical
work, deriving more and sharper implications, and empirical work, testing the im-
plications and using the new measures for the status of persons and the status of
characteristics to assess key status phenomena in surveys and experiments.
1996) provide new urgency for obtaining
sharper, more precise, and more reliable
knowledge about the operation of status.
Although much has been learned, many
basic questions about status remain unan-
swered; and the insights that could be mar-
shaled for sustained inquiry reside in sepa-
rate literatures. In this paper I develop an in-
tegrated framework for studying status.! The
framework provides models and methods for
addressing long-standing, unresolved issues.
These issues include: (1) the emergence of
status; (2) how to distinguish between, and
measure, the status of persons and the status
of characteristics; (3) whether quantitative
and qualitative characteristics operate differ-
ently; (4) how to measure status gaps be-
tween subgroups of a group or society; (5)
how to assess the effects of the proportions
in different subgroups; (6) how to incorpo-
rate multiple bases for status; (7) how status
processes differ in small groups and large
societies; (8) how status processes differ in
task groups and other kinds of groups; and
(9) how status is shaped by the degree of
correlation among valued personal charac-
teristics.

The proposed framework has three key
features. First, it distinguishes between two
kinds of characteristics (quantitative and
qualitative) and between three types of sta-
tus which are linked in precise ways to the
two kinds of characteristics. Second, it
builds carefully on previous work, incorpo-
rating seminal ideas and insights into a con-
sistent, coherent whole; chief among these
ideas and insights are (1) the mathematical
specification for the production of status
from quantitative characteristics (owed to
Goode [1978] and Sgrensen [1979]), (2) the
link between the status conferred on indi-
viduals by quantitative characteristics and
the status acquired by qualitative character-
istics (owed to Ridgeway [1991, 1997b],
Ridgeway and Balkwell [1997], and Webster
and Hysom [1998]), and (3) the multidimen-
sional specification of the status of individu-
als (analyzed by Barber [1968], Goode
[1978], Rossi [1979], and Turner [1984,
1995]). Third, the framework is fully mathe-
matized, leading to precise predictions about
the magnitude of status conferred on indi-
viduals and the magnitude of status obtained
by qualitative characteristics, and about the
conditions conducive to greater or lesser sta-
tus and larger or smaller status gaps, and
providing as well a set of measures ready for
use in empirical work.

For example, it is universally believed that
in almost all societies, men have higher sta-
tus than women. But the status gap between
the sexes is also known to vary greatly, and
there has not been a theory-based way to
measure it. The status-gap continuum ex-
tends from societies in which women are not
permitted to vote or to own property to soci-
eties in which women and men work in
teams (on earth and in space, in war and in
peace), vote their conscience, and face no
legal bars to income and wealth. The new
framework provides a coherent set of mod-
els and tools, based on the status, prestige,
and stratification literatures, which enable
both measurement of the status gap and
analysis of why and how the status gap var-
ies in magnitude.

The new framework not only enables ex-
amination of all the unresolved issues but
also yields unexpected results. It shows that
key ideas and insights from the several sta-
tus literatures, when combined together, pro-
duce unexpected synergies, providing new
testable implications and opening new av-
enues for status research. The initial set of
testable implications includes implications
for the effects on status and status structure
of (1) the number and intercorrelation of per-
sonal characteristics, (2) the availability of
information about personal characteristics,
and (3) the proportions of a group in each
category of a qualitative characteristic. Sta-
tus processes have a long reach, and the new
status theory identifies two mechanisms that
may be involved in the phenomenon of “in-
ternalized oppression” (Bourdieu 1997;
Ridgeway 1997a:222; Stanton-Salazar
1997), provides a new way to understand
gains and losses from discrimination, and
yields ceteris paribus implications for a wide
range of behavioral and social phenomena
including coalition formation, defection,
identity and reference-group processes, re-
sponse rates and missing data in surveys,
veiling customs, relative size and skill of
political parties, and the tension between in-
dividualism and collectivism.

Of course, the new framework for status
analysis is preliminary, and further theoreti-
cal and empirical inquiry will no doubt lead
to modifications. To make the framework as
useful as possible, I take a threefold ap-
proach: First, I lay the foundation carefully,
formalizing the three basic status functions
(corresponding to the three kinds of status
identified by the framework), which become
the three basic assumptions of the new sta-
tus theory. Second, I provide a sampling of
the kinds of theoretical development enabled
by the framework, deriving implications for
several special cases, including both small
groups and large societies under a variety of
conditions. Third, I take a brief look at how
The objective is to develop a general frame-
work for the study of status—a framework
that will cover status phenomena and status
processes in all settings (e.g., task groups as
well as nontask groups) and at both micro
and macro levels (e.g., in both small groups
and large societies), that distinguishes
clearly between the status of individuals and
the status of characteristics and between sta-
tus and its determinants and its conse-
quences, and that enables both measurement
and analysis. The framework should contain
the basic building blocks which provide the
starting assumptions from which a variety of
testable implications can be derived and
which provide measures ready for use em-
pirically. Future work can then proceed on
three fronts—expanding and refining the
framework, building theories and deriving
more and sharper implications, and testing
the implications and accumulating informa-
tion on magnitudes and correlates of key sta-
tus phenomena.

The framework draws insights and reason-
ings from the many pertinent literatures, in-
cluding literatures on social organization,
social stratification, status organizing pro-
cesses, and inequality. The emphasis
The new framework distinguishes between
quantitative and qualitative characteristics.
Quantitative characteristics are characteris-
tics of which individuals can have “more” or
“less”; qualitative characteristics, in con-
trast, describe features of individuals that
have no inherent ordering but which can be
used to classify them into groups or catego-
ries. Quantitative characteristics may be car-
dinal (like wealth) or ordinal (like beauty).
Qualitative characteristics may be binary
(like gender) or polytomous (like race and
ethnicity).

Until a decade ago, status research did not
distinguish between quantitative and quali-
tative characteristics; any possible distinc-
tiveness in status processes had not been no-
ticed. For example, Berger et al. (1980) ob-
served:
Ridgeway (1991) was the first to pose the
question of how qualitative characteristics
acquire status value, and pioneered develop-
ment of a theory of status construction in
which cardinal characteristics produce status
for qualitative characteristics (Ridgeway
1991, 1997b; Ridgeway and Balkwell 1997).
Webster and Hysom (1998) extended the
theory so that ordinal as well as cardinal—
that is, all quantitative characteristics—can
be used to produce status for qualitative
characteristics.

QUANTITATIVE CHARACTERISTICS:
GOopDs AND BADS. Within the set of quan-
titative personal characteristics, most status
research has focused on characteristics
which have the property that “more” is pre-
ferred to “less”; for convenience, these will
be called “goods.” For simplicity, this analy-
sis is couched in terms of goods, but, of
course, “bads” (less is preferred to more)
may also operate in status processes and
their handling is straightforward.

QUANTITATIVE CHARACTERISTICS:
CARDINAL VERSUS ORDINAL GOODS, AND
RANK VERSUS AMOUNT OF CARDINAL
Goops. Two related questions arise: whether
to distinguish between cardinal and ordinal
goods; and whether, among cardinal goods,
amounts play a part in status processes or
only ranks. Note that the operation of cardi-
nal and ordinal goods can only be distin-
guished by incorporating amounts of cardi-
nal goods; and, conversely, if only rank mat-
ters in cardinal goods, then there is no dis-
tinction between cardinal and ordinal goods.

As discussed below, the process of choos-
ing a functional form for first-order status
led to the rank-based function that Sgrensen
(1979) proposed in his work on the status of
occupations; and thus the status of individu-
als is modeled as a function of rank only. A
shortcoming is that the distribution of a
quantitative characteristic such as wealth is
treated as flat, rather than, say, as a peaked
distribution with most individuals located in
some region of the distribution. This short-
coming is mitigated somewhat, however, by
two things: First, the status function, as will
be seen, is not flat, being a nonlinear func-
The framework distinguishes between three
types of status. First-order status, denoted
S1, is a property of individuals and is based
on quantitative personal characteristics. Sec-
ond-order status, denoted S2, is a property
of qualitative characteristics. Third-order
status, denoted S3, is a property of individu-
als; it arises as a way to impute status to in-
dividuals when S1 cannot be generated be-
cause there is no information on quantitative
characteristics, but may linger after informa-
tion is obtained, combining both S1 and S2
types of status. Each of the three types of
status operates in distinctive ways—each
arises and is maintained or altered via dis-
tinctive processes, as elucidated below.

The work on S1— the first kind of status,
which is a property of individuals and which
is based on quantitative characteristics—be-
sides building in a general way on the sta-
tus-relevant literatures, builds in a specific
way on two seminal contributions to the
mathematical specification of status, Goode
(1978) and Sgrensen (1979). Similarly, the
work on S2—the second kind of status,
which is a property of qualitative character-
istics—builds directly on Ridgeway (1991,
1997b), Ridgeway and Balkwell (1997), and
Webster and Hysom (1998). The work on
S3—the third kind of status which is a prop-
erty of persons and which arises when S1
cannot be generated—builds on the multidi-
mensionality aspect of status and prestige
(Barber 1968; Goode 1978; Rossi 1979;
Turner 1984, 1995).

Modeling S1 status requires a function
which yields a clear status metric and em-
bodies the properties discussed in the status
literatures. Chief among these properties is
the property analyzed by Goode (1978) that,
as rank increases, status increases at an in-
creasing rate, rising steeply at higher ranks.
The search for a function satisfying proper-
ties desirable in an S1 function led to the
function proposed by Sgrensen (1979) to
measure the status of occupations. The sim-
plicity, elegance, and tractability of this
function made it an appealing choice.

PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS AND
TYPES OF STATUS. Quantitative characteris-
tics play a special role in the framework, as
they form the basis for first-order status
(S1). In this framework, building on
Ridgeway’s fundamental insight, qualitative
characteristics cannot confer first-order sta-
tus, but rather they must first acquire sec-
ond-order status. Accordingly, qualitative
characteristics are used to form subgroups;
the subgroups are characterized by a sum-
mary measure of the members’ first-order
status, and this summary measure in turn at-
taches to each category of a qualitative char-
acteristic, becoming its measure of second-
order status (S2).

SUMMARY MEASURE OF S1 WITHIN THE
CATEGORIES OF A QUALITATIVE CHARAC-
TERISTIC. The summary measure of S1,
which becomes a category’s measure of S2,
can be any measure of location, such as the
arithmetic mean, the geometric mean, or the
median. For simplicity and concreteness, in
the theoretical development below, we use
the arithmetic mean. As will be seen, choice
of summary measure affects some results but
not others. Future research might investigate
both preference for, availability of, and ef-
fects of alternative measures.
INFORMATION AND TYPES OF STATUS.
Information is of two kinds: (1) information
about the quantitative characteristics of par-
ticular individuals, and (2) information
about the summary measure of first-order
status in the subgroups formed by qualita-
tive characteristics. Information about indi-
viduals’ ranks on quantitative characteristics
is used to produce first-order status (S1). In-
formation about the average first-order sta-
tus of the subgroups formed by qualitative
characteristics is used to generate second-or-
der status (S2) in the qualitative characteris-
tics. In the absence of information about the
quantitative characteristics of particular in-
dividuals (i.e., when first-order status can-
not be generated), second-order status is
used to produce an imputed individual sta-
tus, the third-order status (S3). But S3 may
not disappear when information about the
quantitative characteristics of particular in-
dividuals is obtained; the process by which
Corresponding to each type of status is a
matrix containing each actor’s evaluations of
the status of persons (S1 and S3) and the sta-
tus of characteristics (S2). To illustrate, con-
sider S1 status in a collectivity of N persons.
Each individual (called “Self”) accords S1
status (or makes prestige payments, in
Goode’s [1978] evocative phrase) to every
individual (to “Others” and also to “Self”).
Group members may differ in the first-order
status they accord to any given Other. Dif-
ferent individuals may value different quan-
titative personal characteristics; for example,
one individual may value wealth, while an-
other may value beauty, and a third may
value both. Moreover, different goods may
be weighted differently; for example, one in-
dividual may weight wealth two-thirds and
beauty one-third, while a second may do the
opposite. Thus, the S1 status order is repre-
sented by a matrix (Table 2).
The S1 and S3 matrices are square, each
member of the collectivity represented by
both a row and a column. In the S2 matrix,
each person occupies a row and each char-
acteristic is represented by a set of columns,
one column for each category of the charac-
teristic.

If all the rows of a matrix are identical,
the matrix collapses to a vector. An impor-
tant area of research focuses on the pro-
cesses by which individuals agree, or not, on
status matters, for example, how individuals
choose the quantitative characteristics they
use in the S1 function, how individuals
shape the societal $1 function and societies
in turn shape individuals’ $1 functions.*

The initial theoretical development below
follows a twofold approach. First, as in most
status research, we characterize groups by a
single status function, asking, for example,
what status processes look like if all group
members share the same S1 function (i.e.,
use the same quantitative characteristics as
bases of evaluation and weight them the
same way). Second, we consider strategies
for changing status structures, some of
which involve parallel status structures. For
example, individuals make, and expect,
prestige payments (in Goode’s words) based
on the S1 structure in their heads; con-
versely, they receive prestige payments
based on the S1 structures in others’ heads.
Important and interesting phenomena ac-
company such interindividual differences in
S1 structure.
The weights, which may take zero or posi-
tive values, must sum to one; if zero, the as-
sociated good does not produce status, and
if one, the associated good is the only good
that confers first-order status.

Following Goode (1978), we assume that
first-order status is a special kind of func-
tion: it is not only an increasing function of
the quantitative personal characteristics but
also it increases at an increasing rate. As
Goode (1978:142) observes, “prestige pay-
ments rise steeply.” As discussed above, we
adopt the function proposed by Sgrensen
(1979), which has the upwardly-concave
property as well as other appealing proper-
ties. Accordingly, we specify S1 status as a
function of rank on a valued characteristic:
In this initial theoretical development, we
analyze the operation of first-order status in
several settings, varying the number of
goods and their association and modeling S1
in both small groups and large societies. The
theoretical results are empirically testable
implications. Of course, many more results
can be obtained, and the framework can be
applied to many new arenas.

S1 IN THE SPECIAL CASE OF ONE-GOOD
SMALL GROUPS. To examine how first-order
status operates, we begin with the simplest
one-good case in small groups of size rang-
ing from 2 to 12, with no tied ranks. Table 3
presents the magnitudes of S1 for each mem-
ber of such groups; the valued characteristic
can be any quantitative personal characteris-
tic (e.g., wealth or beauty or athletic skill).”
The figures immediately reveal three impor-
tant implications of the S1 function in the
one-good case. First, the status of the low-
est-ranking person (Member 1) declines as
group size increases. Second, the status of
the highest-ranking person (the last member
in each column) increases as group size in-
creases. Third, average status increases as
group size increases. Thus, the status differ-
ence between the lowest- and highest-rank-
ing members of the group increases steeply
with group size, from .7 S1 units in the dyad
and 1.1 in the triad to almost 2.5 in the 12-
member case.®

Many of the status phenomena in small
groups involve interactions within subsets
of the members. The status difference in
each of the possible pairs of members of a
group is thus an important feature of
groups. The number of pairs rises steeply
from one in the two-member group to 66 in
the 12-member group. To investigate dyadic
status difference in small groups, Table 4
presents the complete S1-difference struc-
ture for the possible pairs in three groups,
those of sizes 4, 5, and 6. Although the full
structure could be reported in the triangle
above the diagonal, Table 4 presents com-
pletely filled-out matrices; these have the
advantage that they directly show not only
the set of S1 differences for the group but
also the set of S1 differences for each indi-
vidual.

As expected from Table 3, the magnitude
of the smallest status distance decreases with
group size, and the magnitude of the largest
status distance increases with group size.
Additionally, there are three main results in
Table 4. First, the magnitude of the S1 dif-
ference increases for successive ranks;
Member | in the 4-member group is not only
farther away from Member 4 than from
Member 3 and farther away from Member 3
than from Member 2 but also the increment
in the status distance increases for each suc-
cessive rank (from .288 to .405 to .683).
Second, a group member is always closer to
the individual below than to the individual
above. For example, in the 6-member group,
Member 3 is closer to Member 2 than to
Member 4, but Member 2 is closer to Mem-
ber 1 than to Member 3. Thus, dyadic rela-
tions are not symmetric. Third, a few (very
few) group members are equally distant
from two group members, one below and the
other above, with the one below being not
immediately below and the one above being
immediately above. In Table 4 there are
three such persons, one in each group: Mem-
ber 3 in the 4-member group, Member 4 in
the 5-member group, and Member 5 in the
6-member group. These individuals may
play pivotal parts in group dynamics, being
uniquely situated to bridge status distance in
two directions.

There is evidence from previous empirical
research that observable behaviors produced
by status follow the predicted S1 patterns.
For example, Bales (1999) documented the
acts initiated by each member of a group, in
groups of size 3 to 8, coding both acts di-
rected at the group and acts directed at an-
other member. The number of acts initiated
increases at an increasing rate with rank, and
who-to-whom matrices of acts initiated in-
dicate that each member is closer in status
to the lower neighbor than to the higher
neighbor, as predicted here.

S1 IN THE SPECIAL CASE OF TWO-GOOD
SMALL GROUPS. Consider now the case in
which the members of a small group use two
quantitative characteristics as bases of
evaluation; as in the previous special case,
there are no tied ranks. If the two goods are
perfectly positively associated—that is, each
member’s rank is the same on both charac-
teristics—then the S1 structure remains the
same as in the one-good case. However, if
the two goods are independent or negatively
associated or imperfectly positively associ-
ated, then S1 structure changes. Here we in-
vestigate the case in which two equally
weighted goods are perfectly negatively as-
sociated. Other special cases can be simi-
larly studied.

Table 5 reports the status structure in the
case of two goods negatively associated and
equally weighted, for groups of size 4, 5, and
6. For each group member, the table reports
S1 derived from each of the two goods, de-
noted s1,; and sl). Member number denotes
the rank on the first good. Thus, for example,
Member 1 in the 4-member group ranks low-
est on the first good and highest on the sec-
ond good; Member 1 has a magnitude of .223
on 51, (the lowest status) and a magnitude of
1.609 on s1, (the highest status). The two-
good S1 status is the unweighted average of
s1,and s15, namely, .916.

Table 5 shows that the status structure is
dramatically compressed, although the aver-
age status in each group remains the same
(compare with Table 3). First, S1 no longer
approaches zero, but now has a floor of
In(2), or approximately .693.9 Second, the
status of the top person—who is always the
person who ranks highest and lowest on the
two characteristics—is reduced by the
amount In-/N; for example, $1 for Member
1 in the 5-member group is reduced from
1.792 (as in Table 3, as well as for the sec-
ond good’s status sl, in Table 5) to .987.
Third, the range of S1 is substantially re-
duced, for example, from 1.792 (1.946—
.154) to .347 (1.050 —.703) for the 6-mem-
ber group. Fourth, all the groups are sym-
metric, such that the S1 scores are symmet-
ric about the midrange. Thus, except for
odd-sized groups, each member has a fellow
group member of identical status; for ex-
ample, in the 4-member group, Members 1
and 4 have identical status, and Members 2
and 3 have identical status.

To the extent that a group’s status struc-
ture defines its character, the groups in Table
5 are dramatically different from their one-
good counterparts in Table 3—they have less
inequality, less status distance, and more dy-
adic symmetry.

To more carefully assess these two-goods/
equally-weighted/negatively-associated
small groups, Table 6 presents the status-dis-
tance matrices for the groups portrayed in
Table 5. The results are striking. First,
whereas the one-good status-distance matri-
ces of Table 5 had large status distances—
for example, ranging from .288 to 1.386 in
the 4-member group—the corresponding sta-
tus distances in these two-good matrices are
small—for example, ranging from 0 to .203
in the 4-member group. Second, the status-
distance matrices retain the property that the
largest status distance increases with group
size, but the smallest status distance is now
independent of group size, being zero for
every group size. Third, all group members
have several identical status distances from
other members, in contradistinction to the
one-good groups in which very few group
members were in this situation; for example,
in the 4-member group, every member has
identical status distances from two other
members.

Figure 1 illustrates the contrast between
the one-good and the two-goods/negatively-
associated small groups, displaying the full
set of S1 differences for the 4-member and
5-member groups (i.e., with 6 and 10 status
differences, respectively). It is clear from
Figure 1 that the one-good group has con-
siderably more status inequality.

S1 IN THE SPECIAL CASE OF LARGE SO-
CIETIES. Status phenomena and processes
occur in groups and societies of all sizes, and
thus it is important to investigate the opera-
tion of first-order status (S1) in large societ-
ies as well as in small groups. To do so, we
use techniques from the study of probability
distributions (Stuart and Ord 1987).!° Sub-
stantively, the model is set up as before. S1
is a function of valued quantitative personal
characteristics; the function is the log-rank
function given in equations 2 and 4. Be-
cause, as seen, the case in which S1 arises
from one good is identical to the case in
which S1 arises from two perfectly posi-
tively associated goods, we present an inte-
grated theoretical development in which two
goods are used as bases of evaluation. As
before, let the two goods be weighted
equally in the S1 function. Also as before,
we distinguish between perfectly positively
associated goods and perfectly negatively
associated goods; we also introduce a new
case, which arises naturally in the study of
probability distributions—namely, the case
in which the two goods are independent.

At the outset it is known that the distribu-
tion associated with S1 in the positively as-
sociated case is the exponential and that its
mean equals 1. Because the mean of the av-
erage of two identical variates is equal to the
original mean, it is also known that the mean
N =6: Fifteen Pairs
Member 1
Member 2
Member 3
Member 4
Member 5
Member 6

255
347
347
255

0

.255

091
.091

0

.255

347
.091

0

091
347

347
091

0

091
347

255

0

091
091

255

0

.255
347
347
.255

 

Note: Group members are ordered from lowest ranking to highest ranking on the first valued characteris-
tic, as in Table 5; each person’s S1 status appears in Table 5. Each row and/or column provides the set of
pairwise S1 status differences involving each member of the group. The full set of pairwise S1 status differ-
ences for the entire group occupies the triangle above the diagonal (and is duplicated in the triangle below

the diagonal).
$1 Status Difference

2.0

 

Four-Member Group

a |

 

 

 

 

 

Ea

i

 

 

 

Five-Member Group

TT

 

 

 

 

all

 

 

 

 

 

 

One Good Two Goods

One Good

Two Goods
A different way to gauge the three types
of S1 structures is to examine their probabil-
ity density functions (pdf). Figure 2 presents
graphs of the three pdf’s. The graphs indi-
cate several important features: First, there
are individuals of very high status in all
three types of S1 structure. Second, there are
individuals of very low status (approaching
zero) only in the positively associated and
independent cases; as already known, in the
negatively associated case, S1 has a floor of
approximately .7. Third, in the positively
and negatively associated cases, the mode
occurs at the lower extreme value and in the
independent case it occurs at .5; that is, there
is a concentration of low-status persons.
These graphs provide vivid depiction of the
sociological insight that high status is rela-
tively scarce and the philosophical insight
that societies differ dramatically according
to whether valued characteristics are posi-
tively or negatively associated.
individuals and groups reward and use as a
status-conferring device. If individuals lose
the valued characteristics, they lose their sta-
tus, holding constant the goods in the S1
function. Conversely, if individuals change
their minds about what they find admirable
and desirable, then receipt of S1 is altered.
For example, suppose that Smith is the best
swimmer in the world. As long as some in-
dividuals (swimming enthusiasts, say) value
swimming skill and Smith retains the skill,
Smith will be accorded the highest status on
the S1 swimming component (by swimming
enthusiasts). However, if Smith loses the
skill or if swimming enthusiasts disappear,
Smith will lose status. Similarly, the strategy
for the film character who says, “I don’t get
no respect,” is to promote admiration for, or
desirability of, some characteristic on which
he or she ranks high.

Note that the strategy of changing the
quantitative characteristics used to confer
status appears in two versions. In the first
version, an individual attempts to change
others’ valued goods, for example, by per-
suading them that wealth is meaningless and
should not be used as a status-conferring de-
vice or that writing poetry is the most admi-
rable and desirable skill. In the second ver-
sion, an individual changes his or her own
valued goods, effectively ceasing to make
prestige payments, in Goode’s (1978) evoca-
tive phrase, and thus putting an end to this
micro form of “internalized oppression.”

To illustrate, consider two college room-
mates in a fraternity house: One is wealthy
and an athlete of no particular distinction;
the other comes from a poor family and is a
gifted athlete.!? If both roommates value
wealth only and use it to confer status, then
the rich roommate will be accorded higher
status than the other roommate—by both of
them. The athlete roommate can change this
S1 structure by two methods: (1) S/he can
persuade him/herself and the rich roommate
that athletic skill is highly desirable and
should also be used to confer status; or
(2) s/he can relinquish his/her love of riches
and value only athletic skill. Under the first
method, if successful (and athletic skill and
wealth are weighted equally), the S1 struc-
ture would be transformed into one of per-
fect equality—the two goods are perfectly
negatively associated, hence both room-
mates would receive equal magnitudes of
S1. Under the second method, if successful,
the athlete roommate would no longer ac-
cord higher status to the rich roommate. Of
course, if the rich roommate still uses wealth
as a basis of evaluation, there would be a
new tension arising from their having dis-
crepant S1 functions.

As shown, the kind of statistical associa-
tion between two or more valued goods—
whether they are positively associated, nega-
First-order status is a property of persons—
individuals obtain first-order status from
their quantitative characteristics. Individuals
also have qualitative characteristics and, by
processes of status generalization (Berger et
al. 1977; Ridgeway 1991, 1997b; Ridgeway
and Balkwell 1997; Webster and Hysom
1998), if in a group or society there is an as-
sociation between the valued quantitative
characteristics (the goods) and a qualitative
characteristic, the qualitative characteristic
acquires status by that association. This sta-
tus acquired by qualitative characteristics we
call second-order status (S2).!4
sociation is between quantitative characteristics
(as between wealth and beauty), in the analysis
of second-order status the focal association is be-
tween one quantitative characteristic and one
qualitative characteristic. Put differently, given
that the term “goods” is used for quantitative
characteristics of which more is preferred to less
and given that here we are not working with
“bads,” the focal association in the analysis of S1
is between two goods, whereas the focal associa-
tion in the analysis of S2 is between a good and a
qualitative characteristic.
We focus here on two outcomes—second-or-
der status (S2) and the gap in second-order
status between the categories of a qualitative
characteristic (S2,,,)—and on determinants
of these outcomes. We examine the effects
of (1) the number of valued goods in the S1
function and the goods’ association, (2) the
association between the valued good(s) and
the qualitative characteristic, and (3) the
relative sizes of the categories of the quali-
tative characteristic. The summary measure
of S1 is specified as the arithmetic mean.
SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR SECOND-
ORDER STATUS. To begin, look back at the
layout of first-order status in one-good small
groups presented in Table 3. If there is a per-
fect association between the good (i.e., the
quantitative characteristic used to confer
first-order status) and a binary qualitative
characteristic, then the qualitative character-
istic will acquire second-order status. For
example, in the group of size 4, if Member 1
is female and Members 2 through 4 are
male, or if Members 1 and 2 are female and
Members 3 and 4 male, or if Members 1
through 3 are female and Member 4 male,
then gender will acquire second-order status,
such that the category “male” will have a
higher magnitude of S2 than the category
“female.” And conversely, if the association
goes in the opposite direction. Thus, the
combination of (1) a one-good S1 function
with (2) a perfect association between the
good and a qualitative characteristic is suffi-
cient to induce second-order status for the
qualitative characteristic. Moreover, because
the S1 structure of a one-good society is
identical to that in a society with several per-
fectly positively associated goods, the com-
bination of (1) perfectly positively associ-
ated goods in the S1 function with (2) a per-
fect association between the goods and a
qualitative characteristic is also a sufficient
condition for second-order status to arise.

Consider now a somewhat more compli-
cated case, that of societies with negatively
associated goods. Look at Table 5. If there is
a perfect association between one of the two
goods and the qualitative characteristic and
if group members are assigned in equal num-
bers to categories of a binary qualitative
characteristic (e.g., let Members 1 and 2 of
the four-member group be men and Members
3 and 4 be women), then the average S1
among men equals the average S1 among
women. In this situation, gender does not
acquire status. On the other hand, suppose
that Members 1 and 4 are women and Mem-
bers 2 and 3 are men—that is, eliminate the
perfect association between the valued goods
and the qualitative characteristic—then av-
erage S1 status differs across the two sexes
and gender acquires second-order status.!5

Combining the results obtained from in-
spection of Tables 3 and 5 leads to statement
of sufficient conditions for the emergence of
$2 status: Given a perfect association be-
tween one quantitative good and the qualita-
tive characteristic, singly sufficient condi-
tions for the qualitative characteristic to ac-
quire second-order status are: (1) S1 is based
on one good; (2) S1 is based on several per-
fectly positively associated goods; (3) S1 is
based on two perfectly negatively associated
goods, and the group size is odd; (4) S1 is
based on two perfectly negatively associated
goods, and the subgroup split is not fifty-
fifty.!6

Note again that even in this case of per-
fect association between one quantitative
good and the qualitative characteristic, there

15 The case of imperfect correlation between
the quantitative and qualitative characteristics is
an important one to analyze. Although space con-
straints prevent such an analysis here, two things
are worth noting: First, a priori it is obvious from
equation 7 that the status gap will be smaller if
the correlation is weaker; the bottom subgroup
will include higher scorers, so to speak, and the
top subgroup will include lower scorers, thus at-
tenuating the status gap. Second, attenuation of
the status gap, especially in situations of multiple
qualitative characteristics acquiring $2, may lead
to competition among alternative views for struc-
turing status relations.

16 Work is underway to analyze the case of two
independent goods.
are situations in which S2 will not arise, in-
cluding the situation, obvious from Table 5,
in which S1 is based on two perfectly nega-
tively associated goods and the subgroup
split is fifty-fifty.!7

S2 IN THE SPECIAL CASE OF ONE-GOOD
SMALL GROUPS. Consider a group of size 12
(as in Table 3). First-order status (S1) is
based on either one good or several posi-
tively associated goods, there are no tied
ranks, and the qualitative characteristic is
binary. Next, suppose that there is a perfect
association between the good(s) and the
qualitative characteristic. The subgroup with
the lowest-ranking individuals on the quan-
titative characteristic is called the bottom
subgroup, and the subgroup with the high-
est-ranking individuals is called the top sub-
group. Now imagine all possible subgroup
splits, ranging from the case in which the
bottom subgroup has 1 member and the top
subgroup has 11 members to the opposite
case in which the bottom subgroup has 11
individuals and the top subgroup has only 1.

Table 8 reports the average first-order sta-
tus in each subgroup formed by the 11 pos-
sible subgroup splits (with each split repre-
sented by a row). As shown, average S1 dif-
fers for the two subgroups in each row; for
example, in the case of a fifty-fifty split, av-
erage S1 is .33 in the bottom subgroup and
1.47 in the top subgroup. Thus, this situation
unambiguously produces second-order sta-
tus. If, in the example just given, the quali-
tative characteristic is gender, then gender
acquires second-order status, and if women
are the top subgroup and men are the bottom
subgroup, then the magnitudes of $2 are .33
for the category “men” and 1.47 for the cat-
egory “women.”

Table 8 also reports the S2 gap between
the two categories of the qualitative charac-
teristic. As shown, the second-order status
gap increases as the relative size of the bot-
tom subgroup increases. To illustrate, if
women are wealthier than men, such that the
poorest woman is richer than the richest man,
then the $2 gap between men and women is
lowest when there is only one man and there
are 11 women (a gap of .89 S1 units) and it is
highest when there are 11 men and one
woman (a gap of 1.82 S1 units).

$2 acquisition is a general process, and
this analysis applies to any qualitative char-
acteristic. For example, consider the status
of academic disciplines. Suppose that a
given interdisciplinary course enrolls first-
year graduate students from discipline A and
third-year graduate students from discipline
B. If competence is valued and if it increases
with years of study, then S2 status arises, fa-
voring discipline B. Moreover, if the disci-
plines differ in sex ratio and racial or ethnic
composition, then a train of further status in-
equalities is set in motion.

S2 IN THE SPECIAL CASE OF ONE-GOOD
LARGE SOCIETIES. Consider now S2 in
large societies in which a binary qualitative
characteristic is perfectly associated with the
good(s). As in the analysis of S1 in large so-
cieties, techniques from the study of prob-
ability distributions make it possible to ob-
tain many a priori results. Table 9 presents,
as in Table 8, the S2 acquired by the two cat-
egories of the qualitative characteristic and
the S2 gap. As shown, and consistent with
the previous results, in both categories, sec-
ond-order status increases with the relative
size of the bottom subgroup. More impor-
tant, the second-order status gap also in-
creases with the relative size of the bottom
subgroup. This means, for example, that
given a racially divided society in which two
races are, respectively, advantaged and dis-
advantaged on the good, the status gap will
be substantially larger if the disadvantaged
race constitutes 90 percent of the population
and the advantaged race constitutes 10 per-
cent of the population than if the disadvan-
taged race constitutes 10 percent of the
population and the advantaged race consti-
tutes 90 percent of the population.

To more fully appreciate the results, it is
useful to graph S1 and S2 (average S1) for
each subgroup split of interest. Figure 3 re-
ports the graphs of S1 and S2 for the case in
which the population is evenly split between
the two categories of the binary qualitative
characteristic. As expected, S1 increases at
an increasing rate as relative rank increases.
A vertical dashed line divides the population
into the two equal-sized subgroups. Average
first-order status is represented by horizon-
tal lines; the two short lines are for S2 in
each of the two subgroups, and the long line
is for average S1 over the entire population.

In this equal-split case, the two categories’
magnitudes of second-order status are equi-
distant from the overall average S1 of 1; and
the S2 gap between the two categories is
2In(2). (There are precise relations between
each subgroup split and the S2 gap.)

This kind of analysis, carried out more
elaborately and examining the effects of all
95 842 05 3.996 3.153

 

Note: Subgroup S2 status (average $1 status) is based on S1 arising from a single valued characteristic or
several perfectly positively associated characteristics. $1 status for representative persons in this population
is reported in the second column of Table 7. Formulas for calculating the S2 status (average S1 status) in the
two subgroups and the S2 status gap in this large-population case (letting p denote the relative size of the
bottom subgroup) are:
tus changes, is maintained, or is discarded.
According to the framework, S2 is totally
dependent on S1 and on the configuration of
goods, their weights, their association with
each other and with the qualitative charac-
teristic. Thus, S2 cannot be directly af-
fected; rather it is altered by altering the de-
terminants of S1 and the association be-
tween the goods and the qualitative charac-
teristic.

To illustrate with an example based on the
work of Ridgeway (1991, 1997b), Ridgeway
and Balkwell (1997), and Webster and
Hysom (1998): Suppose that wealth is the
valued good and that wealth is perfectly as-
sociated with gender, such that men are
richer than women. Wealth produces first-
order status, and first-order status generates
second-order status—the category “male”
has greater S2 than the category “female.”
Strategies to make gender shed its second-
order status include: (1) change the S1 func-
tion (e.g., by eliminating wealth or by intro-
ducing a second good negatively associated
with wealth); and (2) change the association
between wealth and gender (e.g., by recruit-
ing wealthy women and/or destitute men
into the society).
These strategies illuminate the underlying
dynamics, pointing to a mechanism that
may play a part in the phenomenon of “in-
ternalized oppression” (Bourdieu 1997;
Stanton-Salazar 1997). If women did not
value wealth, gender would not have ac-
quired S2. The members of the bottom sub-
group are always in collusion, so to speak,
with the members of the top subgroup. By
agreeing that wealth is desirable, members
of the bottom subgroup let wealth confer
first-order status, and once wealth confers
first-order status, given the association be-
tween wealth and gender, gender acquires
second-order status. Hence, a radical way to
remove S2 from gender is to renounce
wealth. The literature on utopian communi-
ties provides trenchant insights into this
process for removing S2 from qualitative
characteristics. Note, however, that if
women renounce wealth but men still value
it, then there will be two parallel status
structures, with men making prestige pay-
ments on the basis of wealth (to both men
and women) and women making prestige
payments on the basis of something else (to
both men and women). The ensuing wind-
falls and shortfalls in status constitute a
We have described the processes for produc-
ing first-order status—which is a property of
individuals and arises from individuals’
quantitative characteristics, together with in-
formation about their ranks—and for pro-
ducing second-order status—which is a
property of qualitative characteristics and
arises from first-order status. Now consider
the case in which first-order status cannot be
produced because there is no information
about an individual’s ranks on quantitative
characteristics. Suppose that wealth is the
basis of evaluation, but there is no informa-
tion about an individual’s wealth rank. In
this case, if the individual can be catego-
rized with respect to a qualitative character-
istic (e.g., can be classified as male or fe-
male) and if there is information about the
average S1 status in that category of the
qualitative characteristic, then third-order
status is produced and imputed to the indi-
vidual. Formally:
The S3 formula may be generalized in a
number of ways. First, there may be infor-
mation about average S1 status for subsets
formed by more than one qualitative charac-
teristic (e.g., “black women,” “white men,”
etc.). Second, if S1 is produced by more than
one quantitative characteristic, there may be
separate information about average S1 sta-
tus derived from one good in one qualitative
characteristic and average S1 status derived
from another good in another qualitative
characteristic (e.g., average S1 status due to
wealth in each category of gender and aver-
age S1 status due to beauty in each category
of race).

There is another important process. S2,
once produced, acquires a life of its own, so
to speak. Even if information about the per-
tinent quantitative characteristic(s) becomes
available, there may be a reluctance to relin-
quish the S2 component of S3, leading to a
generalized version of S3, denoted $3”. For-
mally:
group S2 lines intersect the S1 curve. To the
left of the intersection in each subgroup, S2
status (average S1 status) is greater than the
individual’s first-order status (S1), and to the
right, S2 status (average S1 status) is smaller
than the individual’s $1. This indicates that
there are status gains and losses from the use
of $2: Individuals whose S1 is lower than
their subgroup’s S2 gain status from the use
of S2, while individuals whose S1 is higher
than their subgroup’s S2 lose status from the
use of $2.18

Use of S2 is a form of discrimination—
individuals are not assessed on their indi-
vidual S1-pertinent quantitative characteris-
tics but rather are treated as part of a sub-
group and their subgroup’s characteristics are
imputed to them. Thus, there are status gains
and losses from discrimination, and they may
not be what one expects. That is, it would be
reassuring to find that all members of the
bottom subgroup suffer from discrimination
and that all members of the top subgroup gain
from discrimination. But the reality is more
complex, with some individuals in the bot-
tom subgroup gaining status from discrimi-
nation and some individuals in the top sub-
group losing status from discrimination.!9

S3 IN THE SPECIAL CASE OF ONE-GOOD
SMALL GROUPS. To analyze S3 in small
groups, we return to the case of a 12-member
group which values one good and in which
that good is perfectly associated with a bi-
nary qualitative characteristic. The members’
S1 was presented in Table 3, and the sub-
groups’ S2 was presented in Table 8. Table
10 reports the status gains and losses from
discrimination in each subgroup and the total
gain and loss, for all possible subgroup splits
from 1-11 to 11-1. For each subgroup, Table
10 reports the Member ID numbers of those
who gain and those who lose, and the per-
centage of the subgroup who gain and lose.
For example, in the 3-9 subgroup split, the
two lowest-ranking members (Member IDs 1
and 2) gain from discrimination and the third
member of the bottom subgroup (Member ID
3) loses from discrimination—within the
subgroup, then, 67 percent gain from dis-
crimination and 33 percent lose from dis-
crimination. Meanwhile, in the top subgroup,
the bottom five members gain from discrimi-
nation and the top four lose from discrimina-
tion; thus, within the top subgroup, 56 per-
cent gain from discrimination and 44 percent
lose. Looking at the group as a whole, seven
members gain and five members lose, for to-
tal percentages of 58 percent who gain from
discrimination and 42 percent who lose. Of
course, when the subgroup has only one per-
son, as in the bottom subgroup of the 1-11
split and the top subgroup of the 11-1 split,
the person neither gains nor loses from dis-
crimination; in those cases, the total gain and
loss do not sum to 100.

Table 10 shows that the majority gain
from discrimination in all subgroup splits
except the 8-4 (a tie) and the 11-1 (which
has a plurality gaining from discrimination).
If individuals care about their status, then in
most situations the majority will want to re-
tain $3 even if information becomes avail-
able to generate S1.

If affinities arise from similarity in inter-
ests and if individuals care about their sta-
tus, then there is a natural affinity between
those members of the bottom subgroup who
gain from discrimination and those members
of the top subgroup who also gain from dis-
crimination. Similarly, there is a natural af-
finity between those members of the bottom
subgroup who lose from discrimination and
those members of the top subgroup who also
lose. Accordingly, the stage is set for coali-
tions to form. These coalitions have the in-
teresting property that proponents of dis-
crimination are drawn from among the least
advantaged of each subgroup, while oppo-
nents of discrimination are drawn from
among the most advantaged of each sub-
group (regardless of the summary measure
of S1 underlying S2). Thus, if the quantita-
tive characteristic which confers S1 status is
correlated with political skill, then oppo-
nents of discrimination—although almost al-
ways outnumbered—may by cunning win
the day.
S3 IN THE SPECIAL CASE OF LARGE SO-
cleTIES. Next we analyze the status gains
and losses from discrimination in large soci-
eties which value one good or several posi-
tively associated goods. $1 in such societies
was reported in Table 7, and S2 in Table 9.
Table 11 indicates that, for every subgroup
split, majorities of both the bottom and top
subgroups gain from discrimination. The
sizes of these majorities differ between bot-
tom and top subgroups and across the sub-
group split. While in the top subgroup, the
percentages who gain and lose are constant
across all subgroup splits—63 percent al-
ways gain and 37 percent always lose—in
the bottom subgroup, the percentage who
gain increases with the relative size of the
bottom subgroup, and the percentage who
lose decreases.?°
To flesh out Table 11, suppose that the
bottom subgroup (or its leadership) decides
to fight against discrimination and the top
subgroup (or its leadership) decides to fight
for discrimination. Both the bottom and top
subgroups are vulnerable to defections; that
is, members may disagree with the leader-
ship and refuse to participate in the fight or
even sabotage it. The figures in Table 11
quantify the danger of defection. In the bot-
tom subgroup, those who gain from dis-
crimination are at risk of defecting; and in
the top subgroup, those who lose from dis-
crimination are at risk of defecting. Accord-
ingly, while the top subgroup has a constant
risk of defecting of approximately 37 per-
cent of the membership, the bottom sub-
group has a larger subset at risk of defect-
ing—the lowest subset at risk of defecting is
over half (50.2 percent in the .05 subgroup
split)—and the subset at risk increases with
the subgroup’s relative size.

Thus, the bottom subgroup is more diffi-
cult to discipline (to prevent defections) than
is the top subgroup. And the difficulty in-
creases as the bottom subgroup increases in
relative size.
Although the subgroup-specific patterns
are monotonic (or constant, as in the top sub-
group), they combine to form totals which
are nonmonotonic. As shown in Table 11, the
overall percentage who gain first decreases
as the relative size of the bottom subgroup
increases, then when the bottom subgroup
contains approximately 70 percent of the
population, the overall percentage who gain
begins to increase. Meanwhile, the overall
percentage who lose first increases, then,
when the bottom subgroup contains approxi-
mately 70 percent of the population—mir-
roring the pattern among the percentage who
gain—the percentage who lose begins to de-
crease. However, although the percentages
who gain and lose vary, a majority always
gains. Thus, in a contest adjudicated by ma-
jority rule, and in which everyone voted and
everyone voted for the platform under which
their own status would be highest, discrimi-
nation would win.

However, as noted above, the proponents
of discrimination are drawn from the bottom
ranks of each subgroup, while the opponents
of discrimination are drawn from the top
ranks of each subgroup. Thus, if the status-
conferring quantitative characteristic is cor-
related with political skill, then opponents of
discrimination—though always outnum-
bered—may be able to snatch victory.

A different way to approach these results
is to assess the sources of support for and
opposition to discrimination. Table 12 pre-
sents, separately for the subset who gain sta-
tus from discrimination and presumably sup-
port it and the subset who lose status from
discrimination and presumably oppose it, the
percentage drawn from the bottom subgroup
and the percentage drawn from the top sub-
group. The percentages from the bottom and
top subgroups sum to one. For example, in
the case where 25 percent of the population
is in the bottom subgroup (the fifth row),
support for discrimination relies heavily on
the top subgroup, which constitutes 78.7 of
its base; concomitantly, opposition to dis-
crimination also relies heavily on the top
subgroup, which provides 69.3 percent of its
constituency.

The sources of support and opposition to
discrimination operate monotonically. As the
percentage in the bottom subgroup in-
creases, the percentages of both the support
and opposition constituencies drawn from
the bottom subgroup increase, and the per-
centages drawn from the top subgroup de-
crease.
A final way to examine the status gains
and losses from discrimination is to graph
the proportions of the entire population
who are in each of the four subsets (those
who gain and are in the bottom subgroup,
those who lose and are in the bottom sub-
group, those who gain and are in the top
subgroup, and those who lose and are in
the top subgroup) as a function of the rela-
tive size of the bottom subgroup. Figure 4
presents these plots. As shown, the two
subsets from the top subgroup decrease lin-
early, the gain subset from the bottom sub-
group increases nonlinearly, and the loss
subset from the bottom subgroup increases
throughout most of the range but then
shifts direction (at a subgroup split of ap-
proximately .955).
Because the proportions in the four sub-
sets sum to one, Figure 4 enables assessment
of which sets dominate, by population split.
For example, in societies in which the pro-
portion in the bottom subgroup is less than a
little over half, the largest subset in the soci-
ety is the one composed of top-subgroup
members who gain from discrimination.
Similarly, at the point where the top-gain
and bottom-gain subsets intersect (i.e., when
the proportion in the bottom subgroup is a
little over half), the two subsets (top-gain
and bottom-gain) are of equal size.

It is especially interesting to examine Fig-
ure 4 at the points corresponding to an equal
population split. As shown, the smallest sub-
set consists of individuals from the top sub-
group who lose from discrimination (18 per-
cent), and the largest subset consists of indi-
viduals from the top subgroup who gain from
discrimination (32 percent); the two subsets
from the bottom subgroup occupy intermedi-
ate places (26 percent in the bottom-gain sub-
set and 24 percent in the bottom-lose sub-
set). Given that the gender split is approxi-
mately fifty-fifty, it would be useful to reex-
amine data generated by experiments on gen-
der and status in light of these results.
Third-order status arises because of the lack
of information on quantitative personal char-
acteristics; but provision of such information
does not guarantee its elimination. Nonethe-
less, provision of the information may be
useful in eliminating S3—for those who
wish to eliminate it. Perhaps the most in-
triguing result is that some members of the
disadvantaged subgroup gain from discrimi-
nation, suggesting another mechanism pro-
ducing and maintaining “internalized op-
pression” (Bourdieu 1997; Ridgeway 1997a:
222; Stanton-Salazar 1997). Thus, devising
strategies to change S3 entails devising strat-
egies for all actors.

Those who gain status from discrimination
have as their objective to maintain S3 as a
function exclusively of $2; introducing S1,
even mildly weighted, diminishes their sta-
tus. Accordingly, a useful strategy for them
is to, first, prevent the free flow of informa-
tion, second, discount the information or dis-
pute its accuracy, and, third, make arguments
for ignoring individual characteristics and
focusing instead on subgroup membership or
other communal considerations. Because
S3 status provides fertile ground for sub-
stantial further theorizing. One avenue in-
volves the effects of status processes on
identity phenomena. Suppose that activation
of a subgroup identity produces status gains
and losses, exactly as in the analysis of dis-
crimination. Then, among other things, two
ceteris paribus implications follow: First, in
self-report surveys, the higher-ranking in
each subgroup formed by a qualitative char-
acteristic (such as race or ethnicity) will be
less likely to answer subgroup-identification
questions; thus, average schooling, skills,
and income will be underestimated in all
subgroups. Second, in face-to-face inter-
views, if interviewer characteristics or be-
havior activate subgroup identity, there will
be a tendency for higher-ranking prospec-
tive respondents to decline to participate in
the survey; thus, nonresponse will be dis-
proportionately greater among persons with
higher schooling, skill, and income.

Finally, suppose that the cross-subgroup
coalitions discussed above lead to formation
of political parties—an “individualistic”
party comprising those who lose from dis-
crimination (or from subgroup identifica-
This paper presented an integrated frame-
work for studying status. The framework
combines ideas and insights from several lit-
eratures in order to address long-standing,
unresolved issues in status research, such as:
(1) the emergence of status; (2) how to dis-
tinguish between, and measure, the status of
individuals and the status of characteristics;
(3) how to measure and understand the sta-
tus gap between subgroups (e.g., between
men and women, or between races); and (4)
how to distinguish the operation of quantita-
tive and qualitative characteristics in the
production of status.

By identifying three distinct types of sta-
tus and linking them in distinctive ways to
quantitative and qualitative characteristics,
the framework makes it possible to analyze
a wide variety of status phenomena in a
broad range of groups and societies.

The new status theory yields many test-
able implications and, based on the work to
date, appears capable of yielding many
more implications beyond the ones pre-
sented here. The initial set includes impli-
cations for the effects of (1) the number and
intercorrelation of personal characteristics,
(2) the availability of information about
personal characteristics, and (3) the propor-
tions of a group in each category of a quali-
tative characteristic. The derived implica-
tions cover such phenomena as status dif-
ferences between group members, status
gaps between subgroups, and overall in-
equality in the status structure, all under
varying conditions. For example, the analy-
ses suggest that under certain given condi-
tions: (1) status inequality is lower if the
valued goods are negatively correlated; (2)
in a two-subgroup society, the least advan-
taged from both subgroups gain status from
discrimination, and the most advantaged
from both subgroups lose status from dis-
crimination, leading to cross-subgroup
coalitions; (3) the status gap between two
subgroups increases with the relative size of
the disadvantaged subgroup; (4) when two
subgroups are fighting for and against dis-
crimination, it is more difficult to prevent
defections in the bottom subgroup than in
the top subgroup; and (5) opponents of dis-
crimination are outnumbered.

The new framework for status analysis
opens many avenues for future work—refin-
ing the basic status functions, building theo-
ries and deriving more and sharper implica-
tions, and testing the implications and using
the new measures for the status of persons
and the status of characteristics to assess key
status phenomena and their correlates in sur-
veys and experiments.

Ahead, a further integration looms on the
horizon. The status analyzed here refers to
evaluations of the worth of individuals and
characteristics (footnote 1). This kind of
status is related to the other major kind of
status of interest in social science—the
“status” in status attainment (Sewell and
Hauser 1972, 1992)—in that the status in
status attainment consists of the character-
istics which confer the evaluation kind of
status. Ultimately, this evaluation status
Guillermina Jasso is Professor of Sociology at
New York University. Recent work includes:
“Trends in the Experience of Injustice” (Social
Justice Research, 2000), “The Changing Skill of
New Immigrants to the United States” (with M.
R. Rosenzweig and J. P. Smith, in Issues in the
Economics of Immigration, edited by G. J.
Borjas, University of Chicago Press, 2000),
“Some of Robert K. Merton’s Contributions to
Justice Theory” (Sociological Theory, 2000),
“The New Immigrant Survey Pilot (NIS-P)” (with
D. S. Massey, M. R. Rosenzweig, and J. P. Smith,
Demography, 2000), “How I Became a Theo-
rist,” (Sociological Theory, 2000), “Assortative
Mating among Married New Legal Immigrants to
the United States” (with D. S. Massey, M. R.
Rosenzweig, and J. P. Smith, International Mi-
gration Review, 2000), and “Rule Finding about
Rule Making: Comparison Processes and the
Making of Norms” (in Social Norms, edited by
M. Hechter and K.-D. Opp, Russell Sage, 2001).
Bales, Robert Freed. 1999. Social Interaction
Systems: Theory and Measurement. New
Brunswick, NJ, and London, England: Trans-
action.

Barber, Bernard. 1968. “Stratification, Social:
Introduction.” Pp. 288-96 in International En-
cyclopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 15, ed-
ited by D. L. Sills. New York: Macmillan.

Berger, Joseph, Hamit Fisek, Robert Norman,
and Morris Zelditch. 1977. Status Character-
istics and Social Interaction: An Expectation
States Approach. New York: Elsevier.

Berger, Joseph, Cecilia Ridgeway, M. Hamit
Fisek, and Robert Z. Norman. 1998. “The Le-
gitimation and Delegitimation of Power and
Prestige Orders.” American Sociological Re-
view 63:379-405S.

Berger, Joseph, Susan J. Rosenholtz, and Morris
Zelditch. 1980. “Status Organizing Processes.”
Annual Review of Sociology 6:479-508.

Blau, Peter M. 1977. Inequality and Heterogene-
ity. New York: Free Press.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1997. “Masculine Domination
Revisited.” The Goffman Prize Lecture. Trans-
lated and edited by Loic Wacquant. Berkeley
Journal of Sociology 41:189-203.

Fararo, Thomas J. 1989. The Meaning of General
Theoretical Sociology: Tradition and Formal-
ization. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Friedkin, Noah E. 1998. A Structural Theory of
Social Influence. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Goode, William J. 1978. The Celebration of He-
roes: Prestige as a Control System. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.

Homans, George C. 1967. “Fundamental Social
Processes.” Pp. 27-78 in Sociology: An Intro-
duction, edited by N. J. Smelser. New York:
Wiley.

Lipset, Seymour Martin. 1968. “Stratification,
Social: Social Class.” Pp. 296-316 in Interna-
tional Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences,
vol. 15, edited by D. L. Sills. New York:
Macmillan.

Marmot, Michael. 2000. “Multilevel Approaches
to Understanding Social Determinants.” Pp.
349-67 in Social Epidemiology, edited by L.
F. Berkman and I. Kawachi. Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.

Merton, Robert K. [1949, 1957] 1968. Social
Theory and Social Structure. 1968. Enlarged
ed. New York: Free Press.

Nagourney, Adam and David Barstow. 2000.
“G.O.P.’s Depth Outdid Gore’s Team in
Florida.” The New York Times, December 22,
2000, pp. Al, A29. (www.nytimes.com)

Parsons, Talcott. [1949] 1964. Essays in Socio-
logical Theory. Rev. ed. New York: Free
Press.

Ridgeway, Cecilia L. 1991. “The Social Con-
struction of Status Value: Gender and Other
Nominal Characteristics.” Social Forces 70:
367-86.

. 1997a. “The Conservation of Gender In-

equality.” American Sociological Review 62:

218-35.

. 1997b. “Where Do Status-Value Beliefs
Come From? New Developments.” Pp. 137-58
in Status, Networks, and Structure, edited by
J. Szmatka, J. Skvoretz, and J. Berger.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Ridgeway, Cecilia L. and James Balkwell. 1997.
“Group Processes and the Diffusion of Status-
Beliefs.” Social Psychology Quarterly 60:14—
31.

Rossi, Peter H. 1979. “Vignette Analysis: Uncov-
ering the Normative Structure of Complex
Judgments.” Pp. 176-86 in Qualitative and
Quantitative Social Research: Papers in
Honor of Paul F. Lazarsfeld, edited by R. K.
Merton, J. S. Coleman, and P. H. Rossi. New
York: Free Press.

Sapolsky, Robert. 1993. “Endocrinology Al-
fresco: Psychoendocrine Studies of Wild Ba-
boons.” Recent Progress in Hormone Research
48:437-68.

Sewell, William H. and Robert M. Hauser. 1972.
Education, Occupation, and Earnings:
Achievement in the Early Career. New York:
Academic.

. 1992. “A Review of the Wisconsin Lon-
gitudinal Study of Social and Psychological
Factors in Aspirations and Achievements,
1963-1990.” Working Paper 92-01, Center for
Demography and Ecology, University of Wis-
consin, Madison.

Sgrensen, Aage B. 1979. “A Model and a Metric
for the Analysis of the Intragenerational Sta-
tus Attainment Process.” American Journal of
Sociology 85:361-84.

Skvoretz, John and Thomas J. Fararo. 1996. “Sta-
tus and Participation in Task Groups: A Dy-
namic Network Model.” American Journal of
Sociology 101:1366-1414.

Smith, James P. 1999. “Healthy Bodies and
Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation between
Health and Economic Status.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 13:145-66.

Stanton-Salazar, Ricardo D. 1997. “A Social
Capital Framework for Understanding the So-
cialization of Racial Minority Children and
Youths.” Harvard Educational Review 67:1—
40.

Stinchcombe, Arthur L. 1968. “Stratification, So-
cial: The Structure of Stratification Systems.”
Pp. 325-32 in International Encyclopedia of
the Social Sciences, vol. 15, edited by D. L.
Sills. New York: Macmillan.

Stuart, Alan and J. Keith Ord. 1987. Kendall’s
Advanced Theory of Statistics. Vol. 1, Distri-
bution Theory. 5th ed. Originally authored by
Sir Maurice Kendall. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Turner, Jonathan H. 1984. Societal Stratification:
A Theoretical Analysis. New York: Columbia
University Press.

. 1995. Macrodynamics: Toward a Theory
on the Organization of Human Populations.
ASA Rose Monograph Series. New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Veblen, Thorstein. [1899] 1953. The Theory of
the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Insti-
tution. Rev. ed. Reprint, New York: New
American Library.

Wagner, David G. and Joseph Berger. 1993.
“Status Characteristics Theory: The Growth of
a Program.” Pp. 23-63 in Theoretical Re-
search Programs: Studies in the Growth of
Theory, edited by J. Berger and M. Zelditch Jr.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Weber, Max. [1922] 1978. Economy and Soci-
ety: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology.
Translated and edited by G. Roth and C.
Wittich. Berkeley, CA: University of Califor-
nia Press.

Webster, Murray, Jr. and Stuart J. Hysom. 1998.
“Creating Status Characteristics.” American
Sociological Review 63:351-78.

Wilkenson, Richard G. 1996. Unhealthy Societ-
ies: The Afflictions of Inequality. London, En-
gland: Routledge.

Zelditch, Morris, Jr. 1968. “Status, Social.” Pp.
250-57 in International Encyclopedia of the
Social Sciences, vol. 15, edited by D. L. Sills.
New York: Macmillan.
