@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2090513?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
among mental patients and their fam-

ilies, attitudes toward the etiology,
treatment, and aftermath of mental illness
have been found to be associated with a num-
ber of sociological variables.1 Although in-
vestigations of the attitudes of the general
public and of patients or their associates
have frequently included the same variables,
they differ considerably in method.? Unlike

MONS the general public, as well as

* This research is being undertaken by the Com-
munity Health Project, directed by Ozzie G. Sim-
mons. The Project is sponsored by the Social Sci-
ence Program at the Harvard School of Public
Health and supported by grant M 1627 from the
National Institute of Mental Health.

1 As examples, see Howard E. Freeman and Gene
G. Kassebaum, “The Relationship of Education and
Knowledge to Opinions about Mental Illness,” Men-
tal Hygiene, 44 (January, 1960), pp. 42-47; Gerald
Gurin, Joseph Veroff and Sheila Feld, Americans
View Their Mental Health, New York: Basic Books,
Inc., 1960; Charles D. Whatley, “Social Attitudes
toward Discharged Mental Patients,” Social Prob-
lems, 4 (Spring, 1959), pp. 313-320; and Julian L.
Woodward, “Changing Ideas on Mental Illness and
its Treatment,” American Sociological Review, 16
(August, 1951), pp. 446-454.

2 As examples, see Eugene B. Gallagher, “A Socio-
psychological Study of Patienthood in the Mental
Hospital,” unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard
University, 1959; Walter G. Klopfer, Alexander A.
Wylie, and Joseph S. Hillson, “Attitudes toward
Mental Hospitals,” Journal of Clinical Psychology,
12 (October, 1956), pp. 361-365; Charles L. Rose,
“Relatives’ Attitudes and Mental Hospitalization,”
Mental Hygiene, 43 (April, 1959), pp. 194-203;
Omnega Souelem, “Mental Patients’ Attitudes to-
ward Mental Hospitals,” Journal of Clinical Psy-
chology, 11 (April, 1955), pp. 181-185; Warren S.
Williams, “Class Differences in the Attitudes of Psy-
the survey research approach often employed
in the former, the latter typically have used
less structured interview techniques or highly
selected study groups.?

The present study of the attitudes of rela-
tives of formerly hospitalized patients is con-
sistent in method with the investigations of
attitudes among the general public. The de-
parture point for the analysis is the two vari-
ables that have been identified as correlates
of mental illness attitudes in virtually every
one of these studies—education and age.*

 

chiatric Patients,’ Social Problems, 4 (January,
1957), pp. 240-244; and, of course, the Yale re-
search reported in August B. Hollingshead and
Fredrick C. Redlich, Social Class and Mental Ill-
ness, New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1958, and
Jerome K. Meyers and Bertram H. Roberts, Family
and Class Dynamics in Mental Illness, New York:
John Wiley and Sons, 1959.

3In general, the questionnaire approach or the
structured interview have been employed in studies
of patients rather than in studies of their relatives.
One recent study of relatives, (Rose, loc. cit.), for
example, employed unstructured interivews which
were later content analyzed. The Yale research, to
which we will make considerable reference in this
paper, infers attitudes “. . . primarily from behavior
observed in and around psychiatric situations rather
than from hypothetical questions presented to per-
sons in interview situations.” Hollingshead and Red-
lich, op. cit., p. 335.

4See Whatley, loc. cit., and Woodward, loc. cit. It
should be noted that, in general, the relationships
reported in the various studies, although consistent
in direction are of low magnitude. As might be ex-
pected, the strongest correlations are found when
the responses to items call for knowledge of psychi-
atric concepts and terms. See Freeman and Kasse-
baum, loc. cit.
The younger and more educated persons in
the community have been found to be, for
example, more scientific and humanitarian,
more willing to associate with former pa-
tients, and more likely to stress interpersonal
difficulties as contributory to mental illness.
One of the objectives of this study is to ex-
amine whether the relationships of education
and age to attitudes toward mental illness
found among the general public also hold
among families of former mental patients.

In addition to education, other variables
viewed as indicators of social class status are
included in the analysis. Hollingshead, Red-
lich, and their associates describe a number
of class differences in attitude among rela-
tives of patients.5 For example, family mem-
bers of the higher social classes are most
likely to explain mental illness in psycho-
genic terms, to hold favorable attitudes to-
ward the hospital and toward the treatment
received by mental patients, and to be will-
ing to accept a patient in the home after hos-
pitalization. The second objective of this in-
vestigation is to re-examine the apparent
relationship among patients’ family members
between social class and “enlightened” views
of mental illness and its treatment.

A number of “clinical” characteristics of
the patients will also be considered. The
rationale for including these variables is that
the severity of the patient’s illness and his
course of treatment are associated with the
attitudes of his family members. The third
objective of this study is to describe the re-
lationships of patients’ present symptomatol-
ogy, diagnosis, previous hospital experience,
and similar variables to their relatives’ atti-
tudes toward mental illness.
a year, a second interview took place at that
time. If the patient returned to the hospital
during the year, the second interview was
obtained shortly after rehospitalization. The
data employed here are from the first inter-
views. Patients were in the community an
average of 41 days at the time of the first
interview (standard deviation=16.5 days).

The relatives interviewed were predomi-
nantly the mothers and spouses of patients
who “left bed” during the first six months
of 1959. “Left bed” was defined as remain-
ing in the community for more than 30 days
with the expectation on the part of the hos-
pital that in-patient treatment was com-
pleted. Many of the patients were techni-
cally still “on the books” of the hospitals,
either on “trial visit” or “extended leave”
status at the time of the first interview.

Every patient with the following char-
acteristics was included in the drawing
group: between 20 and 60 years of age,
white, native born, living in Boston or ad-
jacent areas, hospitalized for purposes other
than observation, not physically handicapped
to the extent of being unemployable, not
hospitalized primarily for acute alcoholism,
and not addicted to narcotics. All the pa-
tients were psychotics with non-organic,
functional disorders, the majority diagnosed
schizophrenic. Each patient selected was last
hospitalized at one of 12 hospitals in eastern
Massachusetts, of which nine are state hos-
pitals and three are hospitals of the Veterans
Administration.

The hospital records of all patients meet-
ing these criteria were reviewed. After elimi-
nating patients released to foster homes,
half-way houses, and day hospitals, inter-
views were attempted in all but 12 of the
714 cases in which the patient returned to
a family setting. These 12 cases met all the
criteria but returned to the hospital before
the interview could be accomplished. Of the
702 interviews attempted, 649 (92%) were
completed: in 49 of the uncompleted cases,
the informants either had severe language
problems or were too emotionally disturbed
to be interviewed, and in four cases the in-
formants could not be located. Hospital rec-
ord data were available for all patients, and
chi-square goodness of fit comparisons of
the completed cases and of the total study
group on 48 social and clinical variables re-
vealed that no significant differences exist
between completed and uncompleted cases.
Likewise, there are no significant differences
between completed and uncompleted inter-
views with respect to the interviewer, the
month the patient left bed, and the kin
relationship of the informant to the patient.

The completed cases include 280 males
and 369 females. The majority of the pa-
tients were hospitalized less than six months,
although two-thirds were previously hos-
pitalized for over 15 days. Approximately
half the patients are married. Interviews
were conducted by psychiatric social workers
in the home, unless the informant desired
otherwise. A standardized interview schedule
was employed, and interviews averaged some-
what less than two hours.
found unsatisfactory since a number of items
were too extreme, were reported as ambig-
uous by the interviewers, or failed to corre-
late with others presumed to measure the
same universe of content. After additional
pretesting, a revised set of items was de-
veloped. In order to evaluate the homo-
geneity of the items in each scale, bi-serial
correlation coefficients were calculated be-
tween responses to each item and scores ob-
tained by summing the responses to the other
items in the respective scale. These “part-
whole” correlation coefficients range between
.35 and .60, indicating that the items in each
of the scales are tapping similar content.
The intercorrelations between the attitude
scales are presented in Table 1. The correla-
tions between the scales are significant, sug-
gesting that they are measuring related uni-
verses of content.® In particular, there is a
strong association between doubting that
patients can recover from mental illness and
feeling that the patient is to blame for his
condition, and both these attitudes are re-
lated to an unfavorable view of the mental
hospital. A psychogenic view of the etiology
nificantly different from zero, and the stabil-
ity of the associations is supported by the
cross-tabular analysis and the results of the
chi-square tests.®

Likewise, age is significantly associated
with attitudes toward mental illness, with the
exception of its relationship to whether fam-
ily members believe patients are responsible
for their condition (see Table 3). The three
scales that yield significant relationships
with respect to both age and education are
most similar in content to the items used in
previous investigations of the attitudes of
the general public. Woodward, for example,
rests his conclusions that younger and more
educated persons are more likely to have
humanitarian and scientific attitudes toward
mental illness on items about the etiology of
illness and the treatment received by patients
in mental hospitals.° Similarly, the questions
employed by Whatley in his study of avoid-
ance reactions to recuperating patients are
most closely represented by the items regard-
ing whether patients can recover completely
from mental illness.1! Thus, the results indi-
cate that the relationships of age and educa-
tion found among the general public also
hold for relatives of former patients.

The correlation between education and
the attitudes toward mental illness suggests
that the formal educational process influ-
ences the individual’s views regarding men-
tal illness. Education is, of course, correlated
with age (r=—.30). In order to evaluate
whether the correlations between age and
the attitudes are merely a matter of the
younger informants having greater exposure
to formal education, additional analysis was
undertaken in which the relationships be-
tween age and attitudes were examined, con-
correlated with attitudes toward mental ill-
ness (see Table 6). These three variables
were included in the analysis in order to as-
sess whether or not the lack of significant
relationships between social class and atti-
tudes was peculiar to the use of Warner’s
scale as the measure of class status. Only
four of the additional 12 coefficients are .10
or greater; only these four are significantly
different from zero on the basis of their mag-
nitude of correlation. Further, although the
trends indicated by the correlational analy-
sis were also observed when the cross-tabular
distributions were inspected, one of the four
relationships regarded as stable on the basis
of the correlational analysis—that between
etiology and breadwinner’s income—failed to
yield a statistically significant chi-square
value.
The lack of correlation between the social
class variables and attitudes, despite seem-
ingly stable relationships between education
and attitudes, suggested it might be useful to
introduce an additional variable into the
analysis. As part of the survey, informants
were asked to complete a multiple-choice
vocabulary test that efficiently predicts
scores on more general intelligence tests.1*
The correlations between attitudes and score
on the word test are all significant, as might
be anticipated since this variable is strongly
associated with education (r=.46). This
finding suggests that the correlation between
education and attitudes is a reflection of
differential verbal ability rather than of dif-
15 Meyers and Roberts, op. cit., p. 25, so describe
the meaning of social class. We wish to emphasize
that the differences in findings may also be the re-
sult of the different approaches employed in measur-
ing attitudes. Another consideration is the issue of
“response set.” The marked shifts in responses sug-
gest that this is not a critical problem. For example,
in the recovery scale the proportion who agree to
the statements varies from 17 per cent to 83 per
cent.

It is of interest that the correlations between the
attitude scales and scores on the vocabulary test are
significant even when education is partialed out, ex-
cept for the relationship between attitude toward
the hospital and verbal ability. In the sense that this
test reflects “intelligence,” the genesis of “enlight-
ened” attitudes toward mental illness may rest with
differential capacity to be influenced by the mass
media and other non-familial agents of socialization,
as well as with differential opportunties for and
actual exposure to these agents.
The attitudes of the relatives were cor-
related with a number of variables that re-
flect aspects of the patient’s hospital and
posthospital experience, including diagnosis,
duration of hospitalization, number of times
previously hospitalized, posthospital symp-
tomatology, and posthospital problems of
patient management. Relatives’ attitudes are
not related to diagnoses of patients’ illness
as either schizophrenia or mania-depression.
Likewise, the duration of hospitalization
and the number of times previously hos-
pitalized are not associated with mental ill-
ness attitudes, with the exception of attitude
toward recovery. Relatives of patients who
were hospitalized more than one time and
also relatives of patients hospitalized for a
longer period of time are more likely to be
pessimistic about chances for a complete re-
covery from mental illness (r=—.15 and
—.12).

The behavior of the patient after his re-
turn to the community—at least to the time
of the interview—is associated with both
attitudes toward recovery and toward re-
sponsibility. Relatives who reported problems
in the management of patients subsequent to
their hospitalization are less likely to believe
patients can recover completely from mental
illness and more likely to blame the patient
for his condition (see Table 9). The degree
classes. The social class index they employed
includes education, however, and they did
not take into account the singular predictive
power of this variable. Our findings, based
upon structured interview rather than ob-
servational data, suggest that the generaliza-
tions of the Yale group regarding social class
and attitudes toward mental illness should
be viewed with caution.

Education, of course, is often regarded as
an indicator of social class, as in the Yale
research, and partialling it out could be
viewed as destroying the “integrity” of the
social status continuum. But education also
reflects another characteristic—level of ver-
bal ability. In this study, we have included
a direct measure of verbal ability, and the
results of the analysis suggest that “enlight-
ened” attitudes toward mental illness can be
more parsimoniously accounted for on the
basis of differential verbal ability than on
the basis of differences in “style of life.” As
Miller and Mishler have indicated, the Yale
group’s failure to control the individual com-
ponents of their contrived class variable
represents a serious limitation of this major
study.

It would be presumptuous, on the basis of
this attitude study, to challenge the Yale
data regarding incidence and prevalence, but
it appears justifiable to question their ex-
planation regarding the attitudes of patients
toward illness and treatment and the atti-
tudes of psychiatrists toward patients. In-
deed, Hollingshead and Redlich acknowledge
the explanatory power of education at vari-
ous points in their discussion of attitudes.
For example, in describing relationships be-
tween psychiatrist and patient, they note:
“The essential principles underlying insight
therapy are shared most frequently by psy-
chiatrists and patients in Classes I and II,
for a number of reasons: Patients in these
classes are inclined more than the lower
classes—because of their education—to seek
and follow professional advice.” 2” Clearly,
future investigations of attitudes toward
mental illness need to consider the possibility
of the explanation being one of differential
education and verbal ability rather than
differential social status.18

The relationship between attitudes toward
mental illness and such vairables as age and
education need to be taken into account in
developing programs of providing more
“therapeutic” home conditions by modifying
family members’ attitudes. The difficulty of
implementing procedures to modify attitudes
that may be anticipated on the basis of their
linkages to age and education is additionally
compounded by the associations between
these attitudes and the posthospital behavior
of the patient. The data from other fields—
for example, minority group relations—sug-
gest that it is difficult to effect marked and
enduring changes in attitudes by means of
Specific programs when these attitudes are
“rooted” in a set of diverse elements that
includes socialization variables as well as
situational ones.19 Thus, while sporadic
the problems inherent in such programs, see Elaine
Cumming and John Cumming, Closed Ranks, Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1957, particularly
pp. 154-155. Finally, it should be emphasized that
the relationships documented in this investigation,
as well as those reported in studies of the general
public, are low in magnitude. Evidently, major de-
terminants of attitudes toward mental illness are as
yet unidentified, which point also must be con-
sidered by persons concerned with modifying these
attitudes.

20See Rose, Joc. cit., and Milton Greenblatt,
Richard H. York, and Esther Lucile Brown, From
Custodial to Therapeutic Patient Care in Mental
Hospitals, New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
1955.

21 Certainly, attempts to modify attitudes among
families of patients need to take into account situa-
tional variables such as those indicated. Shifts in the
symptomatology of the patient, as well as other
characteristics of his posthospital situation, should
be considered in developing programs for family
members. The strategy of intervention might in-
clude, for example, varying its forms and intensity
of contact between relatives and hospital personnel
when a patient’s symptoms are quiescent and when
they are active.
