@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/209437 4?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
Lopata, Helena Znaniecki

1973 Occupation: Housewife. New York: Oxford

University Press.
Miller, Herman

1966 Income Distribution in the United States.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Print-
ing Office.

Mincer, Jacob

1962 “Labor force participation of married
women.” in Aspects of Labor Economics.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Mott, Frank L.

1972 “Fertility, life cycle stage and female labor
force participation in Rhode Island: a retro-
spective view.” Demography 9:173-85.

Oppenheimer, Valerie L.

1970 The Female Labor Force in the United
States. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Potter, Robert G., Jr., Phillip C. Sagi and Charles F.
Westoff.
1962 “Improvement of contraception during the
Case study comparisons of Japanese with Western firms have traditionally emphasized the
importance of historical and cultural factors for understanding differences in their managerial
practices and organizational structures. But to date there have been few systematic attempts to
apply recent insights from organizational theory developed largely within the context of West-
ern organizations to their Japanese counterparts. This paper combines theoretical insights from
both Weberian and decision-making traditions within a single model which is then tested with
data from forty-four Japanese manufacturing plants. The results indicate that many relation-
ships linking factors such as organizational size and work Variability with structure are quite
similar to those found in British and American organizations despite the historical and cultural
factors which may be unique to Japanese firms.
Reimann, 1973; Mansfield, 1973) but also
hypotheses linking structure to a host of con-
textual factors (Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967;
Hickson et al., 1969; Blau, 1972; Azumi,
1972a). While the foci of research projects
vary widely, they are all in a common search
for consistent relationships among a limited
set of variables, and this theme is central
whether one is comparing organizations in a
single industry, across institutional realms, or
across national boundaries.

This paper attempts to draw upon recent
advances in both theory and method, to com-
bine several propositions which have not been
linked, and to test these propositions with a
set of data on Japanese manufacturing plants.
The attempt, therefore, is twofold: first to
identify a theoretical framework for examin-
ing relationships between context and struc-
ture based on previous studies of Western
bureaucracy, and secondly to test its relevance
for manufacturing organizations in a different
cultural context. The effort lies in identifying
structural regularities among organizations in
different settings. Though the distribution of
organizations in terms of their size, product-
market mix, or technological dependence may
vary widely across different countries, the is-
sue here is one of determining whether these
and other organizational characteristics covary
in ways consistent with comparable relation-
ships observed in recent studies of American
and British organizations (Blau, 1972; Child,
1973b). To the extent that these are consis-
tent one can argue for the salience of key con-
textual factors in understanding organization-
al design despite the underlying cultural and
historical differences which separate Japanese
from Western firms. If, on the other hand, the
patterns are not consistent, other factors must
be sought to explain the lack of regularities.
In contrast with early comparative studies
which took administrative intensity as their
key structural variable (Terrien and Mills,
1955; Anderson and Warkov, 1961), more re-
cent analyses have operationalized a host of
other organizational characteristics and have
begun to examine the relationships among
them (Pugh et al., 1969). At the outset many
of these attempts were guided by assumptions
implicit in Weber’s bureaucratic model, but in-
creasing attention is now being given to deci-
sion-making and cybernetic theories which
provide important new insights to these ques-
tions. By identifying cognitive limits to ration-
al decision-making ties to the scope and na-
ture of the work organizations perform, they
suggest that the Weberian model represents
only one end of a continuum of organization-
al control. Under stable operating conditions
organizations can program activities, specify
individual responsibilities in great detail and
achieve administrative economies of scale by
substituting these impersonal control mech-
anisms for direct supervision and collabora-
tion. But where activities are more variable,
rational bureaucratic control mechanisms are
less efficient, and organizational effectiveness
Recent studies by Blau and his associates
have stimulated debate over the relationship
between the size of an organization and its
administrative overhead pursued earlier by
Terrien and Mills (1955) and Anderson and
Warkov (1961). Replicating their studies on
widely different types of organizations, Blau
and his associates have shown that size is con-
sistently associated with administrative econo-
mies of scale. The theoretical reasons for this
are twofold: first, larger organizations are bet-
ter able to group individuals performing re-
lated tasks within the same administrative unit
so that the incremental burden on the super-
visor decreases with each new addition to the
group and secondly, as organizational size in-
creases, so does the possibility of routinizing
tasks performed and programming their inter-
relationships in advance. The first is respon-
sible for the declining proportion of adminis-
trators and the second for constructing a host
depends more and more upon the ability to
facilitate rather than restrict information
flows (Galbraith, 1973).

While this framework is useful for examin-
ing relationships among other structural di-
mensions, attention here will be directed to
that between administrative intensity (Free-
man, 1973) and the prevalence of written
tules and procedures. These two character-
istics are selected because of the common at-
tention given them by those arguing for size,
environmental uncertainty and technology as
key structural determinants. Where adminis-
trative intensity is indicative of the degree to
which organizations employ greater numbers
of administrative and staff personnel to
achieve ongoing coordination both within and
among departments, the prevalence of written
rules and procedures is representative of the
extent to which activities are coordinated by
plan rather than by feedback. Viewing these
as two alternative modes of coordination pro-
vides a basis for combining the insights of the
three structural schools within a single theo-
retical framework.
munication and feedback both within and
among departments.

Thompson (1967), for example, suggested
that organizations facing more dynamic task
environments would be less concerned with
the application of rules, whereas those facing
more stable situations would rely primarily on
tules and have fewer functional divisions.
Lawrence and Lorsch (1967) building upon
the Burns and Stalker (1961) typology of en-
vironmental uncertainty also found this pat-
tern in their comparison of firms in different
types of industry. The successful container
firm with relatively stable products and
markets relied more heavily upon paperwork
systems to achieve integration, whereas the
successful plastics company placed greater re-
liance on direct contact among managers at all
levels.

Task variability resulting from unstable re-
lationships between the organization and its
environment appears to influence administra-
tive mechanisms for coordinating work in
ways quite different from that simply of size.
Though both may result from a single strate-
gic business decision, it is important to distin-
guish them analytically, for their influences
on the organization of work are just the oppo-
site.
ly related to the automaticity of equipment
replacing first manpower and then decision-
making in actual production operations. In
contrast with other technology variables speci-
fying the adequacy of process-related know-
ledge (Perrow, 1961) and the nature of inter-
dependence among operations (Thompson,
1967), this factor identifies characteristics of
production equipment as an important struc-
tural determinant. While the arguments link-
ing this factor with the two alternative
mechanisms of control are quite diverse, they
have generally focused on its impact on the
volume and variability of information which
must be exchanged to maintain high volume
production.

Blau and Woodward, for example, have
suggested that automaticity influences the
pace and layout of production processes and
may itself be viewed as an impersonal control
mechanism substituting for extensive written
rules and procedures (Blau and Schoenherr,
1971; Reeves and Woodward, 1970). But
Thompson (1967) and more recently Child
(1973b), while not disagreeing directly with
this view, emphasize changes in interdepen-
dence among both production and support
personnel brought about by the investment in
capital intensive technologies. The importance
of maintaining continuous high volume pro-
duction in their view exerts financial incen-
tives to buffer core technologies by employing
additional staff personnel and to facilitate
timely decision-making in the event of disrup-
tions. Despite the coordination achieved by
the pace and layout of machinery which may
reduce dependence upon extensive documen-
tation of production related plans, the in-
creased interdependence among discrete oper-
ations raises the importance of ongoing co-
ordination and thereby raises the need for ad-
ministrative intensity. These insights provide
the basis for our hypotheses linking auto-
matically with the two administrative mecha-
nisms of control.
Attempts to test these and other proposi-
tions linking automaticity to structural
characteristics have produced inconsistent
findings and suggest a weakness in theoretical
treatment. Because this variable has been
viewed as a contextual factor on a coequal
basis with other variables such as size and task
variability, little attention has been given to
the spurious influences of automaticity which
may be due to these other factors.

Woodward (1965), for example, found her
measure of automaticity to be positively re-
lated to the proportion of managers and
supervisory staff, the ratio of indirect to di-
rect employees, and the number of hierarchi-
cal levels in her study of manufacturing plants
in England. But Hickson et al.’s (1969) analy-
sis of another set of British firms indicates
that the influence of workflow integration,
which includes automaticity, only influences
the organization of work closest to the pro-
duction floor. Child (1973c) also found that,
with size controlled, factors related to the
automaticity of work exerted little additional
influence on the number of supervisory and
supportive staff. This inconsistency also ex-
tends to the relationship between automa-
ticity and the utilization of rules and pro-
cedures to coordinate work. Where both Child
(1973a) and Hickson (1969) report no signifi-
cant relationship between their measures of
workflow integration and formalization, repli-
cations of their work in two American sam-
ples indicate a positive relationship between
the two variables in one (Inkson et al., 1970)
and a negative relationship in the other
(Reimann, 1974).

These discrepancies underscore the need to
examine relationships among contextual vari-
ables in addition to analyzing their influences
on structure. The selection of equipment and
layout design can be realistically made only
after deciding first the variety and volume of
goods to be produced. Yet those treating size,
variability and automaticity as contextual
factors ignore for the most part this means
and end distinction. Freeman’s (1973) recent
study of American manufacturing plants cau-
tions against examining the structural in-
fluences of automaticity without taking into
consideration both the variability and volume
of work performed, and these insights provide
the final hypotheses for this model. By view-
ing size and task variability as two dimensions
of organizational objectives which, in turn, in-
fluence decisions on the means of production,
greater account can be taken of their indirect
influences on structure through automaticity.

Larger organizations are better able to stan-
dardize work and coordinate activities more
on the basis of planning than feedback, but
larger organizations which do not similarly in-
crease the variability of operations performed
are also more likely to benefit from capital
intensity which raises different implications
for the coordination of work. In noting this
positive relationship between size and tech-
nology, the present framework suggests that
the indirect effects of size through automa-
ticity negate part of its direct effects on ad-
ministrative control mechanisms. These coun-
tervailing influences may have contributed to
the inconsistent findings linking automaticity
and structure noted earlier. Pursuing this
framework further by examining the in-
fluences of task variability, this same phenom-
enon also occurs. Because task variability re-
duces opportunities to achieve long produc-
tion runs, it should limit capital investment in
automated machinery and thereby negate part
Hy 2
SIZE x > IMPERSONAL RULES
AND PROCEDURES

   

AUTOMATICITY

TASK ADMINISTRATIVE
VARIABILITY INTENSITY
of its direct influences on administrative con-
trol mechanisms.

These final two hypotheses which link size
and task variability with automaticity com-
plete the present theoretical model (see Figure
1). While the model in its present form does
not consider important feedback loops be-
tween structure, technology and the two
strategic dimensions, it does attempt to build
upon current insights by assembling proposi-
tions already in use within a more complex
model. By starting with this set of key vari-
ables whose relationships have been studied
previously, one can begin to test this model
on non-Western firms. To the extent that the
results support these propositions based large-
ly upon assumptions of rationality and eco-
nomic efficiency rather than cultural and mor-
mative factors, one can argue the case for
structural constraints across national boun-
daries.
cated that, while the mean scores for his struc-
tural variables differed significantly from
those in the British plants, the relationship be-
tween size and formalization was similar in
the two countries. This paper attempts to ex-
tend his analysis and to examine the stability
of other relationships provided in our model.
While the sites he visited do not constitute a
representative sample on a statistical basis, his
study is the first to collect quantitative data
comparable to that gathered in British and
American firms and is therefore suggestive, if
not definitive.

The plants selected belong to 44 separate
firms ranging in size from 200 to over 95,000
employees and of the 44 all but seven were
branches of multi-unit organizations. In terms
of product lines there was also broad variation
(from cookies and soy sauce to automobiles
and steel), but in terms of the extent to which
they represent standard product lines there
was considerably less variation. Our measure
of task variability is a four-category ordinal
scale indicating the extent to which outputs
must be modified to meet customer specifica-
tions (see Table 1), and, on this scale, forty
percent of the sample manufactured standard
products with little or no variation. Of the 44
only seven could be classified as job shops
which would adapt production operations to
meet customer requirements.

In terms of the automaticity score which
indicates the extent to which machinery re-
places first manpower and then decision-
making (see Table 1), very few plants have
advanced computer controlled technologies.
The majority were split between rudimentary
powered tools (45%) and repeating automatic
equipment (38%). While none of the plants
which modified outputs to meet customer
specifications received more than the lowest
automaticity score, those with more standard
products were distributed in a bipolar fashion
at levels one (32%) and three (39%) on the
technology measure. Automaticity, while as-
sociated with task variability (r = -.52, p <
.001), has different implications for the organ-
ization of work, and one of the issues address-
ed here is whether both task variability and
automaticity exert independent influences on
In terms of size, the firms represented in
the sample range from a sales volume as low as
9 million dollars over fiscal year 1969 to a
high of 18.9 billion dollars, but the distribu-
tion is skewed with 60% of the companies
above the mean of 241 million dollars. The
number of employees in each plant is also
skewed, but this time in the opposite direc-
tion. While the mean number of personnel em-
ployed in the 44 plants is 1875, 45% have
fewer than 500 employees. The correlation
between company sales and plant employee
size (r = .69, p<.001) suggests that larger com-
panies tend also to have more plant employees
but, as we shall see, sales volume and number
of employees have quite different relation-
ships with automaticity suggesting the im-
portance of distinguishing the two (see Free-
man, 1973).

The indicator of impersonal rules and pro-
cedures used here is the Aston measure of for-
malization. Covering such items as the
presence of organizational charts, work flow
schedules, operations and job descriptions (see
Appendix B), this index represents the extent
Working across the causal sequence repre-
sented in Figure 1, the first set of relation-
ships to be examined are those linking the
volume and variability of work to the use of
capital intensive machinery in the production
process. As suggested by the positive correla-
tion between sales volume and task variability
(r = .33, p < .05), the two dimensions under-
lying growth are mutually associated. But, as
suggested earlier, each of these developments
is likely to exert opposite forces on the ways
in which work is performed. Because more
sophisticated machinery is costly both in capi-
tal outlays and time required to modify pro-
duction operations, the greater the variability
of work, the less likely it is to be automated.
Increased capacity, with no commensurate in-
crease in variability, on the other hand, in-
sures longer production runs and economies
of scale which may justify larger capital out-
lays for specialized machinery.

These two factors are isolated statistically
in Figure 2a, and the beta weights associated
with each factor are in the directions antici-
pated. Of the two, task variability appears to
be the stronger factor accounting for 28% of
the variance in automaticity across the 44
plants. Sales volume here accounts for only a
negligible percentage, but this may be con-
founded by the positive association between
sales volume and plant size (r = .69). Organiza-
tions may achieve greater capacity by either
hiring more production personnel or by in-
vesting in greater capital intensity and, if we
control for this possibility by holding plant
size constant, in Figure 2b the positive path
from sales volume to automaticity increases
from a beta of .06 to .29. Size then as a theo-
retical indicator of capacity differs from num-
ber of plant employees which is negatively re-
lated to automaticity (b* = -.35) and suggests
that greater care should be given when using
the term. Blau and Schoenherr (1971), for ex-
ample, link employee size to automaticity in
their study of employment security agencies,
but it is the amount of work rather than just
the number of employees which may justify a
higher level of automation.
As indicated earlier, organizations may
vary in their ability to standardize responsi-
bilities and limit the amount of ongoing co-
ordination required by advanced planning and
the use of impersonal control mechanisms. In
small organizations, for example, this is less
likely to take place because the volume of
work is insufficient to support the breakout
of narrowly defined jobs. Individuals often
perform many roles and informal relations ob-
viate the need for more impersonal coordina-
tion mechanisms. In larger organizations, how-
ever, not only is there less face-to-face contact
among individuals, but quite often there may
be a number of employees performing similar
roles. In terms of establishing formal co-
ordination mechanisms then, increasing size or
capacity raises the necessity to organize on a
more formal basis while it also provides eco-
nomic advantages to do so in that the same set
of rules and procedures may apply to more
individuals over time.

Current research on Japanese factories
stresses the significance of group identifica-
tion and the lack of formal occupational dis-
tinctions for the organization of work. But to
date no one has examined those factors which
may influence the variation among administra-
tive practices in Japanese plants. Size or the
volume of work has been shown to influence
these in Western firms, and the question re-
mains whether this is also true in Japan. This
assumption, however, applies only to increas-
ing capacity with no commensurate increase
in the variability of work. Holding increases in
capacity constant and focusing upon the in-
fluences of task variability on the use of im-
personal coordination mechanisms, the results
should be just the reverse. Greater task vari-
ability in Japanese plants should reduce op-
portunities to standardize and program ac-
tivities just as it does in Western plants.
Both formal written procedures and highly
automated machinery have been viewed as im-
personal control mechanisms, and it is not sur-
prising, therefore, that their hypothesized re-
lationships with size and task variability are
similar. Machine automaticity, however, is
more than just an impersonal control mecha-
nism. By displacing routine jobs, it alters both
the composition of responsibilities and the
amount of information exchange which can
be planned in advance and, thereby, limits the
utility of written rules and procedures. Those
who plan for, set up and operate more auto-
matic equipment are highly interdependent,
and these activities are less likely to be well
documented.

Each of these relationships is tested in
Figure 3. The importance of incorporating
these three variables within a single frame-
work and using regression techniques to iden-
tify their independent influences on adminis-
trative control mechanisms is demonstrated
most strongly if one first compares the zero-
order correlations linking contextual and
structural variables. The weak association be-
tween both task variability (r = -.07) and auto-
maticity (r = -.03) and the presence of imper-
sonal control mechanisms would bolster the
arguments of those championing size as the
single key determinant of administrative con-
trol. But this assertion would ignore the criti-
cal interdependences between these two vari-
ables and size. By including these additional
variables within the model, one cannot only
improve its predictability (from R?=.14 to
R?=,20) but also gain a better understanding
of the countervailing influences upon formali-
zation. When controlling for their mutual cor-
relation, both task variability and sales volume
exert strong influences upon formalization
which are in keeping with our theoretical ex-
pectations. While not as dominant, the results
in Figure 3 also indicate that automaticity ex-
erts an independent negative influence upon
the presence of written rules and procedures.
The weakness of automaticity here supports
Hickson et al.’s (1969) argument that the im-
pact of this variable is strongly associated only
with those factors directly related with pro-
duction.
233

SALES VOLUME

99

TASK
VARIABILITY

AUTOMATICITY

~46**

     
 

FORMALIZATION

-89
ing upon these studies, the present model pro-
vides an opportunity to trace the conditions
which might account for variation in the re-
liance upon these two forms of coordination.

Looking directly at the zero-order correla-
tion between formalization and administrative
intensity (r = -.32), the pattern reflected by
the data supports Weber’s observation, but the
extent to which this represents a relationship
independent of other factors such as size, task
variability or technology is a question which
Weber could not effectively address. When
these other factors are introduced, as in
Figure 4, the results suggest that these precon-
ditions are much more influential than the
formalization variable alone. Indeed, the in-
fluence of formalization is all but negated (b*
= -.02) and once more size and task variability
appear as dominant influences. Interestingly
enough though, the same factors which
limited opportunities to establish impersonal
controls are those which also stimulate greater
administrative intensity.

Both increasing task variability and auto-
maticity, though inversely related, exert paral-
lel influences on administrative controls. Be-
SALES
VOLUME

    
  

FORMALIZATION

90°

33 AUTOMATICITY

69

~.55

TASK - >ADMINISTRATIVE
VARIABILITY INTENSITY
are similar to those hypothesized for Western
manufacturing plants. By identifying relation-
ships among size, task variability and auto-
maticity as well as those linking these con-
textual variables with the two administrative
control mechanisms, efforts were made to
progress beyond simpler zero-order associa-
tions between context and structures which
have previously led to inconsistent findings.
Not only did this prove useful for untangling
the complex and often conflicting relation-
ships between context and structure, but the
combination of insights from the Weberian
and business administration traditions suggests
two analytically distinct dimensions of strat-
egy or organizational objectives which hereto-
fore have been largely ignored. While the dis-
tinction between strategy and structure has
been a guiding framework for many important
studies (Chandler, 1962), attention has gen-
erally focused upon the complexity or uncer-
tainty dimension without a sufficient con-
sideration of the influences of size. The results
here suggest the importance of identifying the
independent influences of each on both the
means of production and the organization of
work. Throughout this paper the relationships
linking strategic and technological factors
with administrative control mechanisms deal
with organization-wide variables. This was
necessary in light of the available data, but
there is no theoretical reason to ignore the
implications of this model either for the micro
processes through which size and task vari-
ability exert their influences or for the more
macro factors related to Japanese culture and
managerial traditions which affect informa-
tion flows and thereby administrative con-
trols.

On the micro level, organizational objec-
tives may be viewed as exerting different influ-
ences on the volume and variability of work
performed by separate departments and on
the degree of interdependence across units.
Divisions or functional departments may re-
flect quite different structures depending
upon these conditions. Administrative and
medical units in hospitals, for example, rely
on different coordination mechanisms because
increased patient load has different implica-
tions for each (Neuhauser, 1971). The prob-
lems of coordination across departments may
also be examined within this framework.
Where their relationships are stable over time,
standard budgeting procedures may serve as
impersonal control mechanisms; but in the
aerospace industry, for example, where more
cross-departmental coordination must be
achieved on an ongoing basis, matrix struc-
tures have been developed which increase ad-
ministrative intensity to achieve coordination
by feedback more than by plan (Kingdon,
1973). In each case, however, task variability
is not the sole determinant of structure, for
volume of work plays an important role en-
abling organizations to learn a process and de-
vise procedures which limit ongoing coordina-
tion requirements.

The issue of culture can also be examined
within this framework — at least as it influ-
ences an organization’s ability to transfer in-
formation. Abegglen (1958) and more recent-
ly Dore (1973) and Cole (1971) have stressed
the importance of Japanese values and mana-
gerial traditions for decision-making and or-
ganizational structure. Lifetime employment
and the promotion system based more on
seniority than technical expertise are but two
of the many factors mentioned which remove
some of the career risks involved in more open
information exchanges. Given this greater
capacity to maintain coordination on an on-
going basis, the reluctance of Japanese organi-
zations to standardize individual responsibil-
ities and delineate formal authority by posi-
tion may be more appropriate than in Western
firms.

It is important, though, not to stereotype
Japanese industry on the basis of a limited
number of case comparisons. The data pre-
sented here suggest that, even with these cul-
tural differences, relationships between con-
text and structure may remain relatively
stable across countries. Impersonal control
mechanisms and administrative intensity do
seem to serve as alternative integrative mecha-
nisms, and their relationships with factors
such as size, variability and automaticity are
similar to those previously hypothesized in
the organizational literature. From these pre-
liminary findings, the issue of cultural versus
contextual influence on organizational struc-
ture is likely to be as false a dichotomy as that
between size and variability or technology. By
assembling several propositions related to each
of these factors within a single theoretical
framework and testing them with data from
Japanese manufacturing plants, this paper at-
tempts to build on the insights provided by
current organizational theory and to avoid
replicating these mistakes.
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Tue, 21 Jun 2016 19:38:14 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
— Organization chart given to:
none
chief executive only
C.E. plus one other
executive
Abegglen, James
1958 The Japanese Factory. Glencoe: Free Press.
Anderson, T. R. and S. Warkov
1961 “Organizational size and functional com-
plexity: a study of administration in hos-
pitals.” American Sociological Review, 26:
23-38.
Azumi, K.
1972a ‘‘Environmental needs, resources, and
agents.” Pp. 91-200 in Koya Azumi and
Jerald Hage (eds.), Organizational Systems.
Lexington, Ma.: Heath.
1972b “Bureaucracy East and West: a comparative
study of Japanese and British factories.”
Presented at the annual meeting of the
American Sociological Association, New Or-
leans, Louisiana.
Dore, R.

1973 British Factory — Japanese Factory. Berke-

ley: University of California Press.
Freeman, J.

1973 “Environment, technology, and administra-
tive intensity of manufacturing organiza-
tions.’? American Sociological Review
38:750-63.

Galbraith, J.

1973 Designing Complex Organizations. Reading:
Addison-Wesley.

Hickson, D., D.S. Pugh and Dianna Pheysey

1969 “Operations technology and organizational
structure: an empirical reappraisal.” Ad-
ministrative Science Quarterly 14:378-97.

Inkson, J., J.P. Schwitter, D.C. Pheysey and D.J.

Hickson

1970 “A comparison of organization structure
and managerial roles: Ohio, U.S.A., and the
Midlands, England,” Journal of Management
Studies 7:347-63.

Kingdon, D.
1973 Matrix Organizations. London: Tavistock.
Lawrence, P. and J. Lorsch

1967 Organization and Environment. Boston:

Harvard Business School.
Mansfield, R.

1973 “Bureaucracy and centralization: an exam-
ination of organizational structure.” Ad-
ministrative Science Quarterly 18:477-88.

March, J. and H. Simon
1958 Organizations. New York: Wiley.
Meyer, M.

1972 Bureaucratic Structure and Authority. New

York: Harper and Row.
Neuhauser, D.

1971 The Relationship between Administrative
Activities and Hospital Performance. Re-
search Series 28. Chicago: Center for Health
Administration Studies.
Perrow, C.

1961 “The analysis of goals in complex organiza-
tions.’? American Sociological Review
26:854-66.

Pugh, D., D.J. Hickson, C.R. Hinings and C. Turner

1969 “The context of organizational structures.”
Administrative Science Quarterly
14:91-114.

Reimann, B.

1973 “On the dimensions of bureaucratic struc-
ture.” Administrative Science Quarterly
18:462-76.

1974 “Organizational ‘Public Values’ and struc-
ture: an exploratory study.” Presented at
the sixth annual meeting of the American
Institute of Decision Making Sciences, At-
lanta, Georgia.

Reeves, T. and J. Woodward

1970 “Technology and organizational behavior.”

Pp. 37-56 in Joan Woodward (ed.), Indus-
Analysis of a 1964 national survey reveals that residents of the South displayed a much higher
level of anti-black prejudice than residents of the non-South, but the regions differed only
slightly on measures of anti-Semitism and anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant prejudice and on
certain psychological measures—authoritarianism, anomia and psychic distress. Though the
mean level of anti-black prejudice was higher in the South, the variation of individuals around
the mean in each region can be explained by roughly the same variables operating for the most
part in the same way. The regional differences in anti-black prejudice cannot be accounted for
by compositional differences between the regions in psychological characteristics, degree of
urbanization, socioeconomic status or ethnic composition. Those who spent most of their
childhood in one region but later moved to the other had attitudes toward blacks that were
intermediate between those of the nonmigrants in each region; this pattern was not present for
the other types of prejudice. The evidence presented tends to support a subcultural interpreta-
tion of the higher level of anti-black prejudice in the South in 1964.
