American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
The health effects of marital status are frequently cited in the current debate on marriage
promotion, but little is known about how marital health effects vary across groups. This
article assembles the largest properly longitudinal and nationally representative dataset
of elderly married couples in the United States (N = 410,272 couples) and provides
strong evidence that the “widowhood effect” —how the death of a spouse increases the
mortality of the survivor—varies substantially by race. The authors find that whites
married to whites suffer a large and enduring widowhood effect. By contrast, blacks
married to blacks do not suffer a detectable widowhood effect, possibly because they
manage to extend the survival advantage of marriage into widowhood. For racially
intermarried men, wife's race appears to dominate the size and presence of the
widowhood effect entirely, regardless of husbands own race. These results likely arise
from differences in the marital cultures and marital contexts of black and white couples.
More generally, these results demonstrate that the health effects of social ties depend on
the individual attributes of the actors they connect.
ciation is at least partly causal (Lillard and
Waite 1995; Lillard and Panis 1996).

Comparatively little is known, however, about
how the widowhood effect depends on attributes
of the affected individuals. Previous studies
have tended to focus on the simple presence ver-
sus absence of a marital tie while paying little
attention to how the characteristics (or actions)
of spouses may influence the health outcomes
of their union. In network analytical terms, pre-
vious work has stressed the existence over the
content of social ties, and has underplayed the
interaction between the attributes of social actors
and the social ties that connect them.

What many studies lack, in other words, is
attention to effect heterogeneity. Some concern
for traits of individuals connected by a marital
tie is, of course, reflected in the simple fact that
the widowhood effect is typically assessed sep-
arately for men and women, but other dimen-
sions of potential variation are almost
universally neglected. With one inconclusive
exception (Schaefer, Quesenberry, and Wi
1995), research on race differences in the wid-
owhood effect is nonexistent. Effect hetero-
geneity is important for at least two reasons.
First, critical attention to the way widowhood
might have different effects in different popu-
lation subgroups may contribute to an improved
understanding of the mechanisms by which
social relations produce health outcomes. If
widowhood is harmful in some circumstances
but not in others, then those circumstances may
be relevant to the mechanism by which wid-
owhood exerts its effect on mortality. Second,
effect heterogeneity may inform current policy
debates that appear to assume a uniform effect
of marriage for everybody. To the extent that
widowhood is more harmful, or marriage more
beneficial, in some groups than in others, the
study of effect heterogeneity sheds light on
whether interventions to foster marriage, or
meliorate the consequences of marital loss,
could beneficially be focused.

This paper investigates effect heterogeneity
in the widowhood effect as a function of the race
of each spouse. We hypothesize that race-specific
differences exist because race captures factors
that shape the health implications of marriage and
widowhood. Thus, we view race as a proxy for
diversity in marital cultures and marital contexts
rather than as a causal factor in its own right
(Winship and Sobel 2004). Our empirical analy-
sis begins by contrasting the widowhood effects
suffered by black spouses and white spouses in
racially endogamous (same race) couples. We
then compare these to the widowhood effects
suffered by black spouses and white spouses in
racially exogamous (intermarried) couples.
Finally, we investigate how the widowhood effect
evolves over the duration of bereavement and
repeat the race-specific analyses in terms of the
trajectory of the widowhood effect. Results doc-
ument drastic racial differences in the health
effects of marriage and widowhood between
black and white couples. Interestingly, wife’s
race appears more important in determining these
race differences than husband’s race, suggesting
a gendered dynamic of race in bereavement.

To permit this investigation, we develop a
novel dataset. Research on heterogeneity in the
widowhood effect requires a sufficient number
of deaths and bereavements within each group
under consideration. Most standard social sci-
ence datasets, however, are either too small or
too youthful to fulfill this requirement, because
most deaths—and most spousal deaths—occur
among the elderly.! While some existing datasets
Before we can outline the possible relevance of
race for the widowhood effect, some comments
on the postulated mechanisms by which mar-
riage confers health benefits and by which wid-
owhood is harmful are necessary. Given the
possibility that the widowhood effect may
change over the duration of bereavement, we
classify explanatory mechanisms by dividing the
widowhood effect into two components: first,
the long-term difference between the salubrious
attributes of marriage and the detrimental qual-
ities of widowhood; second, the transitional
health burden, if any, of the actual transition
from marriage to widowhood.

To account for the long-term survival advan-
tage of married individuals relative to those
who never married, sociologists emphasize the
social integration in marriage through shared
household living, which provides married spous-
es with a ready source for emotional support and
direct care in case of illness (Christakis and
Allison 2006; Litwak and Messeri 1989).
Spouses, particularly wives, promote healthy
behavior by encouraging regular eating and
sleeping habits, supervising medication intake,
and discouraging risky and unhealthful behav-
iors (Umberson 1987, 1992). Furthermore, mar-
ried spouses may reap information and social
support benefits from the extended reach of
their respective friendship and kinship networks.
Economic approaches advance similar argu-
ments, phrased in terms of marital economies
of scale and efficiency gains from the household
division of labor (Becker 1981). Empirically,
men appear to draw benefits more from the
household labor of their wives, whereas the
mortality advantage for women appears to
derive primarily from the financial contribu-
tions of their husbands (Trovato and Lauris
1989; Lillard and Waite 1995).

Upon the death of a spouse, many of the
health benefits of marriage decrease or disap-
pear. Traditionally, men lose their primary care-
giver (Umberson, Wortman, and Kessler 1992),
while widowed women suffer from reduced
economic resources (Lillard and Waite 1995).
Widows and widowers report less healthy
lifestyles than do married individuals: increased
smoking and less physical activity among men
(Umberson 1987, 1992), and loss of appetite and
body mass among women (Shahar et al. 2001).
Consistent with reduced spousal health super-
vision and a reduced reach of medical referral
networks, widowhood decreases the likelihood
of admission to high-quality hospitals in case of
serious illness for both men and women
(Iwashyna and Christakis 2003). Increased mor-
tality from chronic diseases with long latency
periods shortly following the death of a spouse
(Martikainen and Valkonen 1996a) is further
evidence for a possible decline in the quality of
medical care due to widowhood.

Nevertheless, despite the negative health
impact of widowhood, widowed individuals
may have a lasting advantage over never-mar-
ried individuals (Lillard and Waite 1995),
because some benefits of marriage do not ter-
minate with the death ofa spouse. For example,
bereaved individuals may hold on to all or part
of the survival advantage of marriage because
of higher pension payments or social security
entitlements derived from the employment his-
tory of a deceased spouse. They may enjoy the
continued support from affinal kin (spouse’s
relatives) not available to never-married indi-
viduals. Moreover, they may benefit from
behavioral conditioning, by which the spousal
control of health behavior extends beyond the
grave. Marriage may thus exert what we call a
“memory effect” to shield bereaved individuals
from increased mortality in widowhood. The
strength of such a memory effect might depend
on many factors, including the characteristics of
the deceased spouse and of the surviving spouse.

The difficulty of the actual transition to wid-
owhood also likely contributes to the widow-
hood effect. The transition to widowhood is a
difficult process during which the survivor must
Clearly, the combination of the factors just out-
lined leaves room for considerable heterogene-
ity in size and trajectory of the widowhood
effect. Variations in (a) the difference between
the long-term health implications of marriage
and widowhood, (b) the strength of the memo-
ry effect by which the health benefits of mar-
riage extend into widowhood, and (c) the size
and duration of the short-term implications of
the transition to widowhood may induce a vari-
ety of trajectories in the hazard of death over
time. Figure | illustrates three stylized poten-
tial trajectories.

Figure 1A describes the trajectory most con-
sistent with conventional expectations about
the effects of marriage and widowhood on the
hazard of death. Here, marriage exerts a pro-
tective effect and lowers mortality compared
to singlehood. The difficulty of adjusting to
widowhood creates a spike in mortality imme-
diately following bereavement, after which the
hazard of death returns to almost premarital
levels in the long run. Figures 1B and 1C
describe less expected, yet nonetheless possible,
scenarios. In Figure 1B, bereaved individuals
avoid suffering a widowhood effect, but only at
the cost of never gaining a survival advantage
from marriage to begin with. In Figure 1C,
bereaved individuals also do not suffer a wid-
owhood effect, but for very different reasons.
Here, individuals do gain a survival advantage
from marriage and manage to maintain this sur-
vival advantage even after their spouse has died,
perhaps due to memory effects of marriage.
Note: (A) Standard expectation for the trajectory of the hazard of death, h(t), over time: lowered mortality in
marriage, return to high mortality in widowhood in the long run after a transitional spike immediately following
bereavement. (B) No long-term widowhood effect due to absence of a protective effect of marriage. (C) No long-
term widowhood effect due to extension of protective effect of marriage into widowhood. For clarity, all figures
suppress the individual-level increase in the hazard of death over time.
effect, as previous research lends support to
various features from different scenarios depict-
ed in Figure 1. Figure 1A, the expected trajec-
tory of the hazard of death over the marital life
course, emerges when we combine the results
of two well-known studies. From Lillard and
Waite (1995), Figure 1A takes the decrease of
the hazard of death upon entry into marriage and
the long run return to almost premarital levels
of mortality in widowhood. Lillard and Waite,
however, do not trace the development of the
widowhood effect over the duration of bereave-
ment, such that their study is not informative of
any additional mortality burden during the tran-
sition to widowhood. Martikainen and
Valkonen’s (1996b) Finnish study, by contrast,
has no information on the entry into marriage,
but it documents the existence of a transitional
spike in mortality as well as the long-term ele-
vation of mortality in widowhood compared to
marriage. In line with a smaller transitional
spike in mortality immediately following
bereavement—portrayed in extremis as the total
absence of a transitional spike in Figures 1B and
1C—Christakis and Iwashyna (2003) find that
steps taken to ease the shock and burdensome-
ness of spouse’s death, such as hospice care, may
mitigate the adverse consequences of the tran-
sition to widowhood. The only large U.S. study
known to us charting the trajectory of the wid-
owhood effect by duration of bereavement, how-
ever, finds a pattern that is at odds with all the
trajectories considered in Figure 1. Using health
insurance records from California, Schaefer et
al. (1995) find no statistically significant excess
mortality during the first six months of wid-
owhood among either men or women after
adjusting for baseline covariates, and maximal
excess mortality during months 7-12. We are
not aware of any theoretical explanation for this
pattern, though it may relate to the cumulative
effect of the loss of social support over time. Our
study revisits the issue of the trajectory of the
widowhood effect in the contemporary United
States in the context of investigating racial dif-
ferences in the widowhood effect.
Previous research on race differences in the
health effects of marital status and of the wid-
owhood process is extremely limited. The only
direct test of race differences in the effect of wid-
owhood on mortality known to us finds no sig-
nificant difference between blacks and whites
(Schaefer et al. 1995), though this study was
limited by a small sample of blacks and by its
regional rather than national focus. Two other
studies touch on the issue, but similarly fail to
yield clear results. In a cross-sectional com-
parison of age-specific mortality among mar-
ried and unmarried individuals, Litwak and
Messeri (1989) find that blacks, on average,
appear to receive fewer health benefits from
marriage than whites. This race difference, how-
ever, attenuates with age among men, and
reverses direction among elderly women, such
that black women ages 65 and older appear to
reap a greater health advantage from marriage
than white women. Litwak and Messeri, how-
ever, compared married to all unmarried indi-
viduals and did not distinguish between
never-married and widowed individuals; con-
sequently, their results do not isolate the effect
of widowhood on mortality. Carr (2004a) inves-
tigates the effect of widowhood on psycholog-
ical outcomes among a regional sample of black
and white respondents and finds no clear pat-
tern in race differences; blacks report signifi-
cantly lower levels of anger and despair in
widowhood, but do not differ in levels of grief,
yearning, shock, depressive symptoms, and anx-
iety.

In our opinion, this lack of clear previous
findings on race differences in the widowhood
effect may relate more to sample size restrictions
than to a genuine absence of race differences in
the population. Drawing on work that docu-
ments systematic differences in black and white
marriages (different “marital cultures” accord-
ing to some [Orbuch and Eyster 1997]) as well
as systematic differences in how black couples
and white couples relate to their social envi-
ronment (different marital contexts), we hypoth-
esize that the termination of marriage by death
of a spouse will lead to a smaller widowhood
effect among black couples than among white
couples for several reasons.

First, and perhaps most important, black
spouses have a clear advantage over white
spouses with respect to social integration and
social support in widowhood, because of pro-
nounced differences in household composition
in old age. Unmarried elderly blacks are almost
twice as likely as whites (approximately 40 ver-
sus 20 percent) to live with relatives (Ruggles
1994; Goldscheider and Bures 2003), a differ-
ence that is robust to socioeconomic controls
(Farley and Allen 1987). Lillard and Waite
(1995) document that shared living arrange-
ments reduce mortality among the widowed
through increased household income and
economies of scale. We further expect that the
presence of relatives in the household will
reduce mortality among widowed individuals by
substituting for the loss of spousal promotion of
healthy behavior and by enabling ready assis-
tance with the tasks of daily living and routine
health care. The greater prevalence of nonmar-
ital coresidence in old age among blacks should
thus protect them from the widowhood effect by
mitigating the loss of social integration arising
from widowhood and replacing the essential
pre-professional health care typically rendered
by spouses.

Second, widowed blacks may enjoy survival
advantages over widowed whites because of
greater social support from persons who do not
live in the same household, although previous
research on this point is less clear. Typically,
qualitative researchers find that black adults
enjoy much greater social support than whites
(e.g., Stack 1974), whereas large-sample quan-
titative research on the social networks of blacks
and whites reports conflicting findings (e.g.,
Patterson 1998; Sarkisian and Gerstel 2004).
There is some evidence, however, that blacks
may indeed enjoy greater social support than
whites in old age. For example, Silverstein and
Waite (1993) find that old black women are
more likely than old white women to receive
instrumental support from individuals not liv-
ing in the same household and that the differ-
ence increases with age (black men, however,
are less likely to receive instrumental support).
Ajrouch, Antonucci, and Janevic (2001) find
that despite having smaller social networks than
whites, blacks maintain closer contact with net-
work members and count more family members
in their networks. Non-coresident relatives play
a central role in the care of the elderly (Taylor,
Chatters, and Mays 1988; Spitze and Logan
1990), and some research suggests that elderly
blacks enjoy more social support because of a
more inclusive definition of kinship (Johnson
2000). Finally, blacks have a higher level of
religious participation than whites (Taylor et
al. 1996), which greatly enhances their oppor-
tunities for marshalling social support in crisis
situations (Hatch 1991).

Third, black spouses may experience a small-
er widowhood effect than white spouses because
endogamously married black couples adhere to
a less rigidly gendered division of labor (see
McLoyd et al. 2000 for a review). Historically,
black wives have been more likely to participate
in the labor market and to contribute a rela-
tively larger share of family income than white
wives (Patterson 1998). Black husbands in turn
perform a greater share of household labor and
child rearing (Orbuch and Eyster 1997), are
more likely to approve of working wives, and
value female contributions to family income
more highly than do white husbands (Blee and
Ticamyer 1995). While task specialization can
create efficiency gains in marriage (Becker
1981), it simultaneously engenders mutual
dependence, which becomes a liability with
potentially serious health implications upon the
death of a spouse (Oppenheimer 1997).
Comparatively less task specialization in mar-
riage may thus protect black spouses from some
of the adverse implications of widowhood by
promoting self-sufficiency and fostering skills
of independent living. In a stark illustration of
the dangers of gendered marital division of
labor, Lillard and Waite (1995) find that the
economic loss of widowhood, net of other
covariates, explains the entire effect of widow-
hood on mortality among women. Less drasti-
cally, the assumption of household chores in
widowhood increases the vulnerability to
depression among men (Umberson et al. 1992).
Both men and women suffer greater anxiety in
widowhood if they had been dependent on their
spouse for specific household tasks (Utz et al.
2004).

Fourth, black spouses may suffer less detri-
ment in widowhood than white spouses because
endogamously married black couples consis-
tently report lower average marital quality than
do whites, even net of controls (see McLoyd et
al. 2000 for a review). Lower average self-
reported marital quality may contribute to
greater independence in marriage among black
spouses compared to white spouses (Adelman,
Chadwick, and Baerger 1996), and thus better
prepare blacks for the increased isolation of
widowhood. Research on the psychological
adjustment to widowhood has shown that the
loss of a spouse in a conflicted marriage leads
to fewer psychological problems than the loss
of a spouse in a happy marriage (Carr et al.
2000; Carr 2004a, 2004b). Together, these fac-
tors may help to explain why endogamously
married black men and women might, on aver-
age, fear the death of their spouse less than
their white counterparts (Adelman et al. 1996).

We can employ these arguments about racial
differences in marriage and widowhood to
derive tentative predictions about the expected
trajectories of the widowhood effect suffered by
endogamously married blacks and whites
respectively. For whites, we see no reason to
doubt that the trajectory of the widowhood
effect will conform to conventional expecta-
tions charted in Figure 1A, in line with previ-
ous results by Lillard and Waite (1995) and
Martikainen and Valkonen (1996b). Among
blacks, greater spousal independence due to
lower levels of task specialization in marriage
and lower average self-reported marital quali-
ty will likely reduce the size of the widowhood
effect by reducing the survival advantage of
marriage relative to premarital levels of mor-
tality, as pictured in Figure 1B. At the same
time, the much greater prevalence of shared
household living among unmarried elderly
blacks, and greater social support from non-
coresident individuals will likely reduce the
size of the widowhood effect among blacks rel-
ative to whites by providing functional substi-
tutes for the social integration of marriage, thus
creating a memory effect enabling widowed
blacks to maintain the lower, marital levels of
mortality even after the death of their spouse.
Higher levels of religiosity and religious par-
ticipation among blacks, as well as other factors,
will provide bereaved black spouses with social
and spiritual resources that could reduce the
difficulty of the transition to widowhood. These
latter arguments would predict a trajectory of the
widowhood effect among blacks closer to Figure
1C. Either way, endogamously married blacks
Interracial marriage is rare (Qian and Lichter
2004), especially among the elderly. Pervasive
legal sanctions and rampant social disapproval
discouraged racial intermarriage far into the
twentieth century (Kennedy 2003). Accordingly,
very little is known about morbidity and mor-
tality in this population. Our data contain the
largest longitudinal and nationally representa-
tive sample of interracial couples currently
available. Thus, they provide a unique oppor-
tunity to investigate whether stark differences in
the socio-historical experience of racially inter-
married and racially endogamous couples trans-
late into corresponding differences in the
widowhood effect.

Inasmuch as one can control for background
differences between endogamous and inter-
married couples, we can marshal the compari-
son between endogamous and intermarried
couples to introduce gender into the investiga-
tion of race differences in the widowhood effect.
Contrasting the widowhood effects suffered by
racially endogamous and racially intermarried
men and women can support inferences about
the relative importance of husband’s versus
wife’s race in determining racial variation in
the widowhood effect. This would be impossi-
ble if husbands and wives always shared the
bands in the household production of health
via wives’ centrality for household manage-
ment, the social control of health behaviors,
and maintaining contacts with friends and fam-
ily (Harrison 1978; di Leonardo 1987;
Umberson 1992; Stolzenberg 2001). On the
other hand, it must be noted that estimates for
gender differences in the widowhood effect vary
considerably across studies (Wisocki and
Skowron 2000). One recent and well-executed
study even finds no meaningful gender differ-
ence in the widowhood effect net of controls
(Schaefer et al. 1995). With respect to race,
Sarkisian and Gerstel (2004) find that race dif-
ferences across multiple domains of inter-
household-kin support hinge on different
patterns of kin support among black and white
women, whereas patterns of kin support among
black and white men strongly resemble each
other. If the greater importance of wives for
the household production of health is related to
their individual characteristics, and if black-
white differences in social support are more
pronounced among women than among men, we
would cautiously expect that racial differences
in the widowhood effect are more strongly tied
to wife’s race than to husband’s race. To pick a
specific example, since we expect black spous-
es to suffer a smaller widowhood effect than
white spouses for the reasons outlined earlier,
a greater importance of wives’ race for deter-
mining racial differences in the widowhood
effect would imply that white men married to
black women would suffer a smaller widowhood
effect than white men married to white women,
and potentially also than black men married to
white women.
effects of social connections depend on whom
they connect.

A slight twist is introduced by our focus on
the dissolution, rather than creation, of marital
ties. Since dead spouses are dead, any influ-
ence of their personal characteristics on the
mortality of the surviving spouse must neces-
sarily derive from memory effects, which either
maintain features of the now-dissolved mar-
riage or index particular circumstances of wid-
owhood that are associated with the
characteristics of the deceased spouse.

Specifically, we expect that endogamously
married whites suffer a larger widowhood effect
than endogamously married blacks because of
racial differences in the organization of marriage
and social support in widowhood. Second, we
expect that this smaller widowhood effect
among blacks will derive both from a smaller
difference between the health implications of
marriage and widowhood in the long run and a
less burdensome transition to widowhood in
the short run. Third, we expect to find differ-
ences in the widowhood effect suffered by inter-
married and endogamously married couples
because of a different socio-historical experi-
ence. Lastly, we cautiously expect to find evi-
dence for a gendered dynamic of race in
bereavement, by which wives’ race plays a larg-
er role than husband’s race in determining racial
differences in the widowhood effect because of
wives’ centrality in the household production of
health. As side benefits, our analyses will nec-
essarily revisit the questions of a gender differ-
ence in the widowhood effect and the trajectory
of the widowhood effect over the duration of
bereavement.
Americans older than 65 (Hatten 1980); the
Medicare Provider Analysis and Review
(MedPAR) file (for 1991 and 1992), which con-
tains diagnostic and other information for all
hospitalizations in Medicare beneficiaries; and
the 2002 Vital Status file, which provides demo-
graphic information and death date follow-up
for all individuals ever enrolled in Medicare,
dead or alive. To this data, we merge county-
level and zip code—level contextual informa-
tion from the Area Resource File (Health
Resources 1996), which compiles information
on medical resources by county of residence,
and the 1990 decennial Census, respectively.

In the first step of data development, all
Medicare beneficiaries older than 65 as of
January 1, 1993 in the Denominator file were
examined and subjected to spousal identifica-
tion algorithms (Iwashyna et al. 1998). Out of
an estimated 6.6 million elderly married couples
where both partners were alive and older than
65 at the beginning of the study, we detected
5,496,444 couples (83 percent). Past work has
shown this pool to be representative of all eld-
erly married couples in the U.S. (Iwashyna et al.
2002). The Vital Status file, drawn in late 2002,
provides exact death dates for both spouses in
the entire sample, if they had died. From the
death dates of both members of each couple, we
derive the outcome (time to death or censoring
since January 1, 1993) and the key independent
variable of interest (widowhood).

We derive race classifications for both spous-
es from the race and ethnicity variable in the
Vital Status file. This variable was populated
from the Social Security Administration’s
Master Beneficiary Record (MBR) and has
been verified and updated against the self-
reported race classifications on beneficiaries’
applications for (replacement) social security
cards by CMS (Arday et al. 2000). Previous
research indicates that the race information in
Medicare files is well suited to support com-
parisons between blacks and whites, but not
between members of other races (Lauderdale
and Goldberg 1996). We therefore restrict our
analysis to couples where either partner is either
non-Hispanic black or non-Hispanic white.
Arday et al. (2000) estimate the positive pre-
dictive values (PPV) of the black and white cat-
egories in the Vital Status Record as 96.1 and
98.4 percent, respectively (Table 3), denoting the
probability that persons identified as black or
white in the Vital Status file identified them-
selves by the same race in the 1997 Medicare
Current Beneficiary Survey. These PPVs are
high, especially considering that measurement
protocols and answer choices differed consid-
erably between these two sources. Our supple-
mentary analysis of the 2001 Census Quality
Survey (U.S. Department of Commerce 2004)
indicates that these PPVs are on par with the
race codes in the Census.‘ We further improve
the accuracy of the Vital Status race variables
by adapting and implementing independently
validated first- and last-name algorithms to
remove Asian (Lauderdale and Kestenbaum
2000, 2002) and Hispanic individuals (Word
and Perkins 1996) who are incorrectly labeled
non-Hispanic white or non-Hispanic black in the
Vital Status file.°

From the MedPAR files, we extract detailed
health histories to control for differences in
baseline morbidity. Following the recommen-
dations of Zhang, Iwashyna, and Christakis
(1999), we summarize the chronic disease bur-
den at baseline by computing so-called Charlson
co-morbidity scores (Charlson et al. 1987) from
hospitalization records separately for each
spouse. We trichotomize this measure of health
burden into low, moderate, and severe (Charlson
scores of 0, 1, and 2 or higher, respectively) and
enter separate indicators for 1991 and 1992.
We further include counts of the number of
days each partner had spent in the hospital in
1991 and 1992. Since individuals typically enter
Medicare at age 65, we restrict the analysis to
couples where both partners were older than
67 at baseline to guarantee the availability of a
full two years of health background controls
for the entire sample. We also restrict our sam-
ple to those less than 98 years old.® These
detailed, physician-ascertained controls for con-
founding by health status significantly exceed
the (usually self-reported) health information
available to previous studies of the widowhood
effect.

The Denominator file provides additional
individual-level demographic information (i.e.,
age and sex) from Social Security records; infor-
mation on the couple’s area of residence; and a
poverty indicator for the couple at baseline.”

Knowledge of the area of residence (zip code)
of all respondents in the dataset (from the 1993
Denominator file) allows us to supplement our
individual-level variables with extensive con-
trols for couples’ residential context at base-
line. The use of such area measures has been
validated in the elderly, although it is not with-
out limitations (Krieger 1992; Geronimus,
Bound, and Neidert 1996). At the county level,
we control for the crime rate and the availabil-
ity of medical care as reported in the Area
Resource File. At the zip code level, we control
for urbanization, demographic composition,
median home value, log median income, and
median education, among other factors, which
we draw from the Census Summary Tape File
3B. Since the widowhood effect should hinge on
marital coresidence, we exclude couples with
discordant zip codes between husband’s and
wife’s addresses. Lastly, the availability of con-
textual information restricts our sample to cou-
ples living in the 50 States.

The final analysis employs a stratified sam-
ple. From the pool of 5,496,444 detected mar-
ried couples, we first draw a simple random
sample of couples found by one method of cou-
ple-detection (Iwashyna et al. 1998), which
meets our race, age, and coresidence restrictions.
We then include all remaining non-Hispanic
black-white racially intermarried couples meet-
ing the same restrictions. The final sample con-
tains N = 410,272 elderly married couples, or
an estimated 10 percent of the target population.
We lose only 2.6 percent of the sample across
analyses due to missing values.$

As a further check, we validated the repre-
sentativeness of our sample separately for each
race group included in the analysis against the
5 percent Public Use Micro Sample of the 1990
Census. Our data show good to excellent agree-
ment with the Census on all variables common
to both datasets (see Online Supplement to this
article, ASR Web site: http://www2.asanet.org/
journals/asr/2005/toc049.html).
Time to Death
Age

Couple-Race

Widowhood(t)

Interactions

Health

Poverty

Region of Residence

Residential Context

Number of days from cohort inception (1/1/1993) to proband’s death. VS
Censored on 1/1/2002 if still alive.

Age to 0.1 years. Age squared. Age-order (on January 1, 1993). Entered Den.
separately for both spouses.

Four indicators for the race combination of husband and wife: both white; VS?

both black; husband black and wife white; husband white and wife
black. Restricted to non-Hispanic blacks and whites.

Time-varying indicator of bereavement, = 1 from first day after spouse’s VS
death (thus treating same day deaths as non-widowed deaths).

Widowhood(t) X couple-race. VS

Widowhood(t) X indicators for time since spouse’s death VS

(<1, 2, 6, 12, 24, 36, 36+ months).

Widowhood(t) X couple-race X indicators for time since spouse’s death. VS

Trichotomized Charlson comorbidity scores for prevalence of chronic MedPAR?

health conditions. Weeks spent in hospital. Entered separately for 1991
and 1992 and both spouses.
Indicates that either spouse enrolls in state buy-in program on the basis of Den.
dual eligibility for Medicaid and Medicare in 1993, which implies living
below or near the federal poverty level.

Nine indicators for living in any of the nine geographic divisions of the Den.
1990 Census in 1993.

County level: Population density; violent crime rate; practicing medical ARF
doctors per population; hospital beds per population.

Zip-code level: Degree of urbanization; percent white, black, other race; Census

percent foreign born; percent linguistically isolated; percent elderly;
percent widowed among men and women; male unemployment rate;
median home value; log median income; median education (percent
below high school, high school, some college and above).

Note: All models reported in this article include all of the above variables, except widowhood interaction terms,
which are added as indicated in the text. VS = Vital Status file for 1993-2002; Den.= Denominator file for 1993;
MedPAR = Medicare Provider Analysis and Review files for 1991 and 1992; ARF = Area Resource File for
1990-1993; Census = Census Summary Tape File 3B for 1990.

* The race variable from the VS source was cleaned using first- and last name algorithms as noted in the text.

> Charlson scores were computed using all hospital exit diagnoses of the calendar year.
Table 1 provides summary definitions for all
variables included in our models. The key inde-
pendent variable of interest, widowhood, enters
the equation as a time-varying covariate. Same-
day deaths are treated as non-widowed deaths
for both spouses (n= 136, their inclusion has no
impact on our results). Racial differences in the
effect of widowhood on proband’s mortality as
a function of own race and spouse’s race are cap-
tured by a series of time-varying two-way inter-
actions between widowhood and four
“couple-race” categories (both white; both
black; husband white and wife black; and hus-
band black and wife white) with endogamous-
ly married white couples serving as the
reference category. The products of the coeffi-
cients on the widowhood indicator and each of
these interaction terms give the couple-race-
specific main effects of widowhood. We test
the pair-wise difference among couple-race-
specific widowhood effects using Wald tests
for linear combinations of coefficients using
the STATA software package, release 8.0
(StataCorp 2003).

We recover the temporal trajectory of the
widowhood effect for all respondents by inter-
acting the widowhood indicator with a series of
indicators of time since spouse’s death. We
recover couple-race specific trajectories by
entering triple interactions between widowhood,
duration of widowhood, and couple-race.

These interaction terms primarily serve our
substantive interest in group-specific effect het-
erogeneity in the widowhood effect. They also
serve the important secondary purpose of relax-
ing the Cox proportionality assumption, which,
if violated, may bias our estimates (Hosmer and
Lemeshow 2002). Since our primary interest in
this paper concerns race differences in the wid-
owhood effect, we are particularly mindful of
two possibilities: first, that the race-specific
effects of widowhood may evolve non-propor-
tionally over time; second, that the baseline
mortality of our four couple-race groups may
evolve non-proportionally over time. The first
potential problem is solved by the inclusion of
three-way interactions between widowhood,
couple-race, and time since bereavement. The
Table 2. Sample Size By Gender of Proband, Survival to the End of Follow Up, and Widowhood at Time of

Death or Censoring

 

 

 

Not Widowed Widowed
Couple-Race Total (%) Dead Alive Dead. Alive
Male Probands
Both white 388,794 (94.8) 166,964 140,659 34,981 46,190
Both black 17,064 (4.2) 7,901 4,911 1,856 2,396
Husband black, wife white 2,359 (0.6) 1,095 795 205 264
Wife black, husband white 2,055 (0.5) 934 690 155 276
Total 410,272 (100.0) 176,894 147,055 37,197 49,126
Female Probands
Both white 388,794 (94.8) 81,374 140,659 44,400 122,361
Both black 17,064 (4.2) 4,266 4,911 2,254 5,633
Husband black, wife white 2,359 (0.6) 474 795 255 835
Wife black, husband white 2,055 (0.5) 432 690 243 690
Total 410,272 (100.0) 86,546 147,055 47,152 129,519

 

Note: Authors’ calculations. Unweighted sample frequencies. Both spouses are alive in all couples at cohort
inception on January 1, 1993. End of follow up is January 1, 2002. All respondents are either non-Hispanic

blacks or non-Hispanic whites.
cient multivariate estimation. This holds par-
ticularly for endogamously married spouses,
where sample sizes range from 1,856 to 166,964
observations per cell.

Select sample statistics for the entire sample
are displayed in the first column of Table 3. At
cohort inception, the mean age of the husbands
was 76.6 years, and of the wives 74.1 years. In
79 percent of the couples, the husband was
older than the wife; 4.6 percent of couples lived
in poverty; and 7 percent of husbands suffered
severe co-morbidity burden at baseline, com-
pared to 4 percent of women.

To-be-widowed couples—defined as those
in which at least one spouse will have died by
the end of follow-up—differ considerably at
baseline from couples in which both spouses
will remain alive, as shown in columns 2 and 3
of Table 3. Spouses in to-be-widowed couples
are older (4 years on average) and more likely
to be poor (by 4.8 percentage points) than cou-
ples in which both spouses are going to survive
the nine-year study period. To-be-widowed hus-
bands and wives are twice to three times as
likely to suffer moderate co-morbidity and more
than three times as likely to suffer severe co-
morbidity burden in each of the two years pre-
ceding baseline and have also spent more time
in the hospital.? This strong association between
the baseline health of both spouses and wid-
owhood clearly documents the selection of
unhealthy individuals into widowhood and high-
lights the importance of adjusting for detailed
measures of baseline health and prior health
trajectories in the analysis of the widowhood
effect. By contrast to these large individual-
level differences, the differences between the
residential environment of to-be-widowed and
surviving couples are generally small.

Baseline differences between the four couple-
race groups are documented in the last four
columns of Table 3. Interestingly, the four cou-
ple-race groups resemble each other with respect
to spouses’ age and health at baseline. They
differ considerably, however, on poverty and
residential context. Endogamously married
whites and endogamously married blacks gen-
erally mark the extremes and intermarried cou-
ples fall in between (cf. White and Sassler 2000).
Among endogamously married black couples,
22 percent are poor, as compared to 4 percent
of endogamous white couples and 12 percent of
intermarried couples. Strong residential segre-
gation by race is evident on most indicators of
residential context. Couples in which at least one
spouse is black are more likely to live close to
other blacks, in urban, and in high-poverty areas;
they are exposed to higher rates of violent crime
and live in environments with greater unem-
ployment, lower home values, and lower aver-
age levels of education than endogamously
married white couples. Interestingly, the resi-
dential environment of couples consisting of a
black husband and a white wife tend to resem-
ble more the environment of endogamously
married white couples, whereas couples con-
sisting of a white husband and a black wife live
in environments more similar to those of the
average endogamously married black couple.
This finding suggests a stronger role for wife’s
race than the husband’s race in determining
place of residence and social context.

Because it is known that neighborhood char-
acteristics and poverty are strongly related to
racial differences in health and mortality
(Geronimus et al. 2001), these large racial dif-
ferences in couple-level poverty and residential
environment mandate the inclusion of these
variables in the multivariate analysis of racial
differences in the widowhood effect.
(z€°0) (ze'0) (ir'0) (610) (z1'0) (p70) (170)
%ITT %L %L IZ %B'E %ST %E9 %9'b Ayranod,
(z8"€) (Ole) (s"€) (18°) (€v'2) (soe) (18°)
oly €0'r 86°€ IZ€ 08% Ise 97 sousrayIp ody
(r'0) (ov'0) (er'0) (r'0) (r'0) (v0) (I¥'0)
%b' IZ %8' 61 %9ve %8'0T %S IZ %L'07 %0'1Z Puegsny ueY) Jap]o ayIM
(z6'r) (vor) (ses) (o¢'s) (9L'©) (09's) (o¢'s)
€TEL vOEL 96'EL 6 bl 88 IL SPSL LVbL alan ‘a8
(06's) (p8°s) (€6's) (89's) (0z'r) (88'S) (69's)
LT9L 79°9L LS9L 9S°9L I6O'EL vO'8L 9S°9L Puegsny ‘ody
OFM RTT OFLM OUUAN *oPI on, oary POMOPL, tv sojqeie,,
/pueqsnyy ony, /puegsny 4oelg wog wog nog TosoJ-2]dn0 3D pur foao]-jenpratpuy

 

aory-ajdnog

eSTUBIE POOYMOPIAL

 

sovy-ojdnog Aq pue dQ mojo Jo pug ot} ye pooymopimM Aq soyqeueA J99[9g Joy sonsHRIS cANduUDseg “¢ BIGU,
(a8pd Jxau uo panuyuod)

 

(8€°0)
%OLI
(os‘0)
%S'SP
(6€'0)
%8'81
(6€'0)
%9'8I

(v0)
%VEL
(os‘0)
%OIS
(6€°0)
%0'61
(c¢0)
%L91

(470)
%9L

(80)
%L'79
(6€'0)
“psi
(z€0)
MEL

(6€'0)
%L'81
(Ly'0)
%B EE
(so)
%6'8T
(6€°0)
%S8I

(or'0)
%S' 61
(L¥'0)
%L'EE
(sv'0)
%ERT
(6€'0)
~%y'sI

(8€°0)
%SLI
(8b°0)
%O'9E
(sb'0)
WERT
(s¢0)
%I'8I

(6€0)
M81
(8b'0)
%TSE
(sv)
%E RZ
(60)
%W'SI

SOMA

anos

oASOMPHA

oS@q YON,
“SouYM pure syxor|q SuoUe UOTZONpe URIPSU SI} YIIM Sopod diz UI UIA] s}UapUOdsal JO JUDIE p
“suolesapisuod aovds Joy suoIa1 snsua_ INO} OJ SISA[eUL [LOTYSIIRIS OY} UI Pasn SUOISIAIP SnsUs_D s1YydeIS0Ed ouTU ay} SAUIqUIOD 91q4e} SIU 5

“JOA9] @pOo-diz ay} UO paINswaUU d1v 9]Qe} SIU} Ul }X9JUOD [BUAPISAI JO SIOJBOIPUT JOY}O IB ‘[OABT AJUNOS dy} UO PaINSEOUL SI 9IBI DULID JUD|OLA g

“QAlye UTBUIOI Sasnods Yy}Oq YOIYM Ul asoU) pur ‘7007 ‘| Arenuer pue 66] ‘| Arenues UdIMJ0q saIp asnods ou yseO] Je YOIYA UL OSOY} OWI poprAIp ase safdno_ ,
‘ysonbos uodn ayqepieae are sajquuea []e JO} saanjdii9saq “| SGU] Ul Pojsl] SI So|qeLIVA [OUOD Jo jos [[NF
SY ‘SaTQvLUeA [eNjX9}U09 dy} UO ATsouL ‘ajqeLIeA Jad saseo Sursstut yuso1ed 9°Z 0} dn ym ‘sofdnoo 7/70 p = N ‘Sosoyjuared UI SUOTLIAAP plepue}s ‘suONE NOLO ,sIOyINY -aloNy

 

 

 

(ev'0) (sv'0) (ve'0) (Lr'0) (8¢'0) (9r'0) (Ly'0)
%0'vZ WELZ %b' EL %bvE %O'LE %P'TE bee p289][09 aUIOg
(sv'0) (9¥'0) (z¥'0) (840) (6v'0) (Ly'0) (84'0)
%VIL %8'89 %LLL %L'E9 %E19 %7'99 ~r'r9 plooyps ysIH
(70) (610) (670) (p10) (€10) (910) (st‘0)
%6'V %BE %6'R %6'T %L'I %STZ %TT plooyps ysry wey ssoT
(6¢'0) (6€°0) (8€'0) (se'0) (9€'0) (9€°0) (9¢'0)
€10l 8101 96'6 8701 oe 01 Szvol L701 $ ‘owloour ueIpour SO]
(60'¢) (€8°2) (ss'©) (12 (sz) (9€°2) (Z€°Z)
%BS I'S %6'9 KP %e'P ~b'y ~'P quowAojduoun ae
(96°1L) (L8°€L) (Zo'vs) (ZL'08) (918) (1€LL) (Z6°6L)
86°98 60°68 1L'99 7L'S6 6°66 19°16 €r'r6 ($0001) entea ouroy ueIpo
(6r'0€) (OL'L2) (L70€) (V7) (rsp (98°91) (87°91)
%S8Z %9'T %1'0S %9'°9 %8L %16 %9'B pra
($°9€) (€0'8¢€) (PT'Le) (pz'8¢) (98'L€) (6€'8€) (izse)
IS bl 0S'0L Lev 07°89 €5°69 €6°L9 0s'89 xepur uoneztueqij)
(8b°6) (97'6) (Pron (6L'9) (p8°9) (81'L) (90°L)
8o8 964 6€01 6L'S 96'S €0°9 00'9 OYE OUILID JUSTOLA,
OLN OPT OJIN ONUAN pr on, OAtly POMOPIA\ lv o1qenre,,
/puegsny sy /puegsny org nog nog mod
sovy-ajdnog eST4P}G POOYMOPIA,

 

 

(panuyuoD) *¢ aIqeL
a ee ee ee ee eee ee ee eee ee
1.5

 

Husband Widowed | | Wife Widowed

Hazard Ratios

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.7 + T T 7 —r r r ————

Husband / White / Black / White / Black / White / Black / White / Black /
Wife White White Black Black White White Black Black
al controls. Endogamously married black men,
by contrast, do not suffer a detectable widow-
hood effect (HR: 1.008; CI: [.958-1.062]; p >
0.1). Qualitatively and quantitatively similar
results are obtained for the widowhood effects
suffered by endogamously married women.
Endogamously married white women suffer a
large widowhood effect upon the death of their
husbands (HR: 1.162; CI: [1.146-1.177]; p <
0.01), whereas endogamously married black
women suffer no detectable widowhood effect
(HR: 1.004; CI: [0.953—-1.057]; p > 0.1). The dif-
ference between the widowhood effects for
endogamously married blacks and whites is
highly significant (p < 0.01) for both men and
women. We emphasize that the lack of statisti-
cal significance in the widowhood effect for
endogamously married black men and women
is not owed to imprecise measurement and lim-
itations in sample size. Rather, the combination
of very small point estimates and narrow con-
fidence intervals suggests that the widowhood
effects for endogamously married black men
and women are indeed very close to zero.

Our results for the widowhood effect among
racially intermarried couples reveal a remark-
able gender patterning in the effects of race.
Among racially intermarried men, we find that
black men married to white women suffer a
large and statistically significant widowhood
effect upon the death of their wives (HR: 1.215;
CI: [1.045-1.414]; p < 0.05), whereas white
men married to black women do not (HR: 0.943;
CI: [0.794-1.120]; p > 0.1). Taken together with
our finding of a large widowhood effect among
endogamously married white men and no
detectable effect among endogamously married
black men, these findings suggest that the wid-
owhood effect suffered by bereaved men varies
not by their own race, but rather by the race of
their wives.

This conclusion is further bolstered by exam-
ining the statistical significance of the pair-
wise differences between the widowhood effects
suffered by men in the four couple-race groups
(Figure 2, first panel). The widowhood effect
suffered by black men married to white women
does not differ significantly from that suffered
by white men married to white women net of
controls (p > 0.1). Similarly, the estimate for
white men married to black women does not dif-
fer significantly from the estimate for black
men married to black women (p > 0.1). The
effect for intermarried black husbands is sig-
nificantly larger than that for intermarried white
men and that for endogamously married black
men (p < 0.05). The effect for intermarried
white husbands differs from that for endoga-
mously married white husbands (p < 0.01); and,
as stated earlier, the effect of endogamously
married white men differs from the effect for
endogamously married black men (p < 0.01).
Thus, all six pair-wise contrasts between the
widowhood effects suffered by men in the four
couple-race groups support the conclusion that
wife’s race dominates the size of the widowhood
effect suffered by bereaved men, regardless of
husbands’ own race: the death of a white wife
leads to increased mortality in the surviving
husband net of controls, whereas the death of a
black wife does not lead to a detectable increase
in mortality.

We do not find a similar gendered race pat-
tern in the widowhood effect suffered by women
upon their husbands’ deaths (Figure 2, second
panel). Among women, only endogamously
married white women appear to suffer increased
mortality following their husband’s death.
Endogamously married black women do not
experience a widowhood effect and differ sig-
nificantly from endogamously married white
women. The effects estimated for either group
of racially intermarried women, however, can-
not be statistically told apart from those for
either group of endogamously married women.
It may be that, even in our data, sample size, par-
ticularly for intermarried women, may be insuf-
ficient and the existing differences in effects too
small to be distinguished empirically.

These results are remarkably robust to the
particular choice of control variables in the final
model, which is consistent with the robustness
of previous work on the widowhood effect
among endogamous whites (Schaefer et al.
1995; Lillard and Panis 1996; Martikainen and
Valkonen 1996b). Indeed, a basic model con-
trolling for nothing more than race and age of
both spouses returns quantitatively similar esti-
mates for the racial pattern of widowhood effects
among men and women. Additional models
(not shown) with age interactions showed no sta-
tistically significant variation in the widow-
hood effect by age for any group except for a
modest decline among endogamously married
white men and women at older ages, which did
not affect the difference between the widowhood
effects of endogamously married blacks and
whites or the similarity of widowhood effects
experienced by men and women.
1.8

 

1.6

1.4

1.2

 

 

 

 

10 “4-4 t T T u t
0-11-22-3 3-6 6-12 12-24 24-36 >36

Table 4. Temporal Trajectory of the Widowhood Effect: Proband’s Hazard of Death as a Function of Time Since
Spouse’s Death By Couple-Race

 

 

 

 

Couple-Race
Months since Both Both Black Husband/ White Husband/
Spouse’s Death All White Black White Wife Black Wife
Male Probands
0-1 1.52** 1.55** 1.06 2.07* 1.13
1-2 1.43** 1.45** 1.30 0.53 1.16
2-3 1.30** 1.31** 1.16 2.16* 0.29
3-6 1.19** 1.20** 1.05 1.01 1.09
6-12 De oad 123 1.05 1.22 0.78
12-24 Det Se 1.16** 1.09 0.88 1.19
24-36 1.14** 1.15** 0.97 1.10 0.94
36+ 1.14** 1.15** 0.94 1.44* 0.85
Female Probands
0-1 1.62** 1.64** 1.22 1.29 1.81
12 1.25** 1.26** 1.07 0.77 0.91
2-3 1.18** 1.12** 1.05 0.25 0.91
3-6 1.20** 1.21** 1.07 0.86 1.11
6-12 1.17** 1.18** 1.08 0.76 1.11
12-24 1.13** 1.14** 0.94 1.22 1.09
24-36 1.13** 1.13** 1.00 1.12 0.93
36+ 1.13** 1.14** 0.99 1.00 1.11

 

Note: Authors’ calculations. Table displays hazard ratios for proband’s death from Cox models including all
control variables (see Table 1) and triple interactions between widowhood, couple-race, and duration indicators
for time since widowhood.

* p< .05; ** p <.01 (two-tailed tests).
Similarly, we cannot distinguish from zero the
trajectory of white husbands married to black
wives. The trajectory for black husbands mar-
ried to white wives, however, is significantly dif-
ferent from zero (at some durations) and does
not differ significantly from the signature for
endogamously married white men (at any dura-
tion). Even as the experience of widowhood
evolves over time, the excess mortality of
bereaved men thus appears to be governed by
the race of their now-deceased wives.

Among female probands, as before, endog-
amously married white women suffer a non-
zero widowhood effect at every duration,
whereas the temporal trajectories of the wid-
owhood effect for all other couple-race groups
are indistinguishable from zero or each other,
also at all durations.

Among endogamously married white men and
women, we discern clear evidence for both tem-
poral components of the widowhood effect. The
stable, long-term elevated excess mortality of
widowhood from the second year of widowhood
forward documents the mortality disadvantage of
the state of widowhood as compared to the state
MorTALITY AMONG CURRENTLY MARRIED PER-
SONS AND OTHER RESULTS. It is often noted that
blacks suffer higher mortality than do whites.
Demographic research demonstrates, however,
that racial differences in mortality are reduced
substantially or even disappear when compar-
ing blacks and whites in the same area of resi-
dence (Geronimus et al. 2001). In agreement
with this research, we find no main effect of race
on mortality in the model with couple-race spe-
cific widowhood effects (see Table S2 on the
Online Supplement) once residential context is
controlled, except possibly for somewhat ele-
vated mortality among endogamously married
black women.!? This indicates that there are no
race differences in mortality among husbands
in the four couple-race groups, and only small
race differences among women, as long as both
spouses are alive.

Results for the other variables in the model
largely conform to prior work or expectations
(see Table S2 on the Online Supplement).
Mortality is at its lowest in New England and
West North Central states, and highest in the
South. Mortality increases with age, poverty, and
poor baseline health, as well as with indicators
of disadvantaged residential context, such as
crime rate, unemployment rate, and lower aver-
age education.
that these differences, in turn, can shed addi-
tional light on the etiology and reach of the
widowhood effect. Empirically, we focus on
effect heterogeneity in the widowhood effect as
a function of the race of the husband and wife.
Since all four combinations of race (white,
black) and gender (male, female) are suffi-
ciently represented in our data, and since indi-
vidual-level information is available for all
parties, we are not restricted to tracing effect het-
erogeneity as a function of proband’s own race
alone, but can also investigate how mortality dif-
fers by the race of the deceased spouse. Thus,
our data provide a unique opportunity for study-
ing the interlinked roles of race and gender in
modulating the effects of marital ties on mor-
tality.

Because close to 95 percent of elderly mar-
ried couples in the United States are endoga-
mously married whites, our results for this
couple-race group provide the best point of
comparison with previous work. Like earlier
research, we find a large widowhood effect
among endogamously married white men. We
further confirm Schaefer et al.’s (1995) finding
that white women, too, face a large and statis-
tically significant widowhood effect that is not
qualitatively lower than the widowhood effect
suffered by men. This absence of appreciable
gender differences contradicts most other
research on the topic; however, this may also
simply be a function of attenuating gender dif-
ferences in old age and the fact that our sample
is composed of elderly individuals (Wisocki
and Skowron 2000). Unlike Schaefer et al.
(1995), we find well-behaved trajectories for the
evolution of the widowhood effect over the
duration of bereavement among endogamous-
ly married white men and women, as well as
strong evidence for substantial long-term detri-
ment from widowhood. Excess mortality is
largest during the first month of bereavement
and declines sharply until the third (women) to
sixth (men) month of widowhood. The widow-
hood effect plateaus from the second year of
bereavement and remains highly statistically
significant at substantively meaningful levels
(HR: 1.14). We interpret this long-term wid-
owhood effect as evidence for stable differences
between the mortality implications of the mar-
ried and widowed states. The short-term spike
in mortality shortly following bereavement doc-
uments the particular burden of transitioning
between marriage and widowhood. Bereaved
women appear to overcome this transitional
burden faster than do bereaved men, although
the initial spike among women is actually larg-
er relative to their baseline risk. For endoga-
mously married whites, it appears that nothing
comes to compensate for the survival advantage
bestowed by marriage, even after years of
widowhood.

In stark contrast to the foregoing results for
endogamously married whites, we find no wid-
owhood effect among endogamously married
blacks—neither among men nor among women,
neither short term nor long term. Near-zero
point estimates paired with small confidence
intervals in a large sample containing over
17,000 black couples with extensive individual-
level, couple-level, and contextual controls lend
strong support to the conclusion that neither
widowhood nor the transition to widowhood
affect the survival prospects of endogamously
married black men and women.

A priori, the absence of a widowhood effect
among endogamously married black men and
women is compatible with two scenarios, pre-
viously introduced in Figures 1b and lc. On
one hand, blacks may not experience a widow-
hood effect because, unlike whites, they never
gained survival advantages from marriage in
the first place (Figure 1b). On the other hand,
blacks may have gained survival advantages
from marriage, but unlike whites, manage to
extend this marital survival advantage into wid-
owhood (Figure 1c). Unfortunately, our data
permit no direct empirical test to adjudicate
between these two possibilities—since we lack
data on entries into marriage, we cannot estimate
the survival gain of marriage relative to pre-
marital levels of mortality.

Nonetheless, a straightforward indirect test
between these two scenarios is indeed possible.
First, note that prior work has convincingly
shown that entry into marriage reduces mortality
among whites (Lillard and Waite 1995). Second,
our own results demonstrate that probands
across all four couple-race groups face statisti-
cally indistinguishable hazards of death in mar-
riage, net of controls, as long as their spouses
are alive.'* If endogamously married white
spouses experience reduced mortality in mar-
riage, and if the married mortality of other race
groups is indistinguishable from married mor-
tality among whites, then this would suggest to
us that these other race groups, too, derive a sur-
vival advantage from marriage. In sum, this
would imply that endogamously married blacks
escape the widowhood effect suffered by whites
by extending the survival advantage of mar-
riage into widowhood, as postulated in Figure
Ic.

We suggest three mechanisms to explain why
endogamously married blacks may succeed in
extending the protective effect of marriage into
widowhood, while whites suffer increased mor-
tality and experience a widowhood effect, as
introduced earlier. First, our review of the lit-
erature indicates that widowed elderly blacks are
at a considerable advantage over comparable
whites with respect to receiving social support
from persons living inside the same household
and probably also from persons living else-
where. Notably, about 40 percent of unmarried
elderly blacks live with relatives compared to
only 20 percent of unmarried elderly whites
(Goldscheider and Bures 2003). Given the cen-
trality of kin in the care for the elderly, this
racial difference in household composition like-
ly goes a long way to substitute for the routine
tasks of spousal health support and supervision
upon which the marital health advantage may
depend (Umberson 1987, 1992). Second, racial
differences in the gendered household division
of labor may instill greater self-sufficiency and
reduce spousal task dependence among black
spouses and consequently, on average, prepare
them better for widowhood. Third, greater reli-
giosity and religious participation among blacks
may provide them with spiritual comfort and
social resources for dealing with loss that are
less available to whites. Such differences may
also contribute to an explanation for the absence
of a transitional spike in mortality among endog-
amously married blacks.

Our results for intermarried men show that
intermarried couples differ in their experience
of widowhood from endogamous white and
black couples even net of controls. (We do not
further discuss the results for racially inter-
married women because estimates are too
imprecise.) The results for intermarried men
effectively introduce gender as an explanatory
dimension for the racial differences in the wid-
owhood effect uncovered here. Specifically, we
find that marriage to a black wife protects men
from the widowhood effect, whereas marriage
to a white wife does not, regardless of hus-
band’s own race. Pair-wise statistical compar-
isons between the four couple-race groups
confirm that wife’s race governs the size of the
widowhood effect among men entirely. This
finding is all the more interesting as we have not
been able to ascertain any meaningful gender
differences in the widowhood effect among
endogamously married black and white spous-
es of the kind found in most previous work on
the widowhood effect. It is thus only through its
interaction with race that gender assumes a role
in determining heterogeneity in the widowhood
effect.

As in the case of endogamously married
blacks, the lack of statistically significant dif-
ferences in the hazard of death among husbands
across all four couple-race groups, as long as
their wives are alive, suggests that the absence
of a widowhood effect among men of either
race married to black women derives from their
ability to maintain the survival advantage of
marriage into widowhood. It does not suggest
the irrelevance of black wives for husband’s
survival.

How could a wife’s race affect husband’s
mortality when the wife is dead? Clearly, any
effect on the husband’s current hazard of death
cannot derive from her concurrent, active inter-
ventions. Rather, any apparent effect of a
deceased spouse’s attributes must either derive
from memory effects that index characteristic
aspects of the dissolved marriage, or be due to
characteristic circumstances of the process of
bereavement or the state of widowhood that
correlate with the attributes of the deceased
spouse. The dearth of research on racially inter-
married couples, and elderly intermarried cou-
ples in particular, as well as limitations in our
data prevent us from imposing strong interpre-
tations regarding the mechanisms responsible
for the phenomenon at hand. In the very least,
however, the importance of wife’s race for the
widowhood effect in men is consistent with the
known centrality of women in the household
production of health, and with Sarkisian and
Gerstel’s (2004) finding that black-white dif-
ferences in social support are owed predomi-
nantly to racial differences in the kin
involvement of women rather than men.

A new potential mechanism with regard to the
role of women is raised by our finding that the
residential environment of intermarried cou-
ples resembles that of endogamously married
couples on the basis of wives’ rather than hus-
bands’ race. Wife’s race may thus contribute to
the explanation of husband’s widowhood effect
by deciding the nature of the neighborhood con-
text in which the husband remains after the wife
has died.!> Another mechanism may operate
through the greater rejection of intermarried
couples by white relatives than by black relatives
(Romano 2003, ch. 3; Root 2001, ch. 2). Since
wives are typically responsible for maintaining
kinship networks (di Leonardo 1987), black
men married to white women may be more like-
ly to suffer isolation and lack of support from
their in-laws upon the death of their spouse
than black men married to black women or
white men married to black women.'¢ Finally,
the centrality of wives’ race for determining
the presence or absence of a widowhood effect
among bereaved husbands may indicate that
the three factors suggested by us as being
responsible for the absence of a widowhood
effect among endogamously married black men
(more coresident kin, less gender role special-
ization, and greater religious involvement) may
be more strongly anchored in the marital and
widowed environment created by the female
partner.

Of course, observational studies, including
the present one, can never fully exclude unmea-
sured confounding factors as an alternative
explanation for patterns seen in the data
(Goldman 1993; Korenman, Goldman, and Fu
1997). This holds particularly for unobserved
differences in socio-historical context experi-
enced by endogamous and interracial couples.
We are cautiously optimistic, however, because
the results presented here—particularly those for
endogamously married whites—are remarkably
robust to the introduction of control variables.
This confirms previous findings in the literature
supporting the causal nature of the widowhood
effect (Schaefer et al. 1995; Lillard and Panis
1996; Martikainen and Valkonen 1996b). Even
the introduction of detailed, objective baseline
health controls for both spouses into our model
does little to affect the size of the estimated
coefficients for any of our four couple-race
groups once basic demographic factors and
poverty status are controlled for. Any remain-
ing unobserved confounding factor would have
to operate through pathways independent of
baseline health. Remarriage is unlikely to con-
found our findings because very few widowed
men, and even fewer widowed women, in this
age group remarry (Clarke 1995). Similarly,
we exclude cohabitation with a new romantic
partner as an alternative explanation for the
widowhood effect or racial differences therein,
because only 2.6 percent of all unmarried indi-
viduals over the age of 60 cohabit, and race
differences in cohabitation are negligible
(Chevan 1996).

The consequences of marriage and marital
transitions are increasingly at the forefront of
social-political debates and current research in
the sociology of the family. This study compli-
cates the picture by documenting considerable
and sharply patterned racial variation in the
health effects of marital status transitions. We
find a large and long-lasting widowhood effect
for endogamously married white men and
women, but we find no widowhood effect
among endogamously married blacks. The
absence of a widowhood effect among blacks is
likely due to the extension of the marital survival
advantage into widowhood. For blacks, unlike
for whites, marriage may thus be beneficial
even after it has ended. The availability of a
large sample of intermarried spouses has further
enabled us to investigate the gendered nature of
these race differences in the widowhood effect,
supporting surprising conclusions about the
role of wives’ race.!” More generally, our work
suggests that attributes of people to whom one
is connected—in and of themselves or because
they index contextual features—are relevant in
understanding the salubrious nature of social
ties.
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences
56:112-18.

Arday Susan L., David R. Arday, Stephanie Monroe,
and Jianyi Zhang. 2000. “HCFA’s Racial and
Ethnic Data: Current Accuracy and Recent
Improvements.” Health Care Financing Review
21:107-16.

Becker, Gary S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Blee, Kathleen and Ann Tickamyer. 1995. “Racial
Differences in Men’s Attitudes about Women’s
Gender Roles.” Journal of Marriage and the
Family 57:21-30.

Carr, Deborah S. 2004a. “Black/White Differences
in Psychological Adjustment to Spousal Loss
among Older Adults.” Research on Aging
26:591-622.

—. 2004b. “Gender, Preloss Marital
Dependence, and Older Adults’ Adjustment to
Widowhood.” Journal of Marriage and Family
66:220-35.

Carr, Deborah S., James S. House, Ronald C. Kessler,
Randolph M. Nesse, John Sonnega, and Camille
Wortman. 2000. “Marital Quality and
Psychological Adjustment to Widowhood Among
Older Adults: A Longitudinal Analysis.” Journal
of Gerontology: Social Sciences 55B:S197-S207.

Charlson, M. E., P. Pompei, K. L. Ales, and C. R.
MacKenzie. 1987. “A New Method of Classifying
Prognostic Comorbidity in Longitudinal Studies:
Development and Validation.” Journal of Chronic
Diseases 40:373-83.

Chevan, Albert. 1996. “As Cheaply as One:
Cohabitation in the Older Population.” Journal of
Marriage and the Family 58:656-67.

Christakis, Nicholas A. and Paul D. Allison 2006.
“Mortality after the Hospitalization of a Spouse.”
New England Journal of Medicine 354:in press.

Christakis, Nicholas A. and Theodore J. Iwashyna,
2003 “The Health Impact on Families of Health
Care: A Matched Cohort Study of Hospice Use by
Decedents and Mortality Outcomes in Surviving,
Widowed Spouses.” Social Science and Medicine
57:465-75.

Clark, William D. and Melissa M. Hulbert. 1998.
“Research Issues: Dually Eligible Medicare and
Medicaid Beneficiaries, Challenges and
Opportunities.” Health Care Financing Review
20:1-10.

Clarke, Sally C. 1995. “Advance Report of Final
Divorce Statistics, 1989 and 1990.” Monthly Vital
Statistics Report 42.

di Leonardo, Micaela. 1987. “The Female World of
Cards and Holidays: Women, Family, and the Work
of Kinship.” Signs 12:440-53.

Durkheim, Emile. [1897] 1997. Suicide. New York:
Free Press.

Farley, Reynold, and Walter R. Allen. 1987. The
Color Line and the Quality of Life in America. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Geronimus, Arline T., John Bound, and Lisa J.
Neidert. 1996. “On the Validity of Using Census
Geocode Characteristics to Proxy Individual
Socioeconomic Characteristics.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 91:529-37.

Geronimus, Arline T., John Bound, Timothy A.
Waidmann, Cynthia G. Colen, and Dianne Steffick.
2001. “Inequality in Life Expectancy, Functional
Status, and Active Life Expectancy across Selected
Black and White Populations in the United States.”
Demography 38:227-51.

Goldman, Noreen. 1993. “Marriage Selection and
Mortality Patterns: Inferences and Fallacies.”
Demography 30:189-208.

Goldscheider, Frances K. and Regina M. Bures. 2003.
“The Racial Crossover in Family Complexity in the
United States” Demography 40:569-87.

Gove, Walter R. 1973. “Sex, Marital Status, and
Mortality.” American Journal of Sociology
79:45-67.

Harrison, James. 1978. “Warning: The Male Sex
Role May Be Dangerous to Your Health.” Journal
of Social Issues 34:65-86.

Hatch, Laurie R. 1991. “Informal Support Patterns
of Older African-American and White Women:
Examining Effects of Family, Paid Work, and
Religious Participation.” Research on Aging
13:144-70.

Hatten, James. 1980. “Medicare’s Common
Denominator: The Covered Population.” Health
Care Financing Review 2 (2):53-64.

Health Resources and Services Administration,
Bureau of Health Professions. 1996. Area Resource
File (ARF) System. Fairfax, VA: Quality Resource
Systems, Inc.

Helsing, Knud J. and Moyses Szklo. 1981. “Mortality
after Bereavement.” American Journal of
Epidemiology 114:41-52.

Hosmer, David W. Jr. and Stanley Lemeshow 2002.
Applied Survival Analysis: Regression Modeling
of Time to Event Data. New York: Wiley.

House, James S., Karl R. Landis, and Debra
Umberson. 1988. “Social Relationships and
Health.” Science 241:540-5.

Hoyert, Donna L., Hsiang-Ching Kung, and Betty L.
Smith. 2005. “Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2003.”
National Vital Statistics Reports 53.

Hu, Yuanreng and Noreen Goldman. 1990. “Mortality
Differentials by Marital Status: An International
Comparison.” Demography 27:233-50.

Iwashyna, Theodore J., Gerardine Brennan, James X.
Zhang, and Nicholas A. Christakis. 2002. “Finding
Married Couples in Medicare Claims Data.”
Health Services and Outcomes Research
Methodology 3:75-86.

Iwashyna, Theodore J. and Nicholas A. Christakis.
2003. “Marriage, Widowhood, and Health Care
Use.” Social Science Medicine 57:2137-47.

Iwashyna, Theodore J., James X. Zhang, Diane
Lauderdale, and Nicholas A. Christakis. 1998. “A
Methodology for Identifying Married Couples in
Medicare Data: Mortality, Morbidity, and Health
Care Use among the Married Elderly.”
Demography 35:413-9.

Johnson, Colleen L. 2000. “Perspectives on American
Kinship in the Later 1990s.” Journal of Marriage
and the Family 62:632-9.

Kalmijn, Matthijs. 1998. “Intermarriage and
Homogamy: Causes, Patterns, Trends.” Annual
Review of Sociology 24:395—-421.

Kennedy, Randall. 2003. /nterracial Intimacies: Sex,
Marriage, Identity, and Adoptions. New York:
Pantheon.

Korenman, Sanders, Noreen Goldman, and Haishan
Fu. 1997. “Misclassification Bias in Estimates of
Bereavement Effects.” American Journal of
Epidemiology 145:995—1002.

Krieger, Nancy. 1992. “Overcoming the Absence of
Socioeconomic Data in Medical Records:
Validation and Application of a Census-Based
Methodology.” American Journal of Public Health
92:703-10.

Lauderdale Diane S. and Jack Goldberg. 1996. “The
Expanded Racial and Ethnic Codes in the Medicare
Data Files: Their Completeness of Coverage and
Accuracy.” American Journal of Public Health
86:712-16.

Lauderdale Diane S. and Bert Kestenbaum. 2000.
“Asian American Ethnic Identification by
Surname.” Population Research and Policy Review
19:283-300.

. 2002. “Mortality Rates of Elderly Asian
American Populations Based on Medicare and
Social Security Data.” Demography 39:529-40.

Lillard, Lee A. and Constantijn Panis. 1996. “Marital
Status and Mortality: The Role of Health.”
Demography 33:313-27.

Lillard, Lee A. and Linda J. Waite. 1995. “ ‘Til Death
Do Us Part: Marital Disruption and Mortality.”
American Journal of Sociology 100:1131-56.

Litwak, Eugene and Peter Messeri, in collaboration
with Samuel Wolfe, Sheila Gorman, Merril
Silverstein, and Miguel Guilarte. 1989.
“Organizational Theory, Social Support, and
Mortality Rates: A Theoretical Convergence.”
American Sociological Review 54:49-66.

Martikainen, Pekka and Tapani Valkonen. 1996a.
“Mortality after the Death of a Spouse: Rates and
Causes of Death in a Large Finnish Cohort.”
American Journal of Public Health 86:1087-93.

1996b. “Mortality after Death of Spouse in
Relation to Duration of Bereavement in Finland.”
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
50:264-8.

McLoyd, Vonnie C., Ana Mari Cauce, David
Takeuchi, and Leon Wilson. 2000. “Marital
Processes and Parental Socialization in Families of
Color: A Decade Review of Research.” Journal of
Marriage and the Family 62:1070-93.

Oppenheimer, Valerie K. 1997. “Women’s
Employment and the Gains to Marriage: The
Specialization and Trading Model of Marriage.”
Annual Review of Sociology 23:431-53.

Orbuch, Terri L. and Sandra L. Eyster. 1997.
“Division of Household Labor among Black
Couples and White Couples.” Social Forces
76:301-32.

Patterson, Orlando. 1998. “Broken Bloodlines:
Gender Relations and the Crisis of Marriages and
Families among Afro-Americans.” Pp. 1-168 in
Rituals of Blood: Consequences of Slavery in Two
American Centuries. Washington, DC:
Civitas/Counterpoint.

Preston, Samuel E., Irma T. Elo, Ira Rosenwaike,
and Mark Hill. 1996. “African-American Mortality
at Older Ages: Results from a Matching Study.”
Demography 33:193-209.

Qian, Zhenchao and Daniel T. Lichter. 2004.
“Marriage and Family in a Multiracial Society.”
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, and
Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau.

Romano, Renee C. 2003. Race Mixing: Black-White
Marriage in Postwar America. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Root, Maria P. P. 2001. Loves Revolution: Interracial
Marriage. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University
Press.

Ruggles, Steven. 1994. “The Origins of African-
American Family Structure.” American
Sociological Review 59:136-51.

Sarkisian, Natalia and Naomi Gerstel. 2004. “Kin
Support among Blacks and Whites: Race and
Family Organization.” American Sociological
Review 69:812-37.

Schaefer, Catherine, Charles P. Quesenberry Jr., and
Soora Wi. 1995. “Mortality Following Conjugal
Bereavement and the Effects of a Shared
Environment.” American Journal of Epidemiology
141:1142-52.

Shahar, Danit R., Richard Schultz, Avner Shahar,
and Rena R. Wing. 2001. “The Effect of
Widowhood on Weight Change, Dietary Intake,
and Eating Behavior in the Elderly Population.”
Journal of Aging and Health 13:189-99.

Silverstein, Merril and Linda J. Waite. 1993. “Are
Blacks More Likely Than White to Receive and
Provide Social Support in Middle and Old Age?
Yes, No, and Maybe So.” Journals of Gerontology:
Social Sciences 48:S212-S222.

Spitze, Glenna D. and John Logan. 1990. “Sons,
Daughters, and Intergenerational Support.” Journal
of Marriage and the Family 52:420-30.

Stack, Carol B. 1974. All Our Kin: Strategies for
Survival in a Black Community. New York: Harper
and Row.

StataCorp. 2003. Stata Statistical Software: Release
8. College Station, TX: StataCorp.

Stolzenberg, Ross. 2001. “It’s about Time and
Gender: Spousal Employment and Health.”
American Journal of Sociology 101:61-100.

Taylor, Robert J., Linda M. Chatters, Rukmalie
Jayakody, and Jeffrey S. Levin. 1996. “Black and
White Differences in Religious Participation: A
Multi-sample Comparison.” Journal for the
Scientific Study of Religion 35:403-10.

Taylor, Robert J., Linda M. Chatters, and Vikie Mays.
1988. “Parents, Children, Siblings, In-Laws, and
Non-Kin Sources of Emergency Assistance to
Black Americans.” Family Relations 37:426-31.

Trovato, Frank and Gloria Lauris. 1989. “Marital
Status and Mortality in Canada, 1951-1981.”
Journal of Marriage and the Family 51:907-22.

Umberson, Debra. 1987. “Family Status and Health
Behaviors: Social Control as a Dimension of Social
Integration.” Journal of Health and Social
Behavior 28:306-19.

1992. “Gender, Marital Status and the
Social Control of Health Behavior.” Social Science
and Medicine 34:907-17.

Umberson, Debra, Camille B. Wortman, and Ronald
C. Kessler. 1992. “Widowhood and Depression:
Explaining Long-Term Gender Differences in
Vulnerabilities.” Journal of Health and Social
Behavior 33:10-24.

US. Department of Commerce. 2004. Census Quality
Survey Public Use Data File, 2001 [computer file,
ICPSR release]. Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of
Commerce, Bureau of the Census [producer], and
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-University Consortium for
Political and Social Research [distributor].

Utz, Rebecca L., Erin B. Reidy, Deborah Carr,
Randolph Nesse, and Camille Wortman. 2004.
“The Daily Consequences of Widowhood: The
Role of Gender and Intergenerational Transfers
on Subsequent Housework Performance.” Journal
of Family Issues 25:683-712.

White, Michael J. and Sharon Sassler. 2000. “Judging
Not Only by Color: Ethnicity, Nativity, and
Neighborhood Attainment.” Social Science
Quarterly 80:997-1013.

Winship, Christopher and Michael Sobel. 2004.
“Causal Analysis in Sociological Studies.” Pp.
481-503 in Handbook of Data Analysis, edited
by Melissa A. Hardy and Alan Bryman. London,
England: Sage.

Wisocki, Patricia and Jeffrey Skowron. 2000. “The
Effects of Gender and Culture on Adjustment to
Widowhood.” Pp. 429-48 in Handbook of Gender,
Culture, and Health, edited by Richard M. Eisler
and M. Hersen. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Word, David L. and Colby Perkins Jr. 1996. “Building
a Spanish Surname List for the 1990’s—A New
Approach to an Old Problem.” Technical Working
Paper No. 13, Population Division, U.S. Bureau of
the Census, Washington, DC.

Wortman, Camille B. and Roxane Cohen Silver.
1989. “The Myths of Coping with Loss.” Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 57:349-57.

Zhang, James X., Theodore J. Iwashyna, and Nicholas
A. Christakis. 1999. “The Performance of Different
Lookback Periods and Sources of Information for
Charlson Comorbidity Adjustment in Medicare
Claims.” Medical Care 37:1128-39.
