@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
set forth a detailed account of our

efforts, in a social psychological study
of aging, to operationalize two of Talcott
Parsons’ five pattern variables. We will not
describe the Kansas City Study of Adult
Life, except to indicate the relevance of the
pattern variables to our general conceptual

O: primary intent in this report is to

* This report is based on data from The Kansas
City Study of Adult Life, a project financed by
Grant 3M-9082 from the National Institute of
Mental Health to the Committee on Human Devel-
opment of the University of Chicago. It is under
the supervision of William E. Henry (Principal
Investigator), Robert J. Havighurst, and Bernice
L. Neugarten. The Study Director has been Elaine
Cumming, and the Field Director, Lois R. Dean.
Some of the material contained in this paper ap-
peared previously in “Interaction Style and Success
in Aging,” a report prepared by the author, while
a member of the field research staff, for the Fifty-
third Annual Meeting of the American Sociological
Association, Seattle, Washington, August, 1958.
framework. We will report only the most
rudimentary findings, in order merely to
illustrate some uses to which we are putting
the operations we have developed. And
finally, we will assume on the reader’s part
a general familiarity with the Parsonian
action scheme, although we will of course
report the refinements and modifications in
Parson’s own definitions of the pattern
variables that the empirical tasks have im-
posed on us.

In short, our purpose here is principally
to relate the means by which we have
attacked the following problem: How does
one go about asking, for example, a middle-
aged, Midwestern, lower middle class house-
wife, with rural origins, average intelligence,
and an eighth grade education, whether her
orientations to interaction with others are
primarily affective or affectively neutral, and
whether her role behavior tends on the whole
toward diffuseness or functional specificity?

We have not met with unqualified success,
nor do we consider our work by any means
complete. There remain, for one thing, the
other three pattern variables, although the
two we have used are most relevant to our
present purposes. And, as will become clear,
we are faced with nagging questions of
validity, and of the extent to which we can
safely compare questionnaire items based on
concrete interactions with items based on
the rewards paradigm.

Nevertheless, we believe that we now have
in hand some easily administered operations
that enable us tentatively to measure three
aspects of a person’s orientations to inter-
action as expressed in terms of the pattern
variables. These are (a) his “actual” orienta-
tions: an objectively (or externally) eval-
uated summary of his principal roles and
their accompanying orientations; + (b) his
“self-image”: a subjective statement of his
principal roles and accompanying orienta-
tions; and (c) his “approved” orientations:
a subjective statement of the roles and
orientations he values most highly. Measures
for still a fourth aspect—‘cathected”
orientations that derive from that cluster
of human motivations variously called
“needs,” “impulses,” or “desires”—are still
in the earliest stages of development, and
will not be reported here.
about what social-psychological changes, if
any, occur during the process of “normal”
aging that can be directly attributed to age
change alone, rather than to such age-related
but peripheral variables as, say, reduced
economic circumstances, retirement, or the
loss of children from the home. Basically,
we are addressing ourselves to two questions:
(1) What, in fact, is aging, in social-psy-
chological terms? and (2) How well or how
poorly do different people cope with this
phase of the life span, and what accounts for
variations in the ability to cope? Since ours
is a pilot study, we are chiefly concerned
with producing reasonably well documented
hypotheses, not conclusive and definitive
findings. It is, therefore, as hypotheses that
the actual content we report here should be
viewed.

In pursuit of hypotheses, then, we have
employed a longitudinal research design
whereby, since 1956, we have observed a
panel of some 140 residents of Kansas City
in transit from middle to old age. Their ages
at selection ranged from 49 to 69. Since
“normal” aging is the focus, our panel mem-
bers are working and middle class. The very
bottom and top of the class structure were
sheared off at the outset. They are ambula-
tory and self-sufficient, not institutionalized,
indigent, or severely handicapped either
physically or mentally. To this basic study
panel we have since added a group (herein-
after called the ‘quasi-panel”’) of similarly
healthy and ambulatory people in their
seventies and eighties, permitting us to con-
trast the terminal and the transitional age
periods. We have “observed” our more than
200 respondents by means primarily of
periodic questionnaire-type interviewing. At
this writing all have been interviewed at least
twice, the regular panel members four times.

Quite early in the research, by contrasting
our 80-year olds with our middle-aged panel
members, we began to develop the concept
of “disengagement” as the major social-
psychological dimension along which change
in the latter part of the life span occurs. We
have elaborated this concept in detail else-
where,” but to summarize briefly: by “dis-

2Elaine Cumming, Lois R. Dean, David S.
Newell, and Isabel McCaffrey, “Disengagement—A
Tentative Theory of Aging,” Sociometry, 23 (March,
1960), pp. 23-35.
engagement,” we refer to a process whereby
people become extricated with age from the
close, obligatory interactions of middle life.
We have tentatively posited disengagement
as an emergent as well as a responsive
phenomenon, and see as its major con-
comitants (1) a reduction in amount, variety,
and intensity of social interactions; (2) a
release, therefore, from many of the norma-
tive controls governing social interactions;
and (3) a shift in orientation to social inter-
action. The end product is the relatively
isolated (though not necessarily “lonely”),
comparatively carefree, somewhat eccentric
and exceedingly egocentric old person, a
familiar figure in American society.

It is with the third concomitant orienta-
tion to interaction, that we are concerned
here, since we elected to express this
variable in terms of the two pattern variables
Parsons posits as principally concerned with
the actor’s motivations in interactive situa-
tions. These are (1) Affectivity-Affective
Neutrality, and (2) Diffuseness-Specificity,
which Parsons defines as follows: ®

(1) Affectivity-A ffective Neutrality. Af-
fective interactions carry “the role expecta-
tion that the incumbent of the role may
freely express certain affective reactions to
objects in the situation and need not attempt
to control them in the interests of discipline
. ..” In affectively neutral interactions, the
expectation is that the actor “should restrain
any impulses to certain affective expres-
sions.”

(2) Diffuseness-Specificity. In diffuse in-
teractions, the expectation is that the actor
“will accept any potential significance of a
social object, including obligation to it, which
is compatible with his other interests and
obligations, and that he will give priority to
this expectation over any disposition to con-
fine the role orientation to a specific range
of significance of the object.” Specificity is
the reverse: the expectation that the actor
will be oriented to the social object only
within a concretely defined range of signif-
icance, and will give priority to this expecta-
tion over any disposition to push the inter-
action beyond this limited range.
When the two pattern variables are
combined, four orientation-to-interaction
typologies emerge: diffuse-affective, diffuse-
neutral, specific-affective, and specific-
neutral. Each orientation carries an antic-
ipated relational reward for the actor, and
with Parsons’ rewards paradigm and the
above definitions as a point of departure, we
developed the following empirical descrip-
tions of these four major orientations:

1. Diffuse-affective interactions carry the
expectation of potentially unlimited mutual
obligation and affection. The actor views
these interactions as permanent, and engages
in them for their own sake. The anticipated
relational reward is love,* defined as uncon-
ditional acceptance; and the flavor, or tone,
is warmth, homeyness, “togetherness” in the
uncorrupted sense of that word.

2. Diffuse-neutral interactions carry an
expectation of potentially unlimited mutual
obligation, but no expectation of mutual
affection. They are perceived as occurring
not for their own sake, but in pursuit of a
goal apart from the interactions themselves.
In contrast to the family or close friendship
context of diffuse-affective interactions,
diffuse-neutrality is perhaps best typified by
the interactions between clergymen and
parishioner, teacher and pupil, or among
fellow members of such goal-directed col-
lectivities as unions, charities, fraternal
orders, and the like. The anticipated reward
is esteem, and the tone is moral and evalua-
tive.

3. Specific-affective interactions carry the
expectation of short-run affective gratifica-
tion in the context of limited, quite clearly
defined mutual obligation. In contrast to
diffuse interactions, where obligation attaches
to the relationship itself, the specific inter-
action attaches obligation to the context of
the relationship. The specific-affective inter-
action may be intimate, but it does not
imply long-term mutual responsibility; and
the anticipated reward, as contrasted to the
diffuse rewards of love and esteem, is
responsiveness or receptiveness in the im-
mediate situation. The flavor of the specific-
affective interaction is spontaneous and
affective, but fleeting; and for our purposes,
we have included in this category the myriad
vicarious or pseudo-interactions with person-
alities in television, radio, books, movies,
etc.

4. Specific-neutral interactions carry the
expectation of adequate mutual performance
toward a goal apart from the interaction
itself. As in the specific-affective interaction,
obligation attaches to the context of the
interaction, and the range is limited and
clearly defined. But unlike the specific-affec-
tive interaction, no emotional gratification
is necessarily involved. These are the inter-
actions of work and the market place, the
“good day’s work for a good day’s pay.”
The anticipated reward is approval, and the
flavor is efficient, businesslike.

In short: affective interactions are ends in
themselves; neutral interactions are means
to other ends. Diffuse interactions carry
obligations that are potentially unlimited,
loosely defined, and relational; specific inter-
actions, if they carry any, carry obligations
that are limited, relatively clearly defined,
and contextual. None of the four types can
be found in pure form, empirically. There
may be many specific acts between persons
having diffuse relationships, and many
specific relationships hover constantly on
the edge of diffuseness, but never become
defined as diffuse. Similarly, the closely knit
family circle has moments of neutrality, and
the assembly line worker may often crack
jokes with the boss. But by combining the
notions of range, purpose, nature of obliga-
tion, affective tone, and anticipated reward,
we can at least roughly typify people in ac-
cordance with one or another of these four
orientations.

Now, with respect to the disengagement
hypothesis, we predicted that there would
be a shift in orientation to interaction with
advancing age, and that this shift would be
away from disciplined, cognitive orientations
toward the expressive and gratificatory ones;
away from the orientations carrying long-
term obligations to those in which obligations
are either absent or limited. We believed
that our respondents could be classified
empirically according to the primary orienta-
tions they characteristically display in their
daily interactions, classifications that would
constitute a logically coherent summation of
a person’s roles, plus his motivational set
toward those roles. Having developed such a
measure, we would then use it as a partial
test of the disengagement hypothesis.

As a first step, a staff member closely
familiar with a small group of panel mem-
bers she had interviewed intensively, impres-
sionistically classified each of these respond-
ents on his “actual” orientations to inter-
action. Two orientations were assigned each
respondent, since it was soon apparent that
nearly everyone at some time or another
interacts diffusely and specifically, affectively
and neutrally. But it did seem reasonable,
empirically, to assign each person two
orientations, a primary and a secondary,
into which most of his daily interactions
would fit. The staff member making these
initial classifications based her impressions
on data contained in three panel-wide ques-
tionnaires, in the intensive interviews, and
in her observations of the interaction style
the respondent displayed in the interview
situation itself.

The 70 year old Mr. B, for example,
showed a keen cognitive interest in the pur-
poses and methods of our study, and in the
interview situation endeavored to convey
that he was himself an eminently suitable
respondent by reason of his status and
achievements in life. He also had a good
time being interviewed, and was enthusiastic
in his responses. An examination of the sur-
vey data revealed that a large number of
Mr. B’s interactions occur in organizational
contexts: He is a pillar of his church and the
prime mover in a men’s club associated with
the church. Mr. B is also an amateur rose
grower, reads romantic poetry, and watches
television regularly. He is a family man, but
his children have long since established
homes of their own, and Mr. and Mrs. B
see them only once or twice a month. In ad-
dition, Mr. B is retired, so that the world of
work is no longer his.
In marked contrast to Mr. B is Mrs. W,
a housewife in her mid-fifties, whose daily
life is bound up in her home, her husband,
her sister, and her many “do-it-yourself” ac-
tivities about the house and yard. Mrs. W
and her husband are their own painters, dec-
orators, upholsterers, electricians, plumbers,
and gardeners. They work together at these
tasks, and spend their leisure hours together
listening to the radio or playing cards with
a small group of old, close friends. Mrs. W
sees her sister every day and is in frequent
contact with her grown son and his family
by letter or telephone. Although Mrs. W is
active in her church, these interactions are
to her an extension of her home and family
pattern, and lack the moral and evaluative
tone of Mr. B’s church participation. Simi-
larly, Mrs. W’s socializing takes place in the
home and family context, and she has few
social activities that do not include her
husband.

Still another type is Mr. F, a bachelor in
his early fifties, who lives with his unmarried
sister in an elegantly old-fashioned apart-
ment crammed with antiques and tropical
plants. Mr. F is a music, art, and theatre
lover, a voracious reader of romantic fiction
(he favors Balzac), an enthusiastic antique
fancier, a grower of roses and exotic potted
plants, and a skilled devotee of Kingsley
Double Crostics. He has relatively few
friends, and those he has appear to have
quite specific functions; they are shared-
interest friends, not close, intimate ones. Mr.
F is also devoted to his family, an old and
prominent one from another city, but his
interactions with them, including the sister
with whom he lives, appear essentially neu-
tral: he is concerned not with Togetherness
but with Holding Up the Side. He works at
a routine and solitary job, so that his inter-
actions at his office are few.

And finally, there is Mr. S, a shoelace and
razor blade peddler of 61, who lives alone in
a tiny house with a pot-bellied stove, and
whose only flesh and blood interactions oc-
cur in the course of his daily work. He has
no immediate family and no close friends.
His only “social life” is essentially vicarious,
consisting of wandering about among the
downtown crowds, going to the movies on
Saturday afternoons, and watching televi-
sion.

In pattern variable terms, then, Mr. B is
aman for whom diffuseness is largely neutral,
specificity largely affective. The predomi-
nance in his life of church activities, rose-
growing, television, and romantic poets, plus
the moral and evaluative tone of his utter-
ances, led us to classify him as a diffuse-
neutral interactor with a specific-affective
secondary orientation. Mrs. W’s preoccupa-
tion with home, family, and household tasks
gives her a diffuse-affective primacy, with
specific-neutrality as her secondary orienta-
tion. Mr. F, with his seven lively arts, his
roses and his antiques, is specific-affective in
his primary orientation, while his detached
concern for the family tie gives him a diffuse-
neutral secondary orientation. Mr. S, of the
shoelaces and razor blades, is almost exclu-
sively specific and neutral, with a trace of
specific-affectivity in his downtown meander-
ings, his movies, and his television shows.

Having made several impressionistic clas-
sifications, and having reassured ourselves
that it could be done, our next step was to
try to render our classifications more objec-
tive. We therefore pulled from the three sur-
vey questionnaires then completed those
items that, when taken together, provided
us with the clearest overall picture of the
respondent’s daily interactions. This pro-
cedure yielded 23 items that told us how
often the respondent engaged in what kinds
of interactions. We then began tediously to
classify our respondents, and soon found
that in fact our instrument was more than
twice as long as it needed to be. In addition,
it contained items too dependent on the sub-
jective judgment of the staff member making
the classifications. We therefore undertook,
first, to shorten the instrument, and second,
to determine its reliability from one classifier
to another.

To this end, we reduced the number of
items in the series to eleven. Then, enough
time having elapsed for forgetfulness to set
in, our staff member reclassified a random
thirty cases on the basis of the new short
forms, and we compared these with her origi-
nal long-form classifications. We found the
short form quite reliable, on this test-retest
trial: only 7 per cent of the two sets of clas-
sifications were completely disjunctive, and
73 per cent showed exact agreement, with 20
per cent partial agreement—e.g., either pri-
mary or secondary orientation was the same
in both cases. Next, we gave a new and “un-
contaminated” staff member a short course
of instruction in the Parsons pattern vari-
ables, following which she classified the same
random thirty cases, using the short form.
Once again, this instrument showed gratify-
ing reliability: only 10 per cent of the two
sets of classifications were entirely disjunc-
tive; 67 per cent showed exact agreement;
and 17 per cent showed partial agreement.
For primary orientation only, the score was
much better: 6 per cent disjunctive, 77 exact
agreement, and 17 per cent partial agree-
ment.

At this writing, then, we have, we believe,
a reliable instrument for measuring “actual”
orientations to interaction that is short, easily
administered, and objective. The items it
contains are: ®
Who else lives here with you?

What is your occupation?

Would you describe what an ordinary
week day is like for you?

Could you tell me more about your work?
I'd like to know exactly what you do at
work, what your position is, whom you
work with, etc.

What do you usually do on week ends
(or days off)?

How often do you attend church? Do you
belong to any committees, auxiliaries,
teach Sunday School, or anything like
that?

Do you belong to any groups, clubs, or
associations, or anything like that? (What
are they? How often do you attend meet-
ings? What usually goes on at the meet-
ings? Are you an officer in any of these
organizations? )

Could you tell me what relatives, other
than the ones who live here with you,
you feel closest to, and how often you
see them?

How many people that you know do
you consider really close friends: people
you can confide in anud talk over personal
matters with? (How often do you get
together with any of these close friends?
TasBLe 2, EMPLOYMENT STATUS, AGE, AND PRIMARY ORIENTATION TO INTERACTION

Not Employed

 

 

 

 

 

Employed
Orientation Panel Quasi-panel Panel Quasi-panel
Neutral primacy 94% 67% 38% 8%
Affective primacy 6% 33% 62% 72%
100% (90) 100% (9) 100% (51) 100% (98)
Since we have written elsewhere in detail
of our efforts to measure that elusive con-
cept “morale,” § we merely summarize here:
our study design requires us to evaluate vary-
ing degrees of “success in aging,” and it was
therefore necessary for us to define and meas-
ure “success.” One factor in the definition
we are working out is the individual respond-
ent’s subjective sense of well-being. It is this
factor, for which we have developed a four-
item index, that we are presently calling
morale. Although the precise meaning of this
index is not yet clear to us, we do have
strong evidence for a belief that it reflects
primarily an inner psychological state, and
is not, like many morale or satisfaction meas-
ures, primarily a statement of cognitive or
moral values.

Among our hypotheses with respect to this
morale measure is one that concerns orienta-
tions to interaction as expressed in pattern
variable terms. We predicted that a discrep-
ancy between the relational goals a person
seeks or values and the relational realities of
his everyday life would be associated with
low morale. But to test this hypothesis, we
needed at least three measures: (1) an ob-
jective measure of relational realities, which
we had in “actual orientations to interaction”
described above; (2) a subjective measure
of relational realities, since we thought it
likely that where there was disjunction, the
subjective view of self-as-interactor would
be more important than the objective for
purposes of morale; (3) a measure of rela-
tional goals.

We decided to attack first the problem of
relational goals, which we defined very
loosely as those orientations to interaction a
person appeared to “prefer” or find “most
congenial,” irrespective of his heavily role-
determined “actual” orientations. Accord-
ingly, we again combed the questionnaires
for items bearing on this variable, and
emerged with twelve, on the basis of which
one staff member classified the panel, assign-
ing both a primary and a secondary “pre-
ferred” orientation. However, it quickly be-
came apparent, particularly when we ran a
reliability check, that this measure would
have to be abandoned.® The reasons for its
failure seemed to be these:

1. Most of the items produced responses
that mixed what appeared to be cathected
preferences (‘‘needs” or “desires”) with cog-
nitive or moral value positions, and we felt
inadequate to decide which the respondent
could be said to “prefer.” For example, the
item, “What would you say is the nicest
thing that has happened to you in the past
six months?” would give us something like,
“Oh, I had a party on my birthday and got
lots of gifts and cards! But I guess I’d have
to say being elected secretary of (organiza-
tion) was the nicest thing.” Does this re-
spondent “prefer” specific-affective or dif-
fuse-neutral interactions?

2. Many of the items seemed to cry out
for hedonistic responses. As a result, the
distribution of primary “preferred” orienta-
tions revealed a panel overwhelmingly de-
voted to the pursuit of fun and games (spe-
cific-affective) which from other evidence,
including interviewer evaluations, we knew
was simply not so.

Since we were about to enter the field with
a fourth questionnaire, our next step was to
experiment with new items which we wrote
with the pattern variables specifically in
mind. Combining the concepts of social role
predominance and relational rewards, we de-
vised the following items, designed to elicit
(a) the respondent’s subjective view of his
Here are four general types of people we
see around us in our daily lives. Look
these descriptions over carefully, then
tell me which two of these descriptions
you think resemble you most, as you
actually are. First, tell me the one you
think resembles you most, then the one
that resembles you second most:

(a) A person who is esteemed by others,
and takes a continuous interest in
human welfare in general. (Diffuse-
Neutral)

(b) A person who is enjoyed by others,
and takes his joys and sorrows as
they come, from day to day. (Spe-
cific-A ffective)

(c) A person who is Joved by others, and
takes a continuous interest in the
personal welfare of all those who
are dear to him. (Diffuse-Affective)

(d) A person who is approved of by
others, and attends to his affairs
conscientiously from day to day.
(Specific-Neutral)

. Now go back over the four descriptions

and tell me which two (first choice and
second choice) you would most like to
resemble.

Here is another list of four types of

people. Of these four, which type do

you most prefer to have as friends?

Which do you prefer second most?

(a) People who completely accept you
the way you are, and feel responsible
for your personal problems and wel-
fare. (DA)

(b) People who do their work, attend to
their affairs, and leave you free to
do the same. (SN)

(c) People who try to improve them-
selves, and have definite ideals and
aims in life. (DN)

(d) People who are friendly and lively,
and enjoy getting together to talk
or to socialize. (SA)

Which of the following kinds of people
do you most prefer to have around you

in you daily work? Which do you like

next best?

(a) People who are friendly and enjoy-
able to work with. (SA)

(b) People you can cooperate with to
improve the quality and standards
of your occupation or profession.
(DN)

(c) People you can count on to do their
jobs or tasks properly, as they should
be done. (SN)

(d) People you have known and trusted
for a long time and feel comfortable
working with. (DA)

Which of the following kinds of people

do you most prefer to have around you

as neighbors? Which do you like next
best?

(a) Neighbors you feel familiar and
comfortable with and can treat like
members of the family. (DA)

(b) Neighbors who go about their busi-
ness and live their own lives, leaving
you free to do the same. (SN)

(c) Neighbors you can work with to
preserve or improve the value and
reputation of the neighborhood as a
whole. (DN)

(d) Neighbors who are friendly and soci-
able, and pleasant to pass the time
of day with. (SA)
We now had at least first approximations
of the three measures we needed to test the
relationship between reality-goal discrepan-
cies and morale. The first, an external judg-
ment, was as objective as we could make it,
and quite reliable as between judges. The
second and third being self-statements, the
question of objectivity does not arise; and
since, at this writing, we have no test-retest
data, we can say nothing about the reliability
of the self-statements, one compelling reason
for continuing to regard these measures as
first approximations. As to their validity,
perhaps only Professor Parsons himself can
render a verdict. Lacking that, we can only
hope that we have comprehended the pattern
variables accurately, and that our modifica-
tions and elaborations have remained reason-
ably faithful to the original concepts.

The table below shows the comparative
distribution for the three measures in both
the panel and quasi-panel.

Since discrepancies do appear in this com-
parative distribution," our next step was to
devise a method for scoring each respondent
Orientations

 

 

(Primary) Actual S-I Approved Actual S-I Approved
SN 57% 43% 17% 8% 28% 15%
DN 14% 18% 26% 5% 24% 25%
SA 16% 14% 21% 68% 29% 27%
DA 13% 25% 36% 19% 19% 33%

100% 100%
Tasie 5. AGE, ORIENTATION DISCREPANCIES, AND Morate 18

 

 

 

(70’s Only)
Panel (N=101) Quasi-Panel (N=50)
Medium or Medium or

Morale High (18) Low (83) High (24) Low (26)
Discrepancy A

Higher* 22% 36% 48% 52%

Lower 78% 64% 52% 48%
Discrepancy B

Higher 22% 55% 45% 50%

Lower 78% 45% 55% 50%
Discrepancy C

Higher 17% 471% 37% 27%

Lower 83% 53% 63% 73%

 

* Because our case base is small, we dichotomized these scores, at the point at which the population
“divided itself” on discrepancy in relation to other variables, designating scores of 0-2 as “lower,” and

3-6 as “higher.”

 

and self-image, a disjunction that we cannot
interpret conclusively at present. However, we have
speculated that the explanation may lie principally
in our attempt to reconcile classifications based on
activities, or specific role performances (the objec-
tive measure) with classifications based largely on
values and general role constellations (the self-
statements). In middle age, roles and values tend
to be synonymous, and thus no major actual vs.
self-image disjunctions appear among our panel
members. But in old age, roles change drastically,
while the old values appear to persist (although
Table 4 does show for the quasi-panel some retreat
from the SN self-image and some rise in the SA
self-image). What seems needed are two sets of
three measures which will separate specific roles
from role constellations and rewards. We have, in
fact, devised a list of concrete activities, classifiable
in pattern variable terms, on which we can obtain
self-ratings for comparison with the objective
specific role classifications. And we have interviewer

ratings of the relational rewards respondents seem
to seek in the interview situation, which we hope
may give us objective value classifications for com-
parison with the self-statements.

12Tn computing the discrepancy score, we assign
two points for each discrepant variable in the
primary orientation, one point for each discrepant
variable in the secondary orientation, then sum the
two-sub-scores for our total. For example, a
respondent whose objectively rated orientation is
SN-SA, but whose self-image is DA-SN, would
score “5S” on Discrepancy A. One exception is made,
in the case of a simple reversal of orientations, to
which we arbitrarily assign a score of “1,” on the
grounds that such a discrepancy is not qualitatively
a serious one. For a principal role in the develop-
ment of this scoring system, we are indebted to
James A. Davis, National Opinion Research Center,
Chicago, Illinois.

18 At least two observations should be made about
this table: (a) It does not include our over-80
We repeat that it is not our purpose in
this report to dwell on findings and their in-
terpretations. But to summarize Table 5 very
briefly: Among the middle-aged, a strong
relationship does appear to exist between re-
lational realities, both “real” and perceived,
and relational goals or values. As predicted,
respondents having high morale are far more
likely than respondents with lower morale to
show a low discrepancy between goals and
realities. But no such relationship appears
in the older population. We suggest that this
may reflect a generally lower level of con-
cern in this age group with social interactions
and their rewards. If so, this would tend to
support the disengagement theory of aging,
but a test of this hypothesis must await the
development, now in progress, of an index
for measuring disengagement.
above should be viewed as merely suggestive,
for at least two reasons. First, our case base
is pitifully small, in many instances. Second,
we have had perforce to test hypotheses on
the same population that engendered them.
But ours is a pilot study, whose major objec-
tives are to formulate hypotheses and develop
operations for testing them on large popula-
tions. It has been the main purpose of this
paper to report progress on three such opera-
tions and to suggest some of their uses; it
has not been our purpose to state definitive
conclusions about the social psychology of
aging.

We therefore conclude only that the ori-
entations to interaction summarized by at
least two of the pattern variables can be
efficiently and reliably measured for ordinary
cross sectional populations. And we believe,
with rough supporting evidence, that (a)
these orientations shift with age from a neu-
tral and cognitive to an affective and appre-
ciative primacy; (b) that discrepancies be-
tween relational realities and relational goals,
as summarized by the pattern variables, are
associated for our middle-aged people with
low morale; and (c) that these discrepan-
cies are not related to morale for our older
people, a result which we tentatively inter-
pret as support for the disengagement theory
of aging.
