@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
I investigate how and why the Shah’s policies of accommodation and repres-
sion escalated the revolutionary mobilization of the Iranian population. Sev-
eral major theories—micromobilization theory, value expectancy, and band-
wagon (critical mass) models—are used to sort out the empirical relation-
ships between protest behavior (violent and nonviolent), strikes, spatial dif-
fusion, concessions, and repression in the year prior to the Shah’s exit from
Iran. Estimates from Poisson regression models show that repression had a
short-term negative effect and a long-term positive effect on overall levels of
protest via repression’s influence on spatial diffusion. I infer that this pat-
tern of effects stems from a combination of deterrent and micromobilization
mechanisms. Concessions expanded the protests by accelerating massive ur-
ban strikes that in turn generated more opposition activity throughout Iran.
Spatial diffusion was encouraged by government concessions and massive
labor strikes. Mutually reinforcing relationships between concessions,
strikes, and spatial diffusion indicate the significance of intergroup dynam-
ics in the revolutionary process.
that rapid escalation and diffusion play in
them is sometimes overlooked. The literature
is replete with bandwagon, threshold, and
critical mass models that describe how and
why individual actions can precipitate rapid
unexpected levels of mass participation. But,
models that explain the individual and com-
bined effects of government concessions and
repression on escalation processes are less
convincing (Lichbach 1987).

I address the question of how and why the
Shah’s policies of concession and repression
in 1977 and 1978 escalated the revolutionary
mobilization of large numbers of people and
assured the collapse of the regime in 1979.
Why study the Iranian Revolution? Because
it is an example of a regime’s abrupt collapse
that is brought about through rapid mass mo-
bilization. Understanding the escalatory dy-
namics in the Iranian case can extend under-
standing to similar cases, like Nicaragua in
1979, the Philippines in 1986, and the East
European Communist governments in 1989.

First, I put forth a model that specifies the
links between concessions/repression and the
increasing incentives for individuals and
groups to participate in protest actions. Next,
Empirical studies have documented the
myriad effects of government repression on
dissent. After testing theories that argue the
effects are positive, negative, U-shaped, and
inverted U-shaped, the overwhelming result
is that repression has both positive and nega-
tive effects on government opposition.’ But
how repression both escalates and deters dis-
sent is unknown (Lichbach 1987:271).

Opp and Ruehl (1990) find empirical sup-
port for the hypothesis that repression has a
direct negative effect on protest because it is
a cost; yet repression also has an indirect
positive effect via micromobilization pro-
cesses. The direct negative effect (deterrent)
is predicted by resource mobilization and
rational choice perspectives. Oberschall
(1973), Jenkins and Perrow (1977), and Tilly
(1978) maintain that government sanctions
(bans, arrests, executions, and martial law)
can impede the ability of groups to mobilize
resources (people, money, guns, and ideas)
and challenge the government. Rational
choice theorists assert that if individuals ex-
pect repression for participation, they will be
less inclined to join protest actions (Olson
1965; Hardin 1982).
However, Opp and Ruehl (1990:521-27)
argue that this direct effect of repression can
be nullified, or even reversed, if repression
leads to micromobilization processes that
raise incentives for protest.” These processes
are launched if people are exposed to repres-
sion, if they consider the repression illegiti-
mate, and if they are members of groups that
support protest. Exposure to what people
perceive to be illegitimate repression (either
personally or via social ties) is likely to make
them disillusioned with the established order
and easily recruited for mass actions (Opp
1994:103). They are even more likely to par-
ticipate if they belong to informal associa-
tions that support such action. Hence, repres-
sion indirectly escalates protest actions
(White 1989).

This argument can be examined from a dy-
namic perspective. If Opp and Ruehl (1990)
are correct in their analysis of the indirect
effects of repression on protest, overall levels
of repression should have a short-term nega-
tive effect on dissent because of the time lapse
required for micromobilization processes to
occur, but a long-term escalatory effect.

The next question is whether the deterrent
or escalatory effects of repression are the
same across low to severe measures of re-
pression. Some analysts maintain that the
negative effect is the result of severe repres-
sion (i.e., the costs are too high), while the
positive effect is the result of less severe
measures that incur fewer costs and enable
groups to make demands on government
leaders (Tilly 1978; Hechter 1984). Olivier’s
(1991) and Khawaja’s (1993) analyses of
collective action in South Africa and the
West Bank do indeed find that severe levels
of repression decrease collective action while
low to medium levels escalate it.

Therefore, do the short- and long-term ef-
fects of repression hold across different mea-
sures of repression? If so, the Opp and Ruehl
thesis will have stronger support; if not, then
the short- and long-term effects of repression
may depend on the types of repression and
their timing in the political process.

To complicate the issue further, Lichbach
(1987:286) says that repression cannot be as-
sessed independently from accommodation.
Whether increases in government repression
increase or decrease overall dissent depends
on the efficacy of the opposition’s tactics for
obtaining government concessions. If a gov-
ernment increases repression of the oppo-
sition’s tactics (e.g., street demonstrations) at
the same time that the tactics benefit the op-
position group, then the government’s poli-
cies are inconsistent. The government would
be engaging in accommodation and repres-
sion in response to a given opposition tactic.
Dissent is likely to increase. Only consistent
government accommodative and repressive
policies reduce dissent; inconsistent policies
increase it.

Choosing the correct mix of government
concessions and repression is easier said than
done. Prerevolutionary regimes are especially
vulnerable to making mistakes. They tend to
initiate political liberalization policies that
both restrain repression and grant conces-
sions to dissidents. Such actions create a
more favorable political opportunity for the
opposition (McAdam 1988). Dissidents
quickly calculate that the prospects for suc-
cessful collective action are better than ever.
Their expectations ignite the participation of
large numbers of people whose presence at
one event fuels even greater turnouts at sub-
sequent events, until a bandwagon effect dif-
fuses throughout the population (Granovetter
1978; Salert 1982; Kuran 1989:17—25; Ober-
schall 1994:87-89).

I offer the following hypotheses:

H,: Government repression has a direct neg-
ative effect on protest actions.
Value-expectancy models assert that people
will rebel if they become convinced that dis-
sent will achieve the collective good (Kland-
ermans 1984; Muller and Opp 1986; Finkel,
Muller, and Opp 1989). If the value of the
collective good (e.g., overthrow of the Shah’s
government) is combined with a high expec-
tation of success, people are likely to partici-
pate in mass actions. The variables that are
likely to increase the expected value of a col-
lective good are (1) individual assessments
about whether their participation will make a
difference in achieving the public good, and
(2) expectations that group action will be suc-
cessful. Government concessions to highly
visible groups enhance their perceived influ-
ence and increase the probability that indi-
viduals will join them for mass action (Muller
and Opp 1986:484). Diffusion to a wider ar-
ray of people and places occurs when expec-
tations about the number of participants in a
mass action escalate. With each successive
mass action, more and more people turn out
because their expectations that others will be
joining them have been substantiated by pre-
vious events (Klandermans 1984:585). More-
over, the rate of diffusion will be influenced
by the ability of the opposition to wrest con-
cessions from the government. Important vic-
tories assure people that their continued ac-
tivism will pay off and participation will dif-
fuse rapidly throughout the population
(Chong 1991:151). Thus, I hypothesize:
Small, relatively minor incidents rapidly turn
into major episodes of dissent. What gener-
ates this process?

One factor is the assurance that people
have about the willingness and commitment
of others to engage in such actions. Social
networks play a big role because most people
decide to protest, not in isolation, but jointly
with others. Formal or informal associations
(as is likely the case in repressive regimes)
enable people to exchange information, re-
duce their uncertainty about each other’s in-
tentions to act, and coordinate their plans for
mobilization. This assurance process in-
creases the sense of efficacy among group
members who calculate that their chances for
successful collective action are greatest when
they act together as a team (Chong 1991:
116-25; McAdam and Paulsen 1993:641-45;
Oberschall 1994:85-87). ,

Another consideration is the protestors’
success in achieving government conces-
sions. Because widespread protest puts enor-
mous pressures on leaders to reduce dissent
quickly, they are likely to adopt conciliatory
policies. The result is more dissent because
successful collective action sustains the in-
volvement of old participants while convinc-
ing sideliners of the usefulness of protest and
ensuring their future participation (Chong
1991:116—-25). Moreover, as in the case of
Iran, concessions can signal a regime’s vul-
nerability, which suddenly increases the ex-
pected value of the collective good for many
people at the same time (e.g., political con-
cessions, the Shah’s abdication), thus fueling
the escalatory effect across time and space
(Chong 1991: 116-25; Oberschall 1994:88).4

I hypothesize that:
Weekly data on the occurrence, participation,
and duration of violent and nonviolent pro-
test actions and government policies of re-
pression and concession were collected for
Iran from December 1977 through the first
half of February 1979 from newspapers and
historical accounts.> Daily reports from the
Tehran Journal (the English version of
Ettelaat newspaper), the Foreign Broadcast
Information Service (FBIS) and The New
York Times provided most of the data. but
they were supplemented by the Middle East
Economic Digest and historical accounts by
Ludder (1979), Semkus (1979), Stempel
(1981), and Abrahamian (1982).®

A general breakdown of the events data by
sources shows that the Tehran Journal
and the FBIS account for 90 percent of the
events (each accounted for 45 percent of the
data). The remaining 10 percent of the events
were contributed primarily by historical
sources, followed by The New York Times and
the Middle East Economic Digest. While the
Tehran Journal is a local news source, the
FBIS is a synopsis of daily news reports pro-
vided by local and international sources.’

One problem may affect the validity of the
data. During a two-month period (November
6, 1978 to January 5, 1979) Iranian newspa-
pers shut down as a protest action. Bias may
be present if the data show a decrease in the
number of daily protest events during this
period in comparison to the periods immedi-
ately before or after the shutdown. Fortu-
nately, the data compare favorably, primarily
because of the FB/S news source, which con-
tributed 93 percent of the data during this
two-month period. The average number of
weekly events from all data sources during
the two months preceding the newspaper
strike (i.e., September and October 1978) is
55 events. September and October are good
reference points because protests begin to
take off during this time (see weeks 37 to 44
in Figure 2). During the two-month strike pe-
tiod, the average number of weekly events
reported (primarily by the FB/S) is 42, a
slight decline. After the strike period (Janu-
ary 1, 1979 to February 11, 1979; weeks 53—
58 in Figure 2), the average number of
weekly events goes back to 55. Because the
FBIS was able to rely on a variety of news
sources (both inside and outside Tehran), the
frequency-of-event data do not drop off pre-
cipitously.®
tive” news media are likely to print events of high
intensity in size, duration, and violence, whereas
“more sensitive” media are likely to print a wide
range of low to high intensity events. It is safe to
assume that Farsi-language newspapers may be
more sensitive than the Tehran Journal and the
FBIS, but that does not nullify the validity of the
data because events significant in size, duration,
and violence were more likely to have been cov-
ered consistently over time than were smaller
events. As Snyder and Kelly (1977) say, as long
as the reporting mechanisms consistently cover
the same event characteristics over time, the data
are reasonably valid. Moreover, Snyder and
Kelley (1977:117-21) maintain that “form-spe-
cific” data, such as demonstrations or riots, col-
lected in a specific unit (or country) over time
probably yield valid data in comparison to mul-
tiple conflict indicators over large numbers of
units. The limitation of this approach is that the
study cannot be generalized to a wider range of
cases—a constraint that I accept (for an opposing
view, see Franzosi 1987).
taurants, cinemas, banks, beauty shops, and
state party headquarters—typically in the af-
termath of a religious gathering. Fifty-six
percent of the protests were nonviolent and
44 percent were violent.

A six-week lagged endogenous variable is
introduced in the Poisson regression models
to estimate the effects of the 40-day mourn-
ing cycle on internal conflict. All of these in-
dicators, as well as those described below,
are measured on a weekly basis. The escala-
tion process is not as visible on a daily basis
and a monthly count would obscure it alto-
gether. Figure 2 plots the weekly data from
December 1, 1997 to February 14, 1979.

Strikes. 1 collected data on the frequency
and duration of strikes in public and private
sectors of the economy including school and
university boycotts. The estimated duration
of each strike is somewhat unreliable be-
cause of the on-again, off-again nature of the
strikes and the absence of consistent cover-
age by the newspapers.’ Consequently, I use
only the frequency of strikes. Strikes are not
treated as protest actions for two reasons.
First, strikes began with economic demands
and only broadened to include political de-
mands late in the revolutionary period. Sec-
ond, a significant portion of strikes, particu-
larly strikes in the oil fields, were conducted
by local workers and were not under the
leadership of the clerics, bazaaris,!° or intel-
lectuals. (However, bazarris did provide
monies for striking oil workers.)

Spatial diffusion. Diffusion is defined as
the geographic spread of protest activity and
is measured as the number of cities involved
in protest activity in a given week.'! When
used as an independent variable, diffusion is
100

 

October 1978

December
1978

February
1978

   

80

60

40

20

 

0 filitjpiiit tititiiit
1 6 1 16 21 26 31 36 4 46 51 56
commodations that reflect the government’s
attempt to negotiate with designated leaders
of the opposition (Gamson 1990:32-33). Ex-
amples are the release of political prisoners,
mass pardons or amnesties, reshuffling of
administrative personnel, or arrests of con-
troversial government figures. Substantive
concessions reflect high-level accommoda-
tions. Here, the regime attempts to co-opt the
challenging group leaders and their political
platforms (Gamson 1990:32—33). In Iran, ex-
amples are announcements of press freedom,
the scheduling of free elections, the appoint-
ment of a new Prime Minister with ties to the
clergy, promises of adherence to Islamic
principles, and the closure of casinos.

Government repression. Repression is
measured as the frequency of actions taken
to coercively demobilize the opposition. Less
severe or /ow levels of repression include the
breakup of assemblies, mass arrests during
and after demonstrations, or the arrest of a
major opposition leader. High (severe) forms
of repression involve general policies, such
as bans on assemblies, press censorship, and
martial law.
The short-term effects of repression are
represented in a (t-1) lag structure (a one-
week time lag), while the long-term effects
are measured as a (t-6) lag (a six-week time
lapse) that coincides with the 40-day mourn-
ing cycle.

Government inconsistency. Inconsistency
is based on the possible combinations of high
and low levels of concessions and repression.
High levels of concessions refer to “substan-
tive” gains achieved by challengers, while
“procedural” gains are low levels of conces-
sions. High (severe) repression refers to
population-wide policies such as martial law,
press censorship, or bans on assemblies. Low
(less severe) repression refers to the presence
of mass arrests, the arrests of major opposi-
tion leaders, or the breakup of assemblies.
Combining these high and low levels of gov-
ernment responses yields four possible’ val-
ues of inconsistency for a given week, as
shown in Figure 3. High numerical values
indicate high government inconsistency. !*
Four major events are hypothesized to have
increased the escalation of protest actions
(Stempel 1981; Abrahamian 1982; Parsa
1989): the Qum demonstration on January 7,
1978 (week 53 in Figure 2), when many
theological students and clerics protested an
inflammatory anti-Khomeini article in the
national newspaper resulting in the deaths of
60 to 120 people; the burning down of the
Abadan cinema on August 19, 1978 (week 35
in Figure 2), which resulted in the deaths of
400 people; the selection of a new reform-
minded Prime Minister on August 27, 1978

"2 The coding for any given week is based on
the following definitions: (1) High repression is
the presence of one or more events of severe re-
pression or the number of severe repressive
events is greater than the number of less severe
events; (2) Low repression is the presence of one
or more events of low repression or the number
of less severe repressive events is greater than the
number of severe events; (3) High concession is
the presence of one or more events of high con-
cession or the number of high concessions is
greater than the number of low concessions; (4)
Low concession is the presence of one or more
events of low concession or the number of low
concessions is greater than the number of high
concessions.
protests, violent and nonviolent protests on
spatial diffusion(;_1), strikes(;_1), conces-
sionsy;_1), government inconsistency (+1),
repression(;_1), repressiony;¢), and a lagged
endogenous (dependent) variable;¢).
Lagged and nonlagged variables were com-
pared; the strongest relationships are re-
ported. (2) Model 2 regresses spatial diffu-
sion in addition to the three protest variables
on six lagged (t—-1 to t-6) variables of repres-
sion, plus a lagged (t-6) endogenous depen-
dent variable. (3) Model 3 regresses total
protest and spatial diffusion on six lagged
(t-1 to t-6) variables of low repression, plus
a lagged endogenous dependent variable
(t-6), and then again on six lagged variables
(t-1 to t-6) of severe repression with a
lagged endogenous dependent variable (t-6).
(4) Model 4 regresses concessions, strikes,
and diffusion on concessionsy,_1), strikes),
diffusion(,), total protests;,¢), repression(,_
1) and repressiony6) with a lagged endog-
enous dependent variable for diffusion only.
(5) Model 5 regresses total protests and spa-
tial diffusion on three dummy variables, the
six weeks following the three critical events
in January, August, and September 1978, in
addition to a lagged (t-6) endogenous depen-
dent variable.

Models 1 through 5 were estimated with
an additional dummy variable for the two-
month news strike (coded 1 for weeks of No-
vember 6, 1978 through January 5, 1979 and
0 otherwise). Models 1 and 4 were estimated
with the two-month period omitted from the
data set. Results for the dummy variable es-
timation are reported here (the initial results
and results with the omitted data are avail-
able upon request).
On the one hand, resource mobilization and
rational choice models suggest that repres-
sion raises the costs of participation and con-
sequently depresses protest action. Opp and
Ruehl (1990) argue, on the other hand, that
repression can stimulate protest behavior by
launching micromobilization processes that
bring people to the streets. Repression
delegitimizes the government and makes
people more recruitable for mass action, par-
ticularly if they belong to informal associa-
tions that support such action.

In the Iranian case, the Opp and Ruehl hy-
pothesis provides the stronger explanation.
Table 1 shows that initially (a one-week lag)
government repression has a strong negative
effect on all three protest variables, while six
weeks later, repression has a positive effect.
Given that the lagged effects of repression
show the same patterns for spatial diffusion
(see Table 4), I infer that repression in Iran
was more important in stimulating the diffu-
sion of protest as opposed to suppressing it.
The timing of this positive effect coincides
with the 40-day mourning cycle when many
people come to the streets to protest the
deaths in earlier events. Table 1 confirms this
link via the significant parameter estimates
for the lagged endogenous variables for total
protests and nonviolent protests.

The full significance of these six-week re-
lationships can best be understood from a
historical vantage point. Political mobiliza-
tion against the regime began with the secu-
lar democratic opposition of writers, lawyers,
judges, intellectuals, publishers, and stu-
dents. Most of this activity did not extend
much beyond Tehran because of the govern-
ment’s long-term policy of repression. Suc-
cessful large-scale mobilization occurred
through the mosques. Because the mosques
had been used exclusively for religious pur-
poses over the years, they remained open and
available for gatherings and religious cer-
emonies without government interference.
By 1977, the mosque was the only viable in-
stitution that was available for mobilizing the
opposition on a national scale. Studies esti-
mate that nationwide there were between
20,000 and 80,000 mosques—including
5,000 urban mosques (Halliday 1979:19;
Akhavi 1980:187; Denouex 1990:459).

In the initial stages and after much pres-
sure by local leaders, moderate to conserva-
tive religious leaders supported “mourning
ceremonies” around which many people
could demonstrate their opposition to the
government. Radical clerics, supported by
Ayatollah Khomeini, found active allies
among bazaaris, students, and moderate poli-
ticians who were also highly involved in
mosque activity. Meanwhile, many Iranians
were connected to the mosques through
neighborhood religious associations (hay’at-
i madhabi)), many of which were coinciden-
tally run by bazaari merchants. These local
groups would meet periodically with a cleric
to discuss religious and political issues. In
addition to the hay’ats of the urban poor,
there were the hay’ats of the bazaaris that
met several times a week to exchange infor-
mation about business, government policies,
and the political situation in general. They
also collected funds to finance charitable in-
stitutions, schools, hospitals, mosques, and
welfare assistance to the poor. It was at these
hay’ats that interpersonal, political, and so-
cial networks forged the national alliance be-
tween radical clerics (ulama), bazaaris, and
the intelligentsia. There were 12,000 hay’ats
in Tehran alone (Sreberny-Mohammadi and
Mohammadi 1994:85). These bazaari-ulama
networks mobilized most of the demonstra-
tions reported during the revolutionary pe-
riod (Ashraf and Banuazizi 1985:559). The
most popular form of protest was the
“mourning ceremony”—a 40-day period of
mourning followed by a memorial obser-
vance. These observances produced violent
clashes between security forces and the pub-
lic and generated new deaths and a new cycle
of mourning throughout the country. Each
mourning cycle culminated in the participa-
tion of greater and greater numbers of people
protesting the government’s use of force.
These demands would eventually expand to
include the overthrow of the Shah (Ashraf
and Banuazizi 1985).

Table 2 shows the dynamic relationship
between repression and protest actions and
spatial diffusion. Initially, repression substan-
tially depresses protest actions and spatial
diffusion. Over time, that influence becomes
positive. Four, five, and six weeks later, re-
pression increases protests and diffusion.
The next question is whether the repres-
sion/protest and repression/diffusion links
hold while controlling for level of repres-
sion. Perhaps the short-term negative effects
are influenced by high levels of repression
while the long-term positive effects are
caused by low levels of repression. This is
certainly a plausible scenario if the Iranian
government started using strong repressive
measures and gradually eased them as pro-
test actions spread across the country. How-
ever, Table 3 shows this is not the case.
Table 3 displays results from regressing to-
tal protest actions and spatial diffusion
against low and severe repression at (t-1)
through (t-6) time lags. The initially nega-
tive, then positive patterns established in
Tables | and 2 are repeated for low and se-
vere levels of repression. Both levels of re-
pression have short-term negative influ-
ences, but by the fourth, fifth, and sixth
weeks they have strong positive influences
on total protests and spatial diffusion. More-
over, the pattern stays the same when total
protests are disaggregated into violent and
nonviolent protests (results not shown).

In summary, repression decreased Iranian
protests in the short term, but in the long run
repression helped launch micromobilization
processes that rapidly brought large numbers
of people into the streets. Repression directly
influenced the escalation of protest and indi-
rectly influenced escalation via its positive
influence on spatial diffusion. However,
since I have no direct measure of micro-
mobilization, the inference that these rela-
tionships between repression and protest and
diffusion result from micromobilization pro-
cesses is speculative.
Exactly what kind of micromobilization
process accelerated the Iranian protests is dif-
ficult to pinpoint. The statistically significant
results for the lagged endogenous variables
for total protests and nonviolent protests dur-
ing the sixth week suggest that the cultural
circumstances of the 40-day mourning cycle
may be responsible for the escalation. Ac-
cording to Moaddel (1993), “Shi’i metaphors,
symbols and ceremonies transformed the
general social discontent into a revolutionary
crisis by providing not only an effective chan-
nel of communication between participants in
the revolution and their leaders but also a
mechanism for the political mobilization of
the masses against the state” (p. 163). This
suggests that the micromobilization process
may be unique to the Iranian experience.

On the other hand, the more general Opp
and Ruehl (1990) argument, that repression
. authorities’ provocations and harmful re-
actions to protesters as assets for long-term
mobilization. Specifically, in their micromob-
ilizational efforts to gain popular sympathy for
the collective cause, [they] point to repeated
acts of repression, as these acts ease their task
of constructing a ‘bad profile’ of the authori-
ties. Furthermore, social movement organiza-
tions and their agents call into question au-
thorities’ repressive actions by giving them
different meanings. They reframe the repres-
sive actions of authorities in different lan-
guage, giving them political significance. Such
actions are depicted not as a means of punish-
ment or control but as political ends in them-
selves, endangering people’s existence and
survival. (P. 67)
have been in the past and that the costs of
collective action are more acceptable. Table
1 confirms the hypothesis. Government in-
consistency in the use of repression and con-
cessions accounts for a statistically signifi-
cant increase in the three protest variables,
after controlling for the individual effects of
repression and concessions, spatial diffusion,
strikes, and past protest actions.

Examples of the Shah’s inconsistency be-
gan with his appointment of a new reform-
minded Prime Minister (Sharif-Emami) who
made major concessions to the opposition
during August of 1978. The response was
larger crowds of demonstrators chanting for
an Islamic Republic. Convinced that the situ-
ation was getting out of control, the Shah de-
creed martial law in Tehran and 11 other cit-
ies in September. He also banned all street
demonstrations and issued warrants for the
arrests of eight major opposition leaders. The
next day a prearranged demonstration of
20,000 people ended in deadly clashes with
security troops. Black Friday (September 8),
as it was called, “enflamed public emotions,
intensified popular hatred for the regime and
thereby further radicalized the population”
(Abrahamian 1982:515-16). Black Friday
undermined political moderates who called
for a compromise with the monarchy and
ended the possibility of gradual concessions.
Moreover, Black Friday generated a barrage
of demonstrations and working-class strikes
that shifted political discussions from the
negotiating table to the streets and slums of
Iran’s major urban centers (Abrahamian
1982:516).

In October and November of 1978, more
street demonstrations and escalating urban
strikes pushed the Shah to replace Sharif-
Emami with a military government. Martial
law was then extended to more cities; the
army was ordered to take over the major
newspapers; and moderate opposition lead-
ers were arrested, as were strike committees
elected by refinery workers. Yet the Shah
also offered concessions at the same time. He
pardoned 1,126 political prisoners; withdrew
military officials from the newspaper offices;
arrested 132 former government leaders; dis-
solved the national political party; met many
of the economic demands made by govern-
ment employees and industrial workers; de-
clared that all exiles, including Khomeini,
Concessions, along with spatial diffusion and
strikes, are treated as dependent variables in
Table 4 in order to find indirect effects that
could escalate protest actions. The first link
involves the role of concessions. Value ex-
pectancy models argue that when people be-
come convinced that their participation in
collective action is likely to achieve a collec-
tive good they are more likely to dissent.
Government concessions enhance this per-
ception and increase the probability that
people will join in mass actions. Moreover,
as people turn out for successive events,
more people are encouraged to participate
and a bandwagon effect occurs.

The empirical evidence indicates that gov-
ernment concessions by the Shah had three
major effects. First, as Table 1 indicates, con-
cessions had a direct effect on escalating all
three protest variables. Second, Table 4 indi-
cates that concessions increased the fre-
quency of strikes, which in turn forced more
concessions from the government. Strikes
then produced more protest behavior (Table
1), which subsequently spread to other Ira-
nian cities (Table 4). Finally, concessions en-
couraged protest behavior indirectly via their
positive influence on spatial diffusion.

How and why this occurred is best ex-
plained by historians. In August 1978, Prime
Minister Sharif-Emami supported a liberal-
ization program that played an important role
in generating both dissent and massive urban
strikes by government employees and indus-
trial workers. Only a few days after Sharif-
Emami’s appointment and his announcement
of major concessions combined with a policy
of relaxed repression, industrial workers em-
barked on massive strikes. The retreat of the
government from its traditional policies of
repression provided the opportunity for
workers and white-collar employees to mo-
bilize and act collectively. Workers who pre-
viously had been involved in strikes or sub-
jected to arrests and imprisonment used their
informal networks in the workplace to form
secret cells and committees with trusted co-
workers. Later, they seized the initiative and
organized workers’ collective actions. Fur-
thermore, the lifting of media censorship, es-
pecially vis-a-vis radio and television, al-
lowed broadcast coverage of most strikes and
strikers’ demands. This communication gen-
erated solidarity among different groups of
strikers, especially among oil workers, rail-
way workers, copper, coal and steel workers,
electrical workers, and white-collar employ-
ees (Parsa 1989:145-52).

As the scale of the strikes increased, the
regime opted for economic concessions in-
stead of repression. However, by that point
strikers had broadened their demands for po-
litical concessions. They demanded the un-
conditional release of all political prisoners,
the dissolution of martial law, the expulsion
of foreigners from the workplace, freedom of
expression and the press, dissolution of
SAVAK, disbandment of state-run unions,
and the formation of independent workers’
organizations (Parsa 1989:152-67).

In response to the rising wave of strikes
and demonstrations, the Shah suspended
Sharif-Emami’s rule and imposed a military
government. Despite the subsequent repres-
sion, newly formed networks and increased
solidarity made it difficult for the military re-
gime to force people back to work. More-
over, the bazaaris shut down the bazaars
throughout the country in support of the
strikers. Bazaaris also provided considerable
financial support to many striking workers
both inside and outside the bazaars. As a con-
sequence, the strikes, together with the ba-
zaar shutdowns, led to more nationwide pro-
tests, which eventually disrupted all social
and economic activities in Iran and paralyzed
the government (Ashraf 1988:558-59; Parsa
1989:152-68).
Theorists argue that spatial diffusion and
bandwagon effects are most likely when
people are assured of the willingness and
commitment of others to engage in risky col-
lective action. Social networks play a critical
role in reducing uncertainty because they
provide a forum for exchanging information
and coordinating protest actions. If protests
are successful, the spread of the protest
movement to a wider array of people and
places is virtually assured (unless the sever-
ity of the repression is too high). The band-
wagon effect encourages spatial diffusion
and vice versa.

The empirical evidence in Tables 1 and 4
shows that past levels of total protests and
nonviolent protests are positively associated
with current levels (lagged dependent vari-
able in Table 1); that spatial diffusion had a
direct positive effect on escalating these po-
litical protests (Table 1); and that past levels
of total protests encouraged spatial diffusion
(Table 4). Clearly, both bandwagoning and
spatial diffusion were present. Moreover, the
spread of protest actions indirectly brought
about an escalation of the protests via
diffusion’s significant impacts on govern-
ment concessions and strike behavior at
(t-1), as shown in Table 4 by the coefficients
of .026 and .022 (both significant at p < .01).
Likewise, strikes and concessions accelerated
the spread of protest actions.

The concessions/strikes—diffusion—pro-
test action link is more understandable given
the historical consequences associated with
the Shah’s decision to appoint a new Prime
Minister in the presence of major political
unrest. Prime Minister Sharif-Emami imme-
diately met with top opposition leaders of the
clergy and liberal political organizations. He
reintroduced the Islamic calendar, released
many of the high-ranking clergy imprisoned
since 1975, closed down 57 gambling casi-
nos, dismissed more than 30 SAVAK offic-
ers, abolished the post of Minister for
Women’s Affairs, set up a Ministry of Reli-
gious Affairs, and cut off state subsidies to
the National Resurgence Party. He also en-
dorsed free elections, tax concessions, press
freedom, and civil rights guarantees. Sharif-
Emami attempted to appease religious lead-
ers and the political opposition. However,
these concessions provided new opportuni-
ties for the opposition, particularly, the pro-
Khomeini clergy, who began to challenge the
existing political order (Abrahamian 1982:
514).

Prior to Sharif-Emami’s government, some
70 cities had experienced some form of col-
lective action. By the end-of his time in of-
fice (August through November 1978),
roughly 100 cities had been rocked by anti-
government protests. The scale of these inci-
dents mushroomed as well. Prior to Sharif-
Emami’s government, mourning ceremonies
and demonstrations in large cities had drawn
tens of thousands of people. In Tehran, for
example, between 30,000 and 50,000 people
took part. After Sharif-Emami took office,
the number of participants swelled to hun-
dreds of thousands. At this point, the content
of the demonstrations changed from a defen-
sive protest against earlier killings to an of-
fensive attack on the Shah and his rule (Parsa
1989:211-25).

By early November, the Shah abandoned
the concessions Sharif-Emami had begun
and embarked on a course of repression, re-
placing the Prime Minister with a military
government. According to Parsa (1989:224),
Critical or “triggering” events represent im-
portant turning points in rebellious collective
action. Through accident or design, these
events propel large numbers of people into
collective action. Table 5 summarizes the
impact of four major events at the start of
the Iranian escalation process. The August
(Abadan cinema burning and the appoint-
ment of a reform-oriented Prime Minister)
and September (Black Friday) events are
highly correlated. Therefore, a separate
model was estimated for the Black Friday
event.

The results indicate that the six-week peri-
ods following the Abadan cinema burning,
the appointment of a new Prime Minister,
and Black Friday are associated with a sub-
stantial increase in total protests and spatial
diffusion. The January event (the Qum dem-
onstration in week 5) is associated with a
major decrease in subsequent protest actions
and spatial diffusion. Figure 2, which plots
protest actions over time, indicates that pro-
tests occurred after the Qum demonstration.
However, none of them escalated to a signifi-
cant level in comparison to the fall 1978 pro-
tests (weeks 41 to 44). Clearly, the Abadan/
Prime Minister and Black Friday events rep-
resent major turning points in the escalation
process.
the protest movement. The results suggest
several implications for theories and research
concerning collective action.

First, the results provide additional em-
pirical evidence for the Opp and Ruehl
(1990) thesis that repression sets off micro-
mobilization processes that expand opposi-
tion. This evidence remains consistent after
controlling for the changing influences of
time and type of repression. Second, the re-
sults lend credibility to Lichbach’s (1987)
argument that inconsistent government poli-
cies of concessions and repression intensify
dissent. This relationship also holds up
when the individual effects of repression
and concessions are taken into account.
Third, the evidence provides further support
for the value expectancy and bandwagon
models that stress the importance of conces-
sions and spatial diffusion in broadening
protest movements.
Finally, the results yield other interesting
insights. For instance, the changing effects of
repression over time suggest the need to ex-
amine dynamic relationships between gov-
ernments and challengers over time. The evi-
dence in Figure 4 also points future research
in this direction. There are important recip-
rocal relationships among concessions,
strikes, and spatial diffusion that suggest in-
teractive relationships between government
and nongovernment actors. In other words,
there was a fluid and multifaceted dynamic
of action and reaction among the Shah and
his government, the radical clerics, bazaaris,
liberal politicians, and the working classes.

Prevailing theory tends to see the expan-
sion of collection action in terms of griev-
ances and resources of the government and
the opposition (Hoover and Kowalewsi 1992:
151-52). This view overlooks the pattern of
tactical moves and countermoves among
contending parties as an explanation for the
escalation of collective action. Although this
is not a new argument (Snyder 1979,
McAdam 1983), it does testify to the impor-
tance of providing more empirical evidence
about intergroup dynamics.

Another area that needs more research is
the decision-making process of besieged
leaders who mix strategies of concessions
and repression. Is the phenomenon a trial-
and-error process in which leaders desper-
ately struggle to find the right formula to de-
fuse the opposition? What are leaders think-
ing when they switch from one type of gov-
ernment response to another? Is it possible
to model the decision process? These ques-
tions are best answered through a compara-
Abrahamian, Ervand. 1982. Iran between Two
Revolutions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.

Akhavi, Shahrough. 1980. Religion and Politics
in Contemporary Iran: Clergy-State Relations
in the Pahlavi Period. Albany, NY: State Uni-
versity of New York.

Ashraf, Ahmad. 1988. “Bazaar-Mosque Alliance:
The Social Basis of Revolts and Revolutions.”
Politics, Culture and Society 1:538-67.

Ashraf, Ahmad and Ali Banuazizi. 1985. “The
State, Classes and Modes of Mobilization in
the Iranian Revolution.” State, Culture and So-
ciety 1:3-40.

Badii, Naiim and L. Erwin Atwood. 1986. “How
the Tehran Press Responded to the 1979 Ira-
nian Revolution.” Journalism Quarterly 63:
517-36.

Chong, Dennis. 1991. Collective Action and the
Civil Rights Movement. Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press.

Davis, David R. and Michael D. Ward. 1990.
“They Dance Alone: Deaths and the Disap-
peared in Contemporary Chile.” Journal of
Conflict Resolution 34:449-75.

Denoeux, Guilain Pierre. 1990. “Informal Net-
works, Urbanization and Political Unrest in the
Middle East: The Cases of Egypt, Iran and
Lebanon.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Politics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.

Dorien, Patrick. 1981. “Estimating Linear Mod-
els with Spatially Distributed Data.” Sociologi-
cal Methodology 11:359-88.

Finkel, Steven, Edward Muller, and Karl-Dieter
Opp. 1989. “Personal Influence, Collective Ra-
tionality, and Mass Political Action.” American
Political Science Review 85:885-903.

Franzosi, Robert. 1987. “The Press as a Source
of Socio-Historical Data: Issues in the Meth-
odology of Data Collection from Newspapers.”
Historical Methods 20:5-16.

Gamson, William. 1990. The Strategy of Social
Protest. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing
Company.

Goldstone, Jack A. 1994. “Is Revolution Indi-
vidually Rational? Groups and Individuals in
Revolutionary Collective Action.” Rationality
and Society 6:139-66.

Graham, Robert. 1979. Iran: The Illusion of
Power. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Granovetter, Mark. 1978. “Thresholds Models of
Collective Behavior.” American Journal of So-
ciology 83:1420-43.

Gupta, Dipak K., Harinder Singh, and Tom
Sprague. 1993. “Government Coercion of Dis-
sidents: Deterrence or Provocation.” Journal of
Conflict Resolution 37:301-39

Halliday, Fred. 1979. Iran: Dictatorship and De-
velopment. Harmondsworth, NY: New Penguin
Books.

Hardin, Russell. 1982. Collective Action. Balti-
more, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hechter, Michael. 1984. “A Theory of Group
Solidarity.” Pp. 16-57 in Micro-foundations of
Macrosociology, edited by M. Hechter. Phila-

delphia, PA: Temple University Press.

Henderson, Conway W. 1991. “Conditions Af-
fecting the Use of Repression.” Journal of
Conflict Resolution 35:120-42.

Hoover, Dean and David Kowalewski. 1992.
“Dynamic Models of Dissent and Repression.”
Journal of Conflict Resolution 36:150-82.

Jenkins, J. Craig and Charles Perrow. 1977. “In-
surgency of the Powerless: Farm Workers
Movements.” Annual Review of Sociology 42:
249-68

Khawaja, Marwan. 1993. “Repression and Popu-
lar Collective Action: Evidence from the West
Bank.” Sociological Forum 8:47-71.

Klandermans, Bert. 1984. “Mobilization and Par-
ticipation: Social-Psychological Expansions of
Resource Mobilization Theory.” American So-
ciological Review 49:538-600.

King, Gary. 1989. Unifying Political Methodol-
ogy: The Likelihood Theory of Statistical Infer-
ence. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Koopmans, Ruud. 1993. “The Dynamics of Pro-
test Waves: West Germany, 1965-1989.” Am-
erican Sociological Review 58:637-58.

Kuran, Timur. 1989. “Sparks and Prairie Fires: A
Theory of Unanticipated Political Revolution.”
Public Choice 61:41-74.

. 1991. “Now Out of Never: The Element

of Surprise in the East European Revolution of

1989.” World Politics 44:7—-48.
Lichbach, Mark Irving. 1987. “Deterrence or Es-
calation? The Puzzle of Aggregate Studies of
Repression and Dissent.” Journal of Conflict
Resolution 31:266-97.

. 1992. “Nobody Cites Nobody Else: Math-

ematical Models of Domestic Political Con-

flict.” Defence Economics 3:341-57.

. 1994, “Rethinking Rationality and Rebel-
lion: Theories of Collective Action and Prob-
lems of Collective Dissent.” Rationality and
Society 6:8-39.

Ludder, Jerome H., Jr. 1979. “Events of Septem-
ber and October 1978.” Review of Iranian Po-
litical Economy and History 3:154-85.

Macy, Michael W. 1991. “Chains of Cooperation:
Threshold Effects in Collective Action.”
American Sociological Review 56:730-47.

Markoff, John. 1985. “The Social Geography of
Rural Revolt at the Beginning of the French
Revolution.” American Sociological Review
50:761-81.

Marwell, Gerald and Pamela Oliver. 1993. The
Critical Mass in Collective Action. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

McAdam, Doug. 1983. “Tactical Innovation and
the Pace of Insurgency.” American Sociologi-
cal Review 48:735-54.

. 1988. “Micromobilization Contexts and
Recruitment to Activism.” International Social
Movement Research 1:125-54.

McAdam, Doug and Ronnelle Paulsen. 1993.
“Specifying the Relationship between Social
Ties and Activism.” American Journal of Soci-
ology 99:640-67.

McPhail, Clark and Ronald T. Wohlstein. 1983.
“Individual and Collective Behaviors within
Gatherings, Demonstrations and Riots.” An-
nual Review of Sociology 9:579-600.

Moaddel, Mansoor. 1993. Class, Politics, and
Ideology in the Iranian Revolution. New York:
Columbia University Press.

. 1994. “Political Conflict in the World
Economy: A Cross-National Analysis of Mod-
ernization and World-System Theories.”
American Sociological Review 59:276-303.

Muller, Edward N. and Karl-Dieter Opp. 1986.
“Rational Choice and Rebellious Collective
Action.” American Political Science Review
80:472-87.

Muller, Edward N. and Erich Weede. 1990.
“Cross-National Variation in Political Vio-
lence: A Rational Action Approach.” Journal
of Conflict Resolution 34:624-51.

Oberschall, Anthony R. 1973. Social Conflict and
Social Movements. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

. 1994. “Rational Choice in Collective Pro-
tests.” Rationality and Society 6:79-100.

Olivier, Johan L. 1991. “State Repression and
Collective Action in South Africa, 1970-
1984.” South African Journal of Sociology
22:109-17.

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective
Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Olzak, Susan and Johan L. Olivier. 1994. “The
Dynamics of Ethnic Collective Action in South
Africa and the United States: A Comparative
Study.” Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the International Sociological Association,
July, Bielefeld, Germany.

Opp, Karl-Dieter. 1994. “Repression and Revo-
lutionary Action in 1989.” Rationality and So-
ciety 6:101-38.

Opp, Karl-Dieter and Wolfgang Ruehl. 1990.
“Repression, Micromobilization and Political
Protest.” Social Forces 69:521-47.

Paige, Jeffrey M. 1971. “Political Orientation and
Riot Participation.” American Sociological Re-
view 35:627-49,

Parsa, Misagh. 1989. Social Origins of the Ira-
nian Revolution. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.

Salert, Barbara. 1982. “On the Concept of
Threshold.” Pp. 61-80 in Missing Elements in
Political Inquiry: Logic and Levels of Analy-
sis, edited by J. A. Gillespie and D. A. Zinnes.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Semkus, Charles Ismail. 1979. The Fall of Iran,
1978-1979: An Historical Anthology. New
York: Copen Press.

Snyder, David. 1979. “Strategies for Investigat-
ing Violence and Social Change: Illustrations
from Analyses of Racial Disorders and Impli-
cations for Mobilization Research.” Pp. 212-
37 in The Dynamics of Social Movements, ed-
ited by M. N. Zald and J. D. McCarthy. Cam-
bridge, MA: Winthrop.

Snyder, David and William R. Kelly. 1977. “Con-
flict Intensity, Media Sensitivity and the Va-
lidity of Newspaper Data.” American Socio-
logical Review 42:105-23.

Spilerman, Seymour. 1970. “The Causes of Ra-
cial Disturbances: A Comparison of Alterna-
tive Explanations.” American Sociological Re-
view 35:627-49,

. 1971, “The Causes of Racial Distur-

bances: Test of an Explanation.” American So-

ciological Review 35:427-42.

. 1976. “Structural Characteristics of Cit-
ies and the Severity of Racial Disorders.”
American Sociological Review 41:771-93.

Sreberny-Mohammadi, Annabelle and Ali Moh-
ammadi. 1994. Small Media, Big Revolution:
Communication, Culture and the Iranian Revo-
lution. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minne-
sota Press.

Staggenborg, Suzanne. 1993. “Critical Events and
the Mobilization of the Pro-Choice Movement.”
Research in Political Sociology 6:319-45.
Stempel, John. 1981. Inside the Iranian Revolu-
tion. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.

Tarrow, Sidney. 1989. Democracy and Disorder:
Protest and Politics in Italy, 1965-1975. Ox-
ford, England: Oxford University Press.

. 1991. “Struggle, Politics and Conces-

sions: Collective Action, Social Movements

and Cycles of Protest.” Western Societies Pro-
gram Series, Paper No. 21, Center for Interna-
tional Studies, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.

Tilly, Charles. 1978. From Mobilization to Revo-
lution. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Tilly, Charles, Louise Tilly and Richard Tilly.
1975. The Rebellious Century, 1830-1930.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

White, Robert W. 1989. “From Peaceful Protest
to Guerrilla War: Micromobilization of the
Provisional Irish Republican Army.” American
Journal of Sociology 94:1277-1302.
