American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Literature on aggression often suggests that individual deficiencies, such as social incompe-
tence, psychological difficulties, or troublesome home environments, are responsible for
aggressive behavior. In this article, by contrast, we examine aggression from a social network
perspective, arguing that social network centrality, our primary measure of peer status,
increases the capacity for aggression and that competition to gain or maintain status moti-
vates its use. We test these arguments using a unique longitudinal dataset that enables sep-
arate consideration of same- and cross-gender aggression. We find that aggression is generally
not a maladjusted reaction typical of the socially marginal; instead, aggression is intrinsic to
status and escalates with increases in peer status until the pinnacle of the social hierarchy is
attained. Over time, individuals at the very bottom and those at the very top of a hierarchy
become the least aggressive youth. We also find that aggression is influenced not so much
by individual gender differences as by relationships with the other gender and patterns of
gender segregation at school. When cross-gender interactions are plentiful, aggression is
diminished. Yet these factors are also jointly implicated in peer status: in schools where
cross-gender interactions are rare, cross-gender friendships create status distinctions that
magnify the consequences of network centrality.
Aggression is commonplace in U.S. schools:
bullying and other forms of proactive aggres-
sion adversely affect 30 percent, or 5.7
million, American youth each school year
(Nansel et al. 2001). The National Education
Association (1995) estimates that each week-
day, 160,000 students skip school to avoid
being bullied. This aggression has important
consequences. Being victimized by bullies
positively relates to a host of mental health
problems, including depression (Baldry
2004), anxiety (Sharp, Thompson, and Arora
Hoover 2000). Many of these outcomes last
well into adulthood (Schafer et al. 2004).
Moreover, it is not only victims who suffer
negative consequences; aggressors (compared
with bystanders) also experience problems
with school adjustment, mental health, and
integration (Nansel et al. 2004).

Perhaps because psychologists produce the
bulk of the literature on aggression, research
tends to focus on the role of the involved indi-
viduals’ personality traits. With some excep-
tions (e.g., Hawley 2003; Pelligrini and
Long 2002), these traits consist of psycholog-
ical pathologies or developmental deficien-
cies, conveying an impression of aggression
as a counterproductive response to psycholog-
ical difficulties or problems in the home.
Here, we provide a contrasting view that
emphasizes the role of peer status and social
context. We argue that the role of personal
deficiencies is overstated and that concerns
over status drive much aggressive behavior.
As peer status increases, so does the capacity
for aggression, and competition to gain or
maintain status motivates the use of aggres-
sion. Aggression wanes only at the highest
echelons of status, where its utility is
questionable.

Gender receives particular attention in the
literature on aggression, with debate centering
on whether females bully as frequently and in
the same ways as males (for a review, see
Espelage and Swearer [2003]). We suggest
that, for the most part, gender affects aggres-
sion insofar as it relates to peer status. Extend-
ing arguments about gender as a status charac-
teristic, we suggest that the effect of gender is
primarily relational and contextual: adoles-
cents’ aggressive behaviors are influenced
not so much by their own gender as by their
relationships with the other gender, and by
the degree of gender segregation at the school
level, which are jointly implicated in peer sta-
tus. While our primary focus is on the direct
effect of peer status—as reflected in social
network centrality—-we also suggest that
the effect of social network centrality on
aggression is magnified when youth have
Before proceeding, we should clarify our use
of the terms aggression, power, status, and
centrality. Following Kinney (2007), we
define aggression’ broadly as behavior
directed toward harming or causing pain to
another, including physical (e.g., hitting,
shoving, and kicking), verbal (e.g., name-
calling and threats), and indirect aggression
(also called social or relational” aggression).
Indirect aggression is defined as harmful
actions perpetrated outside of a victim’s
immediate purview, such as_ spreading
rumors and ostracism. Here, “‘peer status”
refers to adolescents’ position within their
informal school prestige hierarchy, based on
schoolmates’ assessments. We use the term
“‘power”’ to reflect the capacity to influence
others and the ability to resist others’ influ-
ence. Hypothetically, power and status may
not always overlap, but we argue that in the
adolescent context, power is rooted in peer
status and both are reflected by social net-
work centrality.
is that network position empowers the well-
situated to pursue their ends. The weak ver-
sion is that network position does not create,
but merely reflects, underlying power
arrangements. Most scholars of networks
make the strong argument that networks cre-
ate power and status (Burt 1982; Freeman
1979; Friedkin 1991). Actors ‘‘at the center
of the network, on whom the more peripheral
actors are dependent, are the most powerful
actors in the system’? (Marsden and Lau-
mann 1977:217). Individuals who link other-
wise disconnected actors—that is, individu-
als who bridge structural holes—enjoy
special advantages in social and economic
exchanges (Burt 1982) and exercise control
over information flows (Freeman 1979).
Power-dependency theory shows that net-
works create tangible power imbalances by
regulating the availability of alternative
exchange partners (Cook et al. 1983; Emer-
son 1972; Molm 1990). Even if network
position is initially caused by exogenous per-
sonal qualities, central actors likely receive
a disproportionate share cf new nominations,
not because of personal qualities, but by vir-
tue of having already received many nomina-
tions (Gould 2002). To accept the weak argu-
ment, one would have to assume that no such
Matthew Effects occur (or that ties do not
matter).

Some scholars may be unaccustomed to
talking about power in the context of high
schools. However, as media coverage of youth
who were “‘bullied to death” suggests, some
adolescents have the power to make their
peers’ lives miserable. These same adoles-
cents are also apt to employ more subtle
means of persuasion and pressure, backed by
threat or reward, to achieve their goals.°
Youths who hold this power, exercised or
latent, are likely found at the busy intersec-
tions of social networks rather than at the mar-
gins. Youths who bridge structural holes
—that is, youths who have many friends
who are not friends with each other—have
greater access to valued resources like poten-
tial romantic partners or social options on the
weekend. Because their social lives do not
depend on any single friend or group of
friends, they can exclude others more easily
than they can be excluded themselves. This
gives them greater leverage in each of their
friendships (these friendships often involve
subtle dominance struggles [Gould 2003]).
Because these youths have ties to multiple
peer groups, they are also in a position to
receive and disseminate information and gos-
sip (accurate or otherwise). In addition, actors
in brokerage positions presumably have a large
number of allies they can mobilize as needed.

Even if the weak argument is correct and
network centrality only reflects some set of
underlying qualities, central students likely
wield greater influence than do marginal stu-
dents. The characteristics that make them cen-
tral—affluence, attractiveness, athleticism, or
charisma—should enable them to influence,
manipulate, or otherwise dominate their peers.
In addition, occupying a central position
within a school’s social network, as compared
to a more isolated position, directly increases
the opportunities to engage in aggressive
interactions with one’s peers. Regardless of
the causal relationship between power and
network position, these arguments agree that
network centrality is positively associated
with the ability to exploit or otherwise harm
others. What they do not explain, however,
is when and why harm doing occurs.

With respect to the second question about
the motivation for aggression, many adoles-
cents perceive peer status to be an important
goal and aggression to be an effective means
of attaining it. Alternatively, they view
a lack of aggressiveness, and in particular,
passivity in the face of another’s harmful
behavior, as leading to subsequent losses in
social status and power. Little research exam-
ines whether aggression is, in fact, an effec-
tive way of gaining or maintaining status
(although one recent study found that, under
certain conditions, aggression led to subse-
quent status gains [Rodkin and Berger
2008]), but more important for our purposes
is whether aggression is believed to increase
status. To our knowledge, this question has
not been addressed directly, but research has
established a correlation between status con-
cems and aggression. Gould (2003) convinc-
ingly argues that social rank is of utmost
importance for interaction and that serious,
even deadly, conflicts arise when relative
social rank is unclear or in dispute.* Other
scholars maintain that ambiguity with respect
to ownership of resources increases conflict
and violence (Villareal 2004).

These arguments present aggression as
a reaction to status-related affronts, but other
research finds a link to proactive aggression
as well. Subcultural theories of crime and vio-
lence underscore the argument that enhancing
peer status and respect are motivations for
violent behavior among certain subcultures
that prize readiness to fight (Anderson 1994;
Cloward and Ohlin 1960; Miller 1958).
Recent research finds that violence among
males relates positively to peer acceptance in
school, particularly for students with poor aca-
demic performance (Kreager 2007b). Addi-
tionally, proactively aggressive adolescents
have strong—and their victims weak—status
motivations (Sijtsema et al. 2009). Adoles-
cents who seek status become more aggres-
sive over time; and net of their own individual
motivations, youth in friendship groups that
emphasize status are also more aggressive
(Faris and Ennett forthcoming). If centrality
increases the capacity for aggression, and if
adolescents view aggression as a means to
enhance status (or prevent losses), then greater
network centrality likely leads to increases in
subsequent aggression.

Our argument thus far—that aggression is
perceived to be instrumental behavior for
gaining status and that centrality is associated
with greater capacity for it—stands in contrast
to much of the psychological literature on
aggression, which views it as a reaction to
psychological problems, social insecurities,
or troubled home lives. Many studies find
that aggressive youth are disliked, unpopular,
and experience difficulty maintaining rela-
tionships with classmates (e.g., Adler and
Adler 1995; Garandeau and Cillessen 2006).
This perspective suggests that aggressive
youth are likely peripheral in a school’s social
network and, far from enhancing status, acting
out likely completes their marginalization.
While we suspect that such research overesti-
mates the link between social marginality and
aggression due to measurement methods—
indirect aggression, for instance, is often
ignored—and theoretical emphases on mental
health, we acknowledge the capacity of any
student to be violent, and that certain socially
marginal subcultures can be quite aggres-
sive. We thus anticipate some exceptions
to the generally positive association
between centrality and aggression, but we
argue that the more substantial departure
occurs at the top, not the bottom, of the sta-
tus hierarchy.

There are several reasons to expect indi-
viduals at the pinnacle of the status hierar-
chy to desist in aggression. Fundamentally,
if aggression is purely instrumental for sta-
tus attainment, then individuals at the top
will not find it particularly useful or needed;
pro-social tactics may achieve their ends
more effectively (Hawley 2003). Kindness
may be a luxury most easily enjoyed from
a secure position at the pinnacle of a hierar-
chy, or by individuals who have no hope (or
desire) to reach such heights. A friendly
compliment from the homecoming queen
or the star quarterback is likely to cement,
not minimize, status differences, while a cut-
ting remark is likely to signal status insecu-
rity rather than dominance. In a similar vein,
aggression may expose power arrangements
that, once revealed, render further aggres-
sion unnecessary. Thus, while we expect
that centrality monotonically increases the
capacity for aggression, the need for aggres-
sion decreases once one attains the upper
reaches of social prominence. This leads to
our first hypothesis:
That males are more aggressive than females
is virtually axiomatic for many researchers,
and most empirical studies support this
view (e.g., Coie and Dodge 1998), including
several meta-analyses (e.g., Archer 2004;
Hyde 1984). Gender differences are espe-
cially pronounced if the analysis is limited
to physical aggression, but they often persist
even with broad conceptions of aggression.
Proposed explanations for the difference
include the Male-Warrior Hypothesis, which
emphasizes biological traits (Van Vugt, De
Cremer, and Janssen 2007), as well as
entrenched cultural beliefs about gender roles
and stereotypes (Berger, Cohen, and Zelditch
1972; Ridgeway and Correll 2004). Other
scholars note that differences between the
genders in interpersonal behavior tend to be
exaggerated or essentialized, and that differ-
ences in social context and structural location
account for large amounts of variance in
behavior (Felmlee 1999).

Understanding the magnitude and root
causes of these differences is important, but
we argue that preoccupation with gender dif-
ferences obscures other important ways in
which gender matters for aggression. With
few exceptions (e.g. Rodkin and Berger
2008), scholars have not considered how
inter-gender interaction shapes aggression.
Therefore, in addition to individual-level gen-
der effects, we consider the consequences of
cross-gender friendships and corresponding lev-
els of informal gender segregation at the school
level. Our expectations are guided by two prop-
ositions in addition to our fundamental asser-
tion that aggression is enabled by, and instru-
mental for, social climbing. First, social
interaction increases opportunities for conflict.
Second, favorable interaction with the other
gender is a common goal for many adolescents.

Regarding the former, social interaction is
a prerequisite for aggression, and the more
time people spend together, the more opportu-
nity there is for conflict to arise. There are
additional reasons, however, why aggression
may accompany friendship formation, and
cross-gender friendship formation in particu-
lar. Gould (2003) argues that friendships fea-
ture underlying dominance claims that, when
challenged, result in dramatic conflicts. This
argument encompasses same- and cross-
gender friendships alike, but social ties
between the two genders include the addi-
tional difficulties of higher levels of uncer-
tainty and topic avoidance. Cross-gender
friendships thus hold greater potential for mis-
understanding and conflict (Afifi and Burgoon
1998; Tannen 1990). Indeed, recent research
finds an association between cross-gender
friendships and violent or antisocial behavior
(Arndorfer and Stormshak 2008; Haynie, Stef-
fensmeier, and Bell 2003). For female youth,
studies find a link between a high proportion
of cross-gender friendships and crime
(McCarthy, Felmlee, and Hagan 2004).
Cross-gender friendships also lead to dating
activity (Feiring 1999), which may further
intensify conflict.°

While aggression does transpire between
friends, we suspect the bulk occurs within
adjacent relations (e.g., when classmates
become rivals for the attention of a mutual
friend). These relations are both more preva-
lent than friendship (one invariably has more
friends-of-friends than one has friends) and
lack incentives to keep conflict in check.
Friends, after all, at least like each other,
whatever their differences. There is no such
presumption about friends-of-friends. Cross-
gender friendships will entail a certain amount
of conflict, but more important, they will
bring actors into more frequent contact with
cross-gender friends-of-friends. We thus
anticipate that cross-gender aggression will
increase with the rate of cross-gender friend-
ships, by virtue of increased opportunity and
competition. In a similar vein, we expect
that high levels of gender segregation at the
school level (or a low rate of cross-gender
friendships relative to what we would expect
Our second gender proposition, that cross-
gender relationships are an important goal for
many adolescents, is unlikely to be controver-
sial and finds support in numerous studies. In
the 1960s, for example, Coleman’s (1961)
ethnography of high school documented the
importance of success with the other gender.
While young children’s relationships are usu-
ally completely homogenous with respect to
gender (Eder and Hallinan 1978), gender
homophily wanes after the onset of puberty,
and cross-gender friendships become increas-
ingly common (Shrum, Cheek, and Hunter
1988). Such friendships become tied to peer
status as adolescence proceeds (Bukowski,
Sippola, and Hoza 1999; Collins 2003), per-
haps because they often lead to romantic rela-
tionships (Feiring 1999), which also flourish
over this period (Laursen and Williams 1997).

If cross-gender friendships are an impor-
tant goal and aggression is generally instru-
mental, we might expect youth who form
such ties, and reach their goal, to desist from
aggression. Additionally, compared with indi-
viduals without such friendships, adolescents
with multiple cross-gender friends arguably
spend less of their free time interacting—and
hence, feuding—with peers of their own
gender. For the same reason, we anticipate
relatively higher rates of same-gender aggres-
sion in gender-segregated schools, where
there are few cross-gender friendships and
arguably less interaction between genders.
We therefore test the following hypotheses:
Our primary interest with respect to gender,
and cross-gender friendship specifically, is
its relationship to peer status. We suggested
that cross-gender friendships are a desirable
goal. Goal attainment, however, does not nec-
essarily imply status distinction. Because sta-
tus is relative, distinctions can only be created
when traits or behaviors are uncommon. In the
present case, cross-gender friendships may
provide their own satisfactions, but they can-
not create status distinctions if they are com-
mon. Furthermore, the direction of the status
distinction—whether non-normative behavior
leads to prestige or stigma—depends in part
on the status of those engaged in it. In schools
where cross-gender friendships are uncom-
mon, the social distinctions created by these
friendships are likely to be empowering
(e.g., by providing access to the other gender)
for central adolescents and stigmatizing (e.g.,
by violating gender norms) for marginal ones.

Because we believe that aggression is
entwined with power and status, we call atten-
tion to a unique social position, a “gender
bridge.” We define a gender bridge as a stu-
dent who has cross-gender friendships in
schools where such friendships are rare. We
argue that the positive effect of centrality on
aggression is enhanced for gender bridges,
such that socially prominent gender bridges
enjoy substantial magnification of their
already high levels of peer status. These stu-
dents are thus likely to be even more aggres-
sive toward other students (compared with
comparably central students). For example,
consider two hypothetical students attending
a gender-segregated school. Students A and
B have high centrality, but A has multiple
cross-gender friendships while B has none.
Assuming cross-gender friendships are desir-
able, A’s status is magnified relative to B’s
by virtue of having these friendships when
few of their classmates do. We suggest that
Before proceeding with a description of the
data, three notes are in order. First, some
research on cross-gender interaction finds dif-
ferent consequences by gender (Haynie et al.
2003). Such findings suggest it is not cross-
gender friendships per se, but friendships
with boys that influence outcomes. Although
we construct our variables in cross-gender
and same-gender terms (as opposed to male
friends and female friends), we take these
results seriously and test for gender interac-
tions in our analyses. Second, much research
explores differences in how adolescents are
aggressive. Some scholars assume that
because females have less physical strength,°
for example, they may rely more on indirect
and verbal aggression (Bjérkqvist, Lagerspetz,
and Kaukiainen 1992; Hyde 2005).’ However,
we agree with Espelage and Swearer (2003)
and Jackman (1994) that broader—not nar-
rower or more varied—notions of aggression
are needed to fully examine the role of gender.
If aggression is used tactically, we might
expect it to take on a variety of forms depend-
ing on the situation. Nonetheless, we test our
primary hypotheses separately for physical,
verbal, and indirect aggression. Finally, our
argument about gender centers on platonic
friendships rather than romantic activity.
This is partly due to practical reasons (net-
work data on dating partners is unavailable),
but we also argue that while cross-gender
friendships often lead (directly or indirectly)
The literature on aggressive peer interaction
is voluminous. Nevertheless, it exhibits
a number of limitations. Many studies rely
on small, cross-sectional samples, inhibiting
investigation of predictors of aggression.
Much research also relies solely on self-
reported aggression, which may underestimate
socially undesirable behavior. Few studies col-
lect detailed sociometric data on friendship
ties, and to our knowledge, only two other
studies have collected data on networks of
aggressive relationships, and these consist
mostly of younger children (Rodkin and
Berger 2008; Veenstra et al. 2007). We
attempt to address these limitations by the fol-
lowing means: We obtain reports from both
the respondents and their peers regarding inci-
dents of harmful behavior. We use a relatively
large sample of data from 3,722 students gath-
ered from all of the public middle- and high-
school students in three counties of one state
(19 schools). We undertake a dynamic analy-
sis of aggressive behavior using longitudinal
data from each school gathered at two time
points. Most important, we use a network mea-
sure of aggression that enables investigation of
target characteristics. We analyze aggression
relationally and consider new questions, in
this case, whether cross-gender and same-
gender aggression arise from common factors.
(Ennett et al. 2000), a longitudinal in-school
survey of adolescents in three counties in
North Carolina that began in the spring of
2002 and was administered every six months
through Wave 6 (in the fall of 2005), until it
concluded with a final survey one year later
(such that the oldest cohort was followed
through 12th grade). At Wave 1, all public-
school students in grades 6 through 8 in
each of three counties were eligible, resulting
in a study population of 8,201 students, of
which 7,173 (88 percent) participated at least
once. For each of the seven waves, the
response rate was maintained at or above
75 percent. Our sample includes the 4,266
students who participated in Waves 4 (fall
2004) and 5 (spring 2005);° after listwise
deletion of missing data (544 of 4,266 total
cases were dropped), our final sample
includes 3,722 students. Models with school
clustering and multiple imputation of missing
data (with 20 imputations) for the 544 cases
produce substantively identical results.
We measure the key independent variables
using friendship network data. Students
were asked to name up to five of their best
friends; from these nominations, we calculate
measures of social network centrality. We
examine betweenness centrality, which is
calculated by first determining the shortest
paths, or geodesics, between all pairs of
actors (using undirected ties), and then calcu-
lating the percentage of all these geodesics
that include the focal actor. There are multi-
ple centrality measures, each emphasizing
different structural properties (Borgatti and
Everett 2006; Freeman 1979). We focus on
betweenness centrality, as opposed to other
popular measures like Bonacich centrality
(Bonacich 1987), because it best captures
the brokerage position we associate with sta-
tus in this context and matches our concep-
tion of gender bridges.'°

We also use the friendship nominations to
calculate multiple cross-gender friendships,
a binary indicator of whether a respondent
had at least two cross-gender friends. At the
school level, we measure gender segregation
using Freeman’s (1978) segregation index,
which compares observed and expected pat-
terns of ties across groups. The measure
ranges from —1 to 1, where a 1 is perfect seg-
regation or homophily (i.e., all friendships are
same-gender), a 0 indicates that same- and
We include a number of conventional control
variables, but some bear further discussion.
First, one of the strongest predictors of ado-
lescents’ behavior in a given domain is the
behavior of their friends (Ennett and Bauman
1994; Mercken et al. 2010). Aggression may
be particularly susceptible to peer influence
processes, because it is often perpetrated by
multiple adolescents (Craig and Pepler
1997; Salmivalli et al. 1996) and friends fre-
quently target the same victims (Card and
Hodges 2006). Network studies find strong
correlations between the aggressive behavior
of adolescents and their friends’ aggression
(Mouttapa et al. 2004). Because central
actors have more friends, they may also
have more exposure to aggressive peers.'!
To ensure that the relationship between cen-
trality and aggression is not a spurious result
of peer influence and diffusion processes, we
include friends’ average aggression, defined
as the average aggression level of a respond-
ent’s friends, including those who nominate
the respondent but do not receive a nomina-
tion in return (results do not change when
only nominated friends are included).
Romantic involvement and ensuing con-
flicts may also confound the relationship
between status and aggression, so we include
a binary indicator of whether a respondent
had ever been on a date. The survey instru-
ment defines dates as ‘informal activities
like meeting someone at the mall, a park, or
at a basketball game as well as more formal
activities like going out to eat or to a movie
together.” Studies find that pubertal develop-
ment is positively related to aggression
(Batsche and Knoff 1994; Olweus 1993),
and this was measured by asking “‘compared
to most others your age and gender, do you
think your physical development is much ear-
lier, somewhat earlier, about the same,
Because the dependent variables are counts
of the number of victims each respondent
was aggressive toward (or the number of
aggressors who picked on a respondent), we
estimate negative binomial models that
include a parameter that captures the overdis-
persion of the dependent variable (Long
1997). Coefficients can be interpreted such
that a one-unit increase in Xj; multiplies the
expected outcome measure by a factor of
exp (B,).'? Non-independence of data points
is often a concern in analyses of students in
schools, so we include school-level random
effects in all of our models. We also tested
school fixed effects and the results are iden-
tical. Moreover, we estimate a dynamic
regression model with a lagged dependent
variable and lagged covariates to control for
potential problems associated with the inter-
pretation of causal order in our models. We
measure all covariates (including the lagged
dependent variable) in fall 2004 (Time 1)
and all dependent variables at a second
time point approximately six months later
(spring 2005).
The average student was aggressive toward
just .63 schoolmates and, consistent with
national prevalence estimates (Nansel et al.
2001), the majority (67 percent) of students
were not aggressive toward anyone at Time
2 (see Table 1). Average aggression, like
all other aggression measures, declined
from fall 2004 to spring 2005. Between-
wave correlations of all aggression measures
range from .25 to .36, indicating substantial
individual variability across time. Females
were significantly more aggressive than
males at the start of the school year (although
not at the end), but as might be expected,
males were more physically aggressive.
Males were also more aggressive toward
females than females were toward males,
and females were more aggressive toward
other females than males were toward other
males. Compared to boys, girls occupy sig-
nificantly more central network positions,
are more physically developed, and earn
higher grades, but they are less likely to par-
ticipate in sports. Roughly two-thirds of all
students had been on a date.

We plot the friendship and aggression net-
works of two typical high schools, ““Washing-
ton” and “Jefferson” (see Figure 1). The
nodes are shaded and shaped according to gen-
der. We established their positions in the
graphs by applying a springer-embedder rou-
tine in the Netdraw component of UCINET
(Borgatti, Everett, and Freeman 2002) to the
friendship network such that node positions
are based on friendship relations and do not
change when the friendship relations are
replaced with aggression (the bottom half of
the figures). We exclude adolescents who had
no friendly or aggressive links with their peers.
Relatively isolated individuals are located on
the periphery, while central students fall in
the dense regions of the graph. Washington
High is highly segregated with respect to gen-
der (Freeman segregation = .84); cross-gender
We begin multivariate analysis by estimating
models of overall aggression as well as the
three subtypes of aggression, controlling for
prior aggression levels (see Table 2). Our
purpose in these initial models is to test
whether centrality has the hypothesized
effect on aggression, and whether it has the
same effect on each subtype. As hypothe-
sized, we find that centrality has a curvilinear
effect on change in aggression (Model 1).
Initially, increases in centrality are accompa-
nied by increases in the rate of aggression
(see Figure 2). When betweenness centrality
reaches approximately 4 (i.e., a student is
included in 4 percent of all geodesics),
aggression plateaus and then begins to
decline. Note that the distribution of central-
ity is highly skewed and approximately 86
percent of students have scores less than 2.
Increases in centrality would thus result in
decreasing aggression for only a small per-
centage of very high-status adolescents. For
the vast majority of students, additional cen-
trality increases lead to increased aggression.
We also find the hypothesized curvilinear
effect of centrality on change in physical,
indirect, and verbal aggression (Models 2 to
4), although we only find this effect for phys-
ical and indirect aggression after removing
five outliers.'4 As with overall aggression,
all three subtypes plateau when centrality
approaches 3 to 4 percent and then decline
at the upper echelons (see Figure 2).

We find no evidence of gender differences
in overall, physical, or verbal aggression,
although models of physical aggression that
exclude physical aggression at Time 1 (not
shown) do find that females are less physically
aggressive than males. Expected rates of indi-
rect aggression, however, are 22 percent higher
for females than for males. For all outcomes,
we tested for interactions between gender and
both centrality parameters (not shown), but
none are statistically significant. Because cen-
trality has nearly identical effects on each sub-
type, and because the majority of aggressive
relationships involve more than one form of
aggression, we adopt the composite measure
of aggression in subsequent models.

Before proceeding to models of gendered
aggression, some control variables are note-
worthy. As might be expected, we find evi-
dence of peer influence: a one-unit increase
in the measure of friends’ average aggression
is associated with increases in aggression,
ranging (across the outcomes) from 9 (verbal
aggression) to 16 percent (physical aggres-
sion). Adolescents who play sports became
more aggressive, but this appears to mostly
take the form of verbal aggression. Youth
involved in dating activities are between 22
and 30 percent more aggressive than their
peers who have never been on a date. High
school sophomores are 69 percent less physi-
cally aggressive than 8th graders, but there are
no other age or cohort effects. Perhaps
because it is more difficult to spread rumors
in very large settings, small schools have
higher rates of indirect aggression. With
the exception of low parent education
(which decreases rates of overall and verbal
aggression), race and family background
friends are 16 percent less aggressive toward
their same-gender peers, on average.
Finally, we test our gender bridge hypoth-
esis (Final Model). After including the
hypothesized three-way and all possible two-
way interaction terms, the main and quadratic
effects of centrality become significant (and in
the expected directions). The main effect of
cross-gender friends is essentially unchanged.
We also find the hypothesized positive three-
way interaction between centrality, cross-
gender friends, and school gender segregation,
net of all possible two-way interactions (none
of which are statistically significant). To ease
interpretation, we plot the joint predicted
effect of centrality, cross-gender friendships,
and school gender segregation in Figures 3a
to 3c.'° We advise caution in interpreting
Table 2. Random Effects Negative Binomial Regression of Overall, Physical, Indirect, and
Verbal Aggression, with School Intercepts, Spring 2005 (Time 2)

 

 

 

(1) Overall (2) Physical (3) Indirect (4) Verbal
Aggression Aggression Aggression Aggression.

8 SE B SE B SE B SE
Female —.05 .06 -.11 .08 .20** .07 —.08 -06
Centrality .13** = .04 .22** 107 -10* -05 -12* -05
Centrality squared —.01* 01 —.04** 01 —.02* 01 —.014 01
Friends’ average aggression -10** = .04 .15** = .05 -11* 05 -09* 04
Has been on a date -20*** 06 .23* 09 .26*** — 08 .14* .07
GPA —.01 .03 —.08 05 -.01 04 —.06 04
Sports .12* .06 .09 .09 +12 :07 -16* -07
Pubertal development —.07 05 —.07 08 —.05 .07 —.08 .06
Dependent variable in -28*** = 01 .38*** 03 -35*** 02 .33*** 02

fall 2004 (Time 1)

African American 10 -06 .08 -10 01 08 08 .07
Latino 21 13 122 19 19 17 28 15
Other minority —.18 12 —.22 .19 —.02 14 —.26 14
Grade 9 —.10 12 —.25 18 .06 11 —.12 13
Grade 10 -.11 12 —.37* 19 -00 12 —.19 13
Single-parent home —.03 06 10 09 09 .07 -.01 07
No parent attended college —.13* 06 —.13 09 —.10 08 —.14* .07
School size (hundreds) ~.01 .02 00.03 —.04* .02 —.01 .02
Constant —.70*** 20 —1.09*** .31 —1,.22*** = 25 —.76*** 23
LnR 5.27 1.02 4.04 .67 8.30 18.89 5.51 1.37
Ln S 5.21 1.03 3.61 69 8.12 18.90 5.43 1.38
Log likelihood —3763.60 2152.37 —2754.22 —3179.05
Wald Chisq(17) 608.08*** 278.15*** 373.83*** 7550.45***
N 3,722 3,717 3,717 3,722

 

*p < .05 (one-tail test); * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001 (two-tail test).
o
@

S
c.)

°
BR

i
5
:
i
E

°
iv
as school gender segregation increases (see
Figures 3b and 3c), the slope of centrality
increases for youth with multiple cross-gender
friendships. In highly gender-segregated
schools (see Figure 3c), increases in centrality
are associated with sharp increases in same-
gender aggression for students who have
more than one cross-gender friendship. For
other students, centrality has a negligible or
negative effect on same-gender aggression.
Note, however, that the effect of having
cross-gender friendships strongly depends on
centrality, and it is associated with reduced
aggression among the socially marginal
students—only at relatively high levels of
centrality (above 2) does it increase rates
of aggression. As we anticipated, the effect
of centrality on aggression is greatly magni-
fied for gender bridges. However, even these
youth ultimately desist from same-gender
aggression when centrality reaches the upper
extremes (beyond those shown in the figures),
hypothesized curvilinear, inverted-U effect
of network centrality (Model 1). Contrary
to our hypotheses, however, cross-gender
friendships have no significant effect on
cross-gender aggression. Also contrary to our
expectations, school gender segregation signif-
icantly increases cross-gender aggression.
Compared with students in an average school,
students in a school that is .1 points higher on
gender-segregation are approximately 17
Table 3. Random Effects Negative Binomial Regression of Same-Gender Aggression, with
School Intercepts, Spring 2005 (Time 2)

 

 

Model 1 Model 2 Final Model
8 SE B SE B SE
Female .09 .07 .09 .07 .09 .07
Centrality 05 .04 -06% .04 -10* .04
Centrality squared -.01 01 -.01 01 —.02* .01
Multiple cross-gender el aed 09 —.20* 10
friendships
School gender segregation 63 .70 94 75
Multiple cross-gender friend- —.01 06
ships X centrality
Gender segregation x centrality —.52 36
Multiple cross-gender friend- —1.66 1.91
ships X gender segregation
Multiple cross-gender friend- 1.79** 69
ships gender segregation x
centrality
Friends’ average aggression .11* 04 11** 04 .11* 04
Has been on a date .20** = 07 .21** 07 .21** 07
GPA —.06 .04 —.06 04 —.06 04
Sports 11 .07 10 .07 -10 07
Pubertal development —.04 07 —.03 07 —.04 .07
Same-gender aggression, fall .36*** = 02 -36*** = 02 -36*** 02
2004 (Time 1)
African American 11 .08 10 -08 -10 08
Latino 43** 15 42** 15, 41** 15
Other minority —.09 14 —.08 14 —.12 14
Grade 9 —.19 16 ceil 74 16 —.16 -16
Grade 10 —.32 17 —.30 16 —.30 16
Single-parent home —.06 .07 —.06 .07 —.05 07
No parent attended college —.20** .07 —.19** 07 —.20** 07
School size (hundreds) .00 03 01 .03 00 03
Constant —.82*** 24 —.83*** 24 aan ace 25
LnR 4.22 71 4.33 73 4.34 73
Ln S 3.89 73 4.00 75 4.00 74
Log likelihood —2938.43 —2935.94 — 2932.27
Wald Chi Square (df) 476.72*** (17) 482.45*** (19) 490.86*** (23)

 

Note: N = 3,717.
a F ;
P < .05 (one-tail test); * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001 (two-tail test).
on cross-gender aggression is significantly
magnified for gender bridges (Final Model).
The joint effects are plotted in Figures 4a to
4c and are quite similar to those shown in
Figures 3a to 3c (although predicted rates of
cross-gender aggression are substantially
lower).

In schools with average levels of gender
segregation (see Figure 4a), the effect of cen-
trality is virtually identical for adolescents
regardless of the number of cross-gender
friendships they have. For both groups,
cross-gender aggression is predicted to be
more than two times as high for students
near the pinnacle of the social hierarchy, com-
pared with those at the bottom. As school gen-
der segregation increases (see Figures 4b and
4c), however, centrality begins to have
a strong positive effect on the aggressive
behavior of youth with multiple cross-gender
friendships, while having a diminishing—and
ultimately negligible—effect on their school-
mates. Gender bridges have predicted rates
of cross-gender aggression that are several
times greater than comparably central stu-
dents. For example, when gender segregation
equals .2 and centrality equals 3.0, predicted
cross-gender aggression for youth with multi-
ple cross-gender friends is 1.79, compared
with .55 for equally central classmates without
friends of the other gender. Our results are
strikingly similar for same- and cross-gender
aggression—network centrality generally
increases aggression, especially for gender
bridges, until the very highest levels of cen-
trality are attained.

A few control variables merit attention,
particularly gender. In contrast to same-
gender aggression, females are just 73 percent
as aggressive toward males as males are
toward females. Other results are consistent
across both outcomes: youth who are involved
in dating are 23 percent more aggressive
toward the other gender, compared with stu-
dents who had never been on a date. We
also find higher rates of cross-gender aggres-
sion among youth whose friends are aggres-
sive. However, we find no significant differ-
ences based on family background or other
control variables.

We illustrate the actual aggressive and
friendly relations of gender bridges (see Figure
5) using friendship and aggression relations
(both from the fall) in a highly gender-
segregated network of 8th graders (Freeman
segregation index = .83). Although there are
some cross-gender friendships, students are
strongly clustered according to gender. The
gray nodes represent students with cross-gender
friendships and high centrality scores. As the
dark lines suggest, these gender bridges are
deeply embedded in the aggression network.
regarding our measures, their empirical dis-
tributions, and the causal relationships
among them. We were concerned that the
effects of our variables might differ by gen-
der, age, grade, or dating involvement, so
we tested for interactions between these and
our key independent variables. None are sig-
nificant. Additionally, while we believe that
betweenness centrality best fits our concep-
tion of social status in this context, we also
Table 4. Random Effects Negative Binomial Regression of Opposite-Gender Aggression, with
School Intercepts, Spring 2005 (Time 2)

 

 

 

Model 1 Model 2 Final Model
B SE B SE B SE
Female —.32*** 09 —.31*** .09 ae lee .09
Centrality -16*** 05 .16*** .05 18*** 05
Centrality squared —.02* .01 —.02* .01 —.03** -01
Multiple cross-gender —.02 11 —.08 12
friendships
School gender segregation 1.56* 65 1.58* 72
Multiple cross-gender friend- .07 .07
ships X centrality
Gender segregation x centrality —.40 43
Multiple cross-gender friend- 16 2.37
ships X gender segregation
Multiple cross-gender friend- 1.70* 79
ships X gender segregation x
centrality
Friends’ average aggression -13* 06 .13* 06 .13* 06
Has been on a date .20* 09 .21* 09 .21* 09
GPA -06 05 05 -05 -06 05
Sports 12 09 11 09 11 09
Pubertal development —.12 08 —.12 08 —.13 .08
Cross-gender aggression, fall A7*** .04 A7*** 04 A7*** 04
2004 (Time 1)
African American 15 -10 14 10 14 10
Latino —.19 122 —.23 23 —.20 23
Other minority -.17 19 -.17 19 —.23 19
Grade 9 eee 14 eecilel 14 —.12 14
Grade 10 .04 14 .05 14 05 14
Single-parent home .06 09 .07 .09 .07 .09
No parent attended college —.06 09 —.06 09 —.06 09
School size (hundreds) —.03 -02 —.03 .02 —.03 .02
Constant —.80** -30 —.80*** 30 hth -30
LnR 18.68 320.4 19.16 352.0 18.2 578.4
inS 17.95 320.4 18.43 352.0 17.4 578.4
Log likelihood —1960.42 —1957.62 —1954.04
Wald Chi Square (df) 306.61*** (17) 312.52*** (19) 320.08*** (23)

 

Note: N = 3,722.
“p < .05 (one-tail test); * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001 (two-tail test).
results are relatively robust to the choice of
centrality measures.

Furthermore, it is possible that aggression
and friendship coincide (at least within the
three-month period the measures reference),
and moreover, that such aggression may differ
in meaningful ways from non-friend aggres-
sion. We find that a small percentage of
aggressive behavior (less than 7 percent)
occurred within friendships, and we find no
substantive differences if we exclude these
joint friend—aggression relationships.

It is also possible that the curvilinear
effects in our models are an artifact of the
highly skewed centrality distribution.'° We
examine that possibility by excluding all
cases in which centered betweenness is
greater than 2 (the top 7 percent of the dis-
tribution) and reanalyzing the data. We con-
tinue to find significant negative coeffi-
cients for the quadratic terms for all three
aggression outcomes (i.e., same-gender,
other-gender, and overall aggression).
Again, we find the same inverse-U result if
we use Bonacich centrality, which is sub-
stantially less skewed. We do truncate the
range of centrality in our figures (cutting
off at 5 on the mean-centered score, when
the maximum observed is 12), because the
data are so sparse at the upper extreme.'”

In a similar vein, we were concerned
about influential outliers. As mentioned ear-
lier, we did find at least five influential
cases that, if included in the model of
same-gender aggression, reduce the three-
way gender bridge interaction as well as
the squared term of centrality to nonsignifi-
cant levels. These five cases are predomi-
nantly female (four of five), minority (four
of five), and athletes (all five), and are
highly aggressive (on average, 10 times
the sample mean) and highly central (at
the 97th percentile or above). These cases
represent substantively interesting excep-
tions to our argument regarding desistence
at the pinnacle of the social hierarchy. Addi-
tionally, one of the schools is an outlier with
respect to gender segregation, with a value
of .98 on a scale of —1 to 1, indicating
that cross-gender friendships were nearly
nonexistent. Dropping this school does not
affect the results for cross-gender aggres-
sion, and it only marginally affects the
results for same-gender aggression (the
three-way interaction term’s significance
falls to p < .05 with a one-tail test).
Fundamentally, we were also concerned
with the complexity of estimating a three-way
interaction effect (along with the corre-
sponding set of two-way interactions), so
we tested our gender bridge hypothesis by
stratifying the sample based on school gen-
der segregation. We initially divided the
sample into three categories—high (approx-
imately the top 15 percent of the gender-
segregation distribution), medium (the mid-
dle 70 percent of gender segregation), and
low (the bottom 15 percent)—but the results
EZ
De ASR
Se hy
CZ | OH i

y
y
Pee
are identical for the latter two groups, which
we merged. We find that the two-way interac-
tion between centrality and having multiple
cross-gender friendships is significant and
positive in the high-segregation schools for
both forms of aggression, as we hypothesized
(see Table S2 in the online supplement). This
instills greater confidence in our results for the
three-way interaction in the full sample.

We originally used the percentage of other-
gender friends for our measure of cross-
gender friendships, but because the results
are substantively similar we switched to the
binary measure to simplify interpretation of
the interaction effects. The binary measure,
however, does not entirely resolve an addi-
tional concern: arguably, a student who exclu-
sively nominates other-gender friends may
cease to act as a gender bridge. Very few indi-
viduals (n = 22) exclusively nominated other-
gender friends, and our results do not change
if we drop these cases or replace our current
indicator variable with one for having
between two and four cross-gender friend-
ships. However, a model with an indicator
for having at least one (instead of multiple)
cross-gender friendship is not significant.
Peer status among adolescents tends to relate
to a variety of positive outcomes involving
school (Parker and Asher 1987), social
adjustment (Gest, Graham-Bermann, and
Hartup 2001), and physical and mental health
(Almquist 2009). There are some exceptions,
however, such as disadvantaged, high-status
boys in violent groups, who are at elevated
risk for dropping out of school (Staff and
Kreager 2008). Here we document a link
between relatively high levels of peer status,
as reflected by network centrality, and
another negative result—aggressive behav-
ior. Our findings contribute to a small body
of work that documents the problems associ-
ated with peer status among youth. Our
results underscore the argument that attaining
and maintaining group status likely involves
some degree of antagonistic behavior, per-
haps enacted in combination, or in a cyclical
fashion (Adler and Adler 1995), with more
cooperative and prosocial actions.

Our findings stand in contrast to prevailing
themes in the literature on bullying and
aggression, and suggest that aggression is
not primarily a maladjusted reaction from
socially marginal or psychologically troubled
adolescents. Rather, aggression is intrinsic to
status but in a nonlinear fashion. Individuals
at the bottom of the status hierarchy do not
have as much capacity for aggression, while
those at the very top do not have as much
cause to use it. But for the vast majority of
adolescents, increases in status are, over
time, accompanied by increases in aggression
toward their peers. While we differentiate
aggression victims according to their gender
in relation to their attackers, we find very
few differences. For the vast majority of youth
who are somewhere below the pinnacle of
a school’s social hierarchy, centrality
increases adolescents’ aggression toward
peers of their own and the other gender.

In general, increases in centrality are met
with decreases in aggression only for individ-
uals who already occupy the core of a school’s
social system, that is, students who arguably
have less need for aggression as an instrument
for social climbing. The question of whether
aggression works—whether and how it
increases status—is beyond the scope of this
article (it is the subject of ongoing research),
but we suggest that for status to influence
aggression, it is sufficient that youth believe
it does. We also note that our theoretical
model does not apply without exception. For
same-gender aggression especially, a few
highly central youth maintain unexpectedly
high levels of aggression. It is conceivable
that for these youth, aggression is less of
a means to an end than an end in itself, pro-
viding entertainment at others’ expense.

Much research on aggression focuses on
the role of gender, generally on whether girls
and boys are aggressive at different rates, or in
different ways, but also occasionally on
whether predictors of aggression operate dif-
ferently by gender. We find some expected
gender differences: compared to boys, girls
are less often physically aggressive (in the
cross-section) and more frequently indirectly
aggressive. Girls are also less likely to aggress
against boys than boys are to aggress against
girls. However, most of these differences are
modest, and overall rates of aggression are
equivalent by gender. Furthermore, we find
no evidence that the factors predicting aggres-
sion operate differently for girls versus boys.

Instead, we find that gender relationships,
and the gender environment, strongly influence
aggression. This underlines arguments that
stress the social relational and contextual
nature of gender (eg. Felmlee 1999;
Ridgeway and Correll 2004). In particular,
cross-gender friendships—at either the school
or the individual level—decrease aggression.
However, in schools where cross-gender
friendships are rare—and arguably, status mar-
kers—these relationships magnify the link
between peer status and aggression. Our results
suggest that gender bridges—that is, youth
with multiple cross-gender friendships in
schools where such ties are scarce—who are
also socially prominent are particularly aggres-
sive toward classmates of their own and the
other gender. Romantic interests likely play
a role in this process, and dating involvement
increases aggression. Status and gender context
effects hold, however, regardless of whether
a student had ever dated and are not moderated
by dating status.

Almost as noteworthy as these core find-
ings are the findings that did not emerge.
Youth from single-parent households are no
more aggressive than others. Students whose
parents have low levels of education are sig-
nificantly less aggressive. While Latino stu-
dents are more aggressive toward their
same-gender classmates, there are no differen-
ces between whites, African Americans, and
other minority students. Grade in school mat-
ters only for physical aggression. Academic
achievement and sports participation—the
competing purposes of high schools, accord-
ing to Coleman (1961)—also have little effect
on aggression, with the latter modestly
increasing overall and verbal aggression.
Pubertal development, generally thought to
increase aggression, has no effect.

From a practical standpoint, our results
have several implications for bullying preven-
tion efforts, which currently fail to show sub-
stantial or lasting improvements (Merrell et al.
2008). Such interventions should adopt an
expanded view of aggression that includes
more subtle and insidious forms of harass-
ment. Fundamentally, these programs should
consider how aggressive behaviors are rooted
in status processes. Status is the culmination
of patterns of relationships and evaluations
of peers, and intervention strategies might
succeed by focusing not on bullies or victims,
but on the audience for aggression. Interven-
tions may have a better chance of success if
bystanders scom aggression instead of being
impressed or entertained by it.

Among the strengths of this study is its use
of a broad, relational measure of aggression,
which allows consideration of new questions
as to who targets whom. We also take advan-
tage of a longitudinal data framework, and we
tested our findings under a variety of specifi-
cations. Nonetheless, there are substantial lim-
itations. This study is based on a sample of
small-town and rural North Carolina students
and may not be generalizable to other popula-
tions. We consider the consequences of status
over the course of just one academic year, and
we do not consider long-term status trajecto-
ries. On the flip side, our study does not exam-
ine shorter-term events that may have substan-
tial consequences—one week in a teenager’s
life can bring dramatic social successes and
failures. We take up the former question in
ongoing research, but our data do not allow
consideration of the latter.

In summary, we focus on aggression as the
outcome of social interactions in which indi-
viduals routinely vie for status, influence,
and power. Our findings call into question
several traditional assumptions, including the
argument that isolated individuals on a group’s
fringes are the most likely to behave aggres-
sively. Instead, aggression remains most com-
mon among centrally located students, with
the exception of the few at the very top of
the hierarchy. Moreover, we find that social
factors at the dyad, group, and school level
all powerfully shape harmful behavior in
a school setting; these factors include the
aggressive behavior of an adolescent’s
friends, location in the friendship hierarchy,
and patterns of relationships between the gen-
ders in a school. Our results suggest that
future research would benefit from further
investigation of the social context of
1. We avoid the term “bullying” for two reasons.
First, there is considerable confusion concerning
the definition of bullying (Espelage and Swearer
2003). Second, the most commonly used definition
restricts bullying to repeated harmful behavior
directed toward another person who is less powerful
(Olweus 1993). This is problematic for our purposes
because it prevents empirical examination of the
relationship between aggression and power by
including the latter in the definition of the former.
Additionally, it unnecessarily excludes actions like
spreading a single, devastating rumor.

. Definitions of these three terms vary; for example,
indirect aggression has been defined as social
manipulation, whereas relational aggression has
been defined as behavior intended to harm a per-
son’s friendships or social standing (Crick and Grot-
peter 1995). Empirically, however, there is insuffi-
cient difference to justify distinctions between
them (Archer and Coyne 2005).

. This power is attributable to the students’ individual
positions and characteristics, but it is also due in
part to context: the “caged environment” (Martin
2009) of school prevents the weak from escaping.
Whatever the source, few adults are similarly cir-
cumstanced—how many adults would be able to
drive a colleague to suicide?—leading to the coun-
terintuitive conclusion that adolescents may have
more power than adults.

. Compared with asymmetric role relationships (.g.,
bosses and workers), Gould (2003) finds that homi-
cide is more common in symmetric or ambiguous
role relationships (e.g., friends, or a worker who is
older than her boss) because they provide mixed
or no indications as to relative status, leaving
10.

participants to sort it out for themselves. In such
relationships, seemingly trivial disputes hold great
significance because they signal lasting—and intol-
erable—claims of dominance.

For instance, recent research shows that heterosex-
ual romantic relationships are characterized by sig-
nificantly more negative interactions than are
same-gender friendships (Kuttler and La Greca
2004), that girls often face ostracism as a result
of gender double standards (Kreager and Staff
2009), and that boys experience significant insecu-
tity in dating relationships (Giordano, Longmore,
and Manning 2006).

Research on heterosexual dating violence, however,
often finds that females physically attack their part-
ners more frequently than do males, although males
do more serious damage (Foshee 1996; Malik,
Sorenson, and Aneshensel 1997).

Direct observation shows that females are more
likely than males to engage in indirect aggression
(Archer 2004), but gender stereotypes may bias
such results (Giles and Heyman 2005). When stud-
ies use peer- or self-reports, gender effect sizes are
much smaller (Card et al. 2008; Espelage and
Swearer 2003; Rhys and Bear 1997) or reversed
(Tomada and Schneider 1997).

. We do not use data from subsequent waves because

one school district dropped out of the study (due to
events unrelated to the project) and because of com-
plications associated with changes occurring
between school years (especially 8th graders mov-
ing into high schools).

. This decision rule is appropriate not only because of

underreporting concerns, but because one party’s
failure to agree on the nature of the relationship is
not necessarily a denial. With a restriction on the
number of possible aggressors and victims a respon-
dent can nominate (i.e., five each), the number six
victim would not be nominated by the aggressor,
but the aggressor might nonetheless be the primary
aggressor for victim six.

The advantage of betweenness over Bonacich for
our purposes is made clear in the case of hangers-
on, or unpopular students who have one friend (per-
haps aspirational and unreciprocated) who is highly
popular. Such a person would receive a substantial
boost in Bonacich centrality. Because hangers-on
do not create a bridge between any given pair of
their peers, their betweenness centrality is zero,
a score we contend is appropriate for their vulnera-
ble and low-status positions in the hierarchy. The
primary scenario where betweenness centrality
might not conform to general understandings of sta-
tus occurs when an actor has two ties that connect
large, dense, and otherwise disconnected groups.
However, all school friendship networks in these
data consist of a single, large component, with
11.

13.

14.

a small number of isolated individuals and dyads, so
this scenario does not apply here.

We do not control for the number of friends because
this is already implicated in the measure of central-
ity, and it would complicate interpretation. When
added to our models, number of friends does not
have a significant effect on any outcome, nor does
it substantively change our results.

. In analyses not shown here, we controlled for meas-

ures of anxiety, depression, and anger. Only one of
these variables is significant in just one model (i.e.,
anxiety has a marginally positive effect on same-
gender aggression), and their inclusion does not
affect the size or statistical significance of the sub-
stantive variables. We do not include them, how-
ever, because of their relatively high rate of
missingness.

We also estimated zero-inflated negative binomial
models. Convergence occurs only in models with
basic demographic information in the zero equation,
and few of these variables increase the likelihood of
a zero score. No substantive changes occur in the
other independent variables.

These five outliers are highly aggressive (approxi-
mately 10 times the sample mean for both measures
of aggression) and highly central (all at the 97th
percentile or above). Including these five influential
cases decreases the effect of centrality squared on
physical and indirect aggression to non-statistically
significant levels.

. We generate predicted same-gender aggression lev-

els for the modal/mean values (8th grade white
females with two parents, at least one of whom
attended college, and who play sports and date
and are otherwise average for continuous variables).
We do not include the extremes of centrality and
school gender segregation in the figures—the
observed maxima of which are 11.8 and .38, respec-
tively (with grand-mean centering)—because obser-
vations are relatively sparse at those levels.

. Although we did not anticipate that the squared

term for centrality would vary based on patterns
of friendship across gender lines, we nonetheless
tested for interactions between centrality squared
and the other variables implicated in the gender
bridge hypothesis. None are significant; they gener-
ate multicollinearity problems, so we dropped them
from the analysis.

. At the other extreme of centrality, less than 2 per-

cent of the 4,266 adolescents (who participated in
both waves of the survey) were isolates. Because
these cases are missing data on other independent
variables, we exclude them from the analysis. How-
ever, substantive results do not change if missing
data for all eligible cases are imputed and isolates
are included in the analysis (along with a binary
indicator for isolate, which is not significant).
18.

The effect of aggression on centrality is the subject
of ongoing research and beyond the scope of this
article, but preliminary results suggest that the effect
depends in great degree on target characteristics.

. In the SUR, none of the aggression measures at

Time 1 (ie., overall aggression, same-gender
aggression [SG], or cross-gender aggression [OG])
have a significant effect on centrality at Time 2.
At the same time, the centrality measures continue
to have the expected relationships to change in
aggression, although the statistical significance of
three of the six substantive variables (i.e., the
three-way interaction in models of OG aggression,
and centrality and centrality-squared in SG aggres-
sion) drops to p < .05 levels in one-tail tests. How-
ever, the drop in significance is exclusively because
SUR treats these outcomes as continuous rather
than count variables, and not because of bias caused
by error correlation. Compared with independent
OLS regressions, the results are identical when the
errors are allowed to correlate in SUR. Ongoing
research suggests that aggression does enhance
social status under certain conditions; its effect
depends on target characteristics that are beyond
the scope of this article.
Baldry, Anna C. 2004. “The Impact of Direct and Indi-
rect Bullying on the Mental and Physical Health of
Italian Youngsters.” Aggressive Behavior 30:343-55.

Batsche, George M. and Howard M. Knoff. 1994. “Bul-
lies and Their Victims: Understanding a Pervasive
Problem in the Schools.” School Psychology Review
23:165-74.

Berger, Joseph, Bernard Cohen, and Morris Zelditch.
1972. “Status Characteristics and Social Interac-
tion.” American Sociological Review 37:241-55.

Berthold, Karen A. and John H. Hoover. 2000. ‘‘Corre-
lates of Bullying and Victimization among Interme-
diate Students in the Midwestern USA.” School Psy-
chology International 21:65—78.

Bjérkqvist, Kaj, Kirsti M. J. Lagerspetz, and Ari
Kaukiainen. 1992. “Do Girls Manipulate and Boys
Fight? Developmental Trends in Regard to Direct
and Indirect Aggression.” Aggressive Behavior
18:117-27.

Bonacich, Phillip. 1987. “Power and Centrality: A Fam-
ily of Measures.” American Journal of Sociology
92:1170-82.

Borgatti, Stephen P. and Martin G. Everett. 2006. “A
Graph-Theoretic Perspective on Centrality.” Social
Networks 28:466-84.

Borgatti, Stephen P., Martin G. Everett, and Linton C.
Freeman. 2002. Ucinet for Windows: Software for
Social Network Analysis. Boston, MA: Analytic
Technologies.

Brown, Bradford, Candace Feiring, and Wyndol
Furman. 1999. “Missing the Love Boat: Why
Researchers Have Shied Away from Adolescent
Romance.” Pp. 1-6 in The Development of Romantic
Relationships in Adolescence, edited by W. Furman,
B. Brown, and C. Feiring. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Bukowski, William, Lorrie Sippola, and Betsy Hoza.
1999. “Same and Other: Interdependency between
Participants in Same- and Other-Gender Friend-
ships.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 28:
439-59.

Burt, Ronald S. 1982. Toward a Structural Theory of
Action: Network Models of Social Structure, Percep-
tion, and Action. New York: Academic Press.

Card, Noel and Earnest Hodges. 2006. “Shared Targets
for Aggression by Early Adolescent Friends.”
Developmental Psychology 42:1327-38.

Card, Noel A., Brian D. Stucky, Gita M. Sawalani, and
Todd D. Little. 2008. “Direct and Indirect Aggres-
sion during Childhood and Adolescence: A Meta-
Analytic Review of Gender Differences, Intercorre-
lations, and Relations to Maladjustment.” Child
Development 79:1185—1229.

Carney, Jolynn. 2000. ‘“‘Bullied to Death: Perceptions
of Peer Abuse and Suicidal Behavior during
Adolescence.” School Psychology International
21:213-23.
Cloward, Richard A. and Lloyd E. Ohlin. 1960. Delin-
quency and Opportunity: A Theory of Delinquent
Gangs. New York: Free Press.

Coie, John D. and Kenneth A. Dodge. 1998. ““Aggres-
sion and Antisocial Behavior.” Pp. 779-862 in
Handbook of Child Psychology, Vol. 3, Social, Emo-
tional, and Personality Development, edited by W.
Damon. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Coleman, James Samuel. 1961. The Adolescent Society:
The Social Life of the Teenager and Its Impact on
Education. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.

Collins, William. 2003. “More than Myth: The Devel-
opmental Significance of Romantic Relationships
during Adolescence.” Journal of Research on Ado-
lescence 13:1-24.

Cook, Karen S., Richard M. Emerson, Mary R.
Gillmore, and Toshio Yamagishi. 1983. ‘The Distri-
bution of Power in Exchange Networks: Theory and
Experimental Results.” American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 89:275-305.

Craig, Wendy and D. Pepler. 1997. “Observations of
Bullying and Victimization in the Schoolyard.”
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 13:41-60.

Crick, Nicki and Jennifer Grotpeter. 1995. “‘Relational
Aggression, Gender, and Social-Psychological
Adjustment.” Child Development 66:710—722.

Eder, Donna and Maureen Hallinan. 1978. “‘Gender Dif-
ferences in Children’s Friendships.” American
Sociological Review 43:237-50.

Emerson, Richard M. 1972. “Power-Dependence Rela-
tions.” American Sociological Review 27:31-41.
Ennett, Susan T. and Karl E. Bauman. 1994. “The Con-
tribution of Influence and Selection to Adolescent
Peer Group Homogeneity: The Case of Adolescent
Cigarette Smoking.” Journal of Personality and

Social Psychology 67:653-63.

Ennett, Susan, Karl Bauman, Vangie Foshee, Andrea
Hussong, and Rob Durant. 2000. The Context of Ado-
lescent Substance Use. NIDA Grant No. ROI
DA13459. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Espelage, Dorothy L. and Susan M. Swearer. 2003.
“Research on School Bullying and Victimization:
What Have We Learned and Where Do We Go
from Here?” School Psychology Review 32:365-83.

Faris, Robert and Susan Ennett. Forthcoming. “‘Adoles-
cent Aggression: The Role of Peer Group Status
Motives, Peer Aggression, and Group Characteris-
tics.” Social Networks.

Feiring, Candice. 1999. “‘Other-Gender Friendships and
the Development of Romantic Relationships in Ado-
lescence.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence
28:495-512.

Felmlee, Diane H. 1999. “Social Norms in Same- and
Cross-Gender Friendships.” Social Psychology
Quarterly 62:53-67.

Felmlee, Diane and Lowell Hargens. 1988. ‘‘Estimation
and Hypothesis Testing for Seemingly Unrelated
Regressions: A Sociological Application.” Social
Science Research 17:384-99.

Foshee, Vangie. 1996. “‘Gender Differences in Adoles-
cent Dating Abuse Prevalence, Types, and Inju-
ties.” Health Education Research 11:275—86.

Freeman, Linton. 1978. “Segregation in Social Net-
works.”” Sociological Methods and Research
6:411-29.

. 1979. “Centrality in Social Networks Concep-
tual Clarification.” Social Networks 1:215-39.

Friedkin, Noah. 1991. “Theoretical Foundations for
Centrality Measures.” American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 96:1478-1504.

Garandeau, Claire F. and Antonius H. N. Cillessen.
2006. “From Indirect Aggression to Invisible
Aggression: A Conceptual View on Bullying and
Peer Group Manipulation.” Aggression and Violent
Behavior 11:612-25.

Gest, Scott, Sandra A. Graham-Bermann, and Willard
W. Hartup. 2001. “Peer Experience: Common and
Unique Features of Number of Friendships, Social
Network Centrality, and Sociometric Status.” Social
Development 10:23-40.

Ghandour, Reem, Mary Overpeck, Zhihuan Huang,
Michael Kogan, and Peter Scheidt. 2004. ‘‘Head-
ache, Stomachache, Backache, and Morning Fatigue
among Adolescent Girls in the United States.”
Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine
158:797-803.

Giles, Jessica W. and Gail D. Heyman. 2005. “Young
Children’s Beliefs about the Relationship between
Gender and Aggressive Behavior.” Child Develop-
ment 76:107-121.

Giordano, Peggy, Monica A. Longmore, and Wendy D.
Manning. 2006. “Gender and the Meanings of Ado-
lescent Romantic Relationships: A Focus on Boys.”
American Sociological Review 71:260-87.

Gould, Roger V. 2002. “The Origins of Status Hierar-
chies: A Formal Theory and Empirical Test.” Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology 107:1143-78.

. 2003. Collision of Wills: How Ambiguity About
Social Rank Breeds Conflict. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Hawley, Patricia. 2003. ““Prosocial and Coercive Config-
urations of Resource Control in Early Adolescence: A
Case for the Well-Adapted Machiavellian.” Merrill-
Palmer Quarterly 49:279-309.

Haynie, Dana, Darrel Steffensmeier, and Kerryn Bell.
2003. “Gender and Serious Violence: Untangling the
Role of Friendship Gender Composition and Peer Vio-
lence.” Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice 5:235-53.

Hyde, Janet Shibley. 1984. “How Large Are Gender
Differences in Aggression? A Developmental
Meta-Analysis.” Developmental Psychology 20:
722-36.

. 2005. “The Gender Similarities Hypothesis.”

American Psychologist 60:581—92.
Jackman, Mary. 1994. The Velvet Glove: Paternalism
and Conflict in Gender, Class, and Race Relations.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Kinney, William. 2007. “Aggression.” In Blackwell
Encyclopedia of Sociology, edited by G. Ritzer. Mal-
den, MA: Blackwell.

Kreager, Derek A. 2007a. “Unnecessary Roughness?
School Sports, Peer Networks, and Male Adolescent
Violence.” American Sociological Review 72:705-24.

. 2007b. “When it’s Good to be ‘Bad’: Violence
and Adolescent Peer Acceptance.” Criminology
45:893-923.

Kreager, Derek A. and Jeremy Staff. 2009. ‘‘The Sexual
Double Standard and Adolescent Peer Acceptance.”
Social Psychology Quarterly 72:143-64.

Kuttler, Ami and Annette La Greca. 2004. “Linkages
among Adolescent Girls’ Romantic Relationships,
Best Friendships, and Peer Networks.” Journal of
Adolescence 27:395-414.

Laursen, Brett and Vickie Williams. 1997. ‘‘Perceptions
of Interdependence and Closeness in Family and
Peer Relationships among Adolescents with and
without Romantic Partners.” New Directions for
Child Development 78:3-20.

Long, J. Scott. 1997. Regression Models for Categorical
and Limited Dependent Variables. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.

Malik, Shaista, Susan Sorenson, and Carol Aneshensel.
1997. “Community and Dating Violence among
Adolescents: Perpetration and Victimization.” Jour-
nal of Adolescent Health 21:291-301.

Marsden, Peter V. and Edward O. Laumann. 1977. “Col-
lective Action in a Community Elite: Exchange, Influ-
ence Resources and Issue Resolution.” Pp. 199-250 in
Power, Paradigms, and Community Research, edited
by R. Liebert and A. Imershein. London: ISI/Sage.

Martin, John Levi. 2009. ‘‘Formation and Stabilization
of Vertical Hierarchies among Adolescents: Towards
a Quantitative Ethology of Dominance among
Humans.” Social Psychology Quarterly 72:241-64.

McCarthy, Bill and Teresa Casey. 2008. “Love, Gender,
and Crime: Adolescent Romantic Relationships and
Offending.” American Sociological Review 73:
944-69.

McCarthy, Bill, Diane Felmlee, and John Hagan. 2004.
“Girl Friends are Better: Gender, Friends, and Crime
among School and Street Youth.” Criminology
42:805-835.

Mercken, L., Tom Snijders, Christian Steglich, E.
Vartiaien, and H. de Vries. 2010. “Dynamics of
Adolescent Friendship Networks and Smoking
Behavior.” Social Networks 32:72-81.

Merrell, Kenneth, Barbara Gueldner, Scott Ross, and
Duane Isava. 2008. “‘How Effective Are School Bul-
lying Intervention Programs? A Meta-Analysis of
Intervention Research.” School Psychology Interna-
tional 23:26-42.
Miller, Walter B. 1958. “Lower Class Culture as a Gen-
erating Milieu of Gang Delinquency.” Journal of
Social Issues 14:5-19.

Molm, Linda. 1990. “Structure, Action, and Outcomes:
The Dynamics of Power in Social Exchange.” Amer-
ican Sociological Review 55:427-47.

Mouttapa, Michelle, Tom Valente, Peggy Gallaher,
Louise A. Rohrbach, and Jennifer B. Unger. 2004.
“Social Network Predictors of Bullying and Victim-
ization.” Adolescence 39:315-35.

Nansel, Tonja, Wendy Craig, Mary Overpeck, G. Saluja,
and June Ruan. 2004. “Cross-National Consistency
in the Relationship between Bullying Behaviors
and Psychosocial Adjustment.” Archives of Pediat-
rics & Adolescent Medicine 158:730-36.

Nansel, Tonja, Mary Overpeck, Ramani Pilla, W. June
Ruan, Bruce Simons-Morton, and Peter Scheidt.
2001. “‘Bullying Behaviors among US Youth: Prev-
alence and Association with Psychosocial Adjust-
ment.” Journal of the American Medical Association
285:2094-2100.

National Education Association. 1995. “Youth Risk
Behavior Survey Data Results.” Retrieved February
10, 2006 (http://www.nea.org).

Olweus, Dan. 1993. Bullying At School: What We Know
and What We Can Do. Oxford: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Parker, Jeffrey G. and Steven R. Asher. 1987. “Peer
Relations and Later Personal Adjustment: Are
Low-Accepted Children at Risk?” Psychological
Bulletin 102:357-89.

Pelligrini, A. and J. Long. 2002. “‘A Longitudinal Study
of Bullying, Dominance, and Victimization during
the Transition from Primary School through Second-
ary School.” British Journal of Developmental Psy-
chology 20:259-80.

Rhys, Gail S. and George G. Bear. 1997. ‘Relational
Aggression and Peer Relations: Gender and Devel-
opmental Issues.” Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 43:
87-106.

Ridgeway, Cecilia L. and Shelley J. Correll. 2004.
“Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Per-
spective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations.”
Gender & Society 18:510-31.

Rodkin, Philip C. and Christian Berger. 2008. ‘““Who
Bullies Whom? Social Status Asymmetries by Vic-
tim Gender.” International Journal of Behavioral
Development 32:473-85.

Salmivalli, Christina, Kirsti Lagerspetz, Kaj Bjérkqvist,
Karin Osterman, and Ari Kaukiainen. 1996. “Bully-
ing as a Group Process: Participant Roles and their
Relations to Social Status within the Group.”
Aggressive Behavior 22:\—15.

Schafer, Mechthild, Stefan Korn, Peter K. Smith, Simon
C. Hunter, Joaquin A. Mora-Merchan, Monika M.
Singer, and Kevin van der Meulen. 2004. “Lonely
in the Crowd: Recollections of Bullying.” British
Journal of Developmental Psychology 22:379-94.

Sharp, Sonia, David Thompson, and Tiny Arora. 2000.
“How Long before It Hurts? An Investigation into
Long-Term Bullying.” School Psychology Interna-
tional 21:37-46.

Shrum, Wesley, Neil Cheek, and Saundra Hunter. 1988.
“Friendship in School: Gender and Racial Homo-
phily.” Sociology of Education 61:227-39.

Sijtsema, Jelle J., René Veenstra, Siegwart Lindenberg,
and Christina Salmivalli. 2009. “Empirical Test of
Bullies’ Status Goals: Assessing Direct Goals,
Aggression, and Prestige.” Aggressive Behavior
35:57-67.

Staff, Jeremy and Derek A. Kreager. 2008. “Too Cool
for School? Violence, Peer Status and High School
Dropout.” Social Forces 87:445~71.

Stolzenberg, Ross. 2004. “Regression Analysis.”
Pp. 165-208 in Handbook of Data Analysis, edited
by M. Hardy and A. Bryman. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.

Tannen, Deborah. 1990. You Just Don’t Understand:
Women and Men in Conversation. New York:
William Morrow.

Tomada, Giovanna and Barry Schneider. 1997. “Rela-
tional Aggression, Gender, and Peer Acceptance:
Invariance across Culture, Stability over Time, and
Concordance among Informants.” Developmental
Psychology 33:601-609.

‘Van Vugt, Mark, David De Cremer, and Dirk Janssen.
2007. “Gender Differences in Cooperation and
Competition: The Male-Warrior Hypothesis.” Psy-
chological Science 18:19-23.

Veenstra, Renee, Seigwart Lindenberg, Bonne Zijlstra,
Andrea De Winter, Frank Verhulst, and Johan
Ormel. 2007. “The Dyadic Nature of Bullying and
Victimization: Testing a Dual-Perspective Theory.”
Child Development 78:1843—54.

Villareal, Andres. 2004. “‘The Social Ecology of Rural
Violence: Land Scarcity, the Organization of Agri-
cultural Production, and the Presence of the State.”
American Journal of Sociology 110:313-48.
