@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/208934 1 ?seq=1 &cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
and the marked redistribution of resident
population, the residential distribution of
C.B.D. workers has remained very similar to
that of the total population in terms of zonal
distance from the center of the city. At the
same time, the residential distribution of
C.B.D. workers has remained strikingly dif-
ferent from that of other workers in terms
of distance from the workplace.

Summary. The differentiated pattern of
urban land use clearly implies a separation
of workplaces and residences for labor force
members. Lack of adequate data on work-
place and residence for labor force members
in the United States has prevented system-
atic description and measurement of work-
residence separation, although its importance
in the organization of urban areas is rec-
ognized. Data obtained as a by-product of
the Occupational Mobility Survey are used
to test a number of propositions appearing
in the literature for the universe of wage and
salary workers residing in the City of Chicago
in 1951.

The analysis supports the proposition that
substantial variation in degree of separation
obtains among groups comprising the labor
force. Degree of separation varies directly
with socio-economic level. Separation is sub-
stantially greater for individuals working in
the Central Business District than for those
working outside the area. Socio-economic
level and degree of workplace centralization
operate jointly as well as independently to
produce work-residence separation.
The findings are consistent with more
general propositions about the structure of
urban areas. Good housing and preferred
residential sites are seldom found in prox-
imity to industrial and commercial areas.
It would probably be possible to reproduce
approximately the observed patterns of dif-
ferentials in work-residence separation with
a model which assumes that labor force
members will reside in that area nearest
their workplace which is compatible with
their socio-economic level; however, such a
model has not yet been adequately tested.

No clear relationship of degree of separa-
tion to socio-economic level or workplace
centralization is evident for nonwhites. But
the finding is not necessarily inconsistent
with the hypothesis that socio-economic level
and workplace centralization are major de-
terminants of work-residence separation. The
existing pattern of residential segregation
of nonwhites, which permits little flexibility
in residential location, may render them in-
operative.

Comparative data on work-residence sepa-
ration in Chicago for 1916 suggest a per-
sistence of work-residence differentials
through time. Although mean separation in-
creased during the period, the work-residence
separation of Central Business District
workers remained substantially greater than
that of other workers. It seems likely that
successive analyses can ascertain general
relationships between work-residence sepa-
ration and ecological, socio-economic, and
demographic variables.
Two recent studies subscribe to the hy-
pothesis that “each worker seeks to mini-
mize distance from home to work,” and
that the distribution of industrial workers is
a consequence of the operation of the “prin-
ciple of least effort” as applied to human
behavior.2 Ranyak modifies this thesis by
suggesting that: “People tend to minimize
their journey to work, maximize their em-
ployment benefits and maximize their resi-
dential amenities.” ? In a critical discussion
of the “least effort” approach Schnore says
that the least-effort hypothesis appears to
confuse motivation with its external limiting
conditions.*

It has been suggested by Leipmann and
Hawley that the daily journey to work has
implications of a wider nature in the chang-
ing social order.’ These daily movements
may supplement migration in those cases
where the motive is to seek new employment
opportunities. Hawley goes further in sug-
gesting that the daily journey to work might
supersede migration, at least within local
areas.

Human ecologists, concerned as they are
with regularities of spatial ararngements and
the factors related to these regularities, have
tended to focus their theoretical orientation
toward the problem of commuting in terms
of the restrictive nature of space.* While
John E. Watson, “Traveling Time to Work,” ibid.,
pp. 282-291; Institute for Research in Social Sci-
ence, Population Distribution—Spatial and Tem-
poral: A Study of Daytime-Nighttime Differentials
in the Proportionate Distribution of the Total
Population of Selected Urban Areas, Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina (Industrial Areas
Study), 1952; Robert B. Mitchell and Chester
Rapkin, Urban Traffic: A Function of Land Use,
New York: Columbia University Press, 1954.

2J. Douglas Carroll, Jr., “Home-Work Rela-
tionships of Industrial Employees,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Harvard University, 1950, pp. 21, 24, 130;
Population Distribution—Spatial and Temporal,
op. cit.

8 John A. Ranyak, “A Theoretical Approach to
the Journey to Work,” Bachelor’s Thesis, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, 1952, pp. 11-12.

#Leo F. Schnore, “The Seperation of Home
and Work: A Problem for Human Ecology,” Social
Forces, 32 (December, 1954), pp. 336-343.

5Kate K. Leipmann, The Journey to Work,
New York: Oxford University Press, 1944; and
Amos H. Hawley, Human Ecology, New York:
The Ronald Press, 1950.

See for example: James A. Quinn, Human
Ecology, New York: Prentice-Hall, 1950, pp. 285-
based upon an adaptation of the Bureau
of the Census sampling procedure.’ The
number of adults per dwelling unit in ran-
domly selected blocks were listed, and the
actual sample was then randomly selected
from this listing. The respondents selected
for the sample were interviewed during a
one-week period in March, 1952. Schedules
were completed for 331 respondents; data
were secured on such items as: education,
age, income, residential mobility, job mo-
bility, occupation, house type, dwelling area
rating, in addition to journey to work vari-
of males in the sample (see Table 1). Analy-
sis of the data showed that the median age
for the sample as a whole was 44.8 years.

The median weekly income for the home-
owners in the sample was $82.56, and the
median income for the renters in the sample
was $68.17 per week.

The data showing the occupational distri-
bution in Table 1 indicate that the sample
derived for this study tended to be skewed
toward the upper end of the occupational
scale. Although there is a high proportion
of home ownership in Spokane, the sample
is evidently biased in this direction (see
Table 1).
It has been pointed out that the mode of
travel in our cities is related to the size of
the city. Duncan found that the use of the
automobile does not diminish appreciably in
American cities of moderate size, despite
the opportunity of reaching the place of
work through other means.’ He found that
in six cities of 100,000 to 500,000 popula-
tion, there was a median of 72 per cent who
arrived in private automobiles. The present
study of Spokane found that 73 per cent of
the sample used an automobile to travel to
work.

The sub-hypothesis involving the relation-
ship in mode of travel and the daily cost of
transporation to work was rejected. (All sta-
tistically significant findings are shown in
Table 2.) Analysis shows that the differ-
ences in mode of travel with respect to the
cost of the journey to work were significant
beyond the .001 level. The cost of the
journey to work was greater for a larger
number of commuters using an automobile
than for those using other means of trans-
portation, particularly public transportation.
The median cost of traveling to work one-
way for those using an automobile was 26
cents per day; for those not using an auto-
mobile the cost was 14 cents per day. The
median cost of the journey to work one-way
for the total sample was 18 cents per day.
Certainly, the argument that it costs more
money to use an automobile to travel to work
is borne out by these figures. This does not
necessarily argue for using public transporta-
tion, as is so often done by planners and
traffic experts, for the use of the automobile
is now considered a necessity by many
Americans. It has, to be sure, become a part
of the urban way of life, tied in with the
growing separation of work-place from place
of residence.

The question of the validity and reliability
of the measure of cost of travel to work might
be legitimately raised. This is undoubtedly
a complex problem, and the technique used
in this study of asking people to estimate
the costs of driving their car is admittedly
deficient. A more satisfactory alternative
would have been to have the respondents
keep a record of all expenses within a given
time period and to mail the record to the
investigator at the end of that period.

It was hypothesized that there would be
no statistically significant differences in the
mode of travel to work with respect to the
time involved in travel to work. (Time is
used here as an index to the distance be-
tween workplace and residence.) No signifi-
cant differences were found between those
who walk or use public transportation and,
on the other hand, those who use a private
automobile. Of those respondents who ar-
rived at work in less than ten minutes, 71.4
per cent of them traveled via an automo-
bile; for those who arrived at work in 10-19
minutes from the time they left home, 73.8
per cent traveled by automobile. Analysis
of the data showed that at the extremes of
the time involved in getting to work, ie.,
the lower as well as the upper, the automo-
bile users were in the majority.

The median time involved in going to
work for those using an auto was 17.0 min-
utes, and for those not using an auto the
median time was slightly higher, 19.0; for
the total sample, the median time was 17.5
minutes. A thirty minute commuting time
in an automobile is equivalent to traveling
a distance of about fifteen miles. Hence, the
median distance traveled in Spokane was
eight and one-half miles for those using an
automobile. This is a rather high figure for
a city of this size, but it may be partially
explained by the fact that many workers
living in Spokane commute to an industrial
suburb to work in the aluminum mills. The
data indicate that the automobile does lend
a certain flexibility to the worker with re-
spect to increasing the separation between
his place of work and his residence.

The sub-hypothesis concerned with the re-
lationship of owners and non-owners of auto-
mobiles and their mode of travel to work
was rejected by the data. The differences
between these two groups was significant
beyond the .001 level, with the preponder-
ant number of owner-respondents traveling
to work either in their own or some other
person’s automobile. Ownership of an auto-
mobile undoubtedly influences the manner
used to journey to work. Indeed, the spread
of automobile ownership to all segments of
society has led city planners to the belief
of those using public transportation to travel
to work, 91.6 per cent lived within two
blocks of public transportation. Residential
proximity to public transportation did not
appear to be a factor in automobile owner-
ship. Analysis showed no significant differ-
ence in automobile ownership and non-own-
ership with respect to distance to public
transportation.

Sex Differentials. One of the purposes of
this study was to establish, in addition to
the characteristics of occupation and in-
come, the differential sex characteristics in
regard to mode, time, and cost involved in
traveling between place of residence and the
place of work. Analysis of the data by sex
characteristics with regard to commuting
time to work failed to yield statistically sig-
nificant differences. Are there differences be-
tween the male and female working popula-
the dynamics of urban working life. The
data indicate that there are significant dif-
ferences in the cost of the mode of travel,
with the user of the automobile paying the
higher cost for the convenience of driving to
work in an automobile. Since these data indi-
cate that the female worker in Spokane tends
to ride to work in public transportation, we
would expect that the costs of the journey
to work would be differentiated on the basis
of sex, i.e., it costs the women less money to
get to work than it does the men. This was
borne out by the results which showed that
for those spending 20 cents or less to travel
to work one-way, 51.5 per cent were males
and 80.5 per cent were females.
Socio-economic Status Differentials: In-
come. A major determinant of status in our
society is the amount of income earned by
an individual. Ogburn has appropriately
raised the question: “How do the length of
the journey to work and the mode of travel
vary with income . . . how prevalent is
the tendency for higher income workers to
live greater distances from work?” ® A cross-
tabulation between income per week of the
respondents and time involved in the journey
to work showed that there were no statisti-
cally significant differences. According to
the data in this sample of Spokane, distance
between place of residence and place of
work, as measured by time involved in getting
to work, was not differentiated on the basis
of income. These findings are in disagree-
ment with those of Carroll who found that
lower income groups tend to live closer to
work,2°

The relationship between cost of the jour-
ney to work and income per week was tested
and also showed no statistically significant
differences. Analysis of the percentage differ-
ences of the income groups in terms of cost
of travel showed that they were in the ex-
pected direction although the over-all differ-
ences were not statistically significant.

Statistically significant differences (P=
001) were found in the income of respond-
ents with respect to their mode of travel to
work. There were few respondents in this
sample who walked to work; the majority of
the respondents in the category “without
auto” used public transportation. It is note-
worthy to observe that the mode of travel
was particularly differentiated in the ex-
tremes; only 1.5 per cent of the respondents
using an automobile to travel to work had
a weekly income of $39 or less, whereas 32.3
per cent had incomes of $100 or more.
Furthermore, the two middle-income cate-
gories of $60-$79 and $80-$90 showed little
differentiation in the mode of travel to work.
These findings again are in conflict with
Carroll’s research in Masachusetts where he
found that the lower income groups were
more likely than upper income groups to use
automobiles to travel to work.1! It should be
recalled that Carroll’s study was made in a
more developed, heavily populated, industrial
center in the East, where the phenomenon of
suburbanization and the commuter train is
widespread. On the other hand, the cities
of the West, such as Spokane, tend to have
large areas of relatively sparsely-settled land
within the corporate limits. In this city, as
in others, the outer zone has been developed
for middle-class residences. The phenomenon
of the commuter train is non-existent here;
the automobile is the major vehicle of trans-
portation. The public transportation system
does serve these areas, but this is not rapid
transportation, and the resident of these
areas utilizes his automobile to travel to
work.

Socio-Economic Status Differentials: Oc-
cupation. A person’s occupation may be con-
sidered to be of primary importance in the
assignment of that person to a given class
position in society. Some have even con-
sidered it to be the most important single
factor in the constellation of items that enter
into determination of social class.1? The
Edwards’ occupational socio-economic status
scale was used to categorize the respondents
in this study; cross-tabulations of the occu-
pational classifications were then made with
the commuting data to determine the rela-
tionship between this variable and commut-
ing.

Analysis of the data by occupation and the
time involved in getting to work showed that
there were differences statistically significant
at the .01 level. The data show that re-
spondents in the upper socio-economic status
occupations tend to spend less time traveling
between their home and place of work than
the respondents in the lower socio-economic
status occupational categories.

There were no statistically significant dif-
ferences in occupational status of the re-
spondents with respect to the daily cost of
the journey to work. When the occupational
groups were dichotomized into “High” and
“Low” categories, the only differences noted
in the cost of the journey to work were that
30.3 per cent of the “High” occupational
group spent more than 30 cents in one-way
travel as compared to 26.5 per cent of the
respondents in the “Low” occupational cate-
gories.

No significant differences in occupation
were found with respect to the mode of travel
to work.

Socio-economic Status Differentials: Index
of Status Characteristics. The data were also
analyzed in terms of Warner’s Index of
Status Characteristics.1* Every respondent
was assigned a rating according to this tech-
nique; these ratings were then combined into
groupings for purposes of analysis. (Roughly
the groupings correspond with Middle Class,
Working Class, and Lower Class according
to the method suggested by Warner, et. al.)
The commuting data were then cross-tabu-
lated with the ISC rating and no statistically
significant differences were found. This find-
ing is interesting in the light of the results
obtained with income and occupation with
respect to the variables of mode of travel
and time.

Socio-economic Status Differentials:
Dwelling Area Rating. The sociological study
of the community has included the spatial
distribution of various types of residential
areas, e.g., Burgess’ descriptive categories of
“working men’s homes or ‘two-flat area’,
single-family dwellings and the restricted
district.” 14 Research has shown that income,
occupation, and in general, socio-economic
stratification is closely related to housing
variation. One basis for stratifying the popu-
lation of a community is to use the natural
residential area, in this case, census tracts,
and to assign relative ranks to each. It is
then possible to test hypotheses relating to
differences between residential areas and
time-distance, cost, and mode of travel in
the journey to work.

The method employed in this study to
classify the residential areas was based on
the techniques described by Warner, Meeker,
and Eells.1° They suggest the use of a seven
point scale ranging from “very high” to
“very low” to rank the areas. Each rating
in the present study applies to the census
tract in which the respondent lived. The
This study has provided data about the
commuting patterns and differences of vari-
Ous socio-economic groups in a medium-sized
city. Facts have been presented about the
mode of travel, commuting time, and com-
muting costs in the journey to work. Differ-
entials in these commuting characteristics
for major areas of the city, for each sex, for
each occupational group as well as socio-
economic characteristics were examined.

The results of the study suggest certain
implications for our changing social order.
The rather widespread ownership of the
automobile and its use as the major vehicle
of transportation in the daily journey to
work appear to render greater flexibility to
the breadwinner with regard to location of
his residence in terms of his place of work.
This flexibility of movement may have an
effect of reducing residential mobility, in-
creasing job mobility, and perhaps increasing
what Schnore calls the dysfunctional aspects
of the journey to work.

It is important to note that none of the
socio-economic status variables showed sta-
tistically significant differences with respect
to the cost of the journey to work. Income
N earlier paper+ presented data de-
A signed to throw light on the possible

selective aspect of rural-urban mi-
gration among youth in Missouri. The data
were drawn from a sample of young people
who attended high school in 116 Missouri
communities from 1939 to 1941 and whose
whereabouts in 1952 were known. The in-
vestigation seemed to support the conclu-
sion that migration from farms and small
towns in Missouri towards urban areas
during the period between 1940 and 1952
tended to be selective of those students with
higher scores on a standard intelligence test.
Both in terms of average score and in
terms of the proportion of those with highest
scores, the migrants seemed definitely su-
perior to the nonmigrants. Those who moved
to larger communities were superior to the
ones remaining at home or moving to smaller
towns, and those migrants who moved be-
yond state boundaries seemed superior to
those who remained within the State of
Missouri.

In the interpretation of the superior test
performance of migrants as compared to
nonmigrants, of migrants to cities as com-
pared to movers to small towns and farms,
or of long distance migrants as compared
to short distance ones, it was suggested that
intelligence in itself was probably not a

1C. T. Pihlblad and C. L. Gregory, “Selective
Aspects of Migration Among Missouri High School
Graduates,” American Sociological Review, 19
(June, 1954), pp. 314-324.
primary factor. There is probably no “natu-
ral tendency” for the less able to stay at
home and for those with higher capacity to
move. The explanation may lie in the fact
that those with higher test intelligence tend
to gravitate to occupations which are associ-
ated more with urban than with rural life.
That is, both in training opportunity and in
the pursuit of occupation, outlets tend to be
limited primarily to cities. The next steps in
the study, therefore, are to analyze the re-
lationship between intelligence ? and occupa-
tion and, secondly, to relate occupation
to various aspects of migration. We shall
undertake the first of these steps in this
paper, leaving the second for a later presenta-
tion.

The relationship between occupation and
test intelligence has been the subject of
considerable investigation.2 Most of the
