American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Competitive national politics have not
thrived in the postwar period. The number
of countries with multiparty politics has
declined while the number of one-party
and military regimes has risen each year
(see Sartori, 1976). Though the shift
toward hegemonic politics is so striking
that social scientists appear to be ac-
cepting the trend as inevitable and uni-
directional, the reality is more complex.
The change is not one-sided: some one-
party and military regimes return to mul-
tiparty conditions. Understanding the
nature of political change in the modern
world requires analysis of the causes of
the changes both into and out of
hegemonic politics.

Comparative sociology is not well pre-
pared theoretically or methodologically to
analyze these dynamics. Most of our
theories, by suggesting unidirectional
trends, tend to divert attention from the
details of the change process. When all of
the available data are examined, however,
this orientation appears inadequate. Much
observable change is simply not addressed
The forces that change political structure
have been discussed at length. We note
only the main lines of argument, concen-
trating on those that have an obvious
bearing on the dynamics we study.
Modernization theory. Most work on
political change uses a variant of general
modernization theory, which assumes that
there is basically only one successful de-
velopment strategy. The critical details of
strategy, according to the modernization
perspective, concern internal structural
arrangements. Any change that makes a
peripheral nation more like one of the
European liberal democracies is assumed
to increase the likelihood of ‘‘modern,”’
competitive (or even ‘‘democratic’’) poli-
tics. One variant of modernization theory,
following Lipset (1960), focuses on the
existence of ‘‘modern”’ cultural rules and
modernizing institutions that prepare in-
dividuals for effective political participa-
tion: a productive industrial economy, ur-
banism, and modern schooling. Nations
Dahl goes on to argue that advanced
economies require efficient systems of
communication and diverse specialized
organizations (see also Almond and Pow-
ell, 1966). The creation of such structures
‘tautomatically distribute[s] political re-
sources and political skills to a vast vari-
ety of individuals, groups, and organ-
izations’’ (Dahl, 1971:77). Decentraliza-
tion of political skills presumably creates
conditions for effective opposition to
coercion and for the creation of special-
interest movements.

Moore’s challenge. The modernization
theories have not gone unchallenged. A
variety of scholars—Marxists, neo-
Marxists, and others—have attacked the
view that all countries proceed along the
same developmental path. Moore (1966)
set the agenda for the modern debate by
showing that the nature of the struggle
that accompanies the creation of the mod-
er state profoundly affects subsequent
political development. Moreover, Moore
argues that the nature of successful coa-
litions depends on the timing of economic
development: later development differs
from early development (see the discus-
sion in Bollen, 1979). Though this argu-
ment yields important insights about the
nature of political change and the
structural inertia generated by initial con-
ditions, it overstates the case by implying
that countries cannot subsequently change
their political forms.

World-system perspective. Recent mod-
ernization theories have been challenged
by the world system perspective. Wal-
lerstein (1974) and others argue that
events are determined less by a country’s
internal structure than by its position in
the world division of labor and by the dis-
cipline of the world market. Countries in
different structural positions presumably
face different constraints which are due
primarily to the need for controlling dif-
ferent types of labor. As a result of these
different constraints, they typically de-
velop different political forms.' This
theory, like that of Moore, rejects the no-
tion of a single development path.

Of the three major perspectives men-
tioned here, two emphasize internal ar-
rangements. Both modernization theory
and Moore’s theory emphasize internal
developments. Modernization theory at-
tends to economic growth, investment in
human capital (e.g., education), and the
spread of modern institutions and formal
organizations. The work of Moore stresses
the long-run effects of the political
struggle that creates the modern state and
the timing of development. Moore argues
that different development paths hold for
states formed in different periods.

The third view, world system theory,
explains variations in political forms in
terms of a country’s structural location in
the world economy. Moreover, it suggests
that countries are not quite so trapped by
their origins as the other theories imply.
As positions in the world economy shift,
political forms ought to shift accordingly
(see Chase-Dunn and Rubinson, 1979).

The three perspectives disagree about
two fundamental features of the process of
political change: (1) the relative im-
portance of internal events and external
relations, and (2) the degree to which
modern politics is constrained by history.
Though we consider these two issues in
our analysis, we do not attempt to com-
pare the fit of explicit models drawn from
the three perspectives. The existing com-
parative data are not equally well suited
for analyzing all three. arguments. The
data available are most appropriate for
testing the modernization hypothesis. By
contrast, there is little broadly compara-
tive data on the relative power of major
segments of society at the period of mod-
ern state building.

A more important reason for not testing
explicit models is that each of the per-
spectives implies more determinism in
political development than we see in the
data for 1950-1975. None of the perspec-
tives prepares us to deal with the consid-
erable variety of political changes that we
observe. Consequently, we try to use
existing theory, but we also attempt to
exploit the richness of the data on the
timing of political change. We study the
effects of available measures of internal
social structure and external position of
countries on the rate of political change.
We examine the effects of some of the
features identified by modernization
theory: economic development,*? expan-
sion of modern schooling, and urbaniza-
tion. To consider the historicity of the
change process, we examine the effects of
the timing of state building (the date of
national independence). And we study the
effects of one widely used measure of po-
sition in the world system: export-partner
concentration. The effects of such dimen-
sions on political dynamics are important
in formulating substantive models of the
change process.
and changes that occur within a form.
Given our interest in formal hegemony*
and the degree to which formal authority
is located in a single organization in soci-
ety, we devote special attention to states
with only one party or in which parties
have been abolished. Military dictator-
ships are included as states in which par-
ties have been abolished. Both of these
centralist forms are distinguished from
traditional states without parties and from
states that have minimal levels of formal
political opposition in the government:
states with two or more active (legal) par-
ties.4 In all, we identify four forms of or-
ganization:

Traditional no-party states: gov-
ernments ruled by traditional rulers and
traditional elites. These countries are usu-
ally monarchies (e.g., Libya, Jordan), and
party organizations are illegal.

Military regimes: states in which the
military rules, whether or not parties have
been abolished. There are two subclasses:
(a) constitutional military rule—e.g.,
Ghana; and (b) military coups—e.g.,
Ethiopia.

One-party states: states with only one
legal party represented in the legislature,
e.g., China, Czechoslovakia, U.S.S.R.;
those with a single major party and several
subordinates, e.g., Poland; and states in
which a single party consistently domi-
nates despite the legal existence of oppo-
sition parties—e.g., Mexico, Iran.

Multiparty states: the residual category
which includes states with two parties or
more.*

We use data from Banks (1977) to re-
cord moves among these four categories.®
In Table 3 we report the coding of specific
countries.

The data give yearly readings on posi-
tion in this category system for 140 na-
tions. Though Banks (1977) sometimes re-
ports the date of the event (e.g., dates of
coups), dates are not available for all
changes. Thus, we associate events with
the year in which they occur.

To compare the results from our ap-
proach with those of more conventional
methods we use standard measures of na-
tional characteristics. Our measures and
their sources are:

(a) level of economic development:
gross national product per capita in con-
stant 1973 U.S. dollars (IBRDW, 1976;
AID, various years);

(b) spread of modern organizations and
institutions: level of urbanism (Davis,
1969; United Nations Demographic
Yearbook—various years); and en-
rollments in primary, secondary, and ter-
tiary education (UNESCO, various
years);

(c) position in the world economy:
export-partner concentration measured as
the fraction of a country’s exports that go
to the largest trading partner (UN Year-
books of International Trade Statistics,
various years)—see Chase-Dunn (1975)
and Delacroix (1977), and Rubinson (1977)
for discussions of the measurement and
interpretation of this variable;

(d) timing of state building: date of na-
tional independence (Taylor and Hudson,
1971);

(e) ethnic diversity: we use a simple
measure of population diversity—the
measure of ethno-linguistic fractionaliza-
tion compiled by Taylor and Hudson
(1971) from the Atlas Narovda Mira. This
index gives the probability that two indi-
viduals from a country sampled at random
belong to the same ethno-linguistic group.
The minimum value of the index is zero,
indicating complete homogeneity. The
maximum value depends on the number of
distinct ethnic groups; the more groups,
the higher the ceiling on this index. Thus,
this index gives high values to countries
that have many distinct ethnicities and a
fairly uniform distribution of the popula-
tion across ethnicities. This means that
the highest diversity scores are for sub-
Saharan African countries such as Tan-
zania (.93), Uganda (.90) and Nigeria
(.87). However, some countries from
other regions also have high scores, e.g.,
India (.89), Indonesia (.76), Iran (.76), and
Canada (.75). The Soviet Union (.67),
Belgium (.56), Switzerland (.50), and the
U.S. (.50) also fall above the mean of .40.
This index gives lowest diversity
scores—only .01 each—to Haiti, Japan,
and Portugal.

We add as control variables:

(f) population (UN Demographic Year-
book, various years); and

(g) dummy variables for region: Africa,
Asia, Central America, and South
America.

Measures of all these variables are
available for only 90 of the 140 countries
for which we have measures on the de-
pendent variable.
and show how our methodology differs
from common practice. This discussion
has substantive importance because we
will show that event-history analysis gives
findings different from those of more con-
ventional methods.

A. Panel Analysis: Table 1 records the
data in the conventional panel framework:
a cross-tabulation of destination by origin
for the 1950-1975 period.” It shows a
sharp rise in military regimes and one-
party states over the 25-year period, as we
remarked at the outset. Indeed, 76% of the
newly independent states end up in one of
the two centralist forms.

The panel framework wastes much of
the information available in these data; it
ignores sequences and timing of events.
We pay a high price for disregarding such
information. The process of change in
political forms has at least two properties:
changes may occur at any time (there is no
fixed lag time in the process); and ran-
domness plays a central role. Therefore
the most natural modeling framework is
the class of continuous-time stochastic
processes with discrete-state space. In
this framework, the panel data consist of
observations at two arbitrary times of the
states of N (independent) stochastic
processes—observation records with
gaps. We normally assume all N units
have the same process, so that we think of
the data as N replications of the same
process. The fundamental difficulties with
the panel framework in this context con-
cern embedding and model identification.
Singer and Spilerman (1976a; 1976b)
prove that a two-wave panel does not
provide enough information to identify
uniquely an underlying process even
under highly restrictive assumptions (e.g.,
invoking the Markov property). This is
not an estimation problem; it is a more
fundamental, logical difficulty.

B. Analysis of Transitions: Table 2 re-
ports data in a form similar to that of Table
1 except that the entries count all ob-
served transitions between states. Due to
multiple changes for many countries, we
observe 206 transitions. Table 2 tells a
rather different story from Table 1. Not
surprisingly it gives the impression of
much greater movement. Notice how
much smaller than in Table | are the
counts on the main diagonal. For exam-
ple, Table 1 shows that 72% of the coun-
tries that began with multiparty systems
had the same form of organization 25
years later. Table 2 tells that only 49% of
the spells that begin in the multiparty
category do not move to some other form.
In addition, new states (those becoming
independent after 1950) have a distribu-
tion of initial forms that is quite different
from the array of 1975 outcomes (compare
the bottom rows in the two tables). Inclu-
sion of data on transitions gives slightly
more leverage for model identification,
but it does not come close to using all the
information.

C. Event Sequences: Since Table 2
Table 2. Counts of Transitions?

 

No party (1)

Military (2)
Origin One party (3)
Multiparty (4)

Colony (5)

No party (1)

Military (2)

Destination

One Party (3)

Multiparty (4)

 

2
(.50)

 

 

1
(.25)
2
(.48)
18
(.47)
31
(.39)
1
(.03)

73

0

(.15)

19
(.50)

GID)
16

  

31

       
   
   
   
    

1 4
(.25)

17 46
(.37)

1 38
(.03)

39 80
(.49)

20 38
(.53)

78 206

 

@ Counts on the main diagonal record observations that are censored—i.e., still in the state in 1975.
Table 3. Transition Sequences of Political Structures by Country

 

 

Sequence* Frequency Countries

12 1 Afghanistan

141 1 Nepal

2424 1 El Salvador

24242 1 Peru

2434 1 Thailand

3 5 Mexico, Nicaragua, China, Taiwan, Spain

32 1 Portugal

323 1 Egypt

324 1 Dominican Republic

4 22 South Africa, Canada, Costa Rica, United States, India, Israel, Japan, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, France, West Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Nether-
lands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, Australia, Iceland

42 6 Panama, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, Indonesia, Syria

423232 1 Bolivia

424 4 Colombia, Venezuela, Turkey, Greece

4242 1 Ecuador

42423 1 Burma

42424 1 Argentina

424242 1 Honduras

4242424 1 Guatemala

43 1 Philippines

51 1 Kuwait

52 1 Botswana

53 8 Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda, Rhodesia, Tanzania, Singapore

532 6 Algeria, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Mali, Niger

53232 1 Upper Volta

5323232323 1 Benin (Dahomy)

54 8 Mauritius, Jamaica,Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, Cyprus, Malaysia, Malta, New
Guinea

542 4 Zaire, Nigeria, Somalia, Togo

5423 1 Sierra Leone

543 5 Cameroon, Gabon, Gambia, Mauritania, Zambia

5432 2 Congo (Brazzaville), Uganda
back and forth between multiparty and
military.

Suppose that the parameters of the un-
derlying stochastic process are
constant—i.e., that there is no heteroge-
neity in transition rates due to social
structural variations among countries. In
this extreme simplification, one can use
event sequences directly to test among
classes of models. For example, Singer
(1977) shows how to test the Markov
property with straightforward conditional
probability arguments (see also Billingsley
(1961) and Goodman [1968]).

Some simple calculations of various
conditional probabilities show that mul-
tistep moves involving transiting between
multiparty and military do not fit a con-
stant rate Markov model. If we assumed
that the rates were indeed constants over
all N units (i.e., that the countries are
homogeneous on all relevant dimensions),
these calculations would force us to aban-
don the Markov assumption. However,
because we assume that social structural
differences do indeed affect transition
rates, the rates are not constant. Under
these conditions, the Markov property
cannot be tested so simply. Some of the
apparent dependence on history may re-
flect the continued operation of stable
causal variables that we include in the
analysis reported below. Unfortunately,
inasmuch as we do not have enough cases
to conduct causal analysis separately for
various sequences, we cannot perform a
full-blown test of the Markov property
given heterogeneity. However, we do pre-
sent an analysis strategy that addresses
this issue indirectly.

D. Event-History Analysis: An event
history adds information on timing to an
event sequence. The main value of using
event histories is that the identification
problem discussed above does not arise in
such an extreme form.® Strategies for
event-history analysis have been dis-
cussed at length elsewhere (Tuma and
Hannan, 1978; Tuma et al., 1979; Hannan
and Tuma, 1979). We repeat here only the
essential details.

® More precisely, event histories eliminate the
identification problem as long as we restrict attention
a priori to a certain class of models, e.g., Markov
processes.
where t’ denotes the time of entry into the
political form occupied at t. Our goal is to
estimate the a’s, the effects of observable
variables on transition rates (or on hazard
functions).?

We use specifications that differ on two
dimensions: (1) Markov vs. more general
forms of dependence on history; and (2)
time homogeneity vs. time dependence.
As is well known, the Markov property
holds that history (the record of previous
state occupancies) does not affect the fu-
ture of the process once we take present
state into account. Under the Markov as-
sumption we may pool all the spells en-
numerated in Table 2 into a single
analysis. We report such analyses and
label them ‘‘all-spell’? analyses. If the
Markov assumption does not hold, it is
not legitimate to pool spells for the same
country; history must be taken into ac-
count. We have too few observations to
conduct any extensive non-Markovian
analysis. Instead, we report analyses that
use only the first spells for each country
(following 1950 or date of independence,
whichever is later). If the first spell results
differ substantially from those that use all
spells, we suspect. that ignoring higher-
order dependence gives misleading qual-
itative conclusions regarding causal ef-
fects.1°

The second dimension in our design
concerns assumptions about the variabil-
ity of hazards over time. We take two
approaches. In the first we assume that,
conditional on levels of exogenous vari-
ables upon entry into a state (or 1950,
whichever is later), the rates are constant.
For this case, we use maximum-likelihood
estimators of the sort described by Tuma
et al. (1979). Our second approach as-
sumes a general, but unknown, form of
time variation. Specifically, we assume
that the hazard is:
Before presenting our main findings, we
review the results of a parallel study that
used panel methods. Thomas et al.
(1979)—hereafter called TRMG—argue
that there is a testable difference between
the modernization and the world system
perspective. If the world system argument
is correct—once the level of development
(GNP per capita) and dependence in the
world economy have been taken into
account—education, urbanism, and other
modernizing factors should not affect
rates of political change.

In order to test this hypothesis, they
estimated panel regressions of two mea-
sures of state centralism in 1975. These
regressions reveal consistent negative ef-
fects of per capita GNP on the tendency to
change toward state centralism. This
finding holds both when centralism is
measured as military rule and when mili-
tary regimes and one-party states are
combined into one category. While this
study gave no evidence that other
modernizing experiences (urbanism,
schooling, etc.) affect centralism, it did
find that two measures of national eco-
nomic dependence (export-partner con-
centration and investment dependence)
significantly increase centralism. Thus,
these researchers conclude that the data
favor the world system perspective.

In order to illustrate that choice of
method makes a substantive difference,

 

timator has only recently been extended to the case
of multiple destinations (or competing risks), see
Holt (1978) and Prentice et al. (1978).

'2 We have also estimated models with explicit
time dependence (and those which take into account
changes in levels of independent variables during
spells). In particular, we used the so-called Gom-
pertz specification that permits the transition rates to
decline exponentially with duration in a state. This
specification did not significantly improve the fit rel-
ative to the simpler models.
our analysis uses most of the same inde-
pendent variables'? and the same time pe-
riod, 1950-1975.

A. Effects on Changes of All Types:
First, we analyze whether the measured
socioeconomic conditions affect overall
rates of movement among political forms.
Only four of the variables we examined
had significant effects:'* GNP per capita,
population, ethnic diversity, and region (a
set of dummy variables). Table 4 gives the
relevant findings. High levels of both na-
tional productivity and population de-
crease rates of political change. We pay
particular attention to the GNP effect. The
estimates in Table 4 imply huge dif-
ferences in rates of political change by
level of development. Given the con-
ventional demarcation between developed
and developing countries at roughly
$1,000 GNP per capita, these estimates
imply strong effects of changes in GNP
over the whole range of development. At
the same time, they suggest that GNP has
little effect on rates of political change
among the most developed or core coun-
tries (but see Appendix for a discussion of
the functional form of the GNP effect).

Table 4 shows close agreement between
maximum-likelihood and partial-
likelihood estimates.'5 Although this
agreement suggests that causal effects are
not confounded with possible temporal
variation in rates of political change due to
world system processes or political
trends, analyses using only first spells do
not always agree with those using all
spells. In the case of GNP and population,
the effects are stronger in the analysis of
first spells. However, there is not much
substantive difference between the find-
ings for the first-spell and all-spell
analyses regarding the qualitative effects
of these two variables. In the case of
ethnic diversity and region, the two types
of analysis give radically different results.
In the all-spells analysis, both ethnic di-
versity and the regional terms have sig-
nificant effects. The diversity effect is also
quite strong; it implies a two-and-a-half-
fold increase in the rate between the ob-
served minimum and maximum values of
diversity. However, neither diversity nor
region have large or significant effects in
the first-spells analysis. This difference
suggests that ethnically diverse countries
contribute disproportionately to multiple
changes of political form. This difference
in findings between methods may also
mean that the Markov assumption is not
appropriate here. As we have stated,
however, our data do not permit analyses
that discriminate between these two ex-
planations. Until we learn more about this
problem, we must give less weight to the
all-spells analysis which relies so heavily
on the Markov assumption.

In all of these analyses we also searched
for effects of date of independence (en-
tered as a metric variable), urbanization,
and levels of educational enrollments. In
no case did we find either substantial or
statistically significant effects. Because,
even in the subsequent stages of analysis
reported here, no evidence of such effects
was ever found, we will not further dis-
cuss these efforts here.

B. Effects on Movement out of Specific
States: Next, we disaggregate spells by
origin and repeat analyses such as those in
Table 4 to find whether the effects differ
by each origin category. TRMG’s analysis
suggests that the GNP effect will vary
sharply by origin. According to their
argument, richer nations should be less
likely to move out of noncentralist forms
and more likely to move out of centralist
forms. Our results are quite different. We
find that GNP has a stronger inhibiting
effect on the rate of moving from one-
party politics than on the rate of leaving
‘the multiparty form. At the same level of
wealth, one-party states are at least as
likely to retain their form of organization
as are states with multiple parties.
Recall that Table 4 showed that ethni-
cally diverse states are more likely to
change political forms. Tables 5 and 6
show that the effect holds particularly for
multiparty states. Apparently, states with
both a high level of ethnic diversity and a
political structure that legitimates political
organization of such diversity are es-
pecially unstable. At the same time,
ethnic diversity decreases the rate of
leaving the one-party category (see Table
5). Thus, it appears that ethnically diverse
states are likely to transit from the mul-
tiparty form. If they move to one-party
rule, they are unlikely to change further.
None of the variables in Table 5 has any
substantial or significant impact on the
rate of abandoning military rule. In par-
ticular, military regimes, unlike nonmili-
tary centralist states, do not benefit in
terms of stability from national produc-
tivity.

C. Effects on Entering Categories: We
now reverse our procedure and, ignoring
origins, examine effects on flows into the
four categories. The relevant findings,
which appear in Table,7, agree with the
panel regressions of TRMG. High levels
of GNP per capita yield low rates of mov-
ing into the two centralist forms, military
and one-party. Moreover, there is a sug-
gestion of a positive effect of GNP on
rates of transition to the multiparty form
only in the first-spells analysis.

The most striking finding in Table 7 is
the impact of ethnic diversity on flows
into the one-party form. Ethnic diversity
exerts a strong force on movement toward
one-party rule. The smaller estimate of
this effect, in Panel B, implies that the rate
for countries close to the mean on diver-
sity (.5) is more than two-and-a-half times
larger than that for completely homoge-
neous countries; countries close to the
maximum (with diversity scores of .9)
have an estimated rate six times larger
than completely homogeneous countries.

D. Effects on Specific Transition
Rates: Finally, we turn to the detailed
findings regarding causal effects on spe-
cific transitions. Even ignoring the no-
party form, there are 12 distinct tran-
sitions and, thus, 12 sets of parameters to
be estimated. Consequently, we get rather
imprecise estimates of effects. We do not
report the estimates but, instead, discuss
the patterns that appear.

On the whole, the detailed findings sug-
gest that our results on rates of leaving
states (ignoring destinations) and on rates
of entry (ignoring origins) give a rea-
sonably accurate picture of the process.
Recall that we find that GNP and popula-
Our event-history analysis agrees partly
with previous research. Like TRMG, we
find no evidence that modernizing experi-
ences and institutions affect rates of
change in political forms. Like Bollen
(1979), we find that the date of formal
independence does not affect the change
process (though it certainly affects the
1950 distribution of political forms).

Not all our findings, however, agree
with previous studies. The most interest-
ing comparison between panel and
event-history analyses concerns the im-
pacts of GNP per capita. Previous panel
regressions support the common conten-
tion that development reduces the likeli-
hood of political centralism. Our general
findings regarding GNP effects agree with
the panel regressions in one respect, but
disagree in another. The two analyses
agree concerning the existence of effects
on movement toward centralism: richer
countries are less likely to move from
multiparty politics to one-party or military
tule. In this respect, the conventional
wisdom appears correct. However, we
also find that countries with high per
capita GNPs are less likely to change
political forms, whatever the form. The
effect holds with equal force for the most
common centralist form (one party) and
for the decentralist form (multiparty).
Stated loosely, successful countries retain
their political strategies. This gives a very
different image of the underlying dynamic
process.

There is another important difference
between the panel and event-history
findings. We, unlike TRMG, find no evi-
dence that dependency, as measured by
export-partner concentration, affects
political stability or the direction of
change.

Event-history methods (but not panel
regressions) support the widespread belief
that ethnic diversity destabilizes politics,
especially competitive politics. However,
the interpretation of this relationship is
problematic.'® Diversity may simply
undermine political bargaining and
explode coalition politics as some political
scientists argue. Thus, ethnically diverse
countries might require overarching sym-
bols of nationhood that can be filled only
by a hegemonic state structure, or the re-
lationship might be more contingent and
dynamic. Elsewhere, one of us (Hannan,
1979; see also Nielsen, 1980, and Olzak,
1978) has argued that expansion of state
structures may create the conditions for
successful large-scale ethnic resistance to
the state. Alterations in the forms of
political structure (especially toward for-
mal hegemony) presumably create and
intensify ethnic conflicts which, in turn,
may destabilize politics. Unfortunately,
the data at hand do not contain sufficient
detaii on ethnic organization and collec-
tive action to permit more refined
analyses of these issues. We think that
this matter should have high priority in the
continuing research on political change.

Further research on the effect of ethnic
composition of a country on political
dynamics should also consider dimensions
other than simple diversity. Ethnic diver-
sity as measured here bears most directly
on arguments that stress the importance of
cultural homogeneity on the political pro-
cess, but homogeneity is not the orily rel-
evant factor. Surely the size distribution
of the ethnic populations affects political
dynamics. However, the diversity index
does not distinguish between the case in
which a country’s population is split into
two equal-sized ethnic groups and the
case in which two-thirds of the population
belongs to one ethnicity and the remaining
population is evenly split between two
other ethnicities. In each case the diver-
sity index is one half; the odds that two
randomly selected individuals have the
same ethnicity is .5. However, these two
distributions undoubtedly have different
political implications. In the latter case,
one ethnicity has at least numerical domi-
nance. No coalition between the remain-
ing populations can offset this advantage.
In the case of an even split, small changes
in circumstances for one population may
greatly alter the political equilibrium be-
tween the two populations.

It would seem useful to analyze the sep-
arate effects of the number of ethnic
populations with more than some minimal
share of the national population and of the
size distribution of ethnic populations
within a country. Such studies will clarify
the impact of ethnic demography on na-
tional political dynamics. Once these
elementary questions are understood, we
can address more fundamental questions
concerning the niche structures of ethnic
populations—e.g., cultural divisions of
labor (Hechter, 1974); split-labor markets
(Bonacich, 1972); and intergroup compe-
tition (Hannan, 1979).

In conclusion, we emphasize that
choice between methodologies makes an
important substantive difference. Panel
regressions and event-history analysis
give different qualitative findings regard-
ing the core issues that motivated this
study. We also argue that the methods
which we used make better use of avail-
able data and provide a more sound foot-
ing for further comparative research than
more traditional methods.
-100

“75
a
lo
FE
i
Wo -50
x<
tu
an)
Wo -25
a
ui
wn
a
Q
0

25

 

 
 

 

 

oO

[ °°
[ ° °
L ° °
L 8 ° <
L °
r % 9
| i °
L © °
L o£ 60 ®o 6 o 4
bog @ $35° ©
L $@ OVO Soy OO }
c bo. Oo
5 So °
r °
L @
L 4 | 1 1 4 1. | 1 4 4 4 | joj td | 1 1 1 |
800 1000

200 400 600
GR@SS NATIONAL PRODUCT PER CAPITA

Figure A2. Log-Linear Effect of GNP
|

 

oO

   

  

LPG-LINEAR M@DEL

1 | 1 4 4 1 | 1 1 1 L | 4 4 1 1 | 1 4 L 1 J

200 400 600 800 1000
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT PER CAPITA
the effect of GNP per capita is strongest near zero
and declines monotonically. We now compare the
log-linear model with a model having a threshold. We
use a function r(t) = exp[aG?], (where G is per capita
GNP) that permits the relationship between GNP
and the rate of political change to have a backward-S
shape. All the qualitative conclusions of the paper
are unchanged when we use this alternative specifi-
cation for the GNP effect. GNP still has a very sub-
stantial (and statistically significant) negative effect
on the overall rate of movement. The effects of other
variables are also unaffected by the change in the
model.

Still the two specifications give different im-
pressions of the nature of the process. Figure A.1
plots the multipliers of the base rate of political
change as functions of GNP for both specifications.
The log-square form tells that there is almost no
difference in rates of change between countries with
GNPs of $50 and $200; the curve is almost horizon-
tal. The log-linear model implies a large difference in
rates between these two levels of GNP. That is, the
two specifications have quite different implications
about the relationship of GNP per capita to political
stability for the least developed nations.

Given this difference, we would like to use data to
choose between the specifications. Since the two
models are not hierarchically nested, we cannot use
classical hypothesis-testing procedures to discrimi-
nate between them. The usual alternative procedure
is to use calculated residuals for specification tests.
Unfortunately, since r;, is not observable, we cannot
look directly at residuals (observed minus predicted
rates). Instead we use the fact that expected
duration="/ry, and calculate observed minus pre-
dicted durations in states. We encounter another
problem, however; since censored observations do
not have completed observations, we can calculate
residuals only over the uncensored spells. Clearly
this amounts to selection on the basis of an endoge-
nous characteristic which will generally lead to sys-
tematic differences between selected and unselected
samples. Nonetheless, we overlook this defect in the
procedure and calculate residuals for completed
spells for countries in the range in which the specifi-
cations disagree (GNP<$1,000). This procedure
must be judged cautiously.

The plots of calculated residuals appear in Figures
A.2 and A.3. The log-linear specification predicts
somewhat better for the poorest countries (GNP <
200). Changes in GNP below this level apparently
have a larger effect than the log-square model im-
plies, but the log-square predicts better over the
range from 200 to, roughly, 800. So we still cannot
choose between the two simple specifications.
Perhaps a more complex model can improve the fits
we achieved. Given the substantive importance of
the differences between these formulations, this
matter deserves attention.
ington: AID Statistical and Reports Di-
vision
Almond, Gabriel A., and G. Bingham Powell, Jr.

1966 Comparative Politics: A Developmental

Approach. Boston: Little, Brown.
Banks, Arthur S.

1977 Political Handbook of the World. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Banks, Arthur S., and Robert Textor

1963 A Cross-Polity Survey. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Billingsley, P.

1961 Statistical Inference in Markov Processes.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blondel, Jean

1969 Introduction to Comparative Government.

New York: Praeger.
Bollen, Kenneth A.

1979 ‘Political democracy and the timing of de-
velopment.’’ American Sociological Re-
view 44:572-87.

Bonacich, Edna

1972 ‘*A theory of ethnic antagonism: the split
labor market.’” American Sociological Re-
view 37:547-59.

Chase-Dunn, Christopher

1975 ‘International economic dependence in the
world system.’’ Ph.D. dissertation, De-
partment of Sociology, Stanford Univer-
sity.

Chase-Dunn, Christopher, and Richard Rubinson

1979 ‘‘Cycles, trends, and new departures in
world-system development.”’ Pp. 276-96 in
J. Meyer and M. Hannan (eds.), National
Development and the World System.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Cox, D. R.

1972 ‘*Regression models and life tables.”’ Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Series B,
34: 187-220.

Dahl, Robert A.

1971 Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition.

New Haven: Yale University Press.
Davis, Kingsley

1969 World Urbanization, 1950-1970. Vol. 1.
Population Monograph Series No. 4. Berke-
ley: University of California Press.

Delacroix, Jacques

1977 ‘‘The permeability of information bound-
aries and economic growth.’ Studies in
Comparative International Development
12:3-28.

Deutsch, Karl W.

1961 *‘*Social mobilization and political develop-
ment.’ American Political Science Review
55:493-514.

Duverger, Maurice.

1968 **La sociologie des partis politiques.’’ Pp.
22-45 in G. Gurvitch (ed.), Traite de
sociologie. Vol. II (3rd ed.) Paris: Presses
Universitaires.

Goodman, Leo A.

1968 ‘Analysis of cross-classified data: inde-
pendence, quasi-independence, and in-
teractions in contingency tables with or
without missing entries.’ Journal of Ameri-
can Statistical Association 63:1091-1131.
Hannan, Michael T.

1979 ‘The dynamics of ethnic boundaries in
modern states.”’ Pp. 253-75 in J. Meyer and
M. Hannan (eds.), National Development
and the World System. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Hannan, Michael T., and Nancy Brandon Tuma

1979 ‘‘Methods of temporal analysis.’’ Annual
Review of Sociology 5:303-28.

Hannan, Michael T., Nancy Brandon Tuma, and
Lyle P. Groeneveld

1978 ‘*Income and independence effects on mar-
ital dissolution: evidence from the Seattle-
Denver Income Maintenance Experiment.””
American Journal of Sociology 84:611-33.

Hechter, Michael

1974 “The political economy of ethnic change.”

American Journal of Sociology 79: 1151-78.
Holt, J. D.

1978 ‘*Competing risk analyses with special ref-
erence to matched pair experiments.”
Biometrika 65:159-65.

Huntington, Samuel P.

1968 Political Order in Changing Societies. New

Haven: Yale University Press.
International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
opment

1976 World Tables. Washington, D.C.: IBRD

LaPalombara, Joseph, and Martin Weiner (eds.)
1966 Political Parties and Political Development.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lipset, Seymour Martin
1960 Political Man. Garden City: Doubleday.
Meyer, John W., and Michael T. Hannan (eds.)

1979 National Development and the World Sys-
tem: Educational, Economic and Political
change, 1950-1970. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Meyer, John W., and Michael T. Hannan.

1979 ‘Issues for further comparative research.””
In J. W. Meyer, and M. T. Hannan (eds.),
National Development and the World Sys-
tem: Educational, Economic and Political
Change, 1950-1970. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Moore, Barrington

1966 Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democ-
racy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the
Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press.

Nielsen, Frangois

1980 ‘*“*The Flemish movement in Belgium after
World War II: a dynamic analysis.’’ Ameri-
can Sociological Review 45:76-94.

Olson, Mancur

1963 ‘‘Rapid growth as a destabilizing force.”

Journal of Economic History 23:529-58.
Olzak, Susan M.

1978 ‘*An ecological-competitive model of the
emergence of ethnicity: the French-
Canadian example.’’ Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Sociology, Stanford Univer-
sity.

Prentice, R. L., J. D. Kalfleisch, A. V. Peterson, Jr.,
N. Florour, V. T. Farewell, and N. E. Breslow

1978 **The analysis of failure times in the pres-
ence of competing risk.’’ Biometrics
34:541-54.
Singer, Burton, and Seymour Spilerman

1976b ‘‘Some methodological issues in the
analysis of longitudinal surveys.’’ Annals of
Economic and Social Measurement
5:447-74.

Skocpol, Theda

1977 ‘‘Wallerstein’s world capitalist system: a
theoretical and historical critique.’’ Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 82:1075-89.

Swanson, Guy E.

1971 *tAn organizational analysis of collec-
tives."” American Sociological Review
36:607-23.

Taylor, Charles L., and Michael C. Hudson

1971 World Handbook of Political and Social In-
dicators, Vol. II. Inter-university Consor-
tium for Political Research. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Thomas, George M., Francisco O. Ramirez, John W.
Meyer, Jeanne G. Gobalet
1979 ‘‘Maintaining national boundaries in the
world system: the rise of centralist re-
gimes.”’ Pp. 187-206 in J. Meyer and M.
Hannan (eds.), National Development and
the World System. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Tilly, Charles (ed.)
1975 The Formation of Nation States in Western
Europe. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1975.
Tuma, Nancy Brandon
1979 Invoking RATE (2nd ed.). Menlo Park,
California: SRI International.
Tuma, Nancy Brandon, and Michael T. Hannan
1979 ‘Approaches to the censoring problem in
event-history analysis. ‘*Pp. 209-40 in K.
Schuessler (ed.), Sociological methodol-
ogy, 1979. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Tuma, Nancy Brandon, Michael T. Hannan, and
Lyle P. Groeneveld
1979 ‘‘Dynamic analysis of event histories.”
American Journal of Sociology 84:820-54.
United Nations
1950- Demographic Yearbook. New York: UN
1973
1951- Yearbook of international trade statistics.
1975 New York: UN.
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
Organization
1953- Statistical Yearbook. Louvain: UNESCO.
1976
Wallerstein, Immanuel
1974 The Modern World System: Capitalist Ag-
riculture and the Origins of the European
World Economy in the Sixteenth Century.
New York: Academic Press.
