American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Changes since 1940 in the rates and patterns of labor force participation of married women
are examined using retrospective work histories of wives taken from the 1960 Growth of
American Families Study. The effects of certain predictor variables, such as income of the
husband, wage potential of the wife and number of children under six, on the probability of a
woman working are determined for life cycle stages. Changes since 1940 in the effects of these
predictors are examined using a single-equation, additive linear model and analysis of covariance
techniques. The major hypothesis tested in this research is that significant changes have
occurred since 1940 in the effects of the factors influencing working by wives. The research
supports this hypothesis for the early stages of marriage and childbearing only. No changes in
either probability of work activity between births or the effects of all predictors when these are
considered together on this activity are found for wives with three or more children. When each
causal variable is considered separately, a significant decrease is noted in the effects of those
factors which tend to inhibit wives’ working. Among these are the presence of children under
six, the age of the wife and her educational level. The factors which tend to facilitate working,
past labor force activity and wife’s earning power, have tended to increase in effect or have
remained strongly positive influences.
changed along with the rates. In 1940, married
women 25 to 29 years old had the highest
rates of labor force participation. In 1960,
wives 45 to 54 years old were most likely to
work. Although the increase was much greater
for older than for younger women, all age
groups of married women had substantially
higher rates of labor force participation in
1960 than in 1940 or 1950. The largest recent
increase in labor force activity has occurred
for the group least likely to work, mothers of
pre-school children. By 1970, one-third of all
mothers with a child under six years old were
employed (U.S. Department of Labor, 1971).
Changes since 1940 in labor force
participation of wives, especially during
childbearing, and changes in the effects of fac-
tors which influence that participation are the
focus of this research.

Past research has not examined sufficiently
or satisfactorily explained the increase since
1940 in labor force participation of wives.
Much of the research done on females’ work
has been based on small samples of women
and has been chiefly anecdotal in nature
(Klein, 1965; Gavron, 1966; Klein and Myr-
dal, 1956; Smuts, 1959; Baker, 1964; Lopata,
1973; and others). This past work generally
suffers from the inadequacies of the data
and the lack of rigorous statistical analysis
and, as a result, these studies give few insights
into the reasons for the recent rise in the work
activity of wives. Research on the latter sub-
ject has been done by economists and while
frequently excellent, has typically focused on
the aggregate level (Long, 1958; Lebergott,
1964; Mincer, 1962; Bowen and Finegan,
1969). Care must be taken in inferring from
results of aggregate-level analysis to individual-
level processes. Fine cross-sectional studies,
using excellent data and rigorous methods,
have been done by economists and sociolo-
gists (Cain, 1966; Cohen et al., 1970;
Sweet, 1968; and others), but these studies
are generally rather time bound, using data for
a single year. An individuallevel analysis
which covers the period of rapid rise in the
number of working wives would do much to
fill these gaps in past empirical research. The
purpose of this paper is to perform such an
analysis, using rigorous methods and data
which allow inference about changes in female
labor force participation and its determinants.

Although the present analysis was designed
to overcome gaps in the existing research liter-
ature, our work has, of course, limitations of
its own. Perhaps the most obvious of these
limitations is the fact that our analysis is re-
stricted to women between the ages of 18 and
44. We base our research on women in this age
range because the 1960 Growth of American
Families (GAF) survey used in this research
includes only females in the prime child-
bearing years — women younger than 18 or
older than 44 were not selected for inter-
viewing in that study. However, inasmuch as
considerable recent attention has been paid to
the relationship between the fertility and
labor force participation of women in this age
range, we do not see the limitations of the
GAF sample as a serious threat to the utility
of our analysis for shedding light on key issues
regarding the labor force participation of
women. We now turn to our major hypotheses
about changes in the determinants of married
The focus in this paper is on the impact of
causal factors on the decision of married
women to work for pay and changes in that
impact from 1940 to 1960. The hypothesis
that significant change occurred in the effects
of these factors will be tested in this paper
using analysis of covariance techniques.

Findings from cross-sectional and aggre-
gate-level studies of job-holding by wives sug-
gest a number of hypotheses about changes
since 1940 in the effects of specific causal
factors on employment of married women.
Following the end of the second World War,
there occurred a rapid expansion of employ-
ment in those occupations and industries
which employ a high proportion of female
workers, for example, clerical occupations and
service industries. This resulted in an unprece-
dented demand for female labor. At the same
time, the changing patterns of marriage and
childbearing associated with the baby boom
decreased the supply of young, unmarried
women—the female worker traditionally pre-
ferred by employers. This shortage of women
workers limited the extent to which employ-
ers could exercise their preferences for hiring
young, single and childless women. Relatively
high wages were required to draw sufficient
numbers of women into the labor force to
meet the demand for female labor. As work-
ing wives and mothers became more common,
argue Bowen and Finegan (1969), public sen-
timent toward them became more tolerant, al-
lowing still more women to move into the
paid labor force. These changes imply: (1) a
decrease from 1940 to 1960 in the negative
effect of a woman’s age on the likelihood that
she was employed; (2) a decrease in the in-
hibiting effect of motherhood on a woman’s
probability of employment; (3) an increase in
To examine and quantify the changes since
1940 in labor force participation of wives and
in the effects of specific causal variables on
that participation, analysis of covariance tech-
niques was used in conjunction with a single
equation, additive linear model of labor force
activity of wives (given below). Change since
1940 in the probability that a married woman
worked at various points in her life is ex-
pected. Changes in the effects (coefficients) of
the causal variables in the model on that prob-
ability are expected as well. Analysis of covar-
iance allows the testing of these expectations.
Using this technique one may test for dif-
ferences between time periods in the effects
(slope coefficients) of the independent vari-
ables in the model, that is, differences be-
tween time periods in the model of labor
force participation of wives while removing
the effects of changes since 1940 in mean
levels of such factors as education, income
and number of children in the family. This is
the change we expect to find.

The data used for this research are taken
from the 1960 Growth of American Families
Study, a national sample of married women
18 to 44 years old who were currently living
with their husbands. Respondents were asked
whether they worked between their marriage
and the birth of their first child, between all
succeeding births and since the birth of their
last child. They were asked how long they had
worked each time and whether their work was
full- or part-time. The method of collection of
work histories of wives, i.e., by interbirth in-
tervals' restricts this analysis to job-holding
DFL

= labor force participation—scored 1
= worked, 0 = did not work?

= length of the interval, in months
= age of the woman during the inter-
val, in months

= preference for Catholic religion—
dummy scored 1 if Catholic, 0 other-
wise

= demand for female labor (average
for the interval)

= wife’s wage potential in thousands
of dollars (average for the interval)

= husband’s estimated income in
thousands of dollars (average for the
interval)

= contraceptive use in interval—
scored 1 if the couple began using
contraception in or before that inter-
val, 0 otherwise

= scale of contraceptive practice
from 0 (non-use) to 10 (use of two
or more very effective methods)
The dependent variable is, in effect, a sim-
ple dichotomy. The estimate of the dependent
variable produced by the model may be inter-
preted as the probability that an individual
woman worked in an interval, given the values
of the independent variables; the mean prob-
ability of employment is the labor force parti-
cipation rate of the group. There are some
statistical problems associated with the use of
a dichotomous dependent variable. As alterna-
tive methods such as use of a limited depen-
dent variable, logit or probit analysis were for
various reasons, not viable for this analysis,
ordinary least squares was used as a first ap-
proximation of the relationships (Goldberger,
1964:248-55).

The analysis was restricted to white women
due to the small number of non-white in the
sample. Preliminary analysis showed conclu-
sively that the effects of the independent vari-
ables in the above model depended very
strongly on which interbirth interval was be-
ing considered. The baby boom which began
in the late 1940s resulted in changes in pat-
terns of marriage and childbearing. These
shifts lead us to suspect changes in the propor-
tion of women at any given parity who go on
to have another birth. This fact, plus the
strong interactions between most independent
variables in our model and interbirth interval,
could lead to changes since 1940 in the effects
of certain variables on labor force activity in
the total sample which were due solely to the
changing composition of the total group over
time.

For this reason analysis of change in labor
force activity of wives was done separately for
each interbirth interval, as well as for the total
sample. As relatively few women experienced
a fifth or higher order birth and as data indi-
cated no difference between these high order
intervals in the effects of the independent
variables, the higher order intervals were not
considered separately.

To isolate changes in labor force participa-
tion of married women since 1940, the period
1940 to 1960 was divided into four five-year
segments, 1940 through 1944, 1945-49,
1950-54 and 1955-60. An analysis of covari-
ance was done using the four time periods as
separate groups. The model of labor force ac-
tivity of wives given above was estimated
separately in each time period and over the
entire twenty-year period. The sample used
for estimating this model comprised all inter-
birth intervals which were completed in the
five-year period. Since an interbirth interval
consists of the period from marriage to first
birth or from any birth to the birth following
it, intervals always are completed by a birth.
Because the open interval always ended at the
survey interview, open intervals could not be
examined over time. Intervals which did not
meet the above criteria were excluded from
the analysis to prevent contamination of time
period effects. The sample requires a caution-
ary note. Married women, 18 to 44 years old
in 1960, were included in the GAF survey.
The inclusion in our sample of only those in-
tervals closed by a birth and the division of
the years from 1940 to 1960 into four separ-
ate time periods means that for the earliest
years the sample is not representative of all
married women. The oldest women in the
sample were 24 to 29 years old in the early
1940s. Few of them had a third or fourth
birth by 1944. Thus the samples of women in
the highest interbirth intervals, second to
third and third to fourth births, in the 1940s
are small. The samples are also biased toward
women who married unusually young and
bore children quickly. Table 1 gives the num-
ber of women who completed each interbirth
interval in each time period. For these reasons
the results for these later intervals in the
1940s must be viewed as merely suggestive
and are less often significant than results for
other groups.

Several theoretically important variables in
the model of labor force participation of
wives were not available in the GAF data.
These variables were constructed from data
other than the GAF. The methods by which
this was done will be discussed briefly here.

To assess the job opportunities which face
a woman at the time she is deciding whether
she wants to work, a measure of the demand
for female labor (DFL) was included in the
model. This estimate of demand was calcu-
lated as the ratio of the female experienced
civilian labor force (ECLF) to the total
ECLF.* Similar measures of the relative job
opportunities for women in local areas are
commonly used to predict their employment
(Cohen et al., 1970). The estimate of the de-
pendent variable produced by the model of
labor force participation specified above may
be interpreted as the probability that a
woman was employed in a particular interval,
given her values on the independent variable.
For this reason, the coefficient of the DFL
variable may be interpreted as the impact of
demand for female labor at the national level
on the probability that an individual woman
was employed.
Wife’s wage potential was computed fol-
lowing a procedure used by Cain (1966:89).
Women who were employed at the survey in-
terview were assigned their current wage as
their 1960 wage potential (25 percent).
Women not employed at the time of the sur-
vey but who had worked since marriage, and
for that reason had a known occupation, were
assigned a wage potential for 1960 based on
the mean income in that year of employed
women in that occupation. Detailed census
occupational categories were used for this pro-
cedure. All women for whom last occupation
was known were assigned 1940 and 1950
wage potentials based on the mean income (in
the relevant year) of women employed in that
occupation. Women who had not worked
since marriage (29 percent), for whom no oc-
cupational information was available, were as-
signed wage potentials for 1940, 1950 and
1960 based on the mean income in those
years of employed women with their educa-
tional level. A yearly wage potential was then
computed for each woman by interpolating
from the figures obtained for each census
was not available for earlier years. The value
of husband’s income in the years prior to
1960 was assigned in the following way. Hus-
band’s income, occupation and education as
of 1960 were known. His date of birth was
known. Tabular data from the 1940, 1950
and 1960 censuses of population on earnings
by age, race, sex, major occupational group
and education were used to estimate the pa-
rameters of an MCA model of individual in-
comes for white males in each of these years.
Using these parameter estimates and each hus-
band’s age, occupation and education (race
and sex were implicitly controlled) the in-
come of each husband was estimated for each
of the census years, 1940, 1950 and 1960.
(See Appendix A for the parameter estimates
for each year.) It has been estimated that
these kinds of variables explain about a third
of the variance in individual income (Miller,
1966:125).

The estimate of husband’s income derived
by the above procedure for 1960 was then
compared to the husband’s actual income in
that year as reported in the GAF survey. As
the great majority of individuals tend to be
consistently above or consistently below their
expected income levels, the percent deviation
of actual from expected income for 1960 was
used as a correctional factor which was then
applied to the estimates of husband’s income
for 1940 and 1950.* This income measure cap-
tures no temporary fluctuation which would
result from lay offs or illness. It represents
only long-run or permanent income.
first two births also rose, although not as
much as the rate for the period before the
first birth. No real change in participation
rates between later births occurred from 1940
to 1960. Although the trend is toward in-
creases in labor force participation rates be-
tween births after the second birth, these in-
creases are very small. (3) The negative effect
of a woman’s age on her job-holding decreased
substantially from 1940 to 1960 as did the
inhibiting effect of the presence of young chil-
dren in the home. (4) The pull into the labor
force of wife’s earning power more than
doubled from the early 1940s to the early
1950s in most interbirth intervals. (5) The
negative effect of wife’s education on her
labor force activity peaked in the early 1950s
and then declined to insignificance in the late
1950s. (6) The inhibiting effect of husband’s
income on his wife’s job-holding evident in
the early 1940s declined fairly steadily to the
early 1950s. (7) The woman’s past labor force
experience retained from 1940 to 1960 an im-
portant, positive impact on her working. It
appears from this analysis that those forces
which kept women out of the labor force de-
clined drastically in their inhibiting effects,
while those forces which pulled her into the
labor force either increased in importance or
remained constant.
for the wives in our sample and then de-
creased somewhat in the late 1950s (to 30).
Analysis of covariance indicates that the ef-
fects of the independent variables in the
model varied significantly (p <.05) between
time periods for this total group which in-
cludes all interbirth intervals. However this
variation could be due in part to the changing
composition of the total group over time, as
well as to changes in the relationship between
the variables as stated earlier. Significant time
period differences in the effects of the inde-
pendent variables in the model were found in
the intervals of marriage to first birth and first
to second birth. Labor force participation
rates for these periods show sizeable increases
from 1940 to 1960 for the period of marriage
to first birth and smaller increases for the time
between first and second birth. No differences
of any kind between time periods could be
found for the intervals of second to third or
third to fourth births. It is possible, for these
intervals, to describe all time periods with a
single equation. Although there was a trend
toward increases in labor force participation
rates for these intervals, these increases were
fairly small. It appears that increases from
1940 to 1960 in rates of labor force participa-
tion during childbearing were due to increased
job-holding in the early stages of family for-
mation, that is up to the second birth.
the wife’s decision to work. It has been found
repeatedly that the higher the husband’s in-
come the less likely the wife is to work. This
is the income effect of the husband’s income
on the wife’s job-holding. But the greater her
earning capacity the more likely she is to
work, the substitution or wage effect of her
own income. When there are young children
in the home, however, Mincer (1962) argues
that the income effect is stronger and the
wage effect weaker than when there are none.
Young children in the home have this effect
because according to Cain, prevailing stan-
dards of care for children make it difficult and
often expensive to find acceptable substitutes
for parental care. It is more difficult for a
family to arrange care for young children than
it is to purchase substitutes for the house-
cleaning, laundry or home cooking services
the wife usually provides if she is not em-
ployed.

In effect the net gain in family income
interval. This pattern is strongly evident in our
data. Wife’s wage potential had the largest ef-
fect of any variable in the model on her parti-
cipation during the period between her mar-
riage and first birth (see Table 3). The stan-
dardized regression coefficient (beta) of wife’s
wage potential was the largest in the equation
for this interval at all points in the 1940 to
1960 time period and was often six to ten
times its standard error.> The measure of wife’s
wage potential contains some error as it does
not take into account work experience which
would affect a woman’s earning power. This
has the result of reducing the variance be-
tween categories of wage potential and leading
to conservative estimates of the effect of this
factor on the likelihood that the wife worked.
The large effect of wife’s earning power for
newly married couples is probably due to the
large capital investment required to set up a
household. As housekeeping demands for two
adults are usually small, the net addition to
family income from the wife’s employment is
a large proportion of her total earnings. Under
these circumstances, a woman’s income poten-
tial exerts a powerful inducement to labor
force participation. The pull is much reduced,
although still significant, when there are
young children present.

From the early 1940s to the early 1950s a
statistically significant (p <.05) increase in the
effect of wife’s wage potential occurred.® This
peak in the early 1950s was followed by a
decline at the end of the decade to the levels
of the early 1940s. A similar pattern of
change in the effect of earning power of
women over time was found by Bowen and
Finegan (1969). They attribute the pattern to
short supply (relative to demand) of women
workers in the early 1950s. They speculate
that in this period employers had to lure
women into the labor market with very attrac-
tive wage rates, thus the sizeable effect of
wife’s wage potential on her participation in

 

6 All tests for significant differences between re-
gression coefficients were done using a difference of
means test. As this test depends on the relationship
of the difference between the two coefficients to
the pooled standard errors, the difference between
insignificant coefficients is very rarely significant
Glalock, 1960:170-6).
that period. By the late 1950s working by
wives became more common and attitudes to-
ward job-holding by wives more favorable.
Employers found they could fill their needs
with lower wage rates to women than had pre-
viously been required (Bowen and Finegan,
1969:194).

Cross-sectional, multivariate analysis of
labor force activity of wives has shown a
strong positive effect of wife’s earning power
and a negative effect of husband’s income on
the likelihood that the wife is employed
(Mincer, 1962; Cain, 1966; Bowen and Fine-
gan, 1969; Cohen et al., 1970). The negative
relationship between husband’s income and
wife’s work found in these studies conflicts
with the steady rise in labor force participa-
tion of wives since 1890 while real income per
worker (that is, income of husbands) tripled
(Long, 1962). Mincer (1962) argues, however,
that husband’s long-run or “permanent” in-
come has a weak effect on his wife’s work
activity and that the strong negative relation-
ship usually found is due to the effect of
short-run or “transitory” income on wife’s
work. This explanation, Mincer feels, accounts
for the conflict between cross-sectional find-
ings and the long-term secular increase in
participation rates of wives. Mincer argues
that, over time, the effects of transitory in-
come disappear and the weak negative rela-
tionship between wife’s work and permanent
income of the husband is submerged by the
powerful positive effect of wife’s earning
power on her work activity. Our measure of
husband’s income includes only long-run or
permanent income. Temporary income fluctu-
ations due to unemployment, job changes, in-
heritances or illness are not measured by the
variable we use. Thus, following Mincer’s rea-
soning, we would expect a weak, negative co-
efficient for husband’s estimated income.
Looking at Table 4, the reader will notice that
this is indeed what was found.

As expected, the coefficient for husband’s
estimated income was larger in intervals after
the first birth, that is, when young children are
present, than in the interval from marriage to
first birth, when they are not (see Table 4).
The pull into the labor force of wife’s earning
power greatly exceeds the push out of the
labor force of husband’s income for the inter-
val from marriage to first birth. This is consis-
tent with Mincer’s argument about the relative
size of income and wage effect when there are
no young children present. The opposite tends
to be true for later intervals when young chil-
dren are present. In these intervals, the in-
come effect usually exceeds the wage effect.
This is probably due to the cost and difficulty
with which the services rendered to the family
by the wife are replaced by services purchased
in the market when young children are pre-
sent. No statistically significant changes in the
effect of husband’s income are apparent over
time. The only exception to this general pat-
tern is a slight and statistically insignificant
increase in the size of the- coefficients from
the time period 1955-1960. There is no
theoretical reason to expect increases in the
effect of husband’s income on wife’s labor
force activity; in fact recent data show the
reverse (Council of Economic Advisors,
work activity of the child’s mother (Sweet,
1968; Cohen et al., 1970; Bowen and Finegan,
1969; and others). However, the recent rapid
increase in labor force participation rates of
mothers of young children indicates that this
gross effect has decreased over time and the
same may be true of the net effect of the
presence of young children on the work ac-
tivity of wives. A variable indicating presence
of children under six was introduced into the
basic model (p. 67) for women in the inter-
vals from second to third and third to fourth
births. By definition, no woman had children
before her first birth and all had a young child
in the interval between the first and second
birth. Since all intervals after the first begin
and end with a live birth and since only inter-
vals of five years or less are included in the
sample, all women have at least one child ui-
der five years old present for most of the iri-
terval. The measure of number of children un:
der six captures the marginal effect of the pre-
sence of an additional child of pre-school age
on the mother’s employment. Our results in-
dicate that, for women having a third or
fourth birth, the inhibiting effect that a small
child exerts on its mother’s labor force ac-
tivity has decreased markedly since 1940. In
the early 1940s the presence of young chil-
dren had a significant negative effect on the
likelihood that the woman worked (see Table
5). The coefficient for this variable decreased
steadily in size over the 1940 to 1960 period,
becoming insignificant by the late 1950s. This
decrease is probably due to increased wage
Oppenheimer (1970) suggests that, prior to
about 1950, employers preferred to hire
young, single female workers rather than older
married women. In the late 1940s expansion
of the service sector of the economy which
traditionally has employed a large proportion
of all female workers, resulted in sizeable in-
creases in demand for women employees.
Simultaneous changes such as shifts to earlier
marriage and childbearing and increased pro-
portions marrying acted to decrease the sup-
ply of young, single females. Oppenheimer
argues that this increase in demand coupled
with the decrease in supply acted to turn em-
ployers to women they had not previously
wanted to hire: older, married women. For
these reasons, the 1950s witnessed substantial
increases in labor force participation rates for
older women (Oppenheimer, 1970:15). We at-
tempted to test this reasoning by examining
changes over time in the effect of the age of
the wife on the likelihood of her employment.
If Oppenheimer’s argument is correct and em-
ployers became less able from 1940 to 1960
to use age as a criterion for selection of female
workers, then our data should show a décrease
over time in the slope coefficient for age of
the wife in the interval. The reader will note
in Table 6 that the coefficients for age of wife
in all intervals after the first (marriage to first
birth) decrease in size from fairly large nega-
tive coefficients in the early 1940s to small
and mostly insignificant coefficients in the
late 1950s. For example, the coefficient for
age of wife for the interval between the third
and fourth birth decreased from -.00307 in
1940-44 to -.00003 in 1955-60, a reduction of
almost 100 percent. However, this pattern
does not appear during the interval between
marriage and first birth. These data indicate
that a woman’s age in the interval between her
marriage and first birth had its largest effect
during the 1950s on the probability that she
worked. This effect changes from a small, in-
significant negative effect in the early 1940s
to sizeable positive coefficients in the 1950s.
This change is highly significant (p <.05)
statistically. At least two explanations for this
unexpected finding are possible. These are en-
tirely post hoc speculation, however.

1. The 1950s was a period of expanding
demand for female workers. The ratio of fe-
male to male wage rates as calculated by
Bowen and Finegan (1969:194) was higher
during these years than at any other time in
the years 1940 to 1960. Working became
more common for married women than it had
been earlier. It may be the case that, with
increased acceptance of work by wives, career-
oriented women became more willing to try
to combine work and marriage than previous-
ly. In earlier years, especially the 1930s,
women were forced to quit many kinds of
jobs if they married (Oppenheimer,
1970:127-33). Women who wanted to work
often had to forego marriage. The proportion
of women who ever married increased during
the baby boom period (1947-1961), and
much of this increase could have been due to
increased marriage rates for work-oriented
women. It is possible that women with rela-
tively strong career commitments are over-
represented in the marriage cohorts of the
1950s relative to other years. These women
would probably be older than average at mar-
riage and first birth, and more likely to work.
This explanation would account for the large
positive coefficients in the 1950s for age of
wife in the interval between marriage and first
birth.

2. Another interpretation which is con-
Educational level of the wife has been
found in past research to have strong positive
effect on her employment (Cain, 1966;
Bowen and Finegan, 1969; and others). This
has been explained as due to the fact that
education acts as a proxy for “tastes for paid
employment” (Cohen et al., 1970) or as a
measure of the “psychic income” associated
with the higher status jobs available to well
educated women (Bowen and Finegan, 1969)
in addition to measuring earning potential.
These researchers hypothesize that those
women who like to work tend to complete
unusually large amounts of schooling. Also,
women at relatively high educational levels
have access to interesting jobs in pleasant sur-
roundings which provide them with psycho-
logical gratification apart from money in-
come. As our model includes both wife’s wage
potential and education we are in a position
to determine the effect of education on the
likelihood that a wife works, net of the in-
creased earning power this gives her. If educa-
tion in fact is a proxy for “tastes for employ-
ment” or “psychic income” as suggested by
Bowen and Finegan (1969) and Cohen et al.
(1970), then the coefficient of the variable
should be strongly positive.

As the reader will note from Table 7, al-
most all the coefficients are negative and all
the significant coefficients are negative. The
reader will also note that the coefficients tend
to be largest in the early 1950s. Although
tastes for paid employment or psychic income
may be important determinants of labor force
activity of wives, these data are not consistent
with the use of wife’s education as their
proxy. Perhaps discrimination against women
in pay and promotion produces a ‘psychic
cost” to highly educated women which dis-
courages their participation while their higher
earning power pulls them in the other direc-
tion.”
The peaking of the effect of wife’s educa-
tional level in the 1950s on her participation
warrants discussion. In the years following
World War II, there was a renewed emphasis
on home and family. This was the time of
increased marriage and childbearing. Public
opinion swung strongly against employment
of women who had working husbands (Op-
penheimer, 1970:45). The child development
literature of the period contains many refer-
ences to the permanent harm done to young
children by frequent separation from their
mothers. Perhaps the most widely read and
most influential of these statements appears in
Baby and Child Care by Dr. Benjamin Spock.
In this book, first published in 1946, Spock
makes a strong plea for mother care of young
children. He states:
It would save money in the end if the
government paid a comfortable allowance
to all mothers (of young children) who
would otherwise be compelled to work.
You can think of it this way: useful, well-
adjusted citizens are the most valuable pos-
session a country has, and good mother
care during early childhood is the surest
way to produce them. It doesn’t make
sense to let mothers go to work making
In all intervals after the first, a variable was
included to capture the effect of past labor
force activity on the probability that a woman
was employed at a particular point. This vari-
able was the proportion of the time a woman
worked in all previous intervals. This variable
was in most cases the most powerful predictor
of participation in the second, third and
fourth intervals (see Table 8). The size and
significance of the coefficients both increase
from the early to the late intervals. A similar
finding was reported by Mott (1972). It is
clear that women who work between the
births of the second and third or third and
fourth child are highly motivated, either by
career commitment, psychological needs or
financial necessity. Those who are pushed into
the labor force by any of these forces are the
most likely to be so driven at any later point.
Past participation must also act in part as a
measure of earning power as women who have
spent a large amount of time in the labor
force have a larger wage potential because of
their experience than women who have not
worked in some time. Experience could not
be considered when the variable wife’s wage
potential was constructed.
67) do not warrant much discussion. Prefer-
ence for Catholic religion, while not often sig-
nificant, had a negative effect on participation
as expected. Demand for female labor, contra-
ceptive use and practice and family comple-
tion all were flawed in some way and pro-
duced few significant effects. Demand for fe-
male labor, a national level variable, did not
capture the-important variation between areas
in relative job opportunities for women. Vari-
ations between areas in a single year were
found to be much larger than variations in the
national variable between years. The measure,
it seems, was too gross to show any effect.
The variable dealing with contraception mea-
sured use of contraception and kind of contra-
ception used but could not measure faithful-
ness of use, probably the most important vari-
ant (Potter et al., 1962:168-70). Eamily com-
pletion could only measure births after the
one that closed the interval, too far removed
it appears, to show an effect.
found by using analysis of covariance tech-
niques. Neither change in the probability of
participation nor change over time in the ef-
fects of the independent variables was found
for intervals from second to third birth and
third to fourth birth.

The age of the woman at the midpoint of
the interval decreased significantly in predic-
tive value from 1940 to 1960. The pull into
the labor force of her earning power increased
significantly from the early 1940s to the early
1950s and declined thereafter. The pull of ed-
ucational level out of the labor force also
peaked in the early 1950s. There was a
marked decrease over time in the inhibiting
effect of the presence of small children on the
mother’s work activity.

Labor force participation rates for married
women during childbearing have been in-
creasing steadily since 1940. Our analysis indi-
cates that the effects of those factors which
tend to inhibit work by wives has tended to
decrease from 1940 to 1960. Among these are
the age of the wife and the presence of young
children. Certain others of these inhibiting
factors have shown little change over time.
Some of these are husband’s income and
wife’s educational level, as defined in this
analysis. Forces which tend to pull the wife
into the labor force have tended to increase in
effect over the period, like wife’s wage poten-
tial, or to retain their large positive effect on
working, like past participation. In sum, this
analysis indicates that forces which kept the
wife out of the labor force in the past have
tended to decrease in effect while forces
which encourage participation have tended to
increase or remain constant. It may be that
this trend continued through the 1960s and
into the 1970s.
of Family Income Dynamics, Institute for
Social Research, University of Michigan.

1974 “Income instability.” Pp. 277-303 in Mor-
gan, James, Katherine Dickinson, Jonathon
Dickinson, Jacob Benus and Greg Duncan
(eds.), Five Thousand American Families —
Patterns of Economic Progress. Ann Arbor:
Institute for Social Research.

Benus, Jacob and James Morgan

1972 “Income instability as a dimension of wel-
fare.” A working paper from O.E.O. Study
of Family Income Dynamics for Office of
Economic Opportunity, O.E.O. Project No.
4180. Institute for Social Research.

Blalock, H. M., Jr.

1960 Social Statistics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

1967 “Path coefficients vs. regression coeffici-
ents.” Letter to the Editor, American Jour-
nal of Sociology, 72:675-6.

Bowen, William and T. Aldrich Finegan

1969 The Economics of Labor Force Participa-

tion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cain, Glen C.

1966 Labor Force Participation of Married
Women. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Cohen, Malcolm S., Samuel A. Rea, Jr. and Robert I.
Lerman

1970 A Micro Model of Labor Supply. Washing-

ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Council of Economic Advisors

1973 The Economic Report of the President,
1973. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.

Gavron, Hannah
1966 The Captive Wife. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Goldberger, Arthur S.
1964 Econometric Theory. New York: Wiley.
Johnston, J.

1972 Econometric Methods. New York: McGraw-

Hill.
Klein, Viola

1965 Britain’s Married Women Workers. London:

Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Klein, Viola and Alva Myrdal

1956 Women’s Two Roles: Home and Work. Lon-

don: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Long, Clarence

1958 The Labor Force under Changing Income
and Employment. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press,

1962 “Comment on ‘Labor force participation of
married women’.” in Aspects of Labor
Economics. National Bureau of Economic
Research. Princeton: Princeton University
Press,

Lebergott, Stanley

1964 Manpower in Economic Growth. New York:

McGraw-Hill.
Lopata, Helena Znaniecki

1973 Occupation: Housewife. New York: Oxford

University Press.
Miller, Herman

1966 Income Distribution in the United States.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Print-
ing Office.

Mincer, Jacob

1962 “Labor force participation of married
women.” in Aspects of Labor Economics.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Mott, Frank L.

1972 “Fertility, life cycle stage and female labor
force participation in Rhode Island: a retro-
spective view.” Demography 9:173-85.

Oppenheimer, Valerie L.

1970 The Female Labor Force in the United
States. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Potter, Robert G., Jr., Phillip C. Sagi and Charles F.
Westoff.
1962 “Improvement of contraception during the
Case study comparisons of Japanese with Western firms have traditionally emphasized the
importance of historical and cultural factors for understanding differences in their managerial
practices and organizational structures. But to date there have been few systematic attempts to
apply recent insights from organizational theory developed largely within the context of West-
ern organizations to their Japanese counterparts. This paper combines theoretical insights from
both Weberian and decision-making traditions within a single model which is then tested with
data from forty-four Japanese manufacturing plants. The results indicate that many relation-
ships linking factors such as organizational size and work Variability with structure are quite
similar to those found in British and American organizations despite the historical and cultural
factors which may be unique to Japanese firms.
