American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
_Jusnce is arather murky concept in so-
cial psychology, perhaps because of its
various uses in common discourse. In gen-
eral, the term distributive justice refers to the
fairness of the outcomes or rewards that an
individual or group receives. This can be
contrasted to procedural justice (i.e., the fair-
ness of the process by which outcomes are
determined) and interactional justice (i.e., the
fairness of interpersonal treatment). Al-
though the focus of research has recently
shifted somewhat toward the latter two forms
of justice, our understanding of distributive
justice processes is by no means complete. A
critical question that remains unanswered is
Extant theories suggest that individuals’ perceptions of the fairness of their pay
causally intervene between the salary/wages they receive and their emotional re-
sponses (e.g., satisfaction) to that level of pay. In addition, it has been argued that
the impact of an event evaluated by an individual as unfair depends on the impor-
tance of fairness to that individual—an unfair event has a greater effect for those
who place greater importance on distributive justice. Despite the centrality of these
arguments in the justice literature, current research has not adequately tested them.
In this article, the authors propose a general theoretical model based on these argu-
ments. A structural equation model is then estimated using data from a national
sample of Protestant clergy. The findings support both the mediating role of minis-
ters’ perceptions of distributive justice and the moderating role of the importance of
justice in explaining their level of pay satisfaction.
theoretical model is based on the arguments
contained in extant theoretical perspectives,
the pivotal concept in our model—“justice
perceptions”—is seldom explicitly defined,
and its causal position within the justice
evaluation process is usually only loosely, if
at all, specified. Our work adds to the theo-
retical literature by more explicitly defining
and specifying the causal position of this
critical construct.

The looseness in how the concept of jus-
tice perceptions is often used is rarely chal-
lenged by justice theorists because there
have been few attempts to empirically assess
whether justice perceptions actually serve
the mediating role suggested in the theoreti-
cal literature. In response to this oversight,
we estimate a structural equation model that
relates workplace rewards (including their
comparison with the rewards believed to be
fair) to pay satisfaction through individuals’
perceptions of distributive injustice. We use
survey data collected from a national sample
of Protestant ministers.
cally demonstrated. The majority of social
psychological theories employing the dis-
tributive justice concept recognize (at least
implicitly) that individuals’ perceptions of
injustice in a particular situation intervene
between the reward conditions they face and
the cognitive, behavioral, and emotional out-
comes of interest. However, as Hegtvedt and
Markovsky (1995:272) argue, the perceptual
component of justice evaluations has re-
ceived inadequate theoretical attention.
Since the classical equity (Adams 1965;
Homans 1974; Walster, Walster, and Bers-
chied 1978) and relative deprivation per-
spectives (Crosby 1976; Folger 1986) began
dominating the justice literature more than
30 years ago, primary attention has been
paid to specifying (1) the comparison pro-
cesses that are assumed to lead to percep-
tions of injustice (i.e., justice perceptions as
a dependent variable, or “ends”), and (2) the
cognitive, behavioral, and emotional conse-
quences of injustice (i.e., justice perceptions
as an independent variable, or “means”).
Both “ends” and “means” conceptions of
justice contain, at their heart, the assumption
that it is an individual’s perception of the
degree of injustice existing in a situation that
drives his or her emotional response to re-
ward conditions—if an individual does not
perceive a situation as unfair, he or she will
not express negative emotions regarding that
situation (Hegtvedt and Markovsky 1995;
Tornblom 1992).

Extant research supports the importance of
justice perceptions as both a dependent and
an independent variable.? Unfortunately,
We have developed a general theoretical
model (see Figure 1) in which justice per-
ceptions explicitly mediate the effects of re-
ward conditions on individuals’ emotional
responses to these conditions. At the center
of our model are four distinct constructs that
make up the justice evaluation process—the
justice evaluation, justice perceptions, jus-
tice importance, and the emotional response
to perceived injustice. Below, we explicitly
define these concepts and specify their cau-
sal position within the model. As shown in
Figure 1, we assume that the reward condi-
tions individuals face relative to the rewards
that are believed to be fair (i.e., the justice
evaluation) directly affect individuals’ per-
JUSTICE EVALUATION PROCESS

 

Reward conditions
(pay)

 

 

Pay justice evaluation
(actual Pay vs. just pay) —

 

 

| Justice importance

 

 

Pay justice evaluation
x Justice importance

 

 

Control variables

 

 

 

 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
    

 

_ Emotional response
_ (pay satisfaction) |
Contrary to the self-interest model, our
“justice model” emphasizes a comparison
process, suggesting that it is the magnitude
of rewards relative to some standard of fair-
ness that generates subjective states of injus-
tice and determines the resulting reactions.?
This view of the “relativity” of rewards is
exemplified by classical equity theories
(Adams 1965; Homans 1974; Walster et al.
1978) and relative deprivation formulations
(Crosby 1976). More recent sociological
perspectives have expanded the scope of
possible referents, allowing comparisons to
other individuals, groups, prior experiences,
imagined alternatives, and normative stan-
dards (Folger 1986; Jasso 1986; Markovsky
1991). We follow Markovsky (1985) in as-
suming, as a scope condition, that individu-
als evaluating the fairness of rewards al-
ready possess a principle of fairness with
which to assess outcomes. Therefore, the rel-
evant questions are: Given an activated stan-
dard of distributive justice, how do particu-
lar levels of over- or underreward (relative
to that standard) translate into specific de-
grees of perceived distributive injustice?
And, how are specific degrees of perceived
injustice translated into measurable emo-
tional reactions in specific situations (Jasso
and Wegener 1997:394)?

Jasso (1980) has labeled the comparison
of actual rewards to just rewards the justice
evaluation; we adopt this term to represent
the rewards individuals’ receive relative to
their activated justice standard. Specifi-
cally, Jasso (1980) proposes that an indivi-
dual’s sense of injustice can be expressed
)

where In is the natural logarithm, “actual
share” is the amount of reward received in
the situation, and “just share” is the amount
of reward believed to be fair by the indi-
vidual (for a more detailed discussion of the
determination of the just share, see Jasso and
Wegener 1997:399).

Distributive injustice is assumed to be dis-
tressing (Adams 1965; Homans 1974; Mar-
kovsky 1988; Térnblom 1992) and is ex-
pected to lead to cognitive, behavioral, and
emotional responses (Jasso 1986; Mark and
Folger 1984). Focusing on emotional re-
sponses, we can specify an alternative to the
self-interest model—the greater the discrep-
ancy between the actual and just shares, the
more “negative” the individual’s emotional
response to those rewards (Jasso 1993).
Consistent with this argument, justice re-
searchers have empirically demonstrated
that the greater the discrepancy between the
pay/benefits received and those felt to be de-
served, the more likely an individual is to
make a formal complaint (Markovsky 1985),
the lower his or her satisfaction with those
rewards (Randall and Mueller 1995), and the
greater the resentment he or she will direct
at the perceived perpetrator (Folger et al.
1983). With reference to the theoretical
model presented in Figure 1, we assume that
an individual’s justice evaluation has a total
causal effect on his or her emotional re-
sponse to the situation, net of the absolute
level of rewards received.

JE= a actual sae)

just share
tude of distributive injustice in a particular
situation.> Our primary contribution here is
our assessment of the argument that justice
perceptions mediate the impact of reward
conditions and distributive justice evalua-
tions on individuals’ reactions to injustice.
Three basic assumptions are embodied in the
argument that a variable (Y) mediates the ef-
fects of another variable (X) on a given re-
sponse variable (Z): (1) X is assumed to have
a direct causal effect on Y, (2) Y is assumed
to have a direct causal effect on Z, and (3)
the effect of X on Z is assumed to be indi-
rect, working through X’s effect on Y.

The first assumption suggests that justice
evaluations directly impact an individual’s
perceptions of injustice in the situation. Al-
though equity researchers have focused pri-
marily on the link between “objective” ineq-
uities and behavioral reactions, Adams
(1965) stressed that perceptions play an im-
portant role in linking the two. As Térnblom
(1992) has noted, “perceived discrepancies
between the perceived actual and perceived
ideal (expected) match between inputs and
outputs [are] assumed to result in subjective
experiences of inequity” (p. 181, italics
added).

Contemporary theories of distributive jus-
tice make even finer distinctions between
the concrete, evaluative, subjectively per-
ceived, and responsive components of the
justice evaluation process. Jasso (1980) ex-
plicitly states, with respect to her justice
evaluation function, that the ratio of actual
share to just share (in parentheses in equa-
tion 1) is “an exclusively cognitive magni-
tude, completely devoid of any emotional
content” (p. 6), thus categorically distin-
guishing between distributive justice evalu-
ations and their subjective impact on the in-
dividual. Similarly, Markovsky (1985,
1991) treats the following as distinct ele-
ments of the justice evaluation process: (1)
the actual reward and the reward standard
activated in a situation, (2) the cognitive as-
sessment of their fit, (3) the subjective feel-
ing of justice or injustice resulting from this
comparison, and (4) the overt behavioral re-
sponses of the actor.

Although these perspectives differ some-
what in how justice evaluations, justice per-
ceptions, and reactions to injustice are con-
ceptualized, each perspective acknowledges
(at least implicitly) that perceptions of injus-
tice are a crucial part of the process that
leads individuals to react to injustice. In the
majority of perspectives, however, the defi-
nition and causal position of the justice per-
ception construct is somewhat ambiguous.
Our conceptualization remedies this, as il-
lustrated in Figure 1: Discrepancies between
the rewards an individual receives and those
he or she believes are fair (i.e., the value of
the justice evaluation) directly affect the
individual’s perception of the degree of in-
justice in the situation.

The direct causal link between justice
evaluations and justice perceptions is sup-
ported by an impressive body of experimen-
tal research that has shown that manipulated
discrepancies in rewards have a substantial
impact on individuals’ perceptions of the
fairness of those rewards (Anderson 1976;
Greenberg 1993; Hegtvedt, Thompson, and
Cook 1993; Mellers 1982). Likewise, ex-
periments in which measures of justice per-
ceptions are treated as a “manipulation
check” (i.e., a means of validating the gen-
eral efficacy of the manipulated experimen-
tal factors) are based on the logic that indi-
viduals must perceive reward conditions as
unfair in order to react as theoretically ex-
pected. In such cases, a “successful” ma-
nipulation supports the justice evaluation >
justice perception relationship (Hegtvedt
1990; Markovsky 1985, 1988). Finally, em-
pirical support for the specific justice evalu-
ation function in equation 1 is provided by
data reported by Jasso (1980), Markovsky
(1985), and Randall and Mueller (1995).

The foregoing theoretical arguments and
research findings lead to our first hypothesis,
represented in Figure 1 by the causal path
leading directly from pay justice evaluations
to justice perceptions.
Theoretical interest in perceptual pro-
cesses in the distributive justice literature is
also reflected in the emergence of several
“individual-difference” constructs. For in-
stance, theorists have suggested that indi-
viduals differ in terms of “justice impor-
tance” (Markovsky 1985), “equity sensitiv-
ity” (Huseman, Hatfield, and Miles 1987),
and “expressiveness” (Jasso and Wegener
1997). Although these concepts differ ac-
cording to the particular individual and situ-
ational characteristics they consider impor-
tant and in the manner in which they are ex-
pected to impact the justice evaluation pro-
cess, each provides further support for the
basic contention that “justice is in the eye of
the beholder” (Markovsky 1985:822)—what
the individual perceives in terms of fairness
governs his or her response to the situation.
Determining how such individual-level fac-
tors affect the justice evaluation process
(e.g., through additive or interaction effects)
is critical for correctly specifying and esti-
mating empirical models of distributive jus-
tice processes.

We begin to address this issue by incor-
porating into our model Markovsky’s
(1985) concept of “justice importance,”
which he defines as the degree to which an
individual values fairness in the given situa-
tion and for the particular actor on whose
behalf the justice evaluation is being made.
Markovsky suggests that justice importance
moderates the effect of reward discrepan-
cies (captured by the justice evaluation) on
the amount of injustice perceived—the
more the evaluator cares about justice, the
greater the impact an injustice will have.®
Markovsky (1985) has provided experimen-
tal evidence that increasing the degree to
which an individual identifies with his or
her workgroup (and thus presumably, the
more important it is that the group be fairly
rewarded) increases the impact of a given
pay discrepancy on the number of com-
plaints the individual makes on behalf of
the workgroup. Similarly, Gartrell and
Paille (1997) found that employees who felt
responsible for wage-cut decisions (and
thus who were presumably more indifferent
to the fairness of wage cuts) perceived ac-
tual wage cuts as more fair than employees
who were not responsible.

These are the only two studies we have
found, however, that empirically investigate
the potential moderating effects of justice
importance for justice evaluations, and nei-
ther study employed direct measures of jus-
tice importance. This means not only that a
significant theoretical insight remains sup-
ported by only a few empirical studies, but,
just as important, that statistical models that
do not control for the interactive effects of
justice importance are potentially misspec-
ified. Thus, we include the moderating im-
pact of justice importance in our model of
justice processes, represented in Figure 1 by
the direct causal path leading from the inter-
action term (pay justice evaluation x justice
importance) to justice perceptions. This
leads to our second hypothesis.
The data analyzed here come from a 1996
national survey of parish ministers in the
United Church of Christ (UCC) and Chris-
tian Church (Disciples of Christ) (DOC).
Both are Protestant denominations in the
moderate to liberal range with respect to re-
ligious conservatism. Details of the survey
instrument and sample are provided by Mc-
Duff and Mueller (1999, 2000). Of the 4,500
ministers who were mailed the question-
naire, a total of 2,780 (62 percent) returned
them, a reasonable response rate for a na-
tional-level mailed survey (Dillman 1991).
To ensure sufficient cases for analyzing sub-
groups (not at issue in the current paper), all
female ministers were sampled, while a 50-
percent random sample of male ministers
was taken. Because females were “double
over-sampled,” weights have been intro-
duced so that coefficients estimated from the
entire sample are not biased by female over-
representation. Also, we restricted our analy-
ses to the subset of ministers who reported
that they are not in interim positions. After
applying the sampling weights and eliminat-
ing cases listwise for missing data, the ef-
fective sample size is 2,350 (1,953 males
and 397 females). In general, a comparison
of characteristics of the sample with those
of the population of parish ministers in UCC
and DOC churches indicates that there are
predicting individuals’ emotional reactions;
this has yet to be done.

It is important to note, however, that we
do not mean to criticize or refute the myriad
empirical investigations of justice processes.
To the contrary, these studies provide impor-
tant empirical justification for the individual
assumptions of our model. Rather, we sug-
gest simply that previous research has fo-
cused on aspects of the justice evaluation
process other than the mediating role of jus-
tice perceptions, such that there is a general
lack of evidence directly assessing the me-
diating role of justice perceptions in the
study of distributive justice. Below, we re-
port results from a national survey of Prot-
estant clergy that bear on the mediating role
of justice perceptions and the moderating
role of justice importance in explaining min-
isters’ reported pay satisfaction.
The hypotheses presented above are as-
sessed by estimating a structural equation
model (Jéreskog and Sérbom 1996) based
on the theoretical model presented in Figure
1, as specified with the measures we de-
scribe below. LISREL with maximum-like-
lihood estimation produces reliability-cor-
rected estimates of direct and indirect effects
and the relevant asymptotic standard errors.
As described below, some of the constructs
are captured with multiple-item measures,
although most are based on single indicators.
Finally, several of the indicators are mea-
sured as ordinal scales and, thus, violate the
assumption of interval scales when Pearson
correlations and MLE are used. We con-
ducted several sensitivity checks of the re-
sults using a smaller model, a polychoric
correlation matrix, and weighted-least-
squares estimation. These checks suggest
that our results are robust to the violation of
this assumption.”
ables included in the analysis are presented
in Table 1. The variables are introduced be-
low by tracing the causal model in Figure 1
from left to right, that is, from the exogenous
to the endogenous variables.

CONTROLS. The estimated model in-
cludes three sets of exogenous control vari-
ables. The first set includes characteristics of
the work setting—church budget, church
size, and denomination. The first two vari-
ables are common in models of work satis-
faction and are potentially important sources
of symbolic rewards, as large and well-
funded churches tend to represent high-sta-
tus positions in the ministerial occupational
labor market (McDuff and Mueller 2000).
Also, there are qualitative differences be-
tween denominations that might influence
justice processes, such as the status of min-
isters in the congregation.

The second set of controls includes vari-
ous characteristics of the respondents as em-
ployees and as individuals—gender, marital
status, full-time employment status, being
the primary wage-earner for their household,
occupational tenure, and organizational ten-
ure. Again, these are common controls for
models of work satisfaction that partial out
potentially confounding effects. In general,
ministers in this sample are more likely than
not to be married, to be employed full-time,
and to be the primary wage-earner; they tend
to have been in the profession for around 18
years and in their present position for around
7 years.

The third set of controls focuses on the
degree of autonomy allowed ministers on the
job, an aspect of workplace conditions (other
than the rewards considered below) that may
affect respondents’ overall feelings of fair-
ness and satisfaction. As suggested by recent
research and theory, interactional and proce-
dural aspects of the workplace, although
conceptually distinct from distributive jus-
tice, may exert an independent effect on per-
ceptions of distributive fairness (Brockner
and Wiesenfeld 1996; Randall and Mueller
1995; van den Bos, Vermunt, and Wilke
1997). By including autonomy as an exog-
enous variable in the model, we control for
the potentially confounding effects of intrin-
sic characteristics of the work, as well as
procedural and interactional factors of the
workplace, on distributive justice percep-
tions and pay satisfaction. Ministers in the
sample report, on average, that they have a
relatively high degree of autonomy, with a
mean score of 4.29 (S.D. = .52) on our five-
point autonomy scale (which ranges from
low to high autonomy). Assuming that min-
isters prefer more autonomy in their work,
we expect autonomy to positively affect jus-
tice perceptions and pay satisfaction in our
model.

REWARD CONDITIONS. Because we focus
on respondents’ evaluations and perceptions
of distributive (as opposed to procedural or
interactional) fairness, and the effects of
those evaluations and perceptions on respon-
dents’ pay satisfaction, we include several
variables as indicators of the concrete re-
wards received by respondents in their jobs.
Perhaps the most obvious workplace reward
is pay—ministers in this sample earned an
average of about $33,713 per year in 1996
(S.D. = $14,242). To tap into workplace re-
wards other than pay that may impact re-
spondents’ perceptions of distributive injus-
tice and thus indirectly affect their pay satis-
faction, we also include the number of both
formal and informal benefits. Ministers in
this sample reported receiving an average of
7.84 out of 13 possible formal benefits (S.D.
= 2.76) and an average of 3.5 out of 9 pos-
sible informal benefits (S.D. = 1.84),
weighted by their frequency.

JUSTICE EVALUATIONS. The first variable
of interest in the distributive justice process
is the distributive justice evaluation. This
construct is measured as a pay justice evalu-
ation, by taking the natural log of the ratio
of the income reported by the respondent
(i.e., the actual share) to the income the re-
spondent says he or she deserves (i.e., the
just share).8 This operationalization of the
nates the need for such information by asking re-
spondents to report the level of pay they deserve
given their own experience, effort, education,
and training. This allows the specific referent to
vary across respondents without biasing the mea-
sure of just rewards. Again, this strategy for mea-
suring the just reward is justified by adopting
justice evaluation function proposed by
Jasso (1980) is based on the statistical mod-
els employed by Markovsky (1985) and
Randall and Mueller (1995). As coded here,
the pay justice evaluation variable becomes
more negative as an individual’s salary
moves farther below the deserved salary
(i.e., the greater the degree of underreward),
and it becomes more positive as an indi-
vidual’s salary moves farther above the de-
served salary (i.e., the greater the degree of
overreward). As suggested by Jasso (1980),
the justice evaluation will equal 0 for an in-
dividual who receives the salary he or she
says is deserved. For our sample, the uncen-
tered mean pay justice evaluation is —.28
(S.D. = .30), indicating that, on average,
ministers in our sample are slightly under-
rewarded.

As Randall and Mueller (1995) have dem-
onstrated, the characteristics of the rewards
being evaluated must be carefully consid-
ered within the context in which they are
evaluated. Specifically, several justice re-
searchers have suggested that, under particu-
lar conditions, slight degrees of overreward
may not lead to negative emotional reactions
(Hegtvedt 1990; Hegtvedt et al. 1993; Jasso
1986; Markovsky 1988). There are several
reasons that we do not expect overrewarded
ministers to perceive injustice in their pay or
to express dissatisfaction with it. First, be-
cause most ministers receive low pay rela-
tive to other professionals, it is unlikely that
many respondents in our sample will be
overrewarded. In fact, 85 percent of minis-
ters in the sample were underrewarded,
slightly more than 12 percent were justly re-
warded, and only about 2 percent were over-
rewarded, indicating a general state of
underreward.? Second, because most minis-
ters are not in direct competition with others
for the salary and other benefits they receive,
and because they are not directly responsible
for determining their own pay, it is likely
that those who are overrewarded would be
able to justify this fact through external at-
tributions (Hegtvedt et al. 1993).

Based on this reasoning, the results re-
ported by Randall and Mueller (1995), and
the coding of the variable, we expect pay
justice evaluations to have a positive, mono-
tonic effect on justice perceptions, such that
increasingly negative justice evaluations
should be associated with lower perceived
justice (Hypothesis 1).

JUSTICE IMPORTANCE. As conceptual-
ized, Markovsky’s (1985) concept of justice
importance can be directly operationalized
via attitudinal survey items. We measure this
construct on a five-point scale indicating the
importance to the respondent of being fairly
rewarded given the work done (ranging from
“not at all important” to “of great impor-
tance”). The uncentered mean justice impor-
tance for respondents in this sample is 3.89
(S.D. = .73).

PAY JUSTICE EVALUATION X JUSTICE IM-
PORTANCE INTERACTION. We operational-
ize the pay justice evaluation x justice im-
portance interaction effect proposed in Hy-
pothesis 2 by creating a variable computed
as the product of the justice evaluation and
justice importance variables. This is consis-
tent with Bollen’s (1989:128) recommenda-
tion for including single-indicator interac-
tion terms in LISREL models. Also, because
of high collinearity between the interaction
term and the two variables composing it, we
have centered the pay justice evaluation and
justice importance variables at their means
prior to computing values for the interaction
term, as recommended by Neter et al.
(1996).

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE PERCEPTIONS.
We include two indicators of distributive
justice perceptions, one specific to pay and
one a more global distributive justice mea-
sure (which includes pay plus other benefits
of being a minister). The pay-specific mea-
sure taps the degree to which respondents
perceive that they have been under- or
overrewarded in terms of pay and benefits;
the midpoint (2.5) represents perfect justice.
The mean of 2.38 (S.D. = .72) indicates that
respondents generally perceive themselves
to be slightly underrewarded. Global dis-
tributive justice perceptions are measured by
three items from the Price-Mueller index
that tap the degree to which respondents per-
ceive themselves to be fairly rewarded given
their effort, experience, and responsibilities
(Price and Mueller 1986). Table 1 indicates
that ministers generally agree that they are
fairly rewarded, with a mean of 3.25 on a
five-point Likert scale. However, there is
substantial variation in these perceptions
(S.D. = 1.02), and this variation is more im-
portant to our analysis than the overall
means. Because we do not make any as-
sumptions about the causal-effect of one per-
ception on the other, but we do expect them
to be empirically related, we allow the dis-
turbances for these two justice perceptions
to be correlated in the estimated structural
equation model.

EMOTIONAL RESPONSE. We investigate
the effect of justice evaluations and percep-
tions on respondents’ pay satisfaction, our
indicator of an emotional response to injus-
tice. Pay satisfaction exemplifies what Jasso
(1986) has called a “responsive” conse-
quence of experienced injustice (as opposed
to purposive behaviors designed to reduce
injustice), and it includes both cognitive and
affective elements (Mark and Folger 1984;
Randall and Muelier 1995). We chose this
specific facet of job satisfaction (rather than
overall job satisfaction) because (1) it pro-
vides a cleaner test of the theoretical model
(focusing attention on distributive rather
than other forms of justice) and (2) follow-
ing neoclassical economic theory, pay is per-
haps the most universally (positively) valued
workplace reward. This is important, be-
cause, as Jasso and Wegener (1997) convinc-
ingly argue, whether an individual frames a
particular outcome as a positively or nega-
tively valued object has direct implications
for the form and magnitude of the sense of
injustice that may result. In the analyses to
Table 2 gives the LISREL-estimated corre-
lation coefficients (corrected for unreli-
ability) and Table 3 presents the LISREL-es-
timated path coefficients for the model pro-
posed in Figure 1. Our main concerns are to
(1) demonstrate the general efficacy of the
causal model proposed, (2) determine
whether justice importance interacts with
justice evaluations as proposed by Mar-
kovsky (1985), and (3) determine whether
(and to what extent) justice perceptions me-
diate the effects of the exogenous variables.

In assessing the general efficacy of the
causal model, it is important to first consider
whether the expected relationships between
the exogenous and intervening variables are
found (see Table 3). Focusing on workplace
rewards, both pay and informal benefits
have the expected positive effects on pay
and global justice perceptions. Unexpect-
edly, however, formal benefits have a nega-
tive effect on both pay and global justice
perceptions, a finding we discuss below. Au-
tonomy, our indicator of working conditions
other than pay, has the expected positive ef-
fect on both pay and global justice percep-
tions. Moreover, attesting to the general ef-
ficacy of the model, about 71 percent of the
variance in pay satisfaction is accounted for
by all causally antecedent variables, and
op) @D GD OD GD GD €D @ AD oO © ®@ WwW ©) © WH © WM W soqqeuie A

 

9661 ‘SAaqstUNTA JURISI}0Ig :Sash[eUY ay} Ul SITquIIeA UIaMJeq SJUIIDIJJ0D UOHLIPII0D °7 IIqe I,
“OsEez
= N ‘(ereMyos uoNeUNSs TAYST'T 3M) Aq poyeroud se) ArpiqerforUN 10J poydaLI09 pue ‘so[qeHeA PosojUso oy) Jog ‘o[dures payyStom oy) UO painduiod are suONe|aLIOD :ajoN

 

oor Lo so 60>) Oh or so" ce sv £0" 90° 90-70" 80° 1o- €0- I vl gg sonsnf oanmnquistp Aed (61)
R? 326 271 714

 

Note: Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Model fit information: L? = 482.412; d.f. = 98; stan-
dardized Root Mean Square Residual = .0195; Goodness-of-Fit Index = .983; Adjusted Goodness-of-Fit In-
dex = .949; Normed Fit Index = .980.

“p< .05 “py <.01 *“) < 001 (two-tailed tests)
Table 3. Unstandardized LISREL Coefficients for the Justice Model Illustrated in Figure 1:
Protestant Ministers, 1996

 

 

Mediating Variables

Pay Distributive Global Distributive
Variables Justice Perception Justice Perception Pay Satisfaction
each of the goodness-of-fit indices (see note
to Table 3) indicates a respectable corre-
spondence between the model and the data.
Hypotheses 1 and 2 refer to the first set of
causal paths directly linking justice evalua-
tions and the justice evaluation x justice im-
portance interaction to justice perceptions.
Supporting Hypothesis 1, our measure of
pay justice evaluations has a significant
positive effect on both types of justice per-
ceptions and, in support of Hypothesis 2, our
indicator for the pay justice evaluation x jus-
tice importance interaction significantly in-
fluences both pay and global justice percep-
tions. As suggested by Markovsky (1985),
the positive sign for this interaction term
means that justice evaluations impact justice
perceptions more strongly when justice is
more important to the person (a graph of this
interaction is available on request from the
authors). Unexpectedly, however, justice im-
portance has a significant negative main ef-
fect on both types of justice perceptions (we
discuss possible reasons for this below).
Most important, these findings support the
first assumption required for justice percep-
tions to serve a mediating role as proposed—
respondents’ justice evaluations directly af-
fect their perceptions of distributive justice.
Recall that the second assumption regard-
ing the mediating role of justice perceptions
requires a direct effect of justice percep-
tions on pay satisfaction (Hypothesis 3).
Turning to the estimates for the pay satis-
faction equation in Table 3, both pay and
global justice perceptions significantly and
dramatically increase satisfaction with
one’s pay, supporting Hypothesis 3. With
respect to the other exogenous variables in
our model, we find that the pay justice
evaluation has a significant positive direct
effect, justice importance again has an un-
expected significant negative main effect,
and the direct effect of the interaction term
is not significant. The causal importance of
justice perceptions is highlighted in that
their standardized coefficients (8 = .137 and
B = .705 for pay and global justice percep-
tions, respectively) are substantially larger
than those for any of the other variables
used to predict pay satisfaction.

The third assumption regarding the medi-
ating role of justice perceptions requires that
the effects of the pay justice evaluation and
the pay justice evaluation x justice impor-
tance interaction be indirect, affecting pay
satisfaction primarily through their impact
on justice perceptions. In Table 4, we de-
compose the total causal effects of the key
exogenous and intervening variables in our
model into direct and indirect effects. As re-
ported above, autonomy, pay justice evalua-
tions, and justice importance have signifi-
cant direct effects on pay satisfaction. The
indirect effects of these variables (through
justice perceptions), however, are 85 per-
These results provide substantial support for
the theoretical model presented in Figure 1
and the five hypotheses we have drawn from
it. While the absolute level of pay and infor-
mal benefits have significant and positive
total effects on pay satisfaction, these effects
are entirely indirect through the individual’s
perceptions of distributive justice. These
findings are especially relevant for pay (94
percent of its total causal effect is indirect),
given the inability of previous researchers to
distinguish between the relative efficacy of
self-interest and justice models of work sat-
isfaction (Randall and Mueller 1995). Con-
sistent with the justice model, we find that
the absolute level of rewards received by in-
dividuals does not exhibit a direct effect on
pay satisfaction net of justice evaluations
and perceptions. Randall and Mueller’s
(1995) failure to include justice perceptions
in their statistical models may account for
their inability to adjudicate between the self-
interest and distributive justice explanations.
At a minimum, our findings suggest that fu-
ture investigations of justice evaluation pro-
cesses should include measures of the cru-
cial mediating variable—justice percep-
tions—to avoid reaching faulty substantive
conclusions.

We find an unexpected significant nega-
tive direct effect of formal job benefits on
both pay and global justice perception mea-
sures, and a similar negative total causal ef-
fect (but no direct effect) on pay satisfac-
tion. The fact that respondents who receive
greater formal benefits perceive being
underrewarded, and express lower pay sat-
isfaction as a result, suggests an interesting
paradox. It may be that receiving substan-
tial formal benefits (e.g., insurance, vaca-
tion) leads ministers in this sample to be-
lieve that they could, and, in fact, should,
receive greater pay from their parish. Obvi-
ously, this interpretation is speculative, but
it is supported by the positive correlation (r
= .385, p < .001) between formal benefits
and the amount of pay respondents believe
is just (the denominator of the pay justice
evaluation). Future research investigating
distributive justice in work settings should
include a wide variety of workplace re-
wards, and should attempt to disentangle
the interrelationships between the rewards
respondents receive and those they believe
they deserve (also see Jasso and Wegener
1997).

Also supporting the model presented in
Figure 1, we find that pay justice evaluations
have a positive total causal effect on pay sat-
isfaction, primarily through their effects on
justice perceptions and, consistent with
Markovsky’s (1985) argument, this effect is
moderated by the importance placed on jus-
tice by the respondent. That is, for ministers
in this sample, the more importance they
place on being fairly rewarded, the greater
the effect of discrepancies between their ac-
tual and deserved pay on their perceptions
of distributive justice and, indirectly, on
their pay satisfaction.

The main anomaly found in this study is
the direct negative main effect of justice
importance on pay satisfaction—net of all
other variables, ministers who place a high
value on being fairly rewarded tend to per-
ceive themselves as being underrewarded
and to express lower pay satisfaction. Al-
though justice importance has significant
negative effects on both pay and global jus-
tice perception measures, its effect on pay
satisfaction is predominantly direct (62.5
percent of the total effect is unmediated).
Our measure of justice importance asks re-
spondents about the importance of being
fairly rewarded in general (not restricted to
pay or job benefits). Conceptually, it is pos-
sible that the importance one places on dis-
tributive justice affects not only the transla-
tion of reward discrepancies into perceived
injustice in concrete situations (i.e., the in-
teraction effect proposed here), but also
may serve as a more general schema that
sensitizes individuals to issues of distribu-
tive fairness beyond their pay and job ben-
efits.!'! Thus, individuals who place a high
value on distributive justice may also be
more likely to attend to a wider range of
justice evaluations (e.g., intangible rewards,
workplace procedures, interactions with su-
pervisors) and justice referents. In our sam-
ple, ministers who place a high value on
fair pay may be more sensitive to the fact
that their pay is quite low when compared
with pay in other professions (the ministers’
average salary for 1996 was less than
$34,000 per year). Future research should
investigate both the moderating effects of
justice importance for justice evaluations in
specific situations, and the broader implica-
tions of this overarching value for justice
perceptions and for individuals’ emotional
responses. Because this is one of only a
handful of studies that empirically consid-
ers this intriguing concept, much remains to
be learned about the role of justice impor-
tance in the justice evaluation process.
justice perceptions do, in fact, act as a me-
diator in the justice evaluation process. Ex-
tant empirical studies focus on the effects of
absolute rewards, justice evaluations, or jus-
tice perceptions on individuals’ reactions,
but rarely on all three simultaneously. We
have filled this empirical void by analyzing
data from a national sample of Protestant
ministers that contains measures of all of
these theoretical constructs. Based on esti-
mates from a structural equation model, we
have found considerable support for the pro-
posed justice evaluation model. The effects
of (1) the absolute level of workplace re-
wards (e.g., pay, informal benefits), (2) jus-
tice evaluations (i.e., discrepancies between
actual and deserved pay), and (3) the pay
justice evaluation x justice importance inter-
action on pay satisfaction are all primarily
indirect, mediated by perceptions of pay-
specific and global distributive justice. Sup-
port for our distributive justice model also
provides support for the more general notion
within social psychology that individuals’
perceptions (e.g., definitions of the situa-
tion) play an important mediating role in de-
termining their resultant behaviors and emo-
tions.

Our findings also have practical implica-
tions for understanding justice processes.
Many professionals rely on their ability to
satisfy others’ sense of fairness to maintain
relatively harmonious interpersonal interac-
tions. Understanding the crucial mediating
role of justice perceptions means that this
task becomes more complex—not only
must one consider the level of rewards of-
fered relative to available normative stan-
dards and social referents (e.g., coworkers),
but also individuals’ perceptions of the fair-
ness of those rewards and the individual-
level factors (e.g., justice importance) that
impact reactions to specific reward discrep-
ancies. For instance, Mueller and Wallace
(1996) argue that the “paradox of the con-
tented female worker” (Phelan 1994), in
which women whose work conditions and
rewards are objectively below those of male
counterparts often feel just as satisfied as
(or even more satisfied than) men, is partly
due to the fact that women do not perceive
the differences as unfair. Also, the ability to
manipulate factors such as responsibility
(Gartrell and Paille 1997) and social identi-
fication (Markovsky 1985), which have
been associated with the importance indi-
viduals place on distributive fairness, may
prove particularly effective for managers
and other professionals facing potentially
“explosive” situations (e.g., pay raises/cuts,
layoffs).

While our empirical model was estimated
based on data from a relatively restrictive
population of professionals (i.e., ministers
from two Protestant denominations), there
is reason to be guardedly confident that the
general model would also apply to other
groups of professionals and nonprofession-
als. Justice researchers have generated an
impressive body of research illustrating the
importance of distributive justice percep-
tions for individuals’ attitudes, behaviors,
and emotions in a vast array of work orga-
nizations. This includes evidence that the
rewards employees receive affect percep-
tions of fairness in a wide variety of set-
tings, including workers at a plywood coop-
erative facing pay-cuts (Gartrell and Paille
1997), public university employees facing
pay-raise decisions (Dulebohn and
Martocchio 1998), and teachers in the
United States and South Korea (Mueller,
Iverson, and Jo 1999). There is also evi-
dence that justice perceptions have substan-
tial effects on job and/or pay satisfaction
for a broad range of occupations, including
first-line manufacturing employees (Folger
and Konovsky 1989), engineers in a public
utility company (Sweeney and McFarlin
1993), bank employees (McFarlin and
Sweeney 1992), supervisors in Chinese
joint-venture hotels (Leung et al. 1996), and
Canadian lawyers (Mueller and Wallace
1996). Finally, Randall and Mueller (1995)
provide evidence of the total effect of jus-
tice evaluations on job satisfaction, organi-
zational commitment, intent to stay with an
employer, and turnover for a sample of reg-
istered nurses. The sampling universe cov-
ered by these studies is impressive, ranging
from salaried professionals to hourly manu-
facturing workers. The fact that the evi-
dence in each case supports a portion of our
model gives us reason to be confident that
our entire model should apply to other
samples. Because ours is the first study to
consider each of these relationships simul-
taneously, however, such generalizability is
speculative and awaits further corroboration
and theoretical refinement.

A final word of caution regarding our re-
sults is warranted. The data we use to test the
theoretical model are cross-sectional, and
therefore we cannot make unambiguous
causal inferences despite our estimation of a
structural equation model. In fact, some theo-
rists have questioned the presumed causal
role of justice perceptions, suggesting in-
stead that individuals first experience a nega-
tive affective response, then “search” for the
cause of this negative affect in the situation,
leading them to perceive that their rewards
are “unfair” (Scher and Heisse 1993). In our
case, this argument implies that workplace
rewards lead to pay satisfaction, and only
then to evaluations of pay justice and to per-
ceptions of distributive injustice. Future re-
search, grounded in carefully controlled ex-
periments, may assist in disentangling the
causal order of the cognitive and affective
elements of justice evaluations. However,
such fine-grained analysis is far beyond the
aims of the current paper and the data used in
this study. Instead, we provide an explicit and
general theoretical model, based on the pre-
dominant theoretical position and prior em-
pirical evidence, that stresses the mediating
role of justice perceptions in translating re-
ward conditions into emotional responses,
and find substantial support for the assump-
tions represented by this model.
Unless otherwise noted, all variables were measured
on five-point Likert scales (1= strongly disagree to
5 = strongly agree). Reverse coded items are denot-
ed [R]. Coefficient alpha and factor loadings [ ] are
reported for multi-item scales.

EXOGENOUS CONTROL VARIABLES
WORK SETTING

Church budget. “What is the budget of your con-
gregation?” (1) Under $50,000, (2) $50,000 to
$100,000, (3) Over $100,000.

Church size. “What is the size of your present
congregation?” (1) 0 to 100, (2) 101 to 300, (3)
more than 300.

Denomination. A dummy variable, with UCC
coded 1 and DOC coded 0.

WORKER CHARACTERISTICS

Female. A dummy variable, coded 1 if respon-
dent is a female, 0 if respondent is a male.

Married. A dummy variable, coded 1 if respon-
dent indicated that he or she was currently mar-
ried, 0 if single, divorced, separated, or widowed.

Full-time. A dummy variable, coded 1 if current
position is 40 or more hours per week, 0 if less.

Primary wage-earner. A dummy variable, coded
1 if the respondent indicated he or she earned 51
percent or more of the household income, 0 oth-
erwise.

Years in the ministry. Total years as a minister.

Tenure. Years serving in present congregation.

WORKPLACE REWARDS

Pay. A variable constructed from a single item,
which asked each respondent to indicate their
current yearly income from parish ministry be-
fore taxes: (1) less than $10,000, (2) $10,000 to
$15,999, (3) $16,000 to $20,000, (4) $21,000 to
$25,999, (5) $26,000 to $30,999, (6) $31,000 to
$35,999, (7) $36,000 to $40,999, (8) $41,000 to
$50,999, (9) more than $60,000. We then com-
puted each respondent’s pay as the midpoint of
the salary range they indicated, except in the case
of category (9), in which a Pareto estimate was
assigned (see Parker and Fenwick 1983 for de-
tails on this procedure).

 

Formal benefits. The total number (ranging from
0 to 13) of the following benefits the respondent
receives based on written contract with the con-
gregation: (a) health insurance, (b) dental insur-
ance, (c) medical co-payment plan, (d) vacation,
(e) maternity/paternity leave, (f) life insurance,
(g) disability insurance, (h) sabbaticals, (i) pen-
sion/annuity, (j) travel expenses, (k) continuing
education, (1) allowable reimbursement policy,
(m) malpractice insurance.

Informal benefits. The total number of the fol-
lowing benefits the respondent receives, weight-
ed by their frequency (0 = never, 1 = sometimes,
2 = often), that are dependent on the good will of
the congregation and not in a written contract: (a)
parsonage furnishings, (b) gifts of food, (c) din-
ner invitations by parishioners, (d) special occa-
sion gifts, (e) use of a parishioner’s vacation
home, (f) use of a car, (g) reduced insurance
rates, (h) reduced mortgage rates, (i) country club
and/or other club memberships.

WORKING CONDITIONS

Autonomy. The mean of four items: (a) “I have a
considerable amount of freedom to do my job”
[.82], (b) “I influence the things that affect me on
the job” [.78], (c) “I have input deciding what
tasks or what parts of tasks I will do” [.71], and
(d) “I control the scheduling of my own work”
[.67]. The composite scale has a reliability a@ =
.83, and ranges from 1 to 5 with higher values
representing greater autonomy.

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE VARIABLES

Pay justice evaluation. A variable constructed by
taking the natural log of the ratio of the respon-
dent’s value for pay (see above) and for just pay.
The latter was constructed from the respondent’s
response to the question, “Thinking in terms of
your current position, what annual salary from
your job (base salary plus housing or fair rental
value of parsonage) do you feel you deserve, one
that would be fair and just given your education,
training, experience, position and input into your
work?” (1) $10,000 to $15,999, (2) $16,000 to
$20,999, (3) $21,000 to $25,999, (4) $26,000 to
$30,999, (5) $31,000 to $35,999, (6) $36,000 to
$40,999, (7) $41,000 to $50,999, (8) $51,000 to
$60,999, (9) $61,000 to $70,999, (10) $71,000 or
more. We then assigned each respondent the mid-

 

(Appendix A continued on next page)
Formal benefits. The total number (ranging from
0 to 13) of the following benefits the respondent
receives based on written contract with the con-
gregation: (a) health insurance, (b) dental insur-
ance, (c) medical co-payment plan, (d) vacation,
(e) maternity/paternity leave, (f) life insurance,
(g) disability insurance, (h) sabbaticals, (i) pen-
sion/annuity, (j) travel expenses, (k) continuing
education, (1) allowable reimbursement policy,
(m) malpractice insurance.

Informal benefits. The total number of the fol-
lowing benefits the respondent receives, weight-
ed by their frequency (0 = never, 1 = sometimes,
2 = often), that are dependent on the good will of
the congregation and not in a written contract: (a)
parsonage furnishings, (b) gifts of food, (c) din-
ner invitations by parishioners, (d) special occa-
sion gifts, (e) use of a parishioner’s vacation
home, (f) use of a car, (g) reduced insurance
rates, (h) reduced mortgage rates, (i) country club
and/or other club memberships.
Adams, James S. 1965. “Inequity in Social Ex-
change.” Pp. 267-99 in Advances in Experi-
mental Social Psychology, vol. 2, edited by L.
Berkowitz. New York: Academic.

Anderson, Norman H. 1976. “Equity Judgments
as Information Integration.” Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology 33:291-99.

Bollen, Kenneth. 1989. Structural Equations with
Latent Variables. New York: Wiley.

Brockner, Joel and Batia M. Wiesenfeld. 1996.
“An Integrative Framework for Explaining Re-
actions to Decisions: Interactive Effects of
Outcomes and Procedures.” Psychological
Bulletin 120:189-208.

Cooley, Charles Horton. 1902. Human Nature
and the Social Order. New York: Scribner.
Crosby, Faye. 1976. “A Model of Egoistic Rela-
tive Deprivation.” Psychological Review

83:85-113.

Dillman, Donald. 1991. “The Design and Admin-
istration of Mail Surveys.” Annual Review of
Sociology 17:225-49.

Dulebohn, James and Joseph J. Martocchio.
1998. “Employees’ Perceptions of the Dis-
tributive Justice of Pay Raise Decisions: A
Policy Capturing Approach.” Journal of Busi-
ness and Psychology 13:41-64.

Folger, Robert. 1986 “A Referent Cognitions
Theory of Relative Deprivation.” Pp. 33-55 in
Relative Deprivation and Social Comparison:
The Ontario Symposium, vol. 4, edited by J. M.
Olson, C. P. Herman, and M. P. Zanna.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Folger, Robert and Mary A. Konovsky. 1989.
“Effects of Procedural and Distributive Justice
on Reactions to Pay Raise Decisions.” Acad-
emy of Management Journal 32:115-30.

Folger, Robert, David Rosenfield, Karen
Rheaume, and Chris Martin. 1983. “Relative
Deprivation and Referent Cognitions.” Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology 19:172-84.

Gartrell, C. David and Bernard E. Paille. 1997.
“Wage Cuts and the Fairness of Pay in a
Worker-Owned Plywood Cooperative.” Social
Psychology Quarterly 60:103-17.

Goffman, Erving. 1959. Presentation of Self in
Everyday Life. Garden City, NY: Anchor.

Greenberg, Jerald. 1993. “Stealing in the Name
of Justice: Informational and Interpersonal
Moderators of Theft Reactions to Underpay-
ment Inequity.” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 54:81-103.

Hegtvedt, Karen A. 1990. “The Effects of Rela-
tionship Structure on Emotional Responses to
Inequity.” Social Psychology Quarterly
53:214-28.

Hegtvedt, Karen A. and Barry Markovsky. 1995.
“Justice and Injustice.” Pp. 257-80 in Socio-
logical Perspectives on Social Psychology, ed-
ited by K. S. Cook, G. A. Fine, and J. S.
House. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.

Hegtvedt, Karen A., Elaine A. Thompson, and
Karen S. Cook. 1993. “Power and Equity:
What Counts in Attributions for Exchange
Outcomes?” Social Psychology Quarterly
56:100-119.

Heimer, Karen and Ross L. Matsueda. 1994.
“Role-Taking, Role-Commitment, and Delin-
quency: A Theory of Differential Social Con-
trol.” American Sociological Review 59:365-
90.

Homans, George C. 1974. Social Behavior: Its
. 1986. “A New Representation of the Just
Term in Distributive Justice Theory: Its Prop-
erties and Operation in Theoretical Derivation
and Empirical Estimation.” Journal of Math-
ematical Sociology 12:251-74.

. 1993. “Choice and Emotion in Compari-
son Theory.” Rationality and Society 5:231-
74.

Jasso, Guillermina and Bernd Wegener. 1997.
“Methods for Empirical Justice Analysis: Part
I. Framework, Models and Quantities.” Social
Justice Research 10:393-430.

Jéreskog, Karl G. and Dag Sérbom. 1996.
LISREL 8: User’s Reference Guide. Chicago,
IL: Scientific Software International.

Leung, Kwok, Peter B. Smith, Zhongming Wang,
and Haifa Sun. 1996. “Job Satisfaction in Joint
Venture Hotels in China: An Organizational
Justice Analysis.” Journal of International
Business Studies 27:947-62.

Leventhal, Gerald S., Jurgis Karuza Jr., and Wil-
liam R. Fry. 1980. “Beyond Fairness: A
Theory of Allocation Preferences.” Pp. 167—
218 in Justice in Social Interaction, edited by
G. Mikula. New York: Springer.

Mark, Melvin M. and Robert Folger. 1984. “Re-
sponses to Relative Deprivation: A Conceptual
Framework.” Pp. 192-218 in Review of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, vol. 5, edited
by P. Shaver. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Markovsky, Barry. 1985. “Toward a Multilevel
Distributive Justice Theory.” American Socio-
logical Review 50:822-39.

. 1988. “Injustice and Arousal.” Social
Justice Research 2:223-34.

. 1991. “Prospects for a Cognitive-Struc-
tural Justice Theory.” Pp. 33-58 in Social Jus-
tice in Human Relations, vol. 1, edited by R.
Vermunt and H. Steensma. New York: Ple-
num.

Matsueda, Ross L. 1992. “Reflected Appraisals,
Parental Labeling, and Delinquency: Specify-
ing a Symbolic Interactionist Theory.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 97:1577-1611.

McDuff, Elaine and Charles W. Mueller. 1999.
“Social Support and Compensating Differen-
tials in the Ministry: Gender Differences in

Two Protestant Denominations.” Review of

Religious Research 40:307-30.

. 2000. “The Ministry as an Occupational
Labor Market: Intentions to Leave an Em-
ployer (Church) versus Intentions to Leave a
Profession (Ministry).” Work and Occupations
27:89-116.

McFarlin, Dean B. and Paul D. Sweeney. 1992.
“Distributive and Procedural Justice as Predic-
tors of Satisfaction with Personal and Organi-
zational Outcomes.” Academy of Management
Journal 35:626-37.

Mellers, Barbara A. 1982. “Equity Judgment: A
Revision of Aristotelian Views.” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 111:242-
70.

Messick, David M. and Keith P. Sentis. 1979.
“Fairness and Preference.” Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology 15:418-34.

Mueller, Charles W., Roderick Iverson, and
Dong-Gi Jo. 1999, “Distributive Justice Evalu-
ations in Two Cultural Contexts: A Compari-
son of U.S. and South Korean Teachers.” Hu-
man Relations 52:869-93.

Mueller, Charles W. and Jean E. Wallace. 1996.
“Justice and the Paradox of the Contented Fe-
male Worker.” Social Psychology Quarterly
59:338-49.

Neter, John, Michael H. Kutner, Christopher
Nechtsheim, and William Wasserman. 1996.
Applied Linear Regression Models. Chicago,
IL: Irwin.

Parker, Robert Nash and Rudy Fenwick. 1983.
“The Pareto Curve and Its Utility for Open-
Ended Income Distributions in Survey Re-
search.” Social Forces 61:872-85.

Phelan, Jo. 1994. “The Paradox of the Contented
Female Worker: An Assessment of Alternative
Explanations.” Social Psychology Quarterly
57:95-107.

Price, James and Charles W. Mueller. 1986.
Handbook of Organizational Measurement.
Marshfield, MA: Pitman.

Randall, Christine S. and Charles W. Mueller.
1995. “Extensions of Justice Theory: Justice
Evaluations and Employee’s Reactions in a
Natural Setting.” Social Psychology Quarterly
58:178-94.

Scher, Steven J. and David R. Heisse. 1993, “Af-
fect and the Perception of Injustice.” Pp. 223—
52 in Advances in Group Processes, vol. 10,
edited by E. J. Lawler, B. Markovsky, K.
Heimer, and J. O’Brien. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.

Sweeney, Paul D. and Dean B. McFarlin. 1993.
“Workers’ Evaluations of the ‘Ends’ and the
‘Means’: An Examination of Four Models of
Distributive and Procedural Justice.” Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses 55:23-40.

Thomas, W. I. and Dorothy S. Thomas. 1928.
The Child in America: Behavior Problems and
Programs. New York: Knopf.

Térnblom, Kjell. 1992. “The Social Psychology
of Distributive Justice.” Pp. 177-236 in Jus-
tice: Interdisciplinary Perspectives, edited by
K. R. Scherer. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press.
van den Bos, Kees, Riel Vermunt, and Henk A.
M. Wilke. 1997. “Procedural and Distributive
Justice: What Is Fair Depends More on What
Comes First Than on What Comes Next.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
72:95-104,

Walster, Elaine, George Walster, and Ellen
Berschied. 1978. Equity Theory and Research.
Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
