@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
still nominally a member of the subordinate
Jewish group, intermarries in order to raise
his status or that of his children to that of
the dominant group; and (4) the ac-
culturated person, who having become
“Americanized” and having assumed Gentile
standards, intermarries because no one
among his own Jewish group is acceptable
according to his newly acquired standards.
These concepts and types appear to have
little value because they overlap consider-
ably. Furthermore, they are nebulous to the
extent that they may be used in classifying
almost any individual, whether he inmarries
or intermarries, in one or more types. The
writer fails to see where any patterns or
types of intermarrying individuals exist,
either among Jews or any other groups.
incidence, It varies in time and place accord-
ing to the fluctuations of social conditions.

There is endogamous strength in numbers.
However, unlike some other numerically
small religious groups in Derby, such as the
Greek Orthodox and Greek Catholics, the
Jewish rate of intermarriage has been low.
Two explanations to account for this dis-
crepancy are the following:

1. The Jews are heavily concentrated in
the merchant and professional economic
classes, whereas the Greek Orthodox and
Greek Catholics are recent immigrants from
Peasant Europe and unskilled and semi-
skilled laborers, A higher economic status
provides the Jews with horizontal mobility
to the larger neighboring Jewish com-
munities, permitting them to overcome the
handicap of small numbers.

2. The longer, more varied history of
migration by the Jews, and their centuries
of existence as a minority in proximity to
gentile majorities enabled them to develop
attitudes and techniques of intermarriage
resistance long before their arrival in
America.
Sixty questions were selected from ques-
tionnaires of various types which had been
widely used, among them Thurstone’s “At-
titude” questionnaires, Bell’s “Social Ad-
justment” scales, and personnel forms used
by teacher placement agencies. A conscious
attempt was made to secure what would be
considered “good questionnaire questions”
on the basis of criteria usually listed in
books on research techniques.1 The sixty
questions were of three types: (a) factual
questions, such as, “What is the date of
your birth,” (b) attitude questions, such as,
“T trust in God to support the right and
condemn the wrong,” and (c) evaluation
questions, such as, “Do you feel that your
parents have been unduly strict with you?”
In this way it was intended to secure data
on the relative consistency of different ques-
tion types, These sixty questions constituted
the master questionnaire but it was never
submitted to the informants as such. Instead,
the sixty questions were interspersed among
thirty other irrelevant questions in each of
three questionnaires having different titles
and being set up as differently as possible
so as not to suggest any connection between
them,
Replies were considered consistent if
identical or equivalent answers were given
on each of the three submissions. No tabula-
tion was made concerning the degree of in-
consistency, that is, whether only one of the
three replies was inconsistent with the other
two, or whether all three were different.

1. 71.86 per cent of the responses were
consistent.

2. Women exceeded men in consistency
by .78 per cent, a factor hardly statistically
significant in view of the smallness of the
male sample—17.

3. Factual questions showed the lowest
consistency of the three question types,
62.25 per cent for the men and 69.25 per
cent for the women,

4. The three class groups (sophomores,
juniors and seniors) showed approximately
the same consistency, suggesting that the
amount of scholastic training and the in-
creasing selectivity operating as students
ascend in class ranks apparently do not
influence the stability of responses,

5. Age, likewise, seems not to be a
significant factor although slight differences
(one to five per cent) did appear in favor
of the older informants.

6. No informants had all questions con-
sistent, the highest ranking student having
four questions of the sixty inconsistent.

Although not strictly comparable, a study
The initial problem posed in this paper
has, of course, not been solved by this re-
search. Subordinate queries, however, have
been raised and to some extent answered.
In numerous researches as well as in practi-
cal data gathering, the collector has
traditionally assumed that if he followed
sophisticated questionnaire construction tech-
niques he would secure accurate data. There
may be those who would question the above
statement, insisting instead that the truly
sophisticated researcher expects error and
allows for it. Nevertheless, in perusing a
random sample of ten questionnaire re-
searches published during the last three
years not one of them was found to have
made either implicit or explicit allowance
that his informants may have given incor-
rect replies.

There is, moreover, a widely current
common-sense impression which this and
other researches call into doubt, namely,
that factual questionnaire information is
more reliable than attitudinal or introspec-
tive data. Our data show that the reverse
is true insofar as we may judge accuracy
by consistency. We readily acknowledge that
consistency may not indicate accuracy but
it is certainly obvious that, on the type of
factual material which was studied, incon-
accuracy.

It is not to be assumed, moreover, that
questionnaire data are any less accurate than
other forms of communication such as the
interview or the personal document. We are
dealing here with a fundamental imperfec-
tion in interpersonal communication.
Whether that imperfection is reduced by or
accelerated by this device is quite another
problem worthy of investigation.

Finally, as has already been briefly men-
tioned, consistency and accuracy are not the
same. Here, then, is another research
opportunity worth exploring. In broad
terms, there seems to be a need for a series
of studies along the following lines. A
questionnaire consisting of factual data, of
such nature that the facts could be checked
by the researcher and compared to the re-
sponses of the informants on the question-
naire, could be prepared and submitted to
groups of informants. Such a project could
easily be planned so that it would yield
data pertinent to at least three separate but
related problems: (a) consistency of ques-
tionnaire response, (b) accuracy of question-
naire response, (c) consistency of question-
naire response with other types of response,
such as interviews, autobiographical or other
undirected forms of communication. Pend-
ing such investigations, it is not amiss to
suggest that a more cautious acceptance
of questionnaire data seems to be indicated.
