@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
This paper addresses a number of theoretical and empirical issues derived from
distributive justice theory regarding the social psychological process of justice
evaluation. Building upon current theory and research, justice evaluation is
conceived as a comparison of the rewards one receives with rewards s/he expects.
Using data from a 1979 Indianapolis area survey, we examine beliefs about
inequality and their role in subjective perceptions of distributive justice. We examine
the extent to which “what is” affects perceptions of “what ought to be’ using
collective beliefs about distribution practices, that is, the extent to which persons
perceive departures from justice in terms of existential standards. We find that it is
possible to abstract, with a high degree of distinctiveness, a set of aggregate
principles representing existential notions about the ways in which individual
characteristics are related to household income. We find that this approach to the
measurement of reference standards for the evaluation of income receipts has some
empirical validity, in that it predicts perceptions of over- vs. under-reward, but such
an approach to measuring departures from justice does not produce meaningful
variation in measures of satisfaction and acceptance of income.
with concrete social outcomes, such as per-
ceptions of fairness in the distribution of in-
come.

One recent exception to this pattern is the
sociological treatment by Rossi and his col-
leagues of fairness in the income distribution.
In a path-breaking set of papers, this group
(Jasso and Rossi, 1977; Jasso, 1978; 1980;
Alves and Rossi, 1978) has taken up the task of
quantifying the principles governing the evalu-
ation of fairness in the income distribution.
This research has created new opportunities
for the solution of some of the measurement
issues in the study of distributive justice (see
Rossi and Nock, 1982) and has stimulated new
theoretical developments as well. Jasso (1978),
for example, has developed an empirically-
based formulation of the justice evaluation
process, and she has presented a theory of
distributive justice that focuses on the expla-
nation and prediction of a wide range of indi-
vidual and collective phenomena (Jasso, 1980).

A theoretical model that would guide the
empirical evaluation of perceptions of fairness,
however, presupposes knowledge of the
individual-level standards by which social re-
wards are believed to be legitimately distrib-
uted. Students of distributive justice (e.g. Ho-
mans, 1974; Walster et al., 1978) have long
observed that individuals frequently use dif-
fering criteria for evaluating the fairness of re-
wards and place differential emphasis on
agreed-upon criteria. As Walster et al. (1976:4)
put it, ‘ultimately, equity is in the eye of the
beholder, [and] . . . an individual's perception
of how equitable a relationship is will depend
What images do members of society have
about the processes that produce economic in-
equality in the U.S.? What are their images
about what would constitute a fair income allo-
cation for themselves and others? Economists
and sociologists can point to a number of fac-
tors that produce individual differences in eco-
nomic rewards, such as earnings or personal
income (e.g. Sewell and Hauser, 1975; Jencks
et al., 1979), but the reflection of these factors
in the belief systems of individuals is not clear
from existing research. Very little research has
investigated the beliefs of Americans regarding
the principles that govern the allocation of
economic rewards in society. There has been
some attention to questions concerning beliefs
about opportunity and life chances (Huber and
Form, 1978), beliefs about the fairness of social
inequality and discriminatory practices
(Robinson and Bell, 1978; Kerckhoff and
Parker, 1979), and beliefs about the determi-
nants of status (Coleman and Rainwater, 1978;
Nock and Rossi, 1978). Yet the assessment of
general beliefs about properties of individuals
and social structure that produce inequalities
has been neglected (Kluegel and Smith,
1981:50).

Moreover, belief systems per se have not
been linked to theories of distributive justice.
While the work of the Jasso-Alves-Rossi group
on the evaluation of the fairness of income
allocations has taken some important steps in
the direction of understanding this process, it
has overlooked the critical role of belief sys-
tems in mediating reactions to injustice. This
work has emphasized the role of consensually
shared normative standards in shaping justice
evaluations (Jasso and Rossi, 1977:649; Alves
and Rossi, 1978:562—563) rather than cognitive
expectations derived from beliefs about in-
equality.

This emphasis has provoked a number of
criticisms. Faia (1980:951), for example, argues
that the ‘‘Alves and Rossi concept of normative
judgement, however, is mis-informed and can-
not properly be used to test for the existence of
normative regulation as conventionally under-
stood.” Also, Baker (1980) and Alwin et al.
(1980) point out that while Jasso, Alves and
Rossi bolster their view of consensually held
normative standards using empirical data,
there is considerable evidence within their own
analysis for the view of dissensus in justice
standards (see especially Alves and Rossi,
1978:557-62). Baker (1980:641) also criticizes
the Jasso-Alves-Rossi methods of aggregation
in their estimation of the degree of consensus
in fair income judgements, and he argues that
“any models based on aggregation of such
judgements are artificial and meaningless.”

There is considerable ambiguity in this lit-
erature concerning the type of standards per-
sons employ when evaluating the fairness of
reward allocations, such as family income. For
instance, do persons invoke utopian standards
in evaluating the fairness of rewards, e.g. prin-
ciples of equality and need (Rawls, 1971;
Deutsch, 1975; Schwinger, 1980), or do they
use existential criteria?' There is a strong
theoretical basis for the expectation that if in-
dividuals perceive certain “going rates of re-
turn” to reward-relevant characteristics, they
will evaluate their lot in accord with these dis-
tribution principles (e.g. Berger et al., 1972;
Cook, 1975). There is some question, however,
regarding whether persons agree on what these
existential principles are, let alone what they
should be. And while, in the Jasso and Rossi
(1977) work, individuals are clearly capable of
making fairness judgments regarding income
allocations, these results are unclear with re-
gard to the relative role of existential vs. uto-
pian standards in the evaluation of justice.

We suggest that in order to understand the
justice evaluation process, it is important to
disentangle the role of existential standards—
what is defines what ought to be—from the role
of non-existential or utopian standards. In the
following discussion we examine the nature of
existential versus utopian reward allocative
standards and their significance to judgements
of fairness. Our purpose is to explore how be-
liefs about the existential structure of income
inequality shape cognitive reward expecta-
tions, and in turn how these existentially-based
reward expectations influence subjective reac-
tions to family income.

Existential versus Utopian Standards of
Justice. The study of distributive justice re-
quires a specification of the reference stan-
dards persons use when evaluating the fairness
of their social rewards. The major theoretical
statements of distributive justice assert that
persons’ expectations regarding what they
ought to receive are formed in relation to stan-
dards for allocating rewards. Despite their
major differences, both the exchange (Ho-
mans, 1961; Walster et al., 1967) and status-
value (Berger et al., 1983; Cook, 1975) theories
suggest that existential rather than utopian
standards are employed in evaluative compari-
sons.

According to the exchange perspective,
claims to ‘‘just” rewards are made on the basis
of local comparisons. Specifically, expecta-
tions about a just reward evolve from the com-
parison of one’s status and rewards to a spe-
cific, local other’s status and rewards (Adams,
1965). Individuals assess two status dimen-
sions when evaluating just reward levels (Ho-
mans, 1974:245—46): what persons give within
social exchanges (i.e., their costs), and what
persons bring to the social exchange (i.e., their
investments). As such, the expectation of a just
reward develops out of interaction in social
exchanges.

Emphasizing the local comparison between
two persons (P and O) from the point of view of
P, the exchange formulation assumes that P
evaluates his/her investments and costs against
that of another, O. If P perceives O's ‘“‘contri-
butions” to equal his/her own, s/he will expect
to receive the same amount of reward as O.? If
P’s contributions are superior to O’s, then P’s
reward level should also be superior to O’s,
and so on. In any event, P’s perception of being
under- or over-rewarded relative to O is based
on the negotiated terms of exchange within a
local setting (see Stolte, 1983).

According to the exchange perspective,
there are no absolute standards of justice, but
rather comparisons of the relative fairness of
individuals’ reward levels. Through the appli-
cation of the “rule of distributive justice,” that
is, that rewards should be in line with each
person’s respective contributions to the ex-
change (Homans, 1961; Adams, 1965; Walster
et al., 1976), a person can decide whether his/
her reward receipt is just, in comparison with
another’s.3 For Homans (1974:251-52) this
means that ‘there is no just society, though
there may be societies and groups that are
more or less just, to the extent that their mem-
bers agree in their evaluations and maintain a
rough proportionality between contributions
and rewards.”

While the exchange formulation implicitly
suggests that persons rely on existential more
than utopian standards in defining the social
outcomes they may legitimately expect, the
status-value model explicitly relates
existentially-based principles of reward alloca-
tions with issues of justice. Indeed, Berger et
al. (1972:122) have argued that distributive jus-
tice issues arise only in the presence of “a
stable frame of reference,” from which the
meaning of justice derives. Berger et al. (1972)
formulate the process of justice evaluation in
terms of referential standards—frames of ref-
erence that contain empirical information re-
garding the characteristics and rewards of gen-
eralized individuals.

According to this theory, persons develop
expectations about their reward levels using
existential standards, and these expectations
have a normative character. By comparing self
with similar generalized others, persons come
to expect the same reward level that is typi-
cally allocated to persons like themselves.
Going rates of return to reward-relevant char-
acteristics are, according to Berger et al., re-
flected within the referential reward structure,
and persons’ expected or ‘‘just rewards” are
based on the existential terms of known pat-
terns of exchange. Since the referential reward
structure consists of stereotypic information
about the relation between levels of charac-
teristics possessed by the generalized re-
ference other [contributions or investments in
Homans’ terms, or more generally, inputs (see
Walster et al., 1976)] and levels of reward,
these stereotyped conceptions about “what is”
become the basis for defining “what ought to
be” in local comparative evaluations. Sum-
marizing this principle, Berger et al. (1972:139)
write, “As a consequence of beliefs about what
is typically the case, expectations . . . come to
be formed about what one can legitimately
claim ought to be the case.”

The status-value formulation of Berger et al.
explicitly suggests that persons rely on exis-
tential rather than utopian standards in defining
what they may legitimately expect in the way
of social rewards.‘ It is consistent with Ho-
mans’ (1974:250) observation that ‘‘what
people say ought to be is determined in the long
Tun and with some lag by what they find in fact
to be the case;” and Heider’s (1958:235) view
that “tradition represents the existing reality
made solid by a long history in which it be-
comes identified with the just, the ethical, the
‘should be’ . . . the ‘is’ takes on the character
of the ‘ought’ . . .” In a broader sociological
context, the use of existential principles may
be viewed as a part of the process of legitimat-
ing social inequality (Della Fave, 1980) and the
individual internalization of responsibility for
differences in social rewards (Sennett and
Cobb, 1972).

If the status-value formulation is correct in
asserting that claims to “‘just’” rewards are de-
fined in relation to existing reward allocative
structures, then presumably claims to just
earnings receipts will be formed in relation to
persons’ beliefs about the sources of economic
inequality. Recognizing the role that beliefs
about inequality play in evaluative compari-
sons, Jasso (1980) has reformulated the
classical models of justice evaluation so that
existential reward allocative standards can be
explicitly taken into account. In her examina-
tion of Homans’ and Berger et al.’s theoretical
positions Jasso (1978:1417) observes that the
major disagreement between the two seems “‘to
be exclusively about just shares, about
whether the principles of justice actually held
by individuals and societies are based on exis-
tential or utopian criteria.” With the introduc-
tion of the concept ‘just reward” Jasso (1978)
proposes a potential solution to this contradic-
tion in that, in principle, the reward level a
person expects, based either on existential or
nonexistential principles, can be meaningfully
measured and related to the justice evaluative
process (see Alwin et al., 1980).

According to Jasso’s (1978; 1980) general
theory of justice evaluation, persons desire
goods of value which are socially controlled.
Knowledgeable of the way these social goods
are actually distributed within society, persons
are able to assess their own positional location
within that stratified reward structure. It is in
the use of a “comparison aggregate,” a con-
ceptual frame of reference used in comparison
processes, that persons can locate their rela-
tive rank or amount of a social good. While
individuals may employ a comparison aggre-
gate to calculate their just share of a good as
well as an actual amount, Jasso does not
specify the manner by which individuals
choose comparison aggregates and determine
their level of just reward. By leaving exogen-
ous the basis of the just term, Jasso (1980:6)
suggests that the general theory is capable of
handling both existential and utopian standards
and that her model “can accommodate both
Homans’ (1974) and Berger et al.’s (1972) con-
ceptions of the sources of justice.”

If a person’s actual and just reward levels are
known, the justice evaluation process amounts
to a comparison between a person’s actual and
expected (or just) reward. That is, for an indi-
vidual to determine the fairness of his/her re-
ward, the actual level of reward is compared to
that which is expected to be a just level. The
person’s just reward may be based on the re-
ward level of the generalized referent [referred
to by Jasso (1978, 1980) as the Just Reward or
the Just Amount] or on some utopian criteria,
such as need or equality.

The simple ratio of actual to just rewards
may not capture the justice evaluation phe-
nomenon (Jasso, 1978:1414—15). Positive de-
partures from justice (over-reward) may not be
equivalent to negative departures (under-
reward), and “this appears to violate the
human experience that deficiency is felt to be
more unjust than a comparable excess”
(Jasso, 1978:1403). The injustice created by an
actual reward that exceeds the just reward by a
factor of k may not be equivalent to the injus-
tice created by an under-reward of the same
magnitude. Jasso (1978:1415) suggests that the
problem can be resolved by obtaining the natu-
ral logarithm of the comparison ratio of actual
reward to just reward.

Beliefs About Inequality and Reward Ex-
pectations. From an existential theory per-
spective, if a person’s beliefs about how re-
wards are allocated in the system are known,
one would presumably also know something
about what s/he expects in social rewards and
how s/he would evaluate the justice of reward
allocations. In order to determine what is a just
reward based on existential standards, then, a
person has need of a set of principles that s/he
believes define the pertinent reward-relevant
criteria and the relative weights specifying the
importance of these allocative criteria (see
Cook, 1975:373-74). Such a set of existential
principles may be conceptualized in terms of
the following expression:
where x is a(p X 1) vector of evaluative criteria
that are, in P’s view, relevant to reward alloca-
tion and B is a (1 X p) vector of weights that
express their relative contributions (again in
P’s view) to the reward in question. Then, if
these principles were known for an individual,
it would be a simple matter to assess their role
in his/her expected level of reward. If such
principles were consensually shared by most
members of the social group in question,
aggregate standards could be derived from
these individual principles.

Consensus in Beliefs. A major issue raised in
the literature on distributive justice is the ex-
tent to which beliefs about criteria of justice
are shared or agreed upon by all members of
society. Members of social groups may possess
a wide range of beliefs about the sources of
social inequality. Homans (1974:251) states
that only “for rather brief spans of time or in
rather small groups are men [and women] fully
agreed not only on what the rule of distributive
justice is but also on what particular invest-
ments, contributions, and rewards should
fairly be placed in the scales and at what
weights.” If a person’s beliefs about the princi-
ples of distribution are those that ultimately
condition his/her evaluation of justice or injus-
tice, it is important to know if persons’ fairness
evaluations are based on shared criteria. Jasso
and Rossi (1977:649) and Alves and Rossi
(1978:557-562) suggest that fairness evalua-
tions are based on shared normative criteria
and that a high degree of consensus exists on
what the existential norms are. The measure-
ment of consensus in these studies is flawed by
an inadequate conceptualization of the prob-
lem, however, and further investigation of
these issues is necessary to evaluate this ques-
tion.
replied, but both agree that the utility of the
principle in understanding perceptions of jus-
tice in concrete social outcomes has not been
empirically established.

An empirical examination of this principle
requires the observation of two quantities—the
actual and just rewards—and a set of depen-
dent variables of interest. The most critical
question for any empirical examination of
these issues in non-experimental research is
the manner by which reward expectations are
defined and assessed. In this research we de-
fine the ‘Just Reward” in terms of existential
beliefs about the relationships of reward-
relevant characteristics to variation in actual
rewards. Specifically, we are concerned with
persons’ beliefs about the ways in which
socio-economic rewards are distributed in so-
ciety and the role of these beliefs in persons’
subjective reactions to their own level of
socio-economic rewards. Although there is a
variety of such rewards (e.g. salaries, promo-
tions, privileges, status, influence and au-
thority), we focus here on a generalized status
characteristic of households—family income.

We assume that family income is to some
degree systematically allocated on the basis of
socially relevant and evaluated characteristics
of household members (e.g. indicators of con-
tributions, investments, need, worth, etc.), and
that these reward-relevant characteristics are
to some degree known to members of society.
We also assume that, in matters of family in-
come, perceptions of reward-relevant criteria
and their importance are not idiosyncratic.
While there may be considerable individual
variation in justice standards, we assume that
individuals to some degree share common be-
liefs about the way income is distributed and/or
regulated. We can conceive, therefore, of a
referential structure (Berger et al., 1972) that,
with some degree of error, represents the per-
ceived distribution principles of individuals
(see Cook, 1975:374). However, the degree to
which persons perceive the same legitimate
rules of distribution or have the same beliefs
about ‘‘who gets what?” are empirical issues.

If justice evaluations are primarily idiosyn-
cratic, as some theorists suggest they might
be (e.g., Walster et al., 1976:4; Homans,
1974:251), then it would be very difficult to
predict individual reactions to injustice using
some estimate of a societal standard aggre-
gated over all persons’ beliefs. By contrast, to
the extent that there is universal knowledge of
the relevant evaluative criteria and their
weights and to the extent that individuals agree
on their relevance, as well as on their relative
importance, then it may be possible to deter-
mine a person’s expected (or just) claim on
valued social goods and to evaluate the justice
of rewards in these terms. A number of authors
(e.g. Cook, 1975:374; Jasso and Rossi,
1977:640; Jasso, 1978:1416) suggest that unless
there is some shared aggregate principle for
reward distribution, which can be applied to
most members of the social aggregate, it is
difficult or impossible to assess individuals’
reactions to departures from justice.

In the research presented here we measure
existential criteria for justice evaluation of the
income distribution and assess the effects of
departures from economic justice concep-
tualized in these terms. Our analysis focuses
on four quite specific questions: (1) What are
the criteria, within a standard set of socio-
economically relevant factors, that members of
contemporary society perceive as relevant to
the allocation of family income? (2) How accu-
rate are individuals’ perceptions of the factors
influencing income distribution in the aggre-
gate? Do persons’ beliefs about income deter-
mination reflect “real-world” processes, or do
they exaggerate some factors and minimize the
role of others? (3) How much agreement exists
in judgements about household income? Are
assessments of the relative importance of
income-relevant criteria shared, or are beliefs
about inequality largely idiosyncratic? Finally,
(4) Do existential criteria of justice have any
consequences for individuals’ subjective reac-
tions to income allocations? Do measures of
departures from justice, assessed in existential
terms, relate to measures of perceptions of
fairness and income satisfaction?
randomly assigned to respondents. In all, 135
vignettes were used; forty-five describing
single-person households, sampled from the
1977-78 GSS (n = 970), and 90 describing
married-couple households, sampled from
1,733 cases in the 77-78 GSS. These 135 vig-
nettes were taken to represent the relevant
socio-economic composition of American
households. We intentionally over-sampled
blacks in order to examine differences in the
patterns of income estimation by race. Overall,
each vignette was rated an average of 30 times,
thus providing a relatively good estimate of the
mean income rating for each vignette descrip-
tion.

The vignettes described the education, oc-
cupation, number of children, gender and race
of single and married households; in ‘married
vignettes” both husband’s and wife’s education
and occupation were described® (see Shepelak
(1981) for a detailed description of the vignette
construction procedures). Responses to these
vignette descriptions were scaled in dollar in-
come, and scores for respondent-raters were
ipsatized (i.e. centered about their own means)
so as to remove uninteresting individual dif-
ferences in anchor points (see Cunningham et
al., 1977). In other words, the component of
vignette ratings due to what Rossi and Ander-
son (1982:23) call “judgement thresholds” was
removed in order to restrict inter-individual
variation resulting from the use of different

 

sample vignettes from this population (see Faia
(1980:95 1-52) for a similar argument). This approach
differs in critical ways from that advocated by Rossi
and Anderson(1982), whichconstrainsthe correlations
among vignette characteristics to zero in the con-
struction of vignettes. We believe the strategy used
here produces a less distorted picture of the world to
respondents, and therefore is more valid in terms of
representing relevant referential standards.

© Following the lead of Jasso and Rossi (1977), we
use a limited, but broadly representative, set of
socio-economically relevant characteristics of
households. The characteristics (and their levels) are
as follows: gender (male, female), race (white,
black), marital status (single, married), number of
children (0 to 6), education (less than high school,
high school graduate, some college, college graduate
and post-graduate training), occupation (a variety of
occupational titles ranging from professional work-
ers to private household workers, and including the
titles of housewife and persons looking for work).
Hodge-Seigel-Rossi scores were used to scale dif-
ferences in occupational status (see Rossi et al.,
1974). In order to control for age in the vignette
descriptions, respondents were told that all vignettes
described persons in the age range 35-40. Assign-
ment procedures were used that guaranteed each
respondent to receive 10 married-household vignet-
tes and 5 single-household vignettes; and 5 black
household vignettes and 10 white household vignet-
tes.
anchor points in income ratings. After ipsati-
zation, the scores were then centered at the
grand mean of the vignette income ratings.”

The persons rating these vignettes were
selected on an area-probability basis from the
population of persons aged 18—64 residing in
the urbanized portions of Marion County (In-
dianapolis), Indiana in 1979. U.S. Census in-
formation for 1970 population characteristics,
updated by local planning data, was used for
purposes of sampling. The sampling frame was
stratified by racial composition in order to ade-
quately represent ethnic diversity in the popu-
lation, and block clustering methods were used
to minimize costs and increase the efficiency of
the sample. Interviews were conducted by stu-
dents in the Indianapolis Area Project and by
professional interviewers from the local area.
About one-third of the interviews were con-
ducted by telephone—the remainder were
done in person. The response rate achieved in
the field was approximately sixty percent.
About sixty percent of the respondents were
women; the racial composition was predomi-
nantly white (80 percent); and sixty-one per-
cent were married. The mean age was 37 years,
and the average level of education was 13
years.

In addition to the vignettes described above,
the interview covered a number of subjects
dealing with attitudes and beliefs about social
inequality, including subjective reactions to the
respondent’s own reward allocations. A full
range of relevant household socio-economic
information was also obtained. In this analysis
we examine several measures related to in-
come and subjective reactions to income. The
principal measures we examine here, in order
of their appearance on the questionnaire, are as
follows:

Income—Would you please tell me what
your total family income was in 1978 (last year)
before taxes, including all sources of income?

Fair income—Thinking about your (your
family’s) income for the last year, what do you
believe the fair and just income for yourself
(your family) should have been?
In this section of the paper we present data
from three principle sources. First, we use the
vignette data (described above) from the 1979
Indianapolis Area Project (IAP) as a means of
determining aggregate beliefs about the
sources of income inequality and for defining
an aggregate existential distribution principle,
y = Bx. In Blau’s (1971) terms, we are
measuring the ‘‘going rate” of return to a vari-
ety of household characteristics. Second, we
use data from the 1977-78 General Social Sur-
veys to gauge the veridicality of these distribu-
tional beliefs. Then we use the IAP respondent
data on subjective responses to income, at-
tempting to predict subjective responses to in-
come on the basis of departures from existen-
tial justice.

Beliefs About Income Determination. It is
possible to determine the relative weight that
members of the sample give in the aggregate to
the vignette characteristics (race, gender, mar-
ital status, education, family size and occu-
pational status) by constructing a data set that
contains (p x k) records (where p = the
number of persons and k = the number of
vignettes), each representing a unique
person—vignette combination. In this case this
equals 4,656 person—vignette combinations
with complete data. By regressing the cen-
tered vignette income ratings on the charac-
teristics of the vignettes, we then obtain a rep-
resentation of beliefs (in the aggregate) about
the determinants of income in the vignette
sample (Rossi and Anderson, 1982:20-21).?
Our vignettes were constructed so that we
could estimate these equations separately by
race. Since there are statistically significant
slope differences by race and gender in these
data [Single vignettes: F = 3.86 with df = 9,
1503; Married vignettes: F = 13.16 with df =
5,3125], we present the race x gender sub-
group models for the single vignette house-
holds and the race subgroup models for the
married vignette households. These re-
gressions in the person—vignette data for single
and married vignettes are presented in Table 1.
The regression coefficients in Table 1 represent
the direction and magnitude of influence on
income of the several household charac-
teristics described in the vignettes. In review-
ing the general models of single and married
vignette households, we learn that our respon-
dents attribute a positive role in income judge-
ments to educational attainment(s) and the
prestige of the occupation(s) held by household
members. This is consistent both with
common-sense impressions and the empirical
literature on income determination. Also con-
sistent with known empirical regularities,
males are viewed as relatively advantaged over
females (in single-person households), and
similarly, all other things equal, whites are
seen to have a structured advantage over
blacks. Larger family size, in addition, is asso-
ciated with lower household income in the be-
lief systems of our respondents, in that family
size has a negative regression coefficient in
both single and married households. The belief
in the existence of a negative association of
family size and income, however, runs counter
both to economic theory and the empirical lit-
erature (see Freedman and Thornton, 1982).
It is important to note, however, that despite
the systematic nature of these effects and their
statistical significance, the overall R? in these
equations suggests only a modest degree of
responsiveness to the characteristics described
in the vignettes.'° If individual raters respond
consistently over vignettes, using the same
principles, and if individuals agree on the same
relative weighting of vignette factors, we
would expect a higher R? in these equations.
We expect, then, that some of this lack of
prediction in the individual vignette ratings is
due to a lack of intra- and inter-individual con-
sistency. According to these results, in any
event, individual estimates of family income
are systematically dependent on the charac-
teristics of the vignettes, and for the most part,
there is reason to believe that respondents
weigh factors in income judgements in a way
that bears more than a trivial resemblance to
the empirical world.

The Veridicality of Beliefs. In order to com-
pare these estimated weightings of factors in
income determination with actual sample esti-
mates for the characteristics of households in
the NORC 1977-78 GSS data (from which we
sampled the vignettes) we carried out the same
regression models in the 1977—78 data. Table 2
presents the regression of family income on the
socio-economic characteristics considered in
the above analysis using the data from the
combined 1977-78 GSS surveys. We compare
these results to the additive single- and
married-vignette models described in panel A
of Table 1.'!
Table 1. Regression of Family Income on Household Characteristics: IAP Vignette Sample, 1979

 

 

Single (n= 1,519)

Married (n = 3,137)

 

(A) Additive Model

 

Race $ —860*
Gender —3,314*
Education 490*
Family Size —381*
Prestige 130*
Intercept 13,408

Race $ —303
Husband Education 941*
Wife Education 346*
Family Size —218
Husband Prestige 194*
Wife Prestige 171*
Intercept 20,282
stances there is a surprising level of accuracy
in these judgements.

There are some significant ways in which
respondents err in their estimates of household
income. In general, our respondents under-
estimate the role of ascribed characteristics
(race and gender) and exaggerate the influence
of achievements. It is relatively clear from this
analysis that our respondents systematically
under-estimate the disadvantaging role of both
race and gender in the determination of house-
hold income. The effect of race is substantially
smaller in magnitude in both the single- and
married-household vignette judgements than in
the estimates based on the NORC—GSS data.
According to these NORC data, black house-
holds (both single and married-couple house-
holds) have, on the average, about $2,000 less
than comparable white single-households; and
in the IAP data respondents estimate that black
married-households make only $300 less, and
single black-households make almost $900 less
than comparable white households (ignoring
subgroup differences). Black households in the
IAP vignette sample, therefore, are judged to
be less disadvantaged than they in fact are in
the NORC data. Similarly, the effect of gender
in the single-household vignettes is under-
estimated by about $1,000—the IAP respon-
dents estimate that single females receive
about $3,300 less on the average than single
males, while in the NORC data the disadvan-
tage is actually $4,300.

Consensus in Beliefs About Income Deter-
mination. There are several ways in which the
term ‘‘consensus” is used in the literature on
judgement ratings. One can get divergent views
of the degree of consensus surrounding a set of
judgements, depending on how the term is de-
fined (see Baker, 1977, 1980; Nock, 1982).
Jasso and Rossi (1977) and Alves and Rossi
(1978) maintain that there is a high degree of
consensus on the relevance of a specified set of
evaluative criteria in evaluating the justice of
household income, given specified levels of the
evaluative criteria, but these assertions have
been questioned on both theoretical and meth-
odological grounds (Faia, 1980; Baker, 1980;
Alwin et al., 1980).

In the consideration of consensus in fairness
judgements there are several conceptually dis-
tinct issues. As Homans (1974:251; 1976:232)
observes, even if persons accept the propor-
tionality conception of justice (discussed
above), they may disagree on the reward-
relevant characteristics of persons, and in the
assigning of relative weights to agreed-upon
characteristics. Because of the vicissitudes of
social exchange, furthermore, behavioral
theorists generally concede that consensus in
such matters is difficult to achieve (e.g.
Deutsch, 1975).
Here we assess the degree of consensus in
income judgements and in assigning weights to
relevant factors in the vignette ratings. We first
measure the degree of agreement among vig-
nette raters by assessing the relative amounts
of between- versus within-vignette variance in
vignette ratings (see Table 3).'? To the extent
that individual raters place vignette households
in the same relative order, and in the extreme,
assign a given vignette household the same in-
come, the within-vignette variance (variance
between raters assessing the same vignette) is
minimal. On the other hand, to the extent that
there is no consistency between raters in the
assessment of vignettes, then little between-
vignette variance exists, and one would con-
clude that there is little consensus in income
judgements. Based on these calculations,
about one-half of the vignette rating variance
lies between vignettes (see Table 3) and an
equal amount occurs within vignettes (or be-
tween raters), suggesting only a moderate de-
gree of consensus.

Conceptualizing the vignette variance in
terms of its within- and between-vignette com-
ponents in this matter clarifies the discussion
of a number of different aspects of the issue of
consensus. First, we assume that income rating
variance occurring between vignettes reflects
shared perceptions of differences in the rele-
vance of household characteristics to family
income, that is, variation in income ratings
which is potentially linked to variation in
household characteristics described in the vig-
nettes. The regression of mean vignette ratings
on the vignette characteristics in these data
supports this assumption. In this instance, we
estimate that slightly less than seventy percent
of the between-vignette variance is attributable
to the additive and non-additive effects of the
vignette characteristics (see Table 3).!3 This
figure is not itself a measure of consensus in
income judgements, although it does affect the
overall degree of consensus. Rather, it is a
measure of what attribution theorists (see
Kelley, 1973:112) refer to as the distinctiveness
of the features described in the vignettes. In
other words, it is possible to differentiate the
incomes of households in the vignette sample
to a relatively high degree using the reward-
relevant criteria specified in the vignettes. The
remaining 30 percent assesses the degree to
which the features of the vignettes suggest
idiosyncratic households, which are not easily
evaluated in terms of expected income or about
which there is little agreement. On the whole,
the 70 percent of the income rating variance
captured by the manipulated characteristics of
the vignettes, indicates a high degree of dis-
tinctiveness of these selected characteristics.

The within-vignette or between-raters com-
ponent of vignette rating variance—one-half of
the total rating variance—can be potentially
attributed to a number of factors (Rossi and
Anderson, 1982:23). Characteristics of raters
can in theory affect income ratings, but in the
present case respondent characteristics ac-
count for virtually none of the within-vignette
variance (see Table 3). A regression analysis
revealed that the respondent characteristics of
race, sex, occupational prestige, educational
attainment, total family income, marital status
and number of children accounted for less than
one percent of the variance in judgements of
vignette income. Since we have removed indi-
vidual “judgement thresholds” by ipsatizing
our vignette ratings from the outset, the re-
maining within-vignette variance represents
mainly two inseparable components of varia-
tion: idiosyncrasy in beliefs about the determi-
nants of income, tied neither to aggregate nor
subgroup principles, and random measurement
error occurring in the response process. Since
each person rated only 15 vignettes in our sur-
vey, it is not easily possible to distinguish these
components empirically in our data.'4

The within-vignette component of variance,
thus, is open to considerably more interpreta-
tion than is the case with the between-vignette
variance, and for this reason it is important to
separate the two sets of issues in assessing the
degree of consensus. If one believes that re-
sponse errors in the data-gathering process are
minimal and that the inter-individual dif-
ferences mainly represent idiosyncrasies in be-
liefs, then one would conclude that only mod-
erate levels of agreement or consensus exist in
the beleif systems of individuals. This in-
terpretation would lead to the conclusion that
only .690 x .491 x 100 = 34 percent of the
variation in beliefs represents shared aggregate
principles. There is some support in the meth-
odological literature on magnitude estimation
that vignette evaluation ratings are relatively
reliable (see Baker, 1977), and this is consistent
with such a point of view. However, no exami-
nation of this issue in vignette ratings of in-
come is available.

One might assume, on the other hand, that
virtually all of the interindividual variance (i.e.
within-vignette variance) is due to random or
stochastic processes attributable to individual
inconsistency or unreliability of measurement.
Since, in this case, the true or reliable variance
(the between-vignette variance) is highly pre-
dictable by vignette characteristics, the esti-
mate of consensus in beliefs reflected in the R?
calculated at this level (R? = .690) suggests a
much higher degree of agreement. As indicated
above, there is no way in the present context to
distinguish individual idiosyncrasies in beliefs
from unreliability of measurement, and we
must therefore leave the issue unresolved.

Subjective Responses to Inequality. To this
point in our empirical analysis we have found
that it is possible to abstract, with a high degree
of distinctiveness at the vignette level, a set of
aggregate principles representing existential
notions about the ways in which individual
household characteristics are related to house-
hold income. We have also concluded that,
while there are some important ways in which
these notions differ from existing empirical
regularities, there is some degree to which in-
dividual beliefs coincide with existential
reality. However, these data do not necessarily
support the view that individuals share to any
great extent beliefs about “who gets what” in
the social world.

Given the ambiguities in assessing the degree
of consensus in income judgements, definitive
statements about consensus in fairness stan-
dards seem risky (cf. Jasso and Rossi, 1977;
Alves and Rossi, 1978). Still, there is some
basis for concluding that individuals do share
beliefs about how the socio-economic world is
ordered, and it appears feasible to formulate an
aggregate set of principles or weights that rep-
resent the existential rules persons perceive to
be operating in the vignette sample. We deter-
mine here the extent to which existential be-
liefs about income inequality are related to
perceptions of fairness and satisfaction with
one’s own family income. Table 4 presents the
descriptive univariate information for the
major variables of interest, and Table 5 pre-
sents their bivariate correlations.

Interestingly, very few persons in this
sample—two percent—believe they are over-
rewarded with respect to the income they (or
their family) receive(s). This is consistent with
Homans’ (1976:232) observation that ‘the ben-
eficiaries of injustice are much less likely than
the victims to be disturbed by it;” and Jasso’s
(1978:1403) belief that experiences of defi-
ciency are more unjust than comparable exces-
ses. Slightly over one-half of our respondents
believe themselves to be under-rewarded—33
percent “a little’ and 19 percent “‘a lot”; and a
nearly equal number—46 percent—believe
they are fairly rewarded. Despite this slight
majority sentiment in the direction of unfair-
ness in family income allocation, more persons
(71 percent) are satisfied with their lot—44 per-
cent ‘more or less satisfied” and 27 percent
“pretty well satisfied”. In short, while there is
substantial dissatisfaction with household in-
come levels in this sample, most persons ex-
press relative satisfaction with their income.

Despite this relatively high degree of satis-
faction with family income, there is evidence in
these data that most persons would actually
prefer a somewhat higher amount of income
that the one they currently have. An examina-
tion of the means of the Income and Fair in-
come variables in Table 4 suggests that our
respondents, on the average, judge their fair
income to be somewhat higher than their actual
earned income. The joint distribution of these
variables speaks directly to this issue. They
correlate very highly (r = .924) and may be fit
quite well with a simple linear regression equa-
tion as follows:
relate to subjective reactions to inequality
captured in a survey research context. The
task before us is the specification of a model
that allows us to assess the unique effects of
departures from justice, given measures of
actual and just reward. Here we define the just
reward as a value predicted on the basis of the
set of aggregate beliefs about income determi-
nation given in Table 1. In other words, we use
an equation y = a + Bx for each subgroup
defined in the non-additive model as a basis for
calculating an expected reward.

Following Jasso’s specification of injustice,
that is, the logarithm of the ratio of actual to
expected rewards, we examine the magnitude
of departures from just income separately for
persons whose comparison ratio is above zero
(over-rewarded persons) and those whose
comparison ratio is below zero (under-
rewarded), controlling for income. We employ
the following model to assess these effects:
show that perceptions of income are generally
more strongly related to income level itself
than to measured departures from expected
levels of income. The strongest example of this
here is the measure of Fair income discussed
above. Given the respondent’s income, there is
little that can be added to the prediction of this
variable using our measures of departures from
justice. Similarly, perceptions of relative in-
come and satisfaction with income are not re-
sponsive to variations in measured departures
from justice, but are significantly dependent on
income. Only one of our measures, Over—
underpaid, is sensitive to variation in both in-
come and our measure of departures from jus-
tice. Thus, there is support in these data for the
idea that men and women accept tradition, or
“the way things are,” as a basis for perceiving
the fairness of their reward allocations. While
our measure of existential justice affects per-
ceptions of over- vs. under-payment, however,
these considerations do not appear to be re-
lated to income satisfaction and reports of what
a fair income would be.
economic characteristics produce systematic
responses on the part of our subjects, suggest-
ing a rather high degree of relevance to family
income. Insofar as we have measured
existentially-based expectations regarding
household income using this approach, we find
some evidence that departures from existential
justice are perceived by individuals. This mea-
sured sense of fairness, however, is not re-
flected in persons’ reports of satisfaction with
income or in their reports of what would con-
stitute a fair and just income for themselves
and their families. Income level itself appears
to be much more strongly predictive of these
aspects of subjective attitudes toward income.

Given the strong theoretical basis for an
existential view of justice evaluation in both
Homans’ social exchange model and the Ber-
ger et al. theory of status value, why do the
measures of departures from existential justice
presented here fail to relate to individuals’ per-
ceptions of the fairness and satisfaction with
their income? Do these findings cast doubt on
the theoretical veracity of distributive justice
theory, which maintains that persons experi-
ence a sense of injustice and dissatisfaction
when faced with rewards that do not measure
up to existentially-based expectations? Or has
the operationalization of the components of
justice evaluation used in this research limited
our ability to detect true levels of perceived
injustice? While this research has attempted to
circumvent some of the methodological prob-
lems in assessing fairness evaluations of in-
come receipts, we believe there are a number
of problems in the use of vignettes to measure
expectations of rewards.

One fundamental problem with the use of the
vignette measurement approach in the present
context is suggested by attribution theory.
While our respondents appear to be knowl-
edgeable about the “rules” or “norms” that are
applied in the allocation of income, it is not
clear that they apply these standards to them-
selves. According to attribution theory, actors
may account for their behavior in terms very
different from those used to account for the
behavior of others. Actors are more likely, in
other words, to explain their behavior using
situational accounts, while outside observers
are more likely to perceive the actor's actions
in dispositional terms (Jones, 1976). Jones and
Nisbett (1971) suggest that these variations in
attributional styles may reflect real differences
between actors’ and observers’ access to
unique historical information. And since the
vignettes used here asked about hypothetical
others, these others may be irrelevant to the
self-assessment of satisfaction and acceptance
of income. One such situationally relevant
factor, not assessable by the vignettes, is the
factor of need; and, as we indicated above, this
factor may often govern responses to issues of
fairness. To the extent, then, that our respon-
dents took situational factors into account
when assessing their level of Fair income, they
might have ignored the very existential princi-
ples they used in assessing the expected in-
come of the vignette households. The modest
level of correlation we observe between Fair
income and Just income (see Table 5) may be
interpretable in these terms. Moreover, the
analysis here of the correlation between actual
income and fair income suggests that individu-
als base their considerations of fairness in their
own situation primarily in terms of need, rather
than dispositional factors.

A second difficulty with the measurement
approach we have taken is in its specification
of the referential comparison against which
persons measure departures from justice. If the
theory of status-value is correct in stating that
individuals use a referential structure specify-
ing levels of reward-relevant characteristics
that are similar, indeed equivalent, to their own
(see also Pettigrew, 1967; Williams, 1975), then
with the use of these standards it is possible to
predict for any category of earner his/her jus-
tice evaluation (Jasso, 1978:1416). Although
the use of consensually held standards of jus-
tice appears to be a theoretically promising
advancement in the conceptualization of the
justice evaluation process, we have relied ona
vignette strategy that is inherently limited.
While we have not denied that individuals may
choose from a variety of reference points or
employ a variety of individual or structural
criterion, we have attempted to use a small and
limited set of averaged aggregate standards.

Undoubtedly referential comparisons are
much more constrained by local settings and
persons’ comparisons of fairness must reside
primarily within the organizations and social
networks they inhabit. The locus of referential
comparisons may actually be limited to infor-
mation obtained from behavior settings quite
close to the individual, and our measurement
of existential beliefs does not take this infor-
mation into account. Thus, the vignette ap-
proach used here places too great an emphasis
on the role of generalized socio-economic
characteristics in belief systems at the expense
of obtaining the expectations derived from the
norms and practices that exist within organi-
zational settings.

We have also assumed that once we deter-
mine a person’s actual earnings and his/her just
earnings, as estimated from existential princi-
ples, we could estimate a person’s subjective
response to income inequality. Our analysis of
persons’ justice sentiments was therefore made
outside of the local comparative context. Thus,
the lack of predictive findings regarding sub-
jective responses to income inequality may be
due to our failure to evaluate how the structure
of local work/income settings affects peoples’
reactions to their own reward situations.

A third possible explanation of these
results—one that has been voiced in criticism
of the Jasso-Alves-Rossi work—is that non-
existential standards affect considerations of
fairness. While there is some theoretical sup-
port for existential considerations of fairness of
income allocations, there is also considerable
support for the idea that non-existential factors
play a role in justice evaluations. For example,
while we can imagine that persons in this soci-
ety (and others) accept the economic disad-
vantages of women and racial minorities as
just, many do not. For such persons ascribed
social characteristics, like race, ethnicity and
gender, are perceived to be irrelevant as a basis
for allocating social rewards. To the extent,
then, that persons perceive the realities of the
income distribution as a relevant basis for fair
reward allocation, we would expect their be-
liefs about income determination to be relevant
to their reports of satisfaction and fairness; but
if non-existential standards are overriding in
persons’ judgements of fairness, the use of es-
timates of “referential structures” based on
existential norms will be of little use in pre-
dicting individuals’ reactions to inequity. A
somewhat related explanation for these find-
ings involves the idea that whatever standards
persons use to define what is just, there is little
consensus surrounding these standards. We
may be unable, therefore, to predict levels of
satisfaction and perceived fairness because we
have applied an aggregate set of existential
weights. Whether we use existential or non-
existential considerations in formulating the
justice evaluation process, the degree of indi-
vidual idiosyncrasy in the relevance of various
household characteristics may make it difficult
to establish an empirical basis for evaluating
perceptions of fairness and satisfaction.
Finally, we suspect that individuals attribute
their levels of social reward to those situational
and dispositional factors that, on the one hand,
maintain and protect their sense of dignity and,
on the other hand, maintain and protect the
system of legitimated inequality in the distri-
bution of social rewards. When individuals ac-
cept responsibility for their social rewards rel-
ative to others, rather than challenging the
structure of economic relations, voices of dis-
content are not heard and revolutions in the
socioeconomic order do not occur (Sennett and
Cobb, 1972; Hochschild, 1981; Thurow, 1981).
The issues of social inequality and distributive
justice are joined when individuals come to
believe that they deserve what they get and get
what they deserve (Della Fave, 1980; Lerner,
1975; Lerner and Lerner, 1981). Given that one
of the major findings of this research is that
income level itself is more strongly tied to our
measures of satisfaction with and acceptance
of income than are measured departures from
justice, future research on these issues will be
more successful to the extent that it addresses
the social psychological meaning of positional
inequality and the attributional bases of per-
ceived levels of attainment and success.
Alves, Wayne and Peter Rossi. 1978. “Who Should
Get What?: Fairness Judgements of the Distribu-
tion of Earnings.” American Journal of Sociology
84:541-64.

Alwin, Duane, Norma Shepelak, Larry Wolfarth,
and David Morgan. 1980. “Individual Responses
to Inequity: Evaluating Normative Conceptions of
Justice.” Paper presented at the 75th annual
meeting of the American Sociological Association,
New York.

Aristotle. [1962]. Nicomachean Ethics. (Translated
by Martin Ostwald) New York: Bobbs-Mer-
rill.

Austin, William and Elaine Hatfield. 1980. ‘Equity
Theory, Power, and Social Justice.” Pp. 25-61 in
Justice and Social Interaction: Experimental and
Theoretical Contributions from Psychological Re-
search, edited by Gerold Mikula. New York:
Springer-Verlag.

Austin, William, Neil McGinn, and Charles Sus-
milch. 1980. ‘Internal Standards Revisited: Ef-
fects of Social Comparison and Expectancies on
Judgements of Fairness and Satisfaction.” Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology 16:426—41.

Baker, Paul M. 1977. “On the Use of Psychological
Methods in the Study of Social Status: A Replica-
tion and Some Theoretical Problems.” Social
Forces 55:898-920.

. 1980. “Consensus and Dissensus in the At-
tribution of Status and Equity: Comment on Nock
and Rossi and on Alves and Rossi.” American
Journal of Sociology 86:641—43.

Berger, Joseph, M. Hamit Fisek, Robert Norman,
and David Wagner. 1983. ‘The Formation of Re-
ward Expectations in Status Situations.” Pp.
127-68 in Equity Theory: Psychological and
Sociological Perspectives, edited by David Mes-
sick and Karen Cook. New York: Praeger.

Berger, Joseph, Morris Zelditch, Bo Anderson, and
Bernard Cohen. 1972. ‘Structural Aspects of Dis-
tributive Justice: A Status Value Formulation.”
Pp. 119-46 in Sociological Theories in Progress,
Vol. 2, edited by Joseph Berger, Morris Zelditch
and Bo Anderson. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Berkowitz, Leonard and Elaine Walster. 1976.
Equity Theory: Toward a General Theory of Social
Interaction, Vol. 9, Advances in Experimental So-
cial Psychology. New York: Academic.

Blau, Peter 1971. “Justice in Social Exchange.” Pp.
56-68 in Institutions and Social Exchange: The
Sociologies of Talcott Parsons and George C.
Homans, edited by Herman Turk and Richard
Simpson. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.

Cohen, Ronald and Jerald Greenberg. 1982. “The
Justice Concept in Social Psychology.” Pp. 1-41
in Equity and Justice in Social Behavior, edited by
Jerald Greenberg and Ronald Cohen. New York:
Academic.

Coleman, Richard, Lee Rainwater, and with Kent
McClelland. 1978. Social Standing in America:
New Dimensions of Class. New York: Basic
Books.

Cook, Karen. 1975. “Expectations, Evaluations and
Equity.’’ American Sociological Review
40:372-88.

Cunningham, William H., Isabella C. Cunningham,
and Robert Green. 1977. “The Ipsative Process to
Reduce Response Set Bias.” Public Opinion
Quarterly 41:379-84.

Della Fave, L. Richard. 1980. ‘The Meek Shall Not
Inherit the Earth: Self-Evaluation and the Legiti-
macy of Social Stratification... American
Sociological Review 45:955-71.

Deutsch, Morton. 1975. “Equity, Equality, and
Need: What Determines Which Value Will Be
Used as the Basis of Distributive Justice?” Jour-
nal of Social Issues 31:137-49.

Dohrenwend, Barbara S., Larry Krasnoff, Alexan-
der Askenasy, and Bruce P. Dohrenwend. 1978.
“Exemplification of a Method for Scaling Life
Events: The PERI Life Events Scale.” Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 19:205-29.

Faia, Michael A. 1980. “The Vagaries of the Vignette
World: A Comment on Alves and Rossi.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 85:951-54.

Freedman, Deborah S. and Arland Thornton. 1982.
“Income and Fertility: The Elusive Relationship.”
Demography 19:65-78.

Goodman, Paul. 1974. ‘“‘An Examination of Re-
ferents Used in the Evaluation of Pay.” Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Performance
12:170-95.

Heider, Fritz. 1958. The Psychology of Interpersonal
Relations. New York: Wiley.

Hochschild, Jennifer. 1981. What’s Fair? American
Beliefs about Distributive Justice. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Homans, George C. 1961. Social Behavior: Its
Elementary Forms. New York: Harcourt, Brace
and Jovanovich.

. 1974. Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms

(Rev. Ed.). New York: Harcourt, Brace and

Jovanovich.

. 1976. “Commentary.” Pp. 231-47 in Equity
Theory: Toward a General Theory of Social In-
teraction, edited by Leonard Berkowitz and
Elaine Walster. New York: Academic.

Huber, Joan and William Form. 1978. Income and
Ideology. New York: Free Press.

Jasso, Guillermina. 1978. ‘On the Justice of Earn-
ings: A New Specification of the Justice Evalua-
tion Function.” American Journal of Sociology
83:1398-1419.

. 1980. “A New Theory of Distributive Jus-

’ American Sociological Review 45:3-32.

. 1981. “Further Notes on the Theory of Dis-
tributive Justice.” American Sociological Review
46:352-60.

Jasso, Guillermina and Peter Rossi. 1977. “Distribu-
tive Justice and Earned Income.” American
Sociological Review 42:639-51.

Jencks, Christopher, Susan Bartlett, Mary Corco-
ran, James Crouse, David Eaglesfield, Gregory
Jackson, Kent McClelland, Peter Mueser, Michael
Olneck, Joseph Schwartz, Sherry Ward, and Jill
Williams. 1979. Who Gets Ahead?: The Determi-
nants of Economic Success in America. New
York: Basic Books.

Jones, Edward 1976. “How People Perceive the
Causes of Behavior.” American Scientist 64:300-
305.

Jones, Edward and Richard E. Nisbett. 1971. “The
Actor and the Observer: Divergent Perceptions of
the Causes of Behavior.” Pp. 79-94 in Attribution:

 

 

 

 

tice
Perceiving the Causes of Behavior, edited by Ed-
ward Jones, David Kanouse, Harold Kelley,
Richard Nisbett, Stuart Valins, and Bernard
Weiner. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.

Kelley, Harold. 1973. ‘The Processes of Causal At-
tribution.” American Psychologist 28:107-28.

Kerckhoff, Alan and Robert Parker. 1979. “Equity,
Success and Social Justice in England and the
United States: A Commentary and Critique.”
American Sociological Review 44:328-34.

Kluegel, James and Eliot Smith. 1981. ‘Beliefs
About Stratification.” Annual Review of Sociology
7:29-56.

Lerner, Melvin. 1975. ‘The Justice Motive in Social
Behavior: An Introduction.” Journal of Social Is-
sues 31:1-20.

Lerner, Melvin and Sally Lerner. 1981. The Justice
Motive in Social Behavior. New York: Plenum.
Messe, Lawrence and Barbara Watts. 1983. ““Com-
plex Nature of the Sense of Fairness: Internal
Standards and Social Comparison as Bases for
Reward Evaluations.” Journal of Personality and

Social Psychology 45:84-93.

Mikula, Gerold. 1980. Justice and Social Interac-
tion; Experimental and Theoretical Contributions
from Psychological Research. New York:
Springer-Verlag.

National Opinion Research Center. 1982. General
Social Surveys, 1972-1982: Cumulative
Codebook. Chicago: NORC.

Nock, Steven. 1982. ‘‘Family Social Status: Consen-
sus on Characteristics.” Pp. 95-144 in Measuring
Social Judgments, edited by Peter Rossi and Ste-
ven Nock. Beverly Hills: Sage.

Nock, Steven and Peter Rossi. 1978. ‘‘Ascription
Versus Achievement in the Attribution of Family
Social Status.” American Journal of Sociology
84:565-70.

Pettigrew, Thomas. 1967. ‘Social Evaluation
Theory: Convergences and Applications.” Pp.
241-311 in Nebraska Symposium on Motivation,
edited by David Levine. Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press.

Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

Robinson, Robert and Wendell Bell. 1978.
“Equality, Success, and Social Justice in England
and the United States.” American Sociological
Review 34:125—43.

Rossi, Peter. 1979. “Vignette Analysis: Uncovering
the Normative Structure of Complex Judge-
ments.” Pp. 176-86 in Qualitative and Quantita-
tive Social Research: Papers in Honor of Paul F.
Lazarsfeld, edited by Robert Merton, James
Coleman and Peter Rossi. New York: Free Press.
Rossi, Peter and Andy Anderson. 1982. ‘The Facto-
rial Survey Approach: An Introduction.” Pp.
15-67 in Measuring Social Judgments: The Facto-
rial Survey Approach, edited by Peter Rossi and
Steven Nock. Beverly Hills: Sage.

Rossi, Peter and Steven Nock. 1982. Measuring So-
cial Judgments: The Factorial Survey Approach.
Beverly Hills: Sage.

Rossi, Peter, William Sampson, Christine Bose,
Guillermina Jasso, and Jeff Passel. 1974.
‘Measuring Household Social Standing.” Social
Science Research 3:169-90.

Schwinger, Thomas. 1980. “Just Allocations of
Goods: Decisions Among Three Principles.” Pp.
95-125 in Justice and Social Interaction: Exper-
imental and Theoretical Contributions from Psy-
chological Research, edited by Gerold Mikula.
New York: Springer-Verlag.

Sennett, Richard and Jonathan Cobb. 1972. The
Hidden Injuries of Class. New York: Vintage.
Sewell, William and Robert Hauser. 1975. Educa-
tion, Occupation and Earnings: Achievement in

the Early Career. New York: Academic.

Shepelak, Norma J. 1981. Normative versus idiosyn-
cratic paradigms of distributive justice: Compet-
ing models of equity. PhD Thesis, Indiana Univer-
sity. Cited in Dissertation Abstracts International,
42(7-A):3324, 1982.

Soltan, Karol. 1981. ‘‘Jasso on Distributive Justice.”
American Sociological Review 46:348-52.

Stevens, S. S. 1966. “‘A Metric for the Social Con-
sensus.” Science 151:530-41.

Stolte, John. 1983. ‘The Legitimation of Structural
Inequality.’’ American Sociological Review
48:331-42.

Thurow, Lester. 1981. ‘The Illusion of Economic
Necessity.” In Value Judgment and Income Dis-
tribution, edited by Robert Solo and Charles An-
derson. New York: Praeger.

Walster, Elaine, Ellen Berscheid, and G. William
Walster. 1976. ‘New Directions in Equity Re-
search.” Pp. 1-42 in Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, Vol. 9, edited by Leonard Ber-
kowitz and Elaine Walster. New York: Academic.

Walster, Elaine, G. William Walster, and Ellen
Berscheid. 1978. Equity: Theory and Research.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Weick, Karl 1966. ‘The Concept of Equity in the
Perception of Pay.’ Administrative Science
Quarterly 11:414-39.

Williams, Robin. 1975. “Relative Deprivation.” Pp.
355-78 in The Idea of Social Structure: Papers in
Honor of Robert K. Merton, edited by Lewis
Coser. New York: Harcourt, Brace and
Jovanovich.
