@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
early a quarter of a century has passed since

the feminist movement began a resurgence
in the United States in the mid-1960s. Within a
few years, second-wave feminist movements had
sprung up throughout Europe. Although the spe-
cific causes underlying these movements differed
from country to country, a common factor was a
growing awareness of gender inequalities in the
workplace and home and a growing belief that
these inequalities were sufficiently unjust that
they should be eliminated.

In studies of U.S. women and men, attitudes to-
ward gender inequality have been associated with
employment and family structure (Mason and
Bumpass 1975; Cherlin and Walters 1981; Thom-
ton, Alwin, and Cambum 1983; Smith 1985; Plutzer
1988). However, because these studies have not
been replicated in other countries, it is unknown
whether findings for the U.S. apply to other societ-
ies. We propose a model of consciousness of gender
inequality based, in part, on hypotheses derived from
prior research in the U.S., then test its generalizabil-
ity using national survey data of women and men in
four Westem societies — the United States, Great
Britain, West Germany, and Austria.
A model explaining consciousness of gender inequality is tested using data for the United
States, Great Britain, West Germany, and Austria. Well-educated people tend to be less
favorable toward efforts to reduce gender inequality than less well-educated people. Women
with employed husbands are less supportive of efforts to reduce gender inequality than
women without a male wage earner. Women are more likely to perceive gender inequality
than men and are more supportive of efforts to combat gender inequality. These findings
differ from findings in prior U.S. research. Moreover, U.S. women are unique in several
respects, including a positive influence of labor force participation on support for efforts to
reduce gender inequality. Our findings call into question the generalizability of U.S. studies.
disadvantaged by the distribution of opportuni-
ties, treatment, and conditions will be more con-
scious of inequality than individuals who are ad-
vantaged (Robinson and Bell 1978; Robinson
1983). According to this thesis, women will be
more conscious of gender inequality than men.
The underdog thesis also predicts that individuals
with low prestige jobs and/or low incomes will
be more conscious of gender inequality.’ An al-
ternative to this thesis, the threat hypothesis
(Husbands 1979), can be derived from the study
of race relations. Men with less prestigious occu-
pations or low incomes may tend to view women
as a threat in the competition for jobs, and perhaps
as responsible for their own disadvantaged posi-
tions. As a result, these men may deny the exist-
ence of gender inequality and oppose efforts that
they see as elevating women at their expense.

Education. We test two somewhat contradic-
tory hypotheses regarding the effects of educa-
tion. According to the enlightenment thesis, ed-
ucation produces a greater awareness of inequality
in society by familiarizing individuals with ex-
periences different from their own (including
those of the other sex) and inculcates Enlighten-
ment ideals that promote equal treatment for all.
Thus, highly educated individuals will be more
likely to perceive inequality than individuals with
less education and to favor efforts to reduce ine-
quality.

The reproduction thesis contends that educa-
tion increases awareness of inequality while en-
couraging its acceptance (thus “reproducing” in-
equality). Education, through its competitive
evaluation system, pedagogical content, and hi-
erarchical structure, promotes the idea that ine-
quality is meritocratic, i.e., it results from indi-
vidual differences in talent, effort, and educa-
tional credentials rather than from discrimination
on the basis of ascribed group characteristics
(Bowles and Gintis 1977). Education rewards
and stresses individualistic striving and self-im-
provement, which may reduce support for gov-
ernment intervention as a solution to group dis-
advantage. From the reproduction thesis, we hy-
pothesize that highly educated individuals will
be more likely to perceive inequality than indi-
viduals with less education, but will be less fa-
vorable to intervention to reduce inequality.

Age. According to the egalitarian Zeitgeist
thesis, individuals’ attitudes toward inequality are

' Regrettably, the data do not include measures of
race or class (e.g., ownership of a business or the exer-
cise of authority) in every country, so our hypotheses
are limited to income and occupational prestige.
strongly affected by the historical context when
they were coming of age politically (Lipset and
Ladd 1971, p. 654). In the U.S., the 1960s and
early 1970s were a period of “rediscovery” of
inequalities of class, race, and gender that saw the
rise of movements (New Left, civil rights, femi-
nist) to eliminate these inequalities (Gans 1973).
Many European countries also experienced strong
New Left movements in the 1960s pressing for a
greater role for students in the educational pro-
cess and for greater equality and democracy in
the larger society. The resurgence of feminism in
Europe began in the late 1960s and early 1970s, a
few years later than. in the U.S. (Chafetz and
Dworkin 1986, pp. 171-90). More recently, the
emergence of grassroots peace and ecology
movements in the late 1970s and the formation of
Green political parties with explicit feminist
stances has politicized another generation in West
Germany, Austria, and Great Britain (Kolinsky
1989; Spretnak and Capra 1986, p. 5).?

From the egalitarian Zeitgeist thesis, we ex-
pect young people to be more conscious of gen-
der inequality than older people, reflecting their
coming of age in the 1960s through the early
1980s. In the U.S., however, individuals who
came of age politically after the mid-1970s when
the direct activism of the U.S. feminist move-
ment had subsided (Kitschelt 1985, pp. 283-4)
and an antifeminist backlash was on the upswing
(Ferree and Hess 1985, pp. 132-9) may have been
less affected by the feminist movement than the
preceding generation. Whereas the feminist-ori-
ented environmental and peace movements acti-
vated many young people in Europe during the
1980s, the issues that mobilized the young in the
U.S. during the Reagan years (South Africa,
campus racism, peace, Central America) were,
with few exceptions (e.g., pornography, abortion),
not feminist issues. We are uncertain whether an
egalitarian Zeitgeist effect in the U.S. would be
limited to individuals who came of age during
the most active phase of the American feminist
movement (making the middle generation more
conscious of gender inequality than older or
Inaddition to these general hypotheses, which might
explain consciousness of inequality on any dimen-
sion, we test several hypotheses that apply specifi-
cally to consciousness of gender inequality.
Employment. Most U.S. studies have found
that women’s labor force participation is an im-
portant factor in their support of feminist princi-
ples.? Work outside the home gives women di-
rect experience with sex disparities in earnings,
promotion, and work conditions that are not faced
by women who work in the unpaid domestic
economy. Employed women also have a clear
economic interest in gender equality in the work-
place. Nonemployed women who depend on a
male wage earner and who face rising divorce
rates and the declining status of housewifery may
have an interest in maintaining traditional gender
roles and their attendant sex disparities (Gerson
1987). It has also been argued that women’s sup-
port for feminist goals depends more on their
current employment status than on past employ-
ment statuses (Gerson 1987). We hypothesize
that the greater a woman’s attachment to the la-
bor force, the more likely she will be to perceive
gender inequality and the more favorable toward
intervention to reduce it. Specifically, we hy-
pothesize that women who are currently em-
ployed will be more conscious of gender ine-
quality than women who are not currently but
were employed, and that the latter, in turn, will
be more conscious of gender inequality than

3 Only three of 14 U.S. studies found no relation-
ship between women’s employment and support for
women’s rights (Smith 1985, p. 501).
women who have never been employed. Fur-
thermore, we hypothesize that the more hours
per week spent in paid employment, the more
conscious of gender inequality a woman will be
(Plutzer 1988). We offer no corresponding hy-
potheses for men because employment is the
overwhelming norm for men.

Marital Status and Spouse Employment. Pre-
vious research on U.S. women points to the im-
portance of family situation in feminist orienta-
tions (Luker 1984; Gerson 1987). We expect that
marital status and spouse’s employment status
interact with sex: Women who are single, di-
vorced, widowed, or married to a man who is not
employed are harder hit by women’s lower aver-
age wages than women whose family includes a
male wage earner. We expect such women to be
more conscious of gender inequality than mar-
tied women with employed spouses.*

In contrast, we hypothesize that men whose
wives are employed will be more conscious of
gender inequality than single, separated/divorced,
widowed, or married men whose wives are not
employed (Smith 1985). Men with employed
wives may receive more information about dis-
crimination faced by their wives or other women
in the labor market that increases their awareness
of gender inequality. The effect of wives’ em-
ployment on husbands’ attitudes toward efforts
to reduce gender inequality is less clear. Men
with employed wives may have an economic in-
terest in gender equality because their family in-
come is reduced to the extent that their wives
face discrimination. However, to the extent that
equity in employment and earnings increases
wives’ marital power and increases the amount
of housework expected of husbands (Ross 1987),
men with employed wives may oppose greater
equality in the workplace. On balance, however,
we believe that the economic interest of men
with employed wives will predominate and they
will be more supportive of efforts to reduce gen-
der inequality than men in other family situations.

Gender/Age Interaction. Finally, we assume
that movements that support feminist principles
have had a greater impact on women’s attitudes
than men’s. Although feminism is often directed
at men and women, the movement has had a
We test the generalizability of our model using
survey data from four societies: the United States,
Great Britain, West Germany, and Austria. These
countries differ in the extent of objective gender
inequality, though the differences are not always
consistent (see Table 1). The percentage of
women who are employed is much greater in the
U.S. than in the three European countries. U.S.
women are also more likely to be employed full-
time than women in Austria, West Germany, or
Great Britain. The U.S. is also distinctive in
women’s opportunities for college education:
Women are just over one-half of college students
compared to about two-fifths in the other three
countries. The index of dissimilarity, which indi-
cates the percentage of women (or men) who
would have to be shifted among occupations in
order for the occupational distributions to be the
same for both sexes, shows that the U.S. and
Great Britain are more segregated than West
Germany and Austria (Roos 1985, pp. 50-2).
Comparing women’s earnings relative to men’s
earnings, Austrian and British women do better
relative to men than do women in West Germany
and the U.S. The four countries present diverse
treatments of women. As such, they afford an
opportunity to test whether findings for the U.S.
apply to other advanced industrial societies.
In each country, data were collected by leading
academic research organizations participating in
the International Social Survey Program (ISSP).°
The program aims to collect comparable data on
social attitudes, values, and politics using items
developed by representatives of the member
countries of the ISSP, pretested in each country,

5 The index of dissimilarity is based on a 14-cate-
gory occupational classification coded similarly in
the four countries (Roos 1985, pp. 50-2).

© The organizations are the National Opinion Re-
search Center (NORC) of the University of Chicago
in the U.S.; Zentrum fiir Umfragen, Methoden und
Analysen (ZUMA) in Mannheim, West Germany;
Institut fiir Soziologie of Graz University in Austria;
and Social and Community Planning Research in
London, England.
variables, the omitted category is “never em-
ployed.” Previous employment status is not
available for Austria.

Income — respondents’ yearly job earnings
before taxes and deductions, in categories, with
midpoints representing each category. National
currencies in Austria, West Germany, and Great
Britain are reported in thousands of U.S. dollars.

Occupational prestige — coded in Treiman’s
(1977) Standard International Prestige Units.

Hours worked — the number of hours worked
at all occupations during the previous week.
Missing values on income, occupational pres-
tige, and hours worked were recoded to the mean
for employed persons of each sex in each coun-
try so that in the regression equations distinctions
are made among employed persons only.

Education — years of school completed.
Analyses using educational categories unique to
each country yielded essentially similar results
(available on request).

Married, spouse employed — a dummy vari-
able coded 1 for men or women with currently
employed spouses and 0 for married with non-
employed spouses and single, divorced/separat-
ed, or widowed individuals.

Married, spouse not employed — a dummy
variable coded 1 for men and women with spouses
not currently employed and 0 for married with
employed spouses and single, divorced/separat-
ed, or widowed individuals. For these two vari-
ables, the omitted category is “single, divorced/
separated, and widowed.”

Age — measured in years.

(Age-39 — captures a possible curvilinear
effect of age (39 is the approximate mean age in
the four samples; Blalock 1979, pp. 489-91). The
continuous measure models the gradual growth
of the New Left, feminist, and Green movements
in the European countries, while the parabolic
term models the gradual growth and subsequent
decline in direct action of the U.S. feminist
movement. The gradual rise (and fall) of these
movements makes it nearly impossible to identi-
fy affected cohorts. Moreover, to the extent that
affected cohorts differ among countries, this
would necessitate the use of age cohorts that are
not comparable across countries.
women than for men?”; (b) “How about job op-
portunities for women — do you think they are,
in general, better or worse than job opportunities
for men with similar education and experience?”;
and (c) “And how about income and wages —
compared with men who have similar education
and jobs — are women, in general, paid better or
worse than men?” Response categories and their
scores were: much better for women (1); better
for women (2); no difference, can’t tell (3); worse
for women (4); and much worse for women (5).
The index ranges from 3 to 15 with high scores
indicating a perception of greater inequality to
the disadvantage of women.

Because only the single item on income and
wages was asked in Austria, we are unable to
analyze perceptions of inequality for Austria, but
we include the single perception item as a proxy
for the perception index in the analysis of efforts
to reduce gender inequality in Austria. (Scores
on the one perception item for Austria were mul-
tiplied by three to give the variable the same
range as the index in the other countries.)*

Support for Efforts to Reduce Gender Ine-
quality — measured with a three-item index. Re-
spondents were asked whether (a) “The govern-
ment should increase opportunities for women in
business and industry”; (b) “The government
should increase opportunities for women to go to
university”; and (c) “Women should be given
preferential treatment when applying for jobs or
promotions.” Responses and their scores were:
strongly against (1); against (2); neither for nor
against (3); in favor (4); and strongly in favor (5).
The index ranges from 3 to 15 with high scores
indicating support for efforts to reduce gender
inequality.°

8 Additional analyses using only the one perception
item available in all countries yielded essentially sim-
ilar results (details available from authors).

° Although the third item asks respondents to com-
pare women with men, the first two items do not
explicitly mention men as a referent. Thus it is possi-
ble that someone might agree that government should
increase opportunities for women, but feel that it
should increase opportunities equally for men. None-
theless, the positioning of these questions immediate-
ly after the questions on perceptions which introduced
a clear comparison of women with men appears to
have supplied a context that encouraged respondents
to compare men and women. The item on opportuni-
ties for a university education, which referred specif-
ically to women and men, is correlated only .25 across
all samples with a later item on whether opportunities
for a university education should be increased for all
young people, suggesting that few respondents mis-
interpreted the item in our index.
A favorable response to the third item indi-
cates a willingness to reduce the gap between
men and women in job opportunities, although
some respondents may have felt such action was
inegalitarian in the sense of being “reverse dis-
crimination.” This item is positively correlated
with the other two items in the index, correlates
with independent variables like the other two
items, and loads on the same factor, suggesting
that respondents interpreted the item as an at-
tempt to equalize job opportunities for men and
women.

Factor analyses of the three perception items
with the three items measuring support for inter-
vention to reduce gender inequality revealed two
clear factors in the three countries where all six
measures are available, suggesting that they are
distinct dimensions of consciousness of gender
inequality. Cronbach’s alpha, a measure of reli-
ability, is .60 for the index measuring percep-
tions of inequality in West Germany, .58 in Great
Britain, and .60 in the U.S. Cronbach’s alpha for
the index measuring support for efforts to reduce
inequality is .71 in Austria, .69 in West Germa-
ny, .70 in Great Britain, and .79 in the United
States.
tions, affect support for efforts to reduce inequal-
ity. We must assume that individuals’ objective
characteristics determine their attitudes. Lacking
longitudinal data, we cannot determine the direc-
tion of causality among these variables, but there
is probably some two-way causality. For exam-
ple, Thornton, Alwin, and Camburn (1983), us-
ing longitudinal data, found that women’s em-
ployment affects and is affected by gender atti-
tudes.

We estimate regression models separately for
men and women because several of our hypothe-
ses assume different effects for the two sexes.
Hypotheses that predict the same effects for men
and women can also be tested with the separate
regressions. The significance of sex interactions
is tested using a difference of slopes test between
the coefficients for a particular variable in these
separate equations. This is equivalent to. testing
the significance of the interaction term of the
variable with sex (Kmenta 1971, pp. 419-23).
of inequality and support for efforts to combat it
and all sex differences remain significant. Al-
though these sex differences may not seem sur-
prising, many earlier U.S. studies found little or
no difference between men and women in sup-
port for women’s rights (e.g., Cherlin and Walters
1981; Schreiber 1978; Ferree 1974; Roper Orga-
nization 1980).

The remaining hypotheses are tested with sep-
arate regressions for women and men (Tables 3
and 4). The underdog thesis receives little sup-
port in its assumption that the occupationally or
economically disadvantaged will be more con-
scious of gender inequality. Only three of 28 co-
efficients for income and occupational prestige
on perceptions of gender inequality and support
for its reduction across these countries are signif-
icant in the predicted direction.'° An earlier study

'© We found no evidence of multicollinearity among
occupational prestige, income, education, and hours
of consciousness of racial inequality among U.S.
and English respondents found no tendency for
individuals with low incomes or low occupation-
al prestige to be more likely to perceive racial
inequality than higher status individuals (Robin-
son 1983). Sex is the only determinant of atti-
tudes toward gender inequality, suggesting that
the underdog thesis applies only when the disad-
vantaged group has a direct interest in the ine-
quality under study.

Nor is there any support for the threat hypoth-
esis that economically disadvantaged men are
more likely to deny the existence of gender ine-

 

worked. Most correlations among these variables were
well below .50 and the largest for either sex in any
country was .58, well below the .70 level suggested
as grounds for concern by Hanushek and Jackson
(1977, p. 90). Additional analyses excluding one or
more variables at a time also suggested little evidence
of multicollinearity.
quality and oppose efforts to reduce it. In no
country does occupational prestige or income
have a significant positive effect on men’s per-
ceptions of gender inequality or support for ef-
forts to reduce this. We suspect that sex segrega-
tion of the labor market limits direct competition
between men and women for low status jobs,
making it unlikely that disadvantaged men per-
ceive women as a threat.

The effect of education on perceptions is gen-
erally positive, as predicted by both the enlight-
enment and reproduction theses, although this is
significant only for men in West Germany and
women in the U.S. The enlightenment thesis pre-
diction that education produces greater support
for efforts to reduce inequality is rejected, as none
of the coefficients for education is significantly
positive. Instead, there is considerable support
for the reproduction thesis that education leads
to acceptance of inequality; seven of the eight
effects of education on support for efforts to re-
duce gender inequality are negative and five of
these are significant. This negative effect may be
due to education’s emphasis on individual striv-
ing and accumulation of credentials rather than
government intervention as the solution to group
disadvantage.

From the egalitarian Zeitgeist thesis, we hy-
pothesized generational differences reflecting the
dominant political themes when people were
coming of age politically. In the three European
countries, we expected young people to be more
conscious of gender inequality, reflecting the in-
fluence of the New Left, feminist, and Green
movements of the 1960s through the 1980s. In
the U.S., we wondered whether the egalitarian
Zeitgeist effect would be limited to middle gen-
eration respondents who came of age during the
period of greatest activism of the feminist move-
ment and before the anti-feminist backlash, or
would also include the youngest generation. The
negative coefficients for age in Table 3 indicate
that young women perceive more gender ine-
quality than older women in West Germany and
Great Britain, but the effect is significant only in
West Germany (it falls just short of significance
in Britain, p = .054). The significant negative
coefficient for the squared age term for U.S.
women in Table 3 indicates that the middle gen-
eration perceives more inequality than either older
or younger women."' Our data also show that
young U.S. women are significantly more likely
to favor efforts to reduce gender inequality than
older women (indicated by the negative effect of
age in Table 4), perhaps because these women
realize that they have much of their working lives
ahead of them and want to see recent gains pro-
tected by government intervention. Contrary to
expectation, the significant negative coefficients
for the squared age term in Table 4 indicate that
the middle generation of Austrian and West Ger-
man women is more likely to favor efforts to
reduce inequality. Possibly the feminist move-
ments in these countries had their greatest effects
on support for efforts to reduce inequality on
women who were coming of age during the early
years of resurgence of these movements in the
late 1960s and early 1970s, before these move-
ments were to some extent eclipsed by the peace
and ecology movements (Chafetz and Dworkin
1986, p. 179; Altbach 1984, p. 3). Although
sometimes the middle generation of women is
most conscious of gender inequality and other
times young women, in no country are older
women the most likely to perceive inequality or
to favor intervention to reduce this, a result that
would be inconsistent with the Zeitgeist thesis.
A corollary to the Zeitgeist thesis predicted
weaker age differences among men than among
women, reflecting the greater appeal to women
of feminist movements. Other than a weak ten-

"A recent New York Times survey also found strong
curvilinear effects of age on perceptions of gender
inequality among U.S. women in response to the
question: “All things considered, there are more ad-
vantages in being a man in America today,” and in the
ability to name obstacles to women’s progress (Bel-
kin 1989, p. 16).
dency for the middle generation of German men
to be more likely to perceive gender inequality,
age has no effect on consciousness of gender
inequality among men in our samples. An earlier
study of U.S. data also found greater change over
time in women’s attitudes toward the position of
women than in men’s (Davis and Robinson 1988).

There is little support for the hypothesis that
labor market experience leads women to greater
consciousness of gender inequality. Employed
women in West Germany are more likely to per-
ceive inequality than women who have never
been employed, and employed women in the
United States are more likely to support inter-
vention than women who have never been em-
ployed. Otherwise, women’s employment has no
significant effect on their perceptions of gender
inequality or support for its reduction. Even in
these two exceptions, whether women are cur-
rently employed or are not currently employed
but have some work experience makes no differ-
ence, contrary to Gerson’s (1987) argument that
attitudes depend on current status. In addition,
hours worked is not significant in any country.

The hypothesis that men with employed wives
would be more conscious of gender inequality
than other men receives little support in our data.
Austrian men with employed wives are signifi-
cantly more likely to support efforts to reduce
inequality than single, divorced/separated, or
widowed men (the omitted category) and men
whose wives are not employed (p < .05). Ger-
man men with employed wives differ signifi-
cantly from those whose wives are not employed
(p < .05), but not from single, divorced/separat-
ed, and widowed men. Otherwise, there is no
tendency for men with employed wives to be
more conscious of gender inequality. Because
higher wages for their wives may mean a reduc-
tion in men’s marital power and greater pressure
to share in housework, it is possible that these
factors cancel out the economic interest of men
with employed wives in greater equality for
women in the workplace.

Family situation has a much stronger effect on
women’s attitudes than on men’s. We expected
women with employed husbands to perceive less
gender inequality and be less favorable toward
efforts to combat inequality than women without
amale wage earner. This hypothesis differs from
the more common hypothesis that married wom-
en are less feminist than women who are single,
divorced or widowed. Our dummy variables for
“married, spouse employed” and “married, spouse
not employed” (with single/divorced/widowed
as the omitted category) allow us to see whether
the crucial distinction in attitudes is among mar-
ried women based on spouse’s employment or
between married women generally and other
women. U.S. women with employed husbands
are significantly less likely to perceive gender
inequality than women whose husbands are not
employed (p < .05), but not less likely compared
to single, divorced/separated, and widowed
women. With regard to support for efforts to re-
duce inequality, women with employed husbands
in all four countries are significantly less favor-
able than single, divorced/separated, and wid-
owed women (only in West Germany do women
whose husbands are not employed differ signifi-
cantly from nonmarried women). In additional
analyses in which the omitted category combined
women whose husbands were not employed with
single, separated/divorced, and widowed wom-
en, women with employed husbands were sig-
nificantly less supportive than other women of
efforts to reduce gender inequality in all four
countries (details available from authors). Sur-
prisingly, husband’s employment has a more
consistent effect on women’s support for efforts
to reduce gender inequality than does women’s
own employment.

As studies of attitudes toward inequality in the
U.S. have found (Kluegel and Smith 1982; Form
and Hanson 1985; Knoke, Raffalovich, and Er-
skine 1987), the percentage of variance explained
in consciousness of gender inequality by objec-
tive characteristics is quite low. Generally we
explain less of the variance in perceptions of how
much gender inequality exists than in support for
efforts to combat inequality, probably because
perceptions of gender inequality have an objec-
tive referent. For example, there is an objective
answer to the question of whether opportunities
for a university education are worse for women.
The mass media in all of these countries report
figures on the wage gap between men and wom-
en, the extent to which women are moving into
traditionally male-dominated occupations or are
still largely absent from others, and college en-
rollment rates of women and men. But there is no
objective answer to the question of what, if any-
thing, should be done about gender inequality.
Not surprisingly, as the standard deviations of the
two indices (see Table 2) and the effects of inde-
pendent variables suggest, respondents generally
disagree more on what should be done about gen-
der inequality than on how much there is.
Are the findings of U.S. studies of attitudes to-
ward gender roles and inequality over the past
decade generalizable to other Western countries?
Our analysis of survey data in the U.S., Great
Britain, West Germany, and Austria revealed
several patterns that hold in most of these coun-
tries. Women consistently perceive more gender
inequality than men and are more supportive of
efforts to combat this inequality. Well-educated
people tend to be less favorable toward interven-
tion to reduce gender inequality than less well-
educated people. Married women whose hus-
bands are employed are less supportive of efforts
to combat gender inequality than other women.
Women’s employment status and hours worked
generally have little effect on their conscious-
ness of gender inequality.

These findings are not those commonly reached
by U.S. researchers. Generally, U.S. studies have
found little or no difference between men and
women in support for feminist goals (e.g., Cher-
lin and Walters 1981; Schreiber 1978; Ferree
1974; Roper Organization 1980, but see Huber,
Rexroat, and Spitze 1978) whereas we find sig-
nificant sex differences in all four countries.

In U.S. studies, education tends to be positive-
ly related to feminist orientations (e.g., Huber et
al. 1978; Thornton et al. 1983; Plutzer 1988)
whereas we find that education tends to be posi-
tively related to perceptions of gender inequality
but is more consistently negatively related to
support for efforts to reduce inequality.

Some US. studies have found that divorced
women are somewhat more feminist than mar-
ried women (Huber et al. 1978; Plutzer 1988),
but few studies have tested the hypothesis that
women with employed spouses are less feminist
than women, married or not, whose family in-
come does not include a male wage earner. We
found that the critical division in attitudes was
not between married and nonmarried (i.e., di-
vorced, single, widowed) women but between
women with a male wage earner present and
women without a male wage earner.

U.S. studies consistently find that employment
is a key factor in women’s support of feminist
principles (Smith 1985). In these countries, nei-
ther current nor previous employment has a con-
sistent effect on perceptions of gender inequality
or support for efforts to combat it. Nor is there
any tendency for currently employed women to
be more conscious of gender inequality than pre-
viously employed women or for the number of
hours per week spent in the labor force to affect
women’s consciousness of inequality.

Are U.S. Women Unique? Although it could be
argued that women in each of these four coun-
tries are distinctive in important respects, the fact
that most prior research on attitudes toward fem-
inism has been conducted in the U.S. suggests
that it is important to consider whether U.S.
women are unique. We focus on U.S. women
because they differ more from European women
than U.S. men differ from their European coun-
terparts. U.S. women are most distinctive in the
influence of background factors on support for
efforts to combat gender inequality — the higher
stage of consciousness of gender inequality.

First, U.S. women who perceive considerable
gender inequality are no more favorable toward
efforts to reduce it than women who perceive
little inequality (all country differences are sig-
nificant at p < .05). Consider the effects of the
most important determinants of gender con-
sciousness — education and age. Among U.S.
women, both education and age affect percep-
tions of gender inequality differently from sup-
port for efforts to combat inequality, which helps
explain why there is no strong positive link be-
tween perceptions and support for intervention.
Well-educated women perceive more gender in-
equality than less well-educated women but are
less supportive of government intervention to
reduce inequality. Perhaps well-educated U.S.
women adopt more individualistic solutions to
women’s disadvantaged position because of the
U.S. educational system, which may emphasize
personal effort and achievement more than sys-
tems in Britain and other European countries
(Turner 1960). The extensive self-help literature
in the U.S., including popular magazines (e.g.,
Working Woman, New Woman, Self ) directed at
career women, also promotes individual avenues
to advancement, such as dressing for success,
networking, learning to talk “like a man,” and
organizing one’s time. Not surprisingly, the ten-
dency for education to increase perceptions of
inequality but decrease support for efforts to
combat inequality is more pronounced among
U.S. women than among their European coun-
terparts. Other things being equal, these contra-
dictory effects of education among U.S. women
decrease the likelihood of a strong positive asso-
ciation between perceptions and support for in-
tervention that we find among women in the
European countries.

Age also has contradictory effects among U.S.
women. Young U.S. women perceive less gen-
der inequality than the middle generation of
women but are more supportive of efforts to re-
duce gender inequality than middle generation
or older women. Young U.S. women, having
grown up in a period of less dramatic feminist
activism than the preceding generation, may face
less discrimination than older generations or may
not yet have experienced the difficulties of bal-
ancing career and domestic responsibilities
(Steinem 1984), and for these reasons perceive
less inequality. At the same time, these young
women, who expect to work outside the home
for much of their lives and who have an entire
lifetime ahead of them in which to reap the ben-
efits of greater gender equality, may favor gov-
emment intervention to guarantee equality. As in
the case of education, the contradictory effects of
age on perceptions of inequality and support for
efforts to reduce inequality decrease the likelihood
of a strong positive association between percep-
tions of inequality and support for intervention
among U.S. women.

Second, U.S. women are also unique in the
significant effect of employment on support for
efforts to combat gender inequality (all country
differences are significant at p < .05). Although
we cannot analyze the possible objective bases
for this finding here, our data suggest that greater
discrimination in education and the labor market
cannot explain the effect of employment among
U.S. women (see Table 1). Even if there were
greater discrimination in education and employ-
ment in the U.S., there is no tendency for em-
ployed women to perceive more inequality than
women who have never been employed.

In a country like the U.S. where labor market
participation for women has rapidly expanded
and is now the norm, women who are in the
unpaid domestic economy may oppose efforts to
increase gender equality in the workplace, view-
ing such efforts as devaluing and threatening their
status as full-time homemakers and possibly
eroding their husbands’ earnings (Gerson 1987).
In our U.S. sample, women who have never been
employed are outnumbered by currently em-
ployed women nearly 12 to one, but only about
six to one in Great Britain and four to one in
West Germany. Moreover, the increase in wom-
en’s employment has been far more dramatic in
the U.S. than in the other countries, perhaps
making women who have never worked outside
the home more defensive. From 1966 to 1986,
the percentage of women aged 15 to 64 who
were employed increased by nearly 20 percent in
the U.S., compared to roughly 11 percent in Brit-
Altbach, Edith Hoshino. 1984. “The New German
Women’s Movement.” Signs 9:454-69.

Becker, Uwe. 1989. ““Frauenerwerbstatigkeit: Eine
vergleichende Bestandsaufnahme” [Women’s
Employment: A Comparative Assessment] Pp. 22-
33 in Aus Politik und Zeitgeschichte. Trier, West
Germany: Das Parlament.

Belkin, Lisa. 1989, August 20. “Bars to Equality of
Sexes Seen as Eroding, Slowly.” New York Times,
pp. 1, 16.

Blalock, Hubert M., Jr. 1979. Social Statistics (2nd
ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. 1977. Schooling
in Capitalist America. New York: Basic.

Chafetz, Janet and Anthony Dworkin. 1986. Female
Revolt: Women’s Movements in World and Histor-
ical Perspective. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Alex-
ander.

Cherlin, Andrew and Pamela Barnhouse Walters.
1981. “Trends in U.S. Men’s and Women’s Sex-
Role Attitudes: 1972 to 1978.” American Socio-
logical Review 46:453-60.
Davis, Nancy J. and Robert V. Robinson. 1988. “Class
Identification of Men and Women in the 1970s and
1980s.” American Sociological Review 53:103-12.

Ferree, Myra Marx. 1974. “A Woman for President?:
Changing Responses, 1958-1972.” Public Opinion
Quarterly 38:390-9.

Ferree, Myra Marx and Beth B. Hess. 1985. Contro-
versy and Coalition: The New Feminist Movement.
Boston: Twayne Publishers.

Form, William and Claudine Hanson. 1985. “The
Consistency of Stratal Ideologies of Economic
Justice.” Pp. 239-69 in Research in Social Stratifi-
cation and Mobility, vol. 4, edited by Robert V.
Robinson. Greenwich, CT: JAI.

Gans, Herbert J. 1973. More Equality. New York:
Vintage.

Gerson, Kathleen. 1987. “Emerging Social Divisions
Among Women: Implications for Welfare State
Politics.” Politics and Society 15:213-21.

Giddens, Anthony. 1973. The Class Structure of the
Advanced Societies. New York: Barnes and Noble.

Hanushek, Eric A. and John E. Jackson. 1977. Sta-
tistical Methods for Social Scientists. New York:
Academic.

Huber, Joan, Cynthia Rexroat, and Glenna Spitze.
1978. “A Crucible of Opinion on Women’s Status:
ERA in Illinois.” Social Forces 57:549-65.

Husbands, Christopher T. 1979. “The ‘Threat’ Hy-
pothesis and Racist Voting in England and the
United States.” Pp. 147-83 in Racism and Political
Action in Britain, edited by R. Miles and A. Phi-
zacklea. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Kitschelt, Herbert. 1985. “New Social Movements in
West Germany and the United States.” Political
Power and Social Theory 5:273-324.

Kluegel, James R. and Eliot R. Smith. 1982. ““Whites’
Beliefs about Blacks’ Opportunity.” American So-
ciological Review 47:5 18-32.

Kmenta, Jan. 1971. Elements of Econometrics. New
York: Macmillan.

Knoke, David, Lawrence E. Raffalovich, and Willi-
am Erskine. 1987. “Class, Status, and Economic
Policy Preferences.” Pp. 141-58 in Research in
Social Stratification and Mobility, vol. 6, edited by
Robert V. Robinson. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Kohl, Andreas and Alfred Stiremann. 1984. Oster-
reiches Jahrbuch fiir Politik, 1983 [Austrian Year-
book of Politics, 1983]. Munich, West Germany:
Oldenbourg Verlag.

Kolinsky, Eva. 1989. “Generation and Gender.” Pp.
248-66 in Developments in West German Politics,
edited by G. Smith, W. E. Peterson and P. H. Merkl.
London: MacMillan.

Lipset, Seymour Martin and Everett C. Ladd, Jr. 1971.
“College Generations and Their Politics.” New
Society 16:652-8.

Luker, Kristin. 1984. Abortion and the Politics of
Motherhood. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Mason, Karen O. and Larry Bumpass. 1975. “U.S.
Women’s Sex-Role Ideology, 1970.” American
Journal of Sociology 80:112-9.

Plutzer, Eric. 1988. “Work Life, Family Life, and
Women’s Support of Feminism.” American So-
ciological Review 53:640-9.

Robinson, Robert V. 1983. “Explaining Perceptions
of Class and Racial Inequality in England and the
United States of America.” British Journal of
Sociology 35:344-66.

Robinson, Robert V. and Wendell Bell. 1978.
“Equality, Success, and Social Justice in England
and the United States.” American Sociological Re-
view 43:125-43.

Roos, Patricia A. 1985. Gender and Work: A Com-
parative Analysis of Industrial Societies. Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press.

Roper Organization. 1980. The 1980 Virginia Slims
American Women’s Opinion Poll: A Survey of
Contemporary Attitudes.

Ross, Catherine E. 1987. “The Division of Labor at
Home.” Social Forces 65:816-33.

Rossi, Ernest E. and Barbara P. McCrea. 1985. The
European Political Dictionary. Santa Barbara, CA:
ABC-Clio.
Schreiber, E. M. 1978. “Education and Change in
American Opinions on a Woman for President.”
Public Opinion Quarterly 42:171-82.

Smith, Tom W. 1985. “Working Wives and Wom-
en’s Rights: The Connection Between the Employ-
ment Status of Wives and the Feminist Attitudes of
Husbands.” Sex Roles 12:501-8.

Spretnak, Charlene and Fritjof Capra. 1986. Green
Politics. Santa Fe: Bear and Company.

Steinem, Gloria. 1984. Outrageous Acts and Every-
day Rebellions. New York: New American Library.

Thornton, Arland, Duane F. Alwin, and Donald Cam-
burn. 1983. “Causes and Consequences of Sex-
Role Attitudes and Attitude Change.” American
Sociological Review 48:211-27.

Treiman, Donald J. 1977. Occupational Prestige in
Comparative Perspective. New York: Academic
Press.

Turner, Ralph H. 1960. “Sponsored and Contest Mo-
bility and the School System.” American Socio-
logical Review 25:855-67.

United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
Organization. 1985. Statistical Yearbook, 1985.
New York: United Nations Educational, Scientific,
and Cultural Organization.
