@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Forecasting is a strategy for delivering bad news and is compared to two
other strategies, stalling and being blunt. Forecasting provides some warn-
ing that bad news is forthcoming without keeping the recipient in a state of
indefinite suspense (stalling) or conveying the news abruptly (being blunt).
Forecasting appears to be more effective than stalling or being blunt in help-
ing a recipient to “realize” the bad news because it involves the deliverer
and recipient in a particular social relation: The deliverer of bad news ini-
tiates the telling by giving an advance indication of the bad news to come;
this allows the recipient to calculate the news in advance of its final presen-
tation, when the deliverer confirms what the recipient has been led to antici-
pate. Thus, realization of bad news emerges from intimate collaboration,
whereas stalling and being blunt require recipients to apprehend the news in
a social vacuum. Exacerbating disruption to recipients’ everyday world,
stalling and being blunt increase the probability of misapprehension (deny-
ing, blaming, taking the situation as a joke, etc.) and thereby inhibit rather
than facilitate realization. Realization and lack thereof are features of social
psychology; social practices and interactional organization are implicated
in individual cognition. My data include more than 100 narratives about the
delivery and receipt of bad news.
involved in conveying bad news—being
blunt and stalling. The narrative evidence ex-
hibits how, compared with these strategies,
forecasting appears more effective in procur-
ing a recipient’s realization of the bad news.
Realization refers to knowledge of the news
as demonstrated in announcing, hearing
about, understanding, accepting, or acting on
some altered feature of the social world in a
way that indicates cognitive apprehension of
the feature. In line with theoretical and em-
pirical challenges to the possibility of differ-
entiating solitary minded activity from social
process, the research here suggests that indi-
vidual cognition is intimately connected to
prior intersubjectivity as achieved through
the embodied praxis of talk and social inter-
action (Garfinkel 1967; Joas 1985; Schegloff
1991; Levine, Resnick, and Higgens 1993).
Dictionaries suggest two definitions of
forecasting: (1) to serve as an advance indi-
cation of something to come; and (2) to esti-
mate or calculate beforehand. By and large,
those who must deliver bad news often fore-
cast the news in the first sense. That is, they
prepare their recipients by indicating in ad-
vance what it might be. As compared with
stalling, which gives a recipient no informa-
tion, and being blunt, which gives the recipi-
ent new information all at once, forecasting
in the sense of preparation more effectively
provides for recipients’ realization because it
enables recipients’ own forecasting of the
news in the second sense. That is, they can
estimate and predict what the news will be,
such that when the news actually arrives it
does so in a prepared social psychological
environment. Thus, while I discuss forecast-
ing as a deliverer’s strategy for conveying
bad news, it ultimately facilitates a
recipient’s realization by involving deliverer
and recipient in a relational structure of an-
ticipation.

Accordingly, my concern is not just with
“bad news” per se, but with the organization
and recognition of the ordinary social world.
Sociologies of everyday life propose that
mundane experience depends upon required
mutual adherence among society’s members
to a set of primordial presumptions, which
Schutz (1962) calls the attitude of daily life
(ADL). Following Schutz, Garfinkel (1963:
198) argues that the “perceived normality” of
events in the everyday world is a function of
participants’ adherence to these presump-
tions. In sustaining the shared presumptions,
that is, members experience the world in
terms of resistance, recalcitrance, obduracy,
and structure (Zimmerman and Pollner
1970). And, in a way that clarifies how pre-
sumptions of the ADL involve socially inter-
active work rather than cognitive states,
Sacks (1984) argues that the experienced
“ordinariness” of the mundane world is
achieved partly through practices of conver-
sational narrating and reporting. Interference
in the achievement of ordinariness and dis-
ruptions to perceived normality render events
as atypical, unlikely or unpredictable, incom-
parable, with indeterminate cause, lacking a
relationship to some means-end scheme, and/
or without moral stature. A person will expe-
rience such events as relatively disorienting,
confusing, senseless, and anomic.

Because the presumptions of the ADL and
the perceptions of normality they sustain
form an unquestioned, albeit ongoing and
produced, backdrop for actors’ everyday
projects, such presumptions and perceptions
present difficulties for inquiry. For this rea-
son, the early ethnomethodological program
(Garfinkel 1967) was rife with attempts to
examine the stability of everyday social
scenes by asking “... what can be done to
make for trouble” (Garfinkel 1963:187). The
research strategy involved a variety of now
well-known “breaching” experiments, such
as standing very close to a person while
maintaining an otherwise normal conversa-
tion, or saying “hello” at the termination of
the conversation. Other manipulations were
more complex, such as playing a recorded,
but faked, interview involving an inept medi-
cal school applicant, eliciting a subject’s as-
sessment, and then providing information
about the “applicant” that contradicted the
subject’s assessment (Garfinkel 1963:198,
228-235; 1967:57-65). In these situations,
subjects showed marked consternation, anxi-
ety, indignation, and/or bewilderment be-
cause of the threat to perceived normality,
and such experiments demonstrated a variety
of practices involved in the production of ev-
eryday order.

More recent ethnomethodological work
largely dispenses with experimental breaches
and seeks more naturally-occurring and
spontaneous disruptions in the fabric of ev-
eryday life (Pollner 1987; Clayman and
Maynard 1995). My inquiry is roughly in this
vein. Bad news events, as we shall see, rep-
resent “natural” ruptures of that fabric. In
varying degrees, participants experience con-
fusion and anomie as a result of the assault
on the ordinary, typical, predictable, moral
world of everyday life. Therefore, close scru-
tiny of experiences involving bad news and
participants’ attempts to reassemble a mean-
ingful world should reveal everyday social
structures. Indeed, the data will show in what
ways the phenomenon of “realizing” every-
day scenes involves participants in an intri-
cate coordination of practical actions and,
conversely, how realization can be inhibited
when such coordination is absent.
tends to be anecdotal and includes recom-
mendations about how the task can be better
managed (Buckman 1984, 1992 #11; Mag-
uire, Fairbairn, and Fletcher 1986). Some so-
cial science research literature employs
quantitative analyses (Lipton and Svarstad
1977; Svarstad and Lipton 1977; Lind et al.
1989), but most is ethnographic (Glaser and
Strauss 1965; Quint 1965; Sudnow 1967;
McClenahen and Lofland 1976; McIntosh
1977; Clark and LaBeff 1982; Evans 1983;
Taylor 1988; Charmaz 1991; Edgar 1994).

Although my analysis relies heavily on
both the clinical and the research literatures
as sources of narratives about bad news ex-
periences, otherwise these literatures share
several limitations that I aim to address.
First, investigators largely concentrate on
the presenting of bad news; studying how
recipients’ receive the news is incidental
and/or separated from the analysis of strate-
gies for delivery (Sudnow 1967; McClen-
ahen and Lofland 1976; Svarstad and Lipton
1977). Suggesting that a “‘variety of social
and psychological considerations” as well
as the manner of presentation affect recipi-
ents’ response to bad news, Glaser and
Strauss (1965:127-35) analyze “general”
tendencies and universal stages in the ad-
justment process (depression, denial, accep-
tance, preparation) in a way that detaches
this process from specific features of the
participants’ talk and interaction. In contrast
to this literature, my aim is to examine ex-
actly how recipients of bad news respond in
situ to different methods of delivery.

A second characteristic of prior studies is
that they tend to be confined by occupation
or substance. Regarding the occupational fo-
cus, McClenahen and Lofland (1976), in
fact, distinguish two kinds of bad news bear-
ers—“those who enact the role in their pri-
vate lives (amateurs), and those who perform
it as part of their work or occupation” (p.
252). Although there are a few exceptions
that involve private and informal interaction
(Clark and LaBeff 1986; Schegloff 1988;
Holt 1993; Maynard 1994), the literature on
bad news overwhelmingly refers to profes-
sional contexts, including law enforcement
(Charmaz 1975; McClenahen and Lofland
1976; Clark and LaBeff 1982), medicine
(Glaser and Strauss 1965; Quint 1965;
Sudnow 1967; Svarstad and Lipton 1977;
Taylor 1988; Lind et al. 1989; Maynard
1989; West and Frankel 1991), and pastoral
counseling (Clark and LaBeff 1982). Re-
search on bad news confined by substance
includes articles dealing with one particular
“bad news” topic, such as death (Glaser and
Strauss 1965; Sudnow 1967; Charmaz 1975;
Clark and LaBeff 1982; Holt 1993), cancer
(Quint 1965; McIntosh 1977; Lind et al.
1989), developmental disabilities (Lipton
and Svarstad 1977; Svarstad and Lipton
1977; Maynard 1989, 1991c, 1992), legal en-
tailment (McClenahen and Lofland 1976;
Darrough 1984), sexual orientation (Ponse
1976; Edgar 1994), or intimate relationships
(Clark and LaBeff 1986). In contrast, my
study includes not just professionals who
bear bad news, but private persons as well,
and I include instances of all of the above
substantive topics plus others. My purpose is
to understand bad news experiences across
the categories of roles and topics. As a rup-
ture to the fabric of everyday life, bad news
episodes have generic properties that these
particularized studies have not addressed. By
examining generic features of these experi-
ences, however, I am not seeking an ab-
stracted understanding of bad news events;
rather my purpose is to direct inquiry so as
to expose the details and hence the concert-
edly achieved organizational facets of the ev-
eryday world.

A third characteristic of the bad news lit-
erature is that it has addressed what I call
“forecasting” under a variety of other ru-
brics. For instance, Glaser and Strauss
(1965) examine “gradual” or “gentle” disclo-
sure to families of dying patients, whereby
medical personnel “create suspicion and pre-
pare a family member for full disclosure as
soon as he reaches the hospital” (pp. 147-
48). Clark and LaBeff (1982) analyze the
“oblique” delivery of death announcements,
through which the deliverer aims to prepare
the recipient with some kind of “lead in” or
“gradual unfolding of the facts” (pp. 372-
73). McClenahen and Lofland (1976:257) ar-
gue that disclosure’s first stage is a “‘prepara-
tory” one in which bearers “presage” their
bad news. Similarly, Taylor (1988:115-16)
refers to a “preamble” with which surgeons
gradually introduce terms such as “serious
illness” before informing about breast can-
cer. Prior researchers, then, have at least
mentioned strategies of delivery that re-
semble forecasting, but they have not fully
defined or explained the phenomenon. For
instance, when researchers suggest that some
kind of preparation is a “stage” or “phase”
of delivery (McClenahen and Lofland 1976;
Clark and LaBeff 1982; Taylor 1988), they
imply that forecasting always occurs, and
they minimize or ignore other strategies.
Thus, presaged presentations are not com-
pared with other strategies in terms of their
influence on the recipient. Furthermore, even
though Glaser and Strauss (1965:148) dis-
cuss “coaxing” families into “awareness,”
and like other researchers (Clark and LaBeff
1982) allude to the relation between “lead-
ing in” or preparing a recipient for bad news
and realization, this relation has not been ex-
plored in any systematic way. My task is to
perform a sustained examination of the con-
nection between “forecasting” bad news and
the realization of the news. This involves
comparing forecasted bad news with other
strategies for delivery and including various
kinds of bad news (death, disease, relation-
ship dissolution, etc.) delivered by people
with diverse relationships to the recipient
(lay, professional, etc.).

A final characteristic of prior research
draws the previous three together: Analyses
have been preoccupied with bad news as
such. I examine bad news events as a ve-
hicle for understanding the social organiza-
tion of the objective-seeming features of ev-
eryday life. Bad news dissolves the obdurate
orderliness of the social world. As partici-
pants act to restore that orderliness, their
practices for achieving the socially real be-
come available for analysis.
of which is ethnographic, I gleaned additional
stories about participants’ experiences.! Fi-
nally, I compiled various journalistic ac-
counts (newspaper stories, autobiographical
articles and books, and “true crime” books)
of news delivery about murder, disease, and
death. In all, I have assembled 33 narratives
from my own interviews, 60 from ethnogra-
phies of medical, legal, family, and other set-
tings or situations where bad news is given,
and 20 journalistic stories.”

Where relevant, I supplement narrative
data with transcripts of recorded bad news
deliveries. The purpose of employing narra-
tive data (and for collecting it in the first
place) is that recordings and transcripts,
while reliably providing behavioral data
(what was said or how somebody glanced or
moved, etc.), do not as frequently indicate
the inner experiences of participants (e.g.,
their attitudes, beliefs, thoughts, or feelings)
as the news delivery progresses. To develop
propositions about the social psychology of
bearing bad news, narrative data is more use-
ful than behavioral data. Social psychology,
as I use this phrase, refers to the observable
interactive behavior that indexes and induces
cognitive understandings for the participants.

Methodologically, my approach to this
data is akin to grounded theory (Glaser and
Strauss 1967) and analytic induction (Znan-
iecki [1934] 1968), as modified by Linde-
smith (1947), Cressey (1953), and others
(Charmaz 1975; Emerson 1983:93-99; Katz
1983). My analysis of the narratives in-
volved two phases—an “initial” and then a
“focused” one (Charmaz 1983). My ap-
proach during the initial phase, using a
small number of narratives, was one of dis-
covery. Regular strategies by which present-
ers delivered bad news and recipients re-
sponded to it began to emerge from the data.
As much as possible, I performed what
Silverman (1993:76) refers to as “internal
analysis” of the textual material, attending
to the participants’ “in vivo codes” (Char-
maz 1983:115); it was from participants’
narratives that the terms “stalling” and “be-
ing blunt” emerged, whereas “forecasting”
was the term I used to encompass a variety
of techniques used by presenters to prepare
recipients for bad news. Through comparing
examples, I began to notice that strategies
for bad news delivery seemed to correlate
with patterns of receipt. As my coding be-
came more focused, I used my initial cat-
egories to examine the larger collection of
narratives, which helped to build and clarify
initial categories and their relationships to
one another (Charmaz 1983:117). Crucial
here was dealing with variations and dis-
crepant cases (Becker 1958), and also em-
ploying previous literature to check my pre-
liminary analyses. Variations, discrepant
cases, and previous literature are particu-
larly important to my discussion later in this
paper of historico-cultural contexts and lo-
cal interactional contingencies.
also see Sudnow 1967:118, 127-28), and ask
them to come to the hospital, thereby enact-
ing what Boden and Molotch (1994) term
“the compulsion of proximity.” Or when
loved ones are already on the scene, news
givers may isolate recipients (Sudnow 1967:
126), as when nurses take family members
to the hospital chapel (Clark and LaBeff
1982:375) or a physician takes them “‘some-
where where it is private and discrete”
(Clark and LaBeff 1982:373). Physicians re-
gard a dying patient’s room as a taboo place
for informing, preferring hallways over their
own offices and spaces that are private rather
than public. Glaser and Strauss’s (1965:153)
term “disclosure space” is an apt one for bad
news deliverers’ arranging of the physical
environment.

Of course, forecasting involves behavioral
cues other than spatial management,° as
when a teller’s nonvocal comportment indi-
cates the nature of a forthcoming announce-
ment. Sudnow (1967:120-22) noticed that
surgeons coming to a waiting room with bad
news to deliver provide a show of solemnity.
This contrasts with the appearance of those
who have good news to deliver, who walk
rapidly and smile at their recipients.

When anticipating news, it seems that re-
cipients are anxious and intent observers of
the setting, and are so regarded by tellers. In
fact, physicians observe that family mem-
bers, when waiting on an emergency ward,
attempt to look into rooms where staff mem-
bers are working on the patient and try to
hear their talk. The family thereby can glim-
pse the patient, hear how staff regard the
situation, and may become suspicious that
bad news is forthcoming. A hospital chaplain
has said:
This “reading” of a knowledgeable person’s
physiognomy can create discomfort for those
who indeed are aware of the news, but who
may not be in a position to tell it. Nurses
sometimes wish the attending physician to
tell bad news to a family member and must
stonewall recipients until the physician ar-
rives.>

In scrutinizing their environment, recipi-
ents employ at least three nonvocal resour-
ces. First, it is clear that a teller’s demeanor
can be communicative. For instance, in Flo-
rida in 1989 it was discovered that in 1979
two infants had been mixed up at birth and
sent home from the hospital with the wrong
families. Nine years later, when one of the
girls was dying of heart disease, genetic test-
ing showed that she was unrelated to either
one of the parents who raised her. These par-
ents began the search that culminated in their
finding their biological daughter. The girl
had been raised by Robert Mays, who then
had to inform her of her relationship to the
other couple. When the girl came home from
school on the fateful day, Mays reported,
“She noticed a look of concern on my face
and asked what was wrong. I just sat her
down on the edge of her bed and told her”
(Leisner 1989). A college hockey coach who
had a heart transplant recalls that after his
original heart became diseased and he had
had some testing, he saw the doctor come in
his hospital room with a “serious look on his
face” (Lucas 1989). And a physician (Quill
1991:465) who had to tell a female patient
that she tested positive for the HIV antibody
remarked that his patient asked him, when he
walked in the room with the results, “Is it
AIDS?” and that she “could read the answer”
on his face. Accordingly, it can be said that
the bearers of bad news “give off” impres-
sions (Goffman 1959) that may unintention-
ally provide indications of what is to come.
For a final example, even when stonewalling
family members, nurses often convey the
news through impressions that “leak”
through (Goffman 1959; Clark and LaBeff
1982:375).

A second nonvocal resource for recipients
is to interpret a news giver’s identity infor-
mation. That is, the arrival of a particular
type of person in a specific setting can fore-
cast what news they are bringing (Sudnow
1967:119). As a category of persons, police
officers are prone to being revelatory in this
way, as are military officers and some others
(Clark and LaBeff 1982:370).

Third, the person does not have to be a
professional; he or she can be someone fa-
miliar, and the place of the person’s visit or
its time within the history of a relationship
can be informative. For instance, after an 18-
year-old man accidentally killed himself
while examining a gun, his friend had to go
to the deceased’s family with the news. He
reported, “I haven’t been around for a while,
so when Jon’s mom saw me, she knew some-
thing was wrong” (Singer 1988). Also con-
sider the late night telephone call:
Pre-announcements. These are devices by
which a news giver can discover whether a
recipient already knows some news-to-be-
told. That is, pre-announcements act as a pre-
cursor to some news and yet withhold it; af-
ter a recipient’s subsequent request—a “go
ahead” signal that completes a pre-announce-
ment sequence—the news is announced
(Terasaki 1976:28). While pre-announce-
ments can be minimal and provide few clues
as to the nature of the news (e.g., “have you
heard?”), some pre-announcements clearly
foreshadow that the news is “awful,” “bad,”
“sad,” or “terrible.”®
Or a teller may speak ironically and jok-
ingly, yet still convey seriousness and diffi-
culty. A security analyst and vice president
of Merrill Lynch, in the position of predict-
ing company earnings and rating the com-
pany accordingly, reported that when she is
about to lower or raise her evaluation, she
calls the Chief Executive Officer a few min-
utes before this information is to become
public. “If it’s a drop,” she said, “I usually
say something like we’re about to find out if
we’re just fair-weather friends” (Bartlett
1988).

Prefacing. A variation of the pre-
announcement is prefacing, a device that
seems to preclude a proposed recipient’s
“go-ahead” utterance. If one is reasonably
sure that the recipient does not know the
news, it may be situationally relevant to
simply signal what is coming and proceed
directly with the announcement.
baby’s lack of improvement, consultations
with other experts, the medical staff’s own
efforts to do “everything” for the child, and
other factors that logically suggest discon-
tinuing the support mechanisms.

Related to logical elaborations is the use
of syllogism, as described by Gill and May-
nard (1995). In clinics for developmental
disabilities, psychologists may (1) present
testing results and other evidence of a
child’s delayed development to parents, and
(2) define mental retardation as typically in-
volving those same delays. These are like
premises of a syllogism that indicate a diag-
nosis and (3) lead the parents to conclude
that the diagnosis applies to their child. That
is, rather than declaring, “Your child is men-
tally retarded,” or “your child has mental re-
tardation,” the clinician (1) produces the
child’s test results, (2) suggests, “that’s
what we call mental retardation,” and there-
by (3) invites the parents to deduce that
their child is retarded.
Forecasting, I argue, is an effective way of
leading the recipient of bad news from a state
of relative ignorance to a state of knowledge
in the situation where the news is to be given.
The recipient’s realization, as we shall see,
is demonstrated especially in a display of
understanding such as venturing a guess pro-
nouncement of the news. As stated earlier,
forecasting fosters realization through giving
advance indications of bad news in a way
that allows recipients an opportunity to esti-
mate or calculate that news in advance. After
recipients guess at or venture the news, de-
liverers are in a position to confirm or dis-
confirm recipients’ displayed presentiments.
In this example, D gives a first clue as to the
news he bears through a pre-announcement
at line 1 indicating that it is “terrible.” Then
D gives a second clue, a naming or identifi-
cation of the news’ subject (line 3). Thus,
there are clear vocal forecasts in this episode
that allow R to guess accurately at the news
in line 4; then D confirms (line 5).

A deliverer’s forecasting clues and indica-
tions engage a recipient’s commonsense
knowledge of the world, the participants’ “re-
cipient-designed” mutual knowledge, and
“their orientation to the occasion of the con-
versation” (Schegloff 1988:444). In promot-
ing the use of commonsense, mutual, and lo-
cal knowledge, a deliverer’s clueing, in fact,
can be rather extended. In the next example,
Charlie informs Ilene, who wanted a ride,
that a planned trip to Syracuse has been can-
celed. Referring to a third party, he starts the
news delivery by reporting particular circum-
stances (lines 1 and 3):
The practices of clueing, guessing, and
confirming also occur in institutional settings
—particularly medical ones—where profes-
sionals must convey bad news (Glaser and
Strauss 1965; Sudnow 1967; McClenahen
and Lofland 1976). Sometimes this appears
inadvertent through a doctor’s nonvocal com-
portment and verbal allusiveness (Jacobs
1969:5). However, the clueing-guessing-con-
firming pattern can be accomplished more
purposefully and explicitly through a “‘per-
spective-display series,” a sequence of turns
that operates interactionally to “co-impli-
cate” the recipient’s perspective in the pre-
sentation of diagnoses (Maynard 1992).
Schematically, the series consists of three
turns: (1) Clinician’s query about patient’s
opinion (perspective-display invitation); (2)
recipient’s perspectival reply or assessment;
and (3) clinician’s confirming report and as-
sessment. Clinical use of this series derives
from a generic conversational strategy for
giving one’s own report or assessment in a
cautious manner by first soliciting another’s
opinion (Maynard 1991b). The parts of this
series are italicized in the next excerpt:
These and similar narratives demonstrate
that forecasts of various sorts do occasion
inferencing on the part of a bad news recipi-
ent. Furthermore, if recipients are occasion-
ally wrong, they nevertheless are only par-
tially so. That is, in examples 3 and 12, re-
cipients correctly infer that the projected
news is bad and that it concerns a family
member. Therefore, the prepared social psy-
chological environment in which the official
news arrives provides at least the contours of
the news, and it is as if the deliverer is cor-
recting an aspect of the recipient’s concep-
tion. The following example is from a wom-
an’s story of taking care of her neighbor’s
cat, who died while the neighbor was away:
For a moment, the house was noisy, and I was
half-awake, but confused. Why were they home
now? They’d said they wouldn’t be home for
another hour. What happened? Then Julie
shushed the children and had Kenny send them
out again. I came downstairs as the front door
was closing. Julie asked me to come into the
family room. She had a strange, worried look
on her face. What could be so bad? “Patti Ann,
I have something to tell you,” my sister said.
“Sit down. Something’s wrong.” My father, I
flashed. He’s had a heart attack! “Steven’s
been shot,” Julie said quietly. (McDonald,
McDonald, and Kahn III 1989:7, italics in
original)
T have a friend who had a brother who was in a
lot of trouble all the time over a period of a
year. And I got a call from my friend and she
said, have you talked to Mary, and she sounded
upset. And I said no, and she sounded so upset
immediately in my brain it turned into, uh-oh,
what’s going on. And she said, “It’s Davy.”
And immediately I said, “Is he dead?” And she
said, “Yeah.” .. . But like I knew it before she
said it. It was really strange because it was al-
most as if the conversation was just a play, be-
cause I knew what was going to happen, and I
just went through the ritual of the conversation.
(Narrative #15)
ing is more effective in aiding the recipient
to realize the bad news, whereas stalling or
being blunt exacerbate the disruption to per-
ceived normality and raise the probability of
misapprehension, impeding such realization.
That is, if bad news involves a fundamental
alteration in the taken-for-granted everyday
world, a problem for the recipient is to real-
ize or apprehend the alteration. Episodes of
a deliverer’s stalling indicate that even
though recipients have a sense of something
being “different” or “not right,” they never-
theless are prevented from knowing the
news. The result is an experience of indeter-
minacy akin to the anomic states Garfinkel
(1967) describes as occurring under induced
conditions, and recipients are more likely to
deny the facts and blame themselves for the
unpleasantness. Blunt deliveries of news re-
quire such rapid and unsupported changes of
orientation to the lifeworld that they increase
the probability of misapprehensions such as
taking the news as a joke, blaming the mes-
senger, or maintaining ordinariness (subsum-
ing present perceptions to past assumptions).
In this example, the erroneous guess, blind-
ness, as compared with the actual news fa-
vors a perhaps less pervasive disorder than
the real one. More generally, when recipients
guess incorrectly as a result of stalling, it is
not in a haphazard way, but in a normalizing
fashion. With disabled children, parents who
have been stalled are initially likely to define
or explain abnormalities as unimportant, as
evidence of idiosyncrasy, as temporary, and
so on (Darling 1979:138-39). Similarly,
when a party in an intimate relationship
wishes to break it off, stalling seems to be a
frequent strategy, partly out of guilt about
hurting the other’s feelings (Clark and La-
Beff 1986:260). As a result, the other party
continues with “business as usual”:
A man that I had worked for in business had
become ill, and he wasn’t at work for a few
days. And his son called the office one day to
say that he was in the hospital and was having
some difficulty with his heart. And he called
back a few times during the morning to say
things were getting worse. So a couple of other
people from the office that had worked with D
for several years went down to the hospital.
And we went into a room where his family
was—his wife and a son and a daughter and his
mother. And a chaplain from the hospital was
there. We went in the room and joined them
and they were keeping vigil and saying some
prayers in hopes that things would improve.
And... a doctor who was working on him
came into the room, and he sat down next to
D’s wife and began by saying this is where
we’re at right now. This is what we’ ve done up
to this point. And he started to explain in great
detail what was happening and what kind of
treatment. ... Myself, I was feeling very hope-
ful that he was going to explain what the next
Step was. But in his fairly elaborate description
of what was going on, D’s wife stopped him
and said, “Doctor, is my husband alive?” And
my own feeling at that time was shock. I
thought, how could she even ask that. Of
course he’s alive. And his response to her was,
“No he’s not.” And D’s wife’s reaction, she
was fairly calm as if she kind of knew, ex-
pressed concern for the mother [and] the chil-
dren, [who] became very emotional and upset.
But in that telling it was almost like a mislead-
ing, like we were going in another direction.
(Narrative #19, italics added)
Self-blame. Parents of developmentally
disabled children are sometimes suspicious
that something is wrong and yet can get no
news from professionals. In such circum-
stances, Darling (1983) indicates that parents
may develop “pathological reactions, such as
blaming the baby’s delayed development on
their own inadequacies as parents” (p. 106).
One mother, after months of sensing that
something was wrong with her child and be-
ing told nothing by professionals other than
that the baby was not “up to other babies her
age,” went with the child to a specialist:
It is not possible for potential recipients to
realize features of their world when deliver-
ers stall, withholding information they know,
and this seems to be why recipients express
relief, no matter how bad the news, when
they are finally told.!° This indicates that it
might be worse to live in an ill-defined or
ambiguous everyday world, such as that
which sufferers of chronic pain experience
(Hilbert 1984), than in one where something
has changed for the worse but can be named
and mutually recognized through interaction.
At least one no longer need blame oneself
for, nor deny, bewildering cues, gestures, and
other signs of possible collapse in one’s ev-
eryday world and can come to know that
world anew.
I was a sophomore in high school, and as usual
I always came back in the afternoon about
3:30, and it was just like any day. My mom
was sitting in the kitchen facing out the win-
dow looking at the town we live in, and just as
I was walking through the kitchen she just
turned around and says to me guess what? And
she was smiling, and I says what, and she says
Grandpa E died. And she was smiling while
she was saying this and I thought that was
kinda contradictory. I thought she can’t be
goofin’ around can she. So just her actual de-
livery by the way she was smiling and you
know I thought no this can’t be true? And I
just totally wouldn’t believe it until like an
hour later somebody else called, and she was
talking to them, and then I first realized, you
know, that he actually did die. (Narrative #4)
In general, as a contrasting strategy to being
blunt, forecasting devices, as in this example,
may help recipients realize bad news by an-
ticipating and proposing to contradict pos-
sible humorous interpretations.

Blaming the messenger. We know about
this phenomenon from the practice among
ancient Persian generals of killing messen-
gers who brought bad news (Tesser and
Rosen 1975:203). While I do not have an ex-
ample of a blunt informing that results in
messenger-blaming, there is indirect evi-
dence for such a relationship in the stated
orientations, beliefs, and practices of deliv-
erers. Recall the situation of the security ana-
lyst whose tactics were described earlier. In
performing financial evaluations of compa-
nies and deciding to downgrade a company’s
rating, she is in some sense responsible for
the news she must deliver. Accordingly, by
prefacing the delivery of negative evaluations
with a relationship formulation (“we’re about
to find out if we’re just fair-weather
friends”), she effectively asks the recipient
(the CEO) to put their relationship above the
news and any responsibility she has for that
news.

Connected with this is that deliverers of
bad news in fact often fee! responsible, and
even guilty, for the news they must present.
Physicians, as Clark and LaBeff (1982:371)
remark, can view a patient’s death as their
own failure. Thus, as mentioned, their proce-
dures for forecasting or giving elaborate ex-
planations picture death as a logical outcome
of a sequence of events in which everything
was done medically that could be. In this
way, Clark and LaBeff (1982:374, 377) ar-
gue, physicians can “cover” their perfor-
mances and attempt to head off any condem-
nation that recipients might direct their way.
In contrast, being blunt decreases the prob-
ability of realization to the extent that it fos-
ters the recipient’s blaming of the physician
in effort to eradicate the message by impugn-
ing its vehicle.

Maintaining ordinariness. A phenomenon
that Sacks (1984) identifies is how people in
the midst of catastrophic events maintain a
sense that “nothing happened.” If we con-
sider catastrophic events as, in a fashion, be-
ing their own announcement, they are per-
haps the bluntest kind of informing one can
experience. The sense of nothing unusual
happening is reflected in participants’ state-
ments of the form, “At first I thought it was
X, then I realized it was Y”; the classic in-
stance, as Sacks (1984:419) observes, is of
witnesses to President’s Kennedy’s assassi-
nation who thought they heard backfires
rather than gunshots. Here are two other in-
stances, one of a plane hijacking, and one of
a murder:
Maintaining ordinariness is related to nor-
malization in that both tactics preserve a
sense of the social world as usual, and ob-
jects within it as basically intact rather than
as altered. But a temporal-perceptual element
distinguishes maintaining ordinariness from
normalization. Normalization refers to prac-
tices whereby potential recipients, having
seen signs of anomaly, face deliverers who
are “in the know” about the meaning of such
signs and who delay telling them for an in-
definite period of time. During this period,
recipients work to define and explain such
signs in ways that deny their importance.
Such work contains as an essential element
the phenomenon of hopefulness. In anticipa-
tion, recipients may entertain alternative pos-
sibilities, yet through hopeful definitions and
explanations they come to favor normal in-
terpretations. Maintaining ordinariness refers
to a related set of practices, but is condensed
to the momentary. Recipients instantaneously
interpret signs of anomaly according to cat-
egories that fit with ongoing and benign or
“innocuous” percepts of daily life (Jefferson
1985). The subsumption is so rapid that hope,
as a conscious expectation for a desired state
of affairs, plays little or no role in the inter-
pretation. Expectations, as they flow from the
recipient’s adherence to the attitude of daily
life, may enter into an initial perception, but
only subsequent to this initial perception do
recipients engage alternative possibilities.
deliverer withholds telling what he or she
knows, and this seems to be why recipients
express relief, no matter how bad the news,
when they finally are informed. At the same
time, forecasting directly conveys the bad
news without being so forthright and abrupt
as to utterly disconcert and disorient the re-
cipient. Similar to stalling, being blunt can
aggravate a state of anomie, but in this case
the possibility of realization is inhibited by
the overwhelming rapidity and boldness of
the presentation. Blunt informings appear to
maximize the chances of panic (Glaser and
Strauss 1965:143), going to pieces (Glaser
and Strauss 1965:149; Lind et al. 1989:586),
and otherwise being devastated. Accordingly,
stalled and blunt informings exacerbate the
senselessness concomitant to lack of typical-
ity, predictability, causality, and morality that
bad news portends in the perceived environ-
ment. Evidence of exacerbated anomic expe-
riences emerges not only in recipients’ mis-
apprehensions, but also in the emotional ex-
periences they report. Narratives about
stalled and blunt deliveries more regularly
contain accounts of recipients’ feelings of
hurt, anger, hostility, and indignation than do
narratives that exhibit a forecasted bad news
delivery. The misapprehensions that stalling
and bluntness provoke, then, seem to ema-
nate from desperate attempts by recipients to
resolve anomie, while forecasting, in the way
that it aids realization, simultaneously pro-
vides for a more settled and accurate appre-
hension of an altered lifeworld.

The foregoing evidence suggests that strat-
egies of forecasting, stalling, and being blunt
form the independent variable and that re-
cipient realization is the dependent variable
in the analysis of the interactional handling
of bad news. While this is roughly accurate,
there are significant complexities that must
be taken into account for proper appreciation
of this equation. I treat these complexities
under the rubrics of historico-cultural varia-
tion and local interactional contingencies.
My overall argument is that strategies of de-
livery, rather than being context-free and ab-
stract resources, are accomplished features of
any particular informing episode. Further-
more, while realization is something news
deliverers facilitate or inhibit in recipients, a
recipient’s realization is very much a matter
of the relationship between participants as it
A question about this account of the forecast-
ing-realization equation is whether it applies
historically and cross-culturally. In medicine,
reviews document a general change in atti-
tudes from the time of Hippocrates until the
present day, so that in the United States at
least, there is currently more pressure for
physicians to disclose the facts of illness to
patients than in previous times (Maynard
1991a; West and Frankel 1991). In the case
of cancer, an often-cited finding is that in the
United States, the medical profession has
radically altered its position in regard to tell-
ing patients the diagnosis of this dreaded dis-
ease. Whereas in 1961, 90 percent of physi-
cians surveyed said they preferred not to re-
veal the diagnosis to cancer patients (Oken
1961), a replication in 1979 shows 97 per-
cent of respondents are willing to do so
(Novack et al. 1979). However, this is far
from becoming a trend cross-culturally. In a
number of countries (Holland et al. 1987),
physicians continue to avoid telling patients
about their cancers because of the harm such
telling is assumed to cause.

Historical and cross-cultural evidence, ac-
cordingly, indicates that in some times and
places medical informants regularly conceal
bad news. This evidence might imply that
not all societies, when dealing with disease,
are as preoccupied as others with the prob-
lem of realization or conveying and attain-
ing knowledge of the condition. Therefore,
it might be that healers in these environ-
ments are like Simmel’s (1950) “secret soci-
eties,” seeking to conceal facts from others
in certain circumstances for internal pur-
poses of sociation, cohesion, and boundary
definition that would also protect outsiders
(patients and their families) from potentially
detrimental knowledge. A close look at the
cross-cultural evidence, however, presents a
more complicated story. The prohibition
against revealing a diagnosis of cancer is far
from absolute, even in cultures where offi-
cial taboos still exist, and these taboos serve
different purposes from those that Simmel
(1950) relates to secrecy. For one thing, if
physicians do not tell the diagnosis to pa-
tients, they regularly do tell family members
instead; family members may then choose to
deliver the news themselves (Long and
Long 1982; Gordon 1990; Beyene 1992).
Furthermore, when this happens, as in Eth-
iopia, it seems that a deeper concern is with
overcoming the suddenness of disclosure
rather than with disclosure per se. “The situ-
ation is discussed among friends and rela-
tives,” says Beyene (1992), “to decide the
appropriate time and the least frightening
way of breaking the news” (p. 330). For ex-
ample, Ethiopians regard the evening as an
inopportune time for informing because it
might mean a long and sleepless night for
the recipient, whereas breaking bad news in
the morning at the person’s home allows
friends to keep the person company, to pre-
pare food, and otherwise help the recipient
cope with the news. :

Even when potential informants are ver-
bally silent about cancer, they may regard re-
cipients as nevertheless knowledgeable. In
Japan, for instance,
social relationships in which the informing
occurs is maintained, and the realization oc-
curs through other modes than verbal and
cognitively logical ones (Good et al. 1990).
Therefore, while there may be times and
places wherein healers work hard to avoid
giving bad news, cultural taboos may be
more concerned with the proper means
whereby recipient realization can occur. In
emphasizing the affinity between a recipient
and both the immediate family and the larger
group, these cultures exhibit an understand-
ing that realization can be enhanced by coor-
dinating the efforts of other parties in addi-
tion to the healer or physician. Indeed, if
staging is seen as a kind of forecasting, some
cultures appear to urge a particular social
psychological form, in this instance forecast-
ing as a social relation for bearing bad
news.!? By the same token, these cultures es-
chew bluntness and stalling because the lat-
ter strategies isolate recipients, leaving them
on their own to decipher the meanings of
signs and symptoms. It is this extreme an-
omic discomfort for recipients that seems to
be avoided in some cultures, not a recipient’s
knowledge or realization of bad news per se.
'3 A bearer of bad news may stall the delivery
of it for many reasons, either intentionally or un-
intentionally. In example 32, stalling may have
been related to cultural values about how doctors
should inform cancer patients. In some cultures,
as we have seen, the tactic is thought to foster
hope. Furthermore, among the chronically ill,
Charmaz (1991:110-19) found that avoiding dis-
closure can prevent undue (and sometimes stig-
matizing) attention to the sufferer’s health. An-
other reason for stalling, at least among physi-
cians, is the lack of training in regard to the
“hows” of presenting bad news (Maguire 1986).
Other professionals, such as nurses, are prohib-
ited by formal and informal rules from giving bad
news because it is their superiors’ job (Quint,
1965; McIntosh, 1977:75). Additionally, profes-
sionals may regard breaking bad news as the
“dirty work” of their occupation and therefore
entirely devalue the task (Davis 1963:30). And
even when physicians gain sure knowledge of a
disease, like polio, they may feign uncertainty as
Even though in example 33 we do not know
the pediatrician’s exact manner of delivering
the bad news, the indications are that he was
gently suggestive in a forecasting manner
rather than boldly forthright in presenting the
diagnosis (he ‘suggested the possibility of
cerebral palsy”). Nevertheless, in the context
of an initial stall (“the other baby’s fine”) and
the mother’s resultant normalized beliefs
about her child, the disclosure appears to have
been experienced as being blunt. Thus, the
bluntness of the informing is not necessarily
an inherent characteristic of the deliverer’s
manner but is relative to the contingently or-
dered context of delay in which the delivery
ultimately occurs and to the set of beliefs a
recipient holds during this delay.!4
Accordingly, whether any delivery exhibits
features of forecasting, stalling, or bluntness
is dependent upon how participants, in inter-
action with one another, invoke and elaborate
their knowledge of one another and their situ-
ation so as to hide, provide, and discern cues
about their world. Consider how even the
most terse vocal message can be part of a situ-
ational context that is utterly communicative
to a recipient. A husband who was waiting
for his wife to arrive home at a local airport
after a brief trip knew that her return involved
one change of planes in Denver. While await-
ing her arrival, he heard the phone ring, and
answered the phone, according to his own
account, with a “casual hello.”
The narrator, having had the prior feelings
and knowing the family situation, was not so
surprised by this otherwise bluntly delivered
news, and in fact reported being mostly con-
cerned about how her mother was “holding
up.” So again, the character of any given
message is ultimately related to, and cannot
be divorced from, its context of production.
While forecasting, stalling, and being
blunt, then, are recognizable strategies that
differently affect the realization of bad news,
historico-cultural variation and local contin-
gencies show that these strategies cannot be
considered as disembodied techniques.
Rather, strategies of forecasting, stalling, and
being blunt are indelibly produced and heard
according to the particularized circumsta-
nces, relationships, practical signaling, and
cue-reading that parties in an informing de-
ploy and embody in action and in interaction
with one another. Accordingly, while I pro-
pose that different devices for conveying bad
news influence a recipient’s realization,
those strategies themselves must be under-
stood as contingent accomplishments (Gar-
finkel 1967). Furthermore, to the extent that
strategies or devices affect a recipient’s ap-
prehension or realization of news, this is,
in part, a matter of social relationship. Both
stalling and bluntness isolate a recipient from
the news deliverer and leave recipients on
their own to decipher the meaning of events,
whereas forecasting binds the two parties to-
gether in what was earlier referred to as a
structure of anticipation. Realization and
lack thereof are features of social psychol-
ogy. In line with Mead (1934), Volosinov
(1973), Vygotsky (1986), and others, the key
point is that social practices and interactional
organization are implicated in individual
cognition. Or, in Joas’s (1985) terms, “‘prac-
tical intersubjectivity” provides for the indi-
vidual actor’s own perceptual formations.
like the actors in a Schutzian (Schutz 1962)
scenario, go about assembling experienced
concrete features of daily life. Because the
telling and receiving of news of all kinds,
whether bad, good, or indifferent, is integral
to how human actors as social creatures inter-
act to make the world of daily life available
to themselves and others, studying such ex-
changes provides access to the attitude of
daily life as an actual and embodied activity.
Bad news, in particular, represents a strong
breach or rupture in the routine order of ev-
eryday life, and thus is rich in displaying how
actors sustain their sense of the real. Indeed,
this study suggests the possibility of a deep-
ened understanding of the phenomenon of
realization-as-locally-concerted-activity.
What I have called forecasting derives from
narrative evidence of participants’ vocal cu-
ing and clueing strategies, such as the use of
pre-announcements, prefaces, logic, and syl-
logism. Narratives also exhibit nonvocal
practices for intentionally and unintentionally
presaging bad news. Recipients are skilled at
reading identity and demeanor, pinpointing
the meaning of occurrences (e.g., telephone
rings) according to temporal configurations,
discerning the import of various kinds of
physical gestures, and drawing on common-
sense knowledge of their local worlds. Par-
ticipants employ these strategies, practices,
and skills according to developing lines of
action and interaction, not in some mechani-
cal and fixed way. With bad news at least,
forecasting implies that realization in every-
day life requires not only transmission of oth-
erwise one-sided knowledge. For realization
to occur most effectively, actors may need to
perform collaboratively in a myriad of de-
tailed ways, complementarily anticipating a
forthcoming official pronouncement about
some lifeworld event, object, or inhabitant.
Realization refers to the acquisition of
knowledge through announcing, hearing
about, understanding, accepting, and thus be-
ginning to enter new social worlds. Realiza-
tion of the social world in this sense is not a
philosophical notion, as if the fundamental
problem in daily life were to resolve meta-
physical questions about the nature of ob-
jects, including bodies and selves, that form
the social world. Schutz (1962) did not ar-
gue that adherence to the attitude of daily life
enabled the realization of some intersub-
jective, mundane experience for the sake of
having an objective world as an end in itself.
Rather, joint adherence is for the sake of en-
gaging that world in a practical way. Put dif-
ferently, participants uniformly address the
nature of the world under the auspices of a
“pragmatic motive” (Zimmerman and
Pollner 1970:85). For example, parties take
for granted a “reciprocity of perspectives ...
[leading] . . . speaker and hearer to assume
their mutual experiences of the interaction
scene are the same even if they were to
change places” (Cicourel 1974:34), only to
get on with the business at hand, not to re-
solve metaphysical questions about the na-
ture of matter. Similarly, if forecasting bad
news, such as the death of a loved one, aids
recipients in realizing that their world has
undergone a fundamental alteration, it is not
because contemplation of life and death is
facilitated. While reflection about death may
certainly accompany the experience, under
some circumstances tellers strive to avoid
such contemplation in both themselves and
their recipients (Charmaz 1975). Instead, in
at least two ways, the forecasting of death
announcements assists in handling the most
practical of problems, namely how to get on
with life now that it has unfavorably
changed. If recipients of bad news can be-
come virtually incapacitated when presented
with the information either bluntly or in a
delayed manner, forecasting may prevent
such recipient loss of control (Glaser and
Strauss 1965:142-43, 149, 151-52). In
death-tellings, moreover, forecasting does
not just prevent “scenes”; it can help rela-
tives begin “‘to settle the patient’s affairs and
consider what life will be like after his
death” (Glaser and Strauss 1965:168).
Forecasting appears to aid realization and
the management of practical problems be-
cause it constitutes an orderly relationship
between the deliverer and the recipient of the
news through which they join in the giving
and receiving process. Forecasting, as a so-
cial psychological phenomenon involving
parties to a bad news event, is something that
the deliverer initiates to give an advance in-
dication of the bad news to come. The recipi-
ent helps consummate the forecast by de-
monstratively calculating the news in ad-
vance of its final presentation. The new real-
ity that is thereby proposed is accomplished
Anspach, Renee R. 1993. Deciding Who Lives:
Fateful Choices in the Intensive-Care Nursery.
Berkeley, CA: University of California.

Bartlett, Kay. 1988. “Market Analyst Goes to
Head of Class.” Wisconsin State Journal
(Madison, WI), January 3, Section 3, p. 1.

Becker, Howard S. 1958. ‘Problems of Inference
and Proof in Participant-Observation.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 23:652-60.

Beyene, Yewoubdar. 1992. “Medical Disclosure
and Refugees: Telling Bad News to Ethiopian
Patients.” Western Journal of Medicine 157:
328-32.

Boden, Deirdre and Harvey L. Molotch. 1994.
“The Compulsion of Proximity.” Pp. 257-86 in
NowHere: Space, Time, and Modernity, edited
by R. Friedland and D. Boden. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.

Buckman, Robert. 1984. “Breaking Bad News:
Why Is It Still So Difficult?” British Medical
Journal 288:1597-99.

. 1992. How to Break Bad News: A Guide
for Health Care Professionals. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.

Charmaz, Kathy. 1975. “The Coroner’s Strategies
for Announcing Death.” Urban Life 4:296-
316.
1995. “Ethnomethodology and Conversation
Analysis.” Pp. 1-30 in Situated Order: Studies
in the Social Organization of Talk and Embod-
ied Activity, edited by P. ten Have and G.
Psathas. Lanham, MD: International Institute
for Ethnomethodology and University Press of
America.

Cressey, Donald R. 1953. Other People’s Money:
A Study in the Social Psychology of Embezzle-
ment. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

Darling, Rosalyn Benjamin. 1979. Families
Against Society: A Study of Reactions to Chil-
dren with Birth Defects. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.

. 1983. “Parent-Professional Interaction:
The Roots of Misunderstanding.” Pp. 95-121
in The Family with a Handicapped Child, ed-
ited by M. Seligman. New York: Grune &
Stratton.

Darrough, William D. 1984. “In the Best Interest
of the Child: Negotiating Parental Cooperation
for Probation Placement.” Urban Life 13:123-
53.

Davis, Fred. 1963. Passage Through Crisis: Po-
lio Victims and Their Families. Indianapolis,
IN: Bobbs-Merrill.

Drew, Paul. 1984. ‘Speakers’ Reportings in Invi-
tation Sequences.” Pp. 152-64 in Structures of
Social Action, edited by J. M. Atkinson and J.
Heritage. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.

Edgar, Timothy. 1994. “Self-Disclosure Strate-
gies of the Stigmatized: Strategies and Out-
comes for the Revelation of Sexual Orienta-
tion.” Pp. 221-37 in Queer Words, Queer Im-
ages: Communication and the Construction of
Homosexuality, edited by R. J. Ringer. New
York: New York University Press.

Emerson, Robert M., ed. 1983. Contemporary
Field Research: A Collection of Readings.
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, Inc.

Evans, Daryl P. 1983. The Lives of Mentally Re-
tarded People. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Fallowfield, Lesley. 1991. Breast Cancer. Lon-
don, England: Tavistock/Routledge.

Garfinkel, Harold. 1963. “A Conception of, and
Experiments with, ‘Trust’ as a Condition of
Stable Concerted Actions.” Pp. 187-238 in
Motivation and Social Interaction, edited by O.
J. Harvey. New York: Ronald Press.

. 1967. Studies in Ethnomethodology.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Gill, Virginia Teas and Douglas W. Maynard.
1995. “On ‘Labeling’ in Actual Interaction:
Delivering and Receiving Diagnoses of Devel-
opmental Disabilities.” Social Problems 42:11-
37.

Glaser, Barney G. and Anselm L. Strauss. 1965.
Awareness of Dying. Chicago, IL: Aldine.

1967. The Discovery of Grounded
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research.
Chicago, IL: Aldine.

Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self
in Everyday Life. New York: Anchor Books.
Good, Mary-Jo Delveccio, Byron J. Good,
Cynthia Schaffer, and Stuart E. Lind. 1990.
“American Oncology and the Discourse on
Hope.” Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry

14:59-79.

Gordon, Deborah R. 1990. “Embodying Illness,
Embodying Cancer.” Culture, Medicine, and
Psychiatry 14:275-97.

“Hackl Case: Man Heard 3 Gunshots.” 1989.
Capital Times (Madison, WI), September 30,
pp. 21-22.

Heritage, John. 1984a. “A Change-of-State Token
and Aspects of its Sequential Placement.” Pp.
299-345 in Structures of Social Action: Stud-
ies in Conversation Analysis, edited by J. M.
Atkinson and J. Heritage. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

. 1984b. Garfinkel and Ethnomethodology.
Cambridge, England: Polity Press.

Hilbert, Richard A. 1984. “The Acultural Dimen-
sions of Chronic Pain: Flawed Reality Con-
struction and the Problem of Meaning.” Social
Problems 31:365-78.

Holland, Jimmie C., Natalie Geary, Anthony
Machini, and Susan Tross. 1987. “An Interna-
tional Survey of Physician Attitudes and Prac-
tice in Regard to Revealing the Diagnosis of
Cancer.” Cancer Investigation 5:151-54.

Holt, Elizabeth. 1993. “The Structure of Death
Announcements: Looking on the Bright Side of
Death.” Text 13:189-204.

Jacobs, Jerry. 1969. The Search for Help: A Study
of the Retarded Child in the Community. Wash-
ington, DC: University Press of America.

Jefferson, Gail. 1985. “On the Interactional Un-
packaging of a ‘Gloss.’” Language in Society
14:435-66.

Joas, Hans. 1985. G. H. Mead: A Contemporary
Re-Examination of His Thought. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Katz, Jack. 1983. “A Theory of Qualitative Meth-
odology: The Social System of Analytic Field-
work.” Pp, 127-48 in Contemporary Field Re-
search: A Collection of Readings, edited by R.
M. Emerson. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland
Press.

Leisner, Pat. 1989. “Father, Child Share Pain and
Tears Trying to Cope with Baby Mix-Up.”
South Bend Tribune (South Bend, IN), Novem-
ber 23.

Levine, John M., Lauren B. Resnick, and E. Tory
Higgens. 1993. “Social Foundations of Cogni-
tion.” Annual Review of Psychology 44: 585—
612.

Lind, Stuart E., Mary-Jo DelVecchio Good,
Steven Seidel, Thomas Csordas, and Byron J.
Good. 1989. “Telling the Diagnosis of Can-
cer.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 7:583-89.
Lindesmith, Alfred R. 1947. Opiate Addiction.

Bloomington, IN: Principia Press.

Lipton, Helene L. and Bonnie L. Svarstad. 1977.
“Sources of Variation in Clinicians’ Commu-
nication to Parents about Mental Retardation.”
American Journal of Mental Deficiency 82:
155-61.

Long, Susan O. and Bruce D. Long. 1982. “Cur-
able Cancers and Fatal Ulcers: Attitudes To-
ward Cancer in Japan.” Social Science and
Medicine 16:2101-08.

Lucas, Mike. 1989. “Wins, Losses No Longer Big
Deal for UNH Coach.” Capital Times (Madi-
son, WI), January 9, Section 2, p. 1.

Maguire, Peter, Susan Fairbairn, and Charles
Fletcher. 1986. “Consultation Skills of Young
Doctors.” British Medical Journal 292:1573-
78.

Maynard, Douglas W. 1989. “Notes on the De-
livery and Reception of Diagnostic News Re-
garding Mental Disabilities.” Pp. 54-67 in The
Interactional Order: New Directions in the
Study of Social Order, edited by D. T. Helm,
W. T. Anderson, A. J. Meehan, and A. W.
Rawls. New York: Irvington.

. 1991a. “Bearing Bad News in Clinical

Settings.” Pp. 143-72 in Progress in Commu-

nication Sciences, edited by B. Dervin. Nor-

wood, NJ: Ablex.

. 1991b. “Interaction and Asymmetry in

Clinical Discourse.” American Journal of So-

ciology 97:448-95.

. 1991c. “The Perspective-Display Series

and the Delivery and Receipt of Diagnostic

News.” Pp. 164-92 in Talk and Social Struc-

ture, edited by D. Boden and D. H. Zimmer-

man. Cambridge, England: Polity Press.

. 1992. “On Clinicians’ Co-Implicating

Recipients in the Delivery of Diagnostic

News.” Pp. 331-58 in Talk at Work: Interac-

tion in Institutional Settings, edited by P. Drew

and J. Heritage. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press.

. 1994. “Bad and Good News in Conversa-
tional Interaction: Preliminary Observations.”
Presented at the annual meeting of the Ameri-
can Sociological Association, August, Los An-
geles, CA.

McClenahen, Lochlan and John Lofland. 1976.
“Bearing Bad News: Tactics of the Deputy
U.S. Marshal.” Sociology of Work and Occu-
pations 3:251-72.

McDonald, Steven, Patti Ann McDonald, and E.
J. Kahn III. 1989. The Steven McDonald Story.
New York: Donald I. Fine, Inc.

McIntosh, Jim. 1977. Communication and Aware-
ness in a Cancer Ward. New York: Prodist.

Mead, George Herbert. 1934. Mind, Self, and So-
ciety. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.

Novack, Dennis, Robin Plume, Raymond L.
Smith, Herbert Ochitil, Gary R. Morrow, and
John M. Bennett. 1979. “Changes in Physi-
cians’ Attitudes Toward Telling the Cancer Pa-
tient.” Journal of the American Medical Asso-
ciation 241:897-900.

Oken, D. 1961. “What to Tell Cancer Patients: A
Study of Medical Attitudes.” Journal of the
American Medical Association 175:1120-28.

Pollner, Melvin. 1987. Mundane Reason: Reality
in Everyday and Sociological Discourse. Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Ponse, Barbara. 1976. “Secrecy in the Lesbian
World.” Urban Life 5:313-38.

Quill, Timothy E. 1991. “Bad News: Delivery,
Dialogue, and Dilemmas.” Archives of Internal
Medicine 151:463-68.

Quint, Jeanne C. 1965. “Institutionalized Prac-
tices of Information Control.” Psychiatry 2:
119-32.

Sacks, Harvey. 1972. “An Initial Investigation of
the Usability of Conversational Data for Doing
Sociology.” Pp. 31-74 in Studies in Social In-
teraction, edited by D. Sudnow. New York:
Free Press.

——. 1984. “On Doing ‘Being Ordinary.’ ” Pp.
413-29 in Structures of Social Action, edited
by J. M. Atkinson and J. Heritage. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

. 1992a. Lectures on Conversation. Vol. 1.

Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.

. 1992b. Lectures on Conversation. Vol. 2.
Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.

Schegloff, Emanuel A. 1988. “On an Actual Vir-
tual Servo-Mechanism for Guessing Bad News:
A Single Case Conjecture.” Social Problems
35:442-S7. .

. 1991. “Conversation Analysis and So-
cially Shared Cognition.” Pp. 150-171 in Per-
spectives on Socially Shared Cognition, edited
by L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, and S. D.
Teasley. Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association.

Schutz, Alfred. 1962. Collected Papers I: The
Problem of Social Reality. The Hague, The
Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.

Seale, Clive. 1991. “Communication and Aware-
ness about Death: A Study of a Random
Sample of Dying Patients.” Social Science and
Medicine 32:943-52.

Silverman, David. 1993. Interpreting Qualitative
Data: Methods for Analysing Talk, Text, and
Interaction. London, England: Sage.

Simmel, Georg. 1950. “The Secret Society.” Pp.
345-76 in The Sociology of Georg Simmel, ed-
ited by K. H. Wolff. New York: The Free
Press.

Singer, Stacey. 1988. “Death in an Instant: Teen
Said Gun Wasn’t Loaded.” Capital Times
(Madison, WI), September 7.

Sudnow, David. 1967. Passing On: The Social
Organization of Dying. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

Svarstad, Bonnie L. and Helene L. Lipton. 1977.
“Informing Parents about Mental Retardation:
A Study of Professional Communication and
Parent Acceptance.” Social Science and Medi-
cine 11:645-51.

Taylor, Kathryn M. 1988. “‘Telling Bad News’:
Physicians and the Disclosure of Undesirable
Information.” Sociology of Health and Illness
10:103-32.

Terasaki, Alene. 1976. “Pre-Announcement Se-
quences in Conversation.” Social Science
Working Paper #99, School of Social Sciences,
University of California, Irvine, CA.

Tesser, Abraham and Sidney Rosen. 1975. “The
Reluctance to Transmit Bad News.” Pp. 192-
232 in Advances in Experimental Social Psy-
chology, edited by L. Berkowitz. New York:
Academic Press.

Volosinov, V. N. 1973. Marxism and the Philoso-
phy of Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Vygotsky, Lev. 1986. Thought and Language.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

West, Candace and Richard M. Frankel. 1991.
“Miscommunication in Medicine.” Pp. 166-94
in “Miscommunication” and Problematic Talk,
edited by N. Coupland, H. Giles, and J. M.
Wiemann. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Zimmerman, Don H. and Melvin Pollner. 1970.
“The Everyday World as a Phenomenon.” Pp.
80-103 in Understanding Everyday Life: To-
ward the Reconstruction of Sociological
Knowledge, edited by J. D. Douglas. Chicago,
IL: Aldine.

Znaniecki, Florian. [1934] 1968. The Method of
Sociology. New York: Octagon.
