American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Mz studies of occupational mobility ne-
glect the everyday social interaction pro-
cesses by which individuals acquire jobs. The
vacancy competition approach (Sgrensen 1989),
for example, considers these processes unprob-
lematic (Halaby 1988). In contrast, microlevel
mobility theory argues that status gains reflect an
individual’s social resources — the individual’s
social networks and social ties. Individuals find
better jobs by contacting persons with superior
knowledge and influence. Typically, these con-
tact persons are not our close friends or relatives
but persons with whom the job seeker has only
weak social ties — ties characterized by infre-
quent contacts and lack of emotional closeness
(Marsden and Campbell 1984).

Both of these assumptions are based on Hei-
der’s (1958, chap. 7) balance theory of interper-
sonal attraction and its network implications.
According to this theory, strong social ties link
individuals who are similar to each other. The
more similar they are, the stronger the ties. Con-
versely, it is only through weak social ties that
individuals may connect to persons with differ-
ent characteristics. Applying this tlieory to occu-
pational status, it seems that only weak social
ties link a job seeker to persons with labor market
information and influence beyond the job seek-
er’s own. In this sense, weak ties are said to be

* Direct correspondence to Bernd Wegener, Institut
fiir Soziologie, Universitit Heidelberg, Sandgasse 9,
6900 Heidelberg, Federal Republic of Germany. This
study is part of the project “Social Relations in Oc-
cupational Mobility” of the Max Planck Institute for
Human Development and Education, Berlin. I appre-
ciate the suggestions and criticisms received from the
editor and several referees.
“strong” — they are “strong” in facilitating at-
tainment (Liu and Duff 1972; Granovetter 1973).

The central hypothesis of micromobility theo-
ry — that contacts with persons via weak ties
results in status gains — has been tested empiri-
cally. Results, however, have been inconclusive
and contradictory. Although some studies found
that weak ties provide mobility advantages
(Granovetter 1974; Friedkin 1980, 1982; Lin,
Vaughn, Ensel 1981; Lin, Ensel, Vaughn 1981;
Lin 1982; Lin and Dumin 1986; De Graaf and
Flap 1988), these results have not been replicat-
ed by others (Murray, Rankin, Magill 1981;
Murray and Poolman 1982; Bridges and Ville-
mez 1986; Marsden and Hurlbert 1988; Prei-
sendérfer and Voss 1988).

I attempt to resolve these contradictions using
new data. I argue that the inconclusive results of
previous studies may be due, in part, to the erro-
neous belief that the strength of social ties affects
all subgroups of job searchers similarly. While
this conjecture seems to follow directly from
Heider’s balance theory of small group behavior,
its application to real-world networks which af-
fect occupational mobility is unjustified.
as Newcomb’s (1968), and Homans’s (1974),
leave this question unanswered.

Consider the following situation. Let A and B
be two networks of strong ties. Heider’s theory
implies that a person from B must employ weak
social ties to contact a person in A, what
Granovetter (1973) calls “bridging ties.” By the
similarity assumption of balance theory, the per-
son in A is, by some standard, different from the
person in B. According to Lin’s “‘prestige princi-
ple,” individuals prefer to mingle with high sta-
tus rather than low status persons (Lin 1982, p.
133). Thus, the person in A is probably of higher
social rank than the person in B, and the status of
the two networks can be determined — network
A is “high” and network B is “low.” This is the
prototypical situation that Granovetter and others
have used to explain the potency of weak ties.
The job searcher in B, the lower status network,
must employ weak social ties to contact some-
one in network A, the higher status network.

These are very strong assumptions. Most real
social networks are somewhat heterogeneous,
containing some persons of high status and some
of lower status. Even if the two networks have
little or no overlap, most status hierarchies are
relatively complex, and there should be within-
network variation. Thus, a low status job search-
er in B may be able to contact someone of higher
standing within his or her own network, i.e., itmay
be effective for that job searcher to make use of
strong ties within the network. In other words, if
balance theory specifies similarity of persons very
broadly so that persons of quite different social
status are considered “similar” (and may belong
to the same network), then individuals will have
contacts with diverse network members through
strong ties.

In a heterogeneous network, weak ties matter
only for individuals near the upper end of the
network’s status continuum. For these persons,
weak ties offer a chance to contact someone of a
status outside the status range of their own net-
work. In this situation, additional information is
needed to predict the kind of social tie that will
benefit a specific job seeker — the status range of
the job seeker’s own network must be known. To
the extent that it covers much of the status con-
tinuum, gains by weak ties will be necessary only
for persons in its high ranking positions. All others
can contact persons within the network via strong
ties. Elaborating the “strength of weak ties” the-
ory in this way may account for the advancement
of some individuals through weak social ties and
the advancement of others through strong ties.
An empirical test of this assertion requires
modelling interactions between the status of jobs
held before a job change and strength of social
ties. The possibility of status/tie interactions is
only hinted at in previous studies (Ensel 1979;
Lin, Ensel, Vaughn 1981; Lin 1982; Wegener
1987). Most microlevel mobility research has
used samples biased towards high status respon-
dents, which according to the argument outlined,
would overestimate the effects of weak ties
(Granovetter 1974; Lin, Ensel, Vaughn 1981).
When less biased samples are drawn, no signifi-
cant linear effects are detected (Marsden and
Hurlbert 1988). However, with balanced sample
designs, both a negative effect of strength of so-
cial ties on advancement for high status job
searchers and a positive effect for job seekers of
low status should emerge, i.e., an interaction ef-
fect exists between tie strength and status of pri-
or job.

Two predictions have guided much of the em-
pirical work in microlevel mobility research: (1)
the status of the contact persons and the status of
the found jobs should be positively related, i.e., the
higher the status of the contact person, the higher
the status of the found job; (2) the strength of
social ties and the status of found jobs should be
negatively related, i.e., the stronger the tie, the
lower the status of the found job (Lin 1982;
Marsden and Hulbert 1988). Most previous stud-
ies have tested these predictions only on a bivari-
ate basis (Granovetter 1974; Lin, Ensel, Vaughn
1981; Lin 1982). Only a few have looked at both
effects simultaneously (e.g., Marsden and Hurl-
bert 1988). As Bridges and Villemez (1986) and
Marsden and Hurlbert (1988) emphasize, little is
known about whether these effects obtain when
other factors relevant to mobility are controlled.
This is especially true for background variables
like the job searcher’s education level and labor
force experience and father’s status.

In predicting the status of a job found through
informal contacts, therefore, the status of the
contact person and strength of ties will be predic-
tors, but additional variables that may affect mo-
bility outcomes must be controlled. The status of
the immediately preceding job and its interaction
with strength of ties must also be considered.
To model the impact of social resources on
changes in status from one job to the next, it is
necessary to include the status of the immediate-
ly preceding job as a control variable — preferably
with regard to complete occupational histories,
including all jobs held following a job change.”
Respondents were asked about all jobs that they
had held for at least six months without interrup-
tion. The criterion for a job shift was leaving a
firm, but intrafirm changes of occupational posi-
tions were also registered.

A total of 1,474 job spells were recorded. Each
spell either had ended because the respondent
left the firm or continued up to the time of inter-
view. Job attributes include occupation before
and after any job shift and the duration of each
job (coded in months). Both of these characteris-
tics were also assessed for occupational move-
ment within a firm. Occupations were classified
using the International Standard Classification
of Occupations (ISCO) issued by the Interna-
tional Labor Office (1969).

Job Status. Most social resource studies use
socioeconomic index scales like Duncan’s SEI
scores or the Hodge-Siegel-Rossi NORC scale.
In studies of German populations, equivalent
measures like the international Treiman (1977)
prestige scale have been used (Habich 1984; De
Graaf and Flap 1988). These measures, howev-
er, neglect the theoretical context of micromo-
bility. Taking social resources — networks or
social ties — into account, is different from tra-
ditional status attainment research because pro-
cesses of social closure must receive explicit at-
tention. In contrast to the status attainment para-
digm, which implies unrestricted labor markets
as an ideal (Horan 1978), micromobility research
focuses on structures that may obstruct free
movement of supply. Instead of universalistic
achievement and openness, particularism and
closure govern these processes (Weber 1972, p.
23). If certain types of social ties promote mo-
bility, then access to these beneficial relations is
controlled by networks and interchange barriers,
i.e., the opportunities for moves are distributed
unevenly.

These structural constraints must be consid-
ered when choosing a metric for mapping upward
or downward social moves. Results may differ
depending on whether a scale is modelled on
processes of closure or is an aggregation of eco-
nomic status attributes. The latter reflects objec-
tive attributes of occupational positions per se
rather than the opportunities for advancement in
society. Any association between mobility and
social resources will be tighter if differential job
opportunities are taken into account when
choosing the scale for measuring moves.

Occupational prestige in this study was calcu-
lated using the Magnitude Prestige Scale (MPS)
(Wegener 1985). Sgrensen’s (1979; 1989) op-
portunity model provides the rationale for this
scale. Sgrensen’s SAS metric uses the distribu-
tion of jobs over different job levels, disregarding
other job characteristics. These frequencies are
then transformed using an exponential distribution
function. The resulting scale values express the
opportunities for vacancies to be filled on a spe-
cific level or any higher level. This metric repre-
sents the prestige distribution of occupational
positions for Germany (Wegener 1985; 1988).
Utilizing magnitude estimation methods (We-
gener 1982; 1983), I found that the respondents
in several national samples rated the prestige of
occupations very much like Sgrensen’s scale,
Proponents of the “strength of weak social ties”
theory usually conceptualize social ties as a di-
chotomy; they are either weak or strong. Howev-
er, this conceptualization is problematic because
in heterogeneous networks, the strength of social
ties may be continuous and multidimensional.
Granovetter (1973, p. 1361), for instance, con-
jectured that tie strength is a combination of
amount of time, emotional intensity, intimacy,
and reciprocal services. Using American and
German data on “three best friends,” Marsden
and Campbell (1984) tried to capture these di-
mensions. However, studying ties to “closest
friends” will not reveal the complexity of social
ties in general, nor would such data provide in-
formation on the features of ties that are relevant
for the mobility process.

Previous studies have assessed tie strength us-
ing a two-step process. Respondents are first
asked whether they found their job through for-
mal methods (e.g., written or personal applica-
tions, newspaper ads, or labor exchange agencies)
or through informal search strategies (e.g., con-
tacting a third person or having heard of a vacan-
cy from another person). If the respondent’s job
search involved one or more contact persons, a
description of these persons is obtained by hav-
ing respondents choose the “type” of person from
a list of alternatives (e.g., relatives, friends, ac-
quaintances, neighbors, colleagues). “Relatives”
and “friends” represent strong ties, whereas “ac-
quaintances,” “neighbors” and “colleagues” are
considered weak ties (Granovetter 1974; Murray
et al. 1981; Lin, Ensel, Vaughn 1981; Lin and
Dumin 1986; Marsden and Hurlbert 1988). The
second step consists of obtaining the occupation
of the contacted person(s) at the time of contact.
Using this information, the relationship between
tie strength, the contact’s occupational prestige,
and prestige of the job the respondent found can
be established.

One problem with this procedure is that social
relations with relatives or friends are not always
close or warm, nor are relations with acquaintan-
ces or colleagues always distant. Furthermore,
the “type” of person with whom a relationship
exists does not tell us the focus of that relation-
ship (Verbrugge 1977; Feld 1981; Fischer 1982a,
1982b; Campbell, Marsden, Hurlbert 1986; We-
gener 1987). Finally, social relationships vary
with respect to duration, interaction frequency,
and motives, none of which is considered when
classifying social ties according to kinship bonds.

To cope with this ambiguity, I use multiple
indicators to identify social ties and to measure
tie strength. Besides social demographic de-
scriptions of the contact persons (occupation,
education, age, and sex), the indicators are: (1) A
classification of contact persons into “types”: fa-
ther, mother, sibling, spouse, other relative, friend,
superior or teacher, colleague of father or moth-
er, neighbor, colleague at an earlier work place,
someone from vocational training, someone from
respondent’s club, close acquaintance, distant
acquaintance, accidental acquaintance. This
classification and all subsequent information re-
fer to the contact person who was “most impor-
tant” for getting the job. If more than one person
was named, the “most important” person was
determined. (2) A ten-point social distance scale
ranging from “distant” to “very close”; respon-
dents were asked how close they felt to the con-
tact person at the time they were looking for the
job. (3) Length of time the respondent had known
the contact person at the time of contact (in
weeks). (4) Frequency of contact with the contact
person, ranging from “daily” to “less than once a
year” (six categories). (5) A list of seven items
describing activities the respondent did or could
imagine doing with the contact person (adapted
from Fischer 1982a). (6) Interest on the part of
the contact person in the respondent getting the
job; a ten-point rating scale from “not at all in-
terested” to “very interested.”

The Structure of Social Ties. Analysis is re-
stricted to individuals who found their jobs
through contact persons — 473 of the 1,474 job
spells (32 percent). This percentage is low in
comparison to most other studies. For example,
Granovetter (1974) reported 56 percent of jobs
were mediated by contacts, Corcoran, Datcher,
and Duncan (1980), 50 percent, Lin, Ensel,
Vaughn (1981), 59 percent, and Marsden and
Hurlbert (1988), 64 percent. German results are
markedly lower, ranging from 40 percent to 44
percent (Habich 1984, 1987; Noll 1985; De Graaf
and Flap 1988). Differences between the United
States and West Germany may reflect structural
differences in the occupational systems of the
two countries. The German system is more
strongly influenced by regulatory public agen-
cies (Allmendinger 1989), which reduce the op-
portunities for informal and deliberate job search.

Relevant attributes of social ties were subject-
ed to a factor analysis for those respondents who
reported social relationships with a contact per-
son. Frequency of contact, duration of the rela-
tionship, social distance, motivation of the con-
tact person in helping the respondent get the job,
and the activities that characterized the relation-
ship produced a solution with three factors. The
VARIMAX rotated factor matrix is shown in
Table 12

The first factor taps trust and intimacy; the
Fischer (1982a) items of “mutual visits,” “look
after his or her house when gone,” and “lending
money” are especially high, as are high frequen-
cy of contact, long duration of relationship, and
social closeness. This factor clearly expresses an
intimacy focus (Feld 1981). The second factor is
characterized by activities that are typical for a
formal relationship: low motivation of the con-
tact person to help, superficial conversations, so-
cial distance, and “business talk.” This factor
represents a formal focus of social ties. The third
factor is characterized by leisure activities: “go-
ing to restaurants and bars together” and “talking

3 An oblique rotation displayed slight associations
between factors, but the orthogonal solution was
chosen to better isolate the effects of the factors on
mobility outcomes.
about personal problems” are the primary vari-
ables marking this factor. This, then, is the /eisure
focus of social ties.

The factor analysis demonstrates that social
ties between job seekers and contact persons ex-
hibit a complex structure rather than the weak/
strong dichotomy that is typically used in micro-
mobility research. Furthermore, this three-di-
mensional structure demonstrates that the com-
mon practice of inferring strength of ties from
kinship bonds leads to imprecise results. Table 2
presents the mean factor scores for each of the
three tie dimensions for types of contact persons.
While the means of the intimacy dimension dis-
tribute quite plausibly over the types of contact
persons, patterns for the other two dimensions
are unclear. It would be difficult to decide which
dimension is relevant for a particular type of
contact person. Furthermore, there is substantial
variation in the individual values for each di-
mension as can be seen from the large coeffi-
cients of variation. A cluster analysis of the types
of contact persons within the coordinates of the
three dimensions reveals that the person types
can be grouped into four clusters, but that varia-
tion within clusters over the three dimensions is
substantial.*

It is misleading, therefore, to classify strength
of social ties according to the types of persons
with whom ties are maintained. It is also difficult
to determine for which dimension a particular tie
should be considered weak or strong; ties are
weak or strong depending on which of the three
dimensions is considered.
contacts are considered; second, only job shifts
are taken into account, i.e., all job spells that
were not terminated by the time of the interview
are excluded. The factors responsible for choos-
ing job search strategies as well as for changing
one’s occupational position are likely to be de-
terminants of the mobility processes under study
(Corcoran et al. 1980; Noll 1985; Habich 1987).

I use a two-step correction procedure to deal
with this problem (Berk and Ray 1982; Berk
1983). This procedure determines the latent
probabilities of individuals being excluded from
the sample and then includes these probabilities
as an instrumental variable. The exclusion prob-
ability in this case is the probability that an indi-
vidual used no contacts and did not experience a
job change. Little is known about what determines
the use of contacts as compared to other job search
methods. Work by Ensel (1979), Corcoran et al.
(1980), Habich (1987), and Noll (1985), howev-
er, suggests that this choice depends on status:
Low status individuals are more likely than high
status individuals to use contact persons. Thus, I
used educational level and the prestige of the
immediately preceding job to predict exclusion
probabilities. There also seem to be sex differ-
ences in contact behavior: Ensel (1979, pp. 167-
73) reported that women employ contact persons
less often than men, especially for first jobs. Fur-
thermore, the probability of utilizing a contact
will likely decrease with growing labor force ex-
perience (Corcoran et al. 1980; Marsden and
Hurlbert 1988). This should be especially true
for Germany, where career trajectories are more
rigidly shaped by institutional settings than in the
United States (Allmendinger 1989).

Finally, internal locus-of-control expectations
(Phares 1976) are likely to exert a positive effect
on the decision to not use contacts. Individuals
with “internal” expectations of control are un-
likely to rely on others when planning a career,
and use social contacts and informal search
methods to a lesser extent than individuals with
“external” control expectations. A group of items
from the German General Social Survey project
(Allgemeine Bevélkerungsumfrage der Sozial-
wissenschaften 1984) measures the extent of in-
ternal control. Respondents were asked to rate
the extent to which they thought that “social ties,”
“having protegees,” “achievement,” “intelli-
gence,” “education,” “social origin,” etc. were
helpful for social advancement. Eight items were
factor analyzed, yielding an acceptable one-di-
mensional solution.® “Intelligence,” “achieve-
ment,” and “education” load highest on that fac-
tor and “having protegees” loads lowest. Large
factor scores indicate a disposition toward inter-
nal control expectations.

Inchoosing predictors of job shift probabilities,
I relied on the accumulated knowledge from life
history studies about the factors that determine
job shifts during a career (e.g., Sdrensen and Tuma
1981; Halaby 1982; Tuma 1985; Carroll and
Mayer 1986; Allmendinger 1989). According to
these studies, labor force experience and high
status reduce the likelihood of persons to change
jobs; high education increases that probability.
Women seem to change jobs more often than
men, and women have a higher propensity to
search for a job with another employer (Halaby
1988). Thus, an equation that estimates exclusion

9 66,
probabilities should show positive effects for
work experience and status, and negative effects
for education and for women.

Probit regression estimates predicting the ex-
clusion probabilities are significant for all vari-
ables except prestige of the previous job (Table
3). While some of the coefficients conform to
our expectations, others do not. In particular, the
education and sex effects are positive. This may
be due, in part, to the small number of predictors
included in the model.’ Also, the selection equa-
tion considers a combined event — it determines
the probabilities of not using contacts and not
changing jobs. Previous social resource and life
course research has addressed only one of these
events. Therefore, there is no “theory of selec-
tion” (Berk 1983, p. 396); previous research does
not indicate under what circumstances people
exhibit both a reluctance to use informal contacts
in a job search and a low propensity for changing
jobs.

In spite of this ambivalence, an R’ analog of .68
indicates that the model fits the data well (Pin-
dyck and Rubinfeld 1976, p. 312). Hence, I use
this model to determine the probability of ex-
cluding an individual from the sample — these
probabilities are included as an instrumental
variable in the structural models for predicting
job prestige.

Internal control expectation, background vari-
ables, and labor force experience are control
variables. Background variables include respon-
dent’s level of education (coded into the five as-
cending graduation levels of the German school
system) and father’s occupation when respon-
dent was age 15. Labor force experience is the
time elapsed since the beginning of the first job
spell.
Table 4 presents the bivariate effects of the
resource variables on prestige.’ These coeffi-
cients replicate the findings of standard microlevel
mobility studies (e.g., Lin, Ensel, Vaughn 1981,
p. 398; Lin 1982, pp. 141-2). The prestige of the
contact person has a strong positive effect on
prestige of the found job and the intimacy di-
mension has a significant negative effect. The
other two dimensions of social ties are not signif-
icant. This is the type of analysis on which the
theory of weak social ties rests.

The results change when the influence of the
four resource variables is considered simulta-
neously. Table 5 presents coefficients from ordi-
nary least squares regressions for four models. In
Model A the effect of the contact person’s pres-
tige persists, but the foci of social ties are not
significant. The coefficient for the intimacy tie
focus, in particular, drops to -1.418 with t = -.92.
This model, which includes only social resource
variables, explains almost 35 percent of the vari-
ation in job prestige, but does not confirm the
central hypothesis of the “strength of weak ties”
theory, i.e., the social tie dimensions in informal
job searches do not seem to influence the pres-
tige of job outcomes.

Model A and the bivariate relations of Table 4
predict absolute prestige values, not differences
in prestige between prior job and found job. The
prestige of the prior job must be included in the
equation. Model B, which includes this variable,
shows no change, but the prior prestige variable

8 The number of cases is limited to 215 in each
equation because this is the sample size for the com-
plete models that follow. To safeguard against any
systematic distortion through missing data, the distri-
butions of all variables from the full and the reduced
samples were compared. There were no significant
differences in means and standard deviations.
proves to be a highly significant predictor and
the R? value is boosted to .65. Thus, even consid-
ering the prestige of the previous job, the social
tie foci have no significant influence.

In Model C, control variables are introduced:
the exclusion probabilities, internal control ex-
pectation, education, father’s prestige, and labor
force experience (in linear and quadratic form).
Only education is related positively to prestige
— better-educated people tend to gain by job
shifts. When looking at prestige differences, in-
creased labor force experience (or age) should be
accompanied by diminishing gains. According-
ly, the coefficient for labor force experience is
negative (though not significant).

The exclusion probabilities have no signifi-
cant effect on prestige, i.e., the sample does not
suffer from positive selectivity. Also, comparing
Model C with models A and B indicates that the
coefficients or levels of significance are not af-
fected to any notable degree. However, a t-value
of 1.88 is high. Contacting persons for jobs in the
first place is not especially profitable (this is also
Preisendérfer and Voss’s [1988] conclusion) and
this is true as well for persons with high job shift
probabilities. These effects cannot be distin-
guished in the present model, however, because
the exclusion criterion is a combined event.

Because the social ties characteristics still are
not statistically significant, it must be concluded
that the “strength of weak ties” theory is empiri-
cally unjustified. Marsden and Hurlbert (1988),
on the basis of their data, reach the same conclu-
sion. Going beyond bivariate relationships and
introducing control variables, the effects of so-
cial resources are not significant except for the
contact person’s prestige. Does micromobility
research rest on a false theorem?

According to my theoretical argument, it is
possible that the social tie dimensions do not af-
fect all individuals to the same extent. To test
whether the influence of social ties depends on
the occupational prestige of the preceding job,
Model D was estimated including the three inter-
action terms between foci of social ties and
prestige of prior jobs. The intimacy focus and the
interaction term containing the intimacy focus
now have significant effects on prestige, but their
signs differ. Whereas individuals with a low
prestige prior job profit from intercession via
strong intimate ties, individuals with high prior
prestige profit most from weak intimate ties.° In
addition, the interaction between formal tie fo-
cus and prior job prestige is significant and posi-
tive. Persons in low prestige positions do not
benefit from a formal relationship with a contact
person, whereas persons starting in a high pres-
tige job do benefit. Model D, then, indicates a
nonlinear influence of social ties on job mobility,
but this influence is restricted to the intimacy and
formality foci and depends on the prestige of
prior jobs.

Is the ordinary least squares approach used in
this analysis appropriate? First, the inclusion of
the interaction terms does not create problems of
collinearity. Collinearity diagnostics, following
Belsley, Kuh, and Welsch (1980), give no indi-
cation of collinearity. Second, close examination
of residuals is called for when dealing with job
spells and possible multiple job shifts. However,
the vast majority of subjects (87 percent) experi-
enced only one job shift involving informal search
methods, making correlated error terms unlikely'°
and a test for serial correlations was not signifi-
cant. It is still possible, however, that standard
model assumptions are not met, especially that
error variances are not homoscedastic. Therefore,
tests for heteroscedasticity were applied using
both the Goldfeld-Quandt test (Goldfeld and
Quandt 1965) and the Park-Glejser test (Park
1966; Glejser 1969). Both methods yielded sig-
nificant results, i.e., the null hypothesis of ho-
moscedasticity could be rejected. Residual diag-
nostics also indicated that heteroscedasticity is
caused primarily by the prior job prestige pre-
dictor. Assuming that the error variances increase
systematically with prior Prestige according to
e= aX, where X,i is the prior prestige variable, a
weighted least squares regression was performed.
In this case, the appropriate weighting scheme
for deflating variables is X," =K/X, )? (Hanushek
and Jackson 1977). This procedure leaves the
coefficient estimates relatively unaffected, but
increases the efficiency of estimation. However,
a consequent increase of standard errors was de-
tected only for the interaction of prior prestige
with the formal tie focus. Correcting for het-
eroscedasticity, this interaction term ceases to be
significant. Therefore, while the t-values of all
other variables are not affected by the weighting
process, I assume that the interaction effect with
the formal tie focus is insignificant.

The analysis shows effects of social tie foci
only when interaction terms are introduced. For
subgroups of the population, namely for individ-

10 Job shift rates in Germany are far lower than in
the United States. For the cohort born in 1930, for
instance, Allmendinger (1989) reports an average
number of job spells in the total work history of 3.5
for Germany and 7.5 for the United States.
I offer a critique of common research practices in
microlevel mobility research. Two problems were
identified and suggestions were made on how
these problems can be dealt with. First, tie
strength, the central independent variable under-
lying Heider’s (1958) and Granovetter’s (1973)
“strength of weak ties” theory, was replaced by
variables describing the multidimensional struc-
ture of social ties. Social relations with others are
not just “weak” or “strong,” they differ on a broad
range of qualities (Feld 1981). More research is
needed to confirm that the foci of intimacy, for-
mality, and leisure are valid dimensions of social
ties. It is unlikely that these dimensions are an
exhaustive description of social ties.

Second, statistical interaction effects were in-
troduced to deal with conceptual problems of
micromobility research. Considering only linear
relationships assumes that tie strength affects the
mobility of all individuals in the same way. In-
cluding interaction effects between tie dimen-
sions and prestige of prior job indicates that job
shifters with initial low prestige jobs advance by
using strong intimate ties, whereas those with
high prestige prior jobs advance by employing
weak intimate ties. Clearly, the “strength of weak
ties” theory is valid only for individuals in high
social strata. Granovetter’s (1974) original study,
on which the theory rests, used a sample of pro-
fessionals and managers, so that others using less
skewed samples were unable to replicate his re-
sults (e.g., Marsden and Hurlbert 1988).

Why do individuals with low occupational
prestige benefit from strong social ties? I suggest
that most networks are heterogeneous, and that
job searchers of relatively low social standing
can contact persons of higher prestige within their
own network. These job searchers are able to ex-
ploit strong intimate ties with the contact persons.
For individuals who occupy high prestige posi-
tions in a network, this possibility is ruled out
because they must reach beyond the bounds of
their network to contact persons of even higher
prestige. According to balance theory, this can
only be done by employing weak intimate ties.
Thus, in heterogeneous networks, the “strength
of weak ties” depends on an individual’s prior
Allgemeine Bevélkerungsumfrage der Sozialwissen-
schaften (ALLBUS) [German General Social Sur-
vey]. 1984. ZA # 1340 [MRDF]. Mannheim: Zen-
trum fiir Umfragen, Methoden und Analysen [pro-
ducer]. Cologne: Zentralarchiv fiir empirische So-
zialforschung [distributor].

Allmendinger, Jutta. 1989. Career Mobility Dynam-
ics. A Comparative Analysis of the United States,
Norway, and West Germany. Stuttgart: Clett-Kot-
ta. .

Belsley, David A., Edwin Kuh, and Roy E. Welsch.
1980. Regression Diagnostics. New York: Wiley.

Berk, Richard A. 1983. “An Introduction to Sample
Selection Bias in Sociological Data.” American
Sociological Review 48:386-98.

Berk, Richard A. and Subhash C. Ray. 1982. “Selec-
tion Bias in Sociological Data.” Social Science
Research 11:352-98.

Blossfeld, Hans-Peter. 1986. “Career Opportunities
in the Federal Republic of Germany: A Dynamic
Approach to the Study of Life-Course, Cohort, and
Period Effects.” European Sociological Review
2:208-25.

Bridges, William P., and Wayne J. Villemez. 1986.
“Informal Hiring and Income in the Labor Market.”
American Sociological Review 51:574-82.

Campbell, Karen E., Peter V. Marsden, and Jeanne S.
Hurlbert. 1986. “Social Resources and Socioeco-
nomic Status.” Social Networks 8:97-117.

Carroll, Glenn R. and Karl Ulrich Mayer. 1986. “Job-
Shift Patterns in the Federal Republic of Germany:
The Effects of Social Class, Industrial Sector, and
Organizational Size.” American Sociological Re-
view 51:323-41.

Corcoran, Mary, Lina Datcher, and Greg J. Duncan.
1980. “Information and Influence in the Labor
Market.” Pp. 1-37 in Five Thousand American
Families. Patterns of Economic Progress, vol. 8,
edited by Greg J. Duncan and James N. Morgan.
Michigan: Institute for Social Research, Universi-
ty of Michigan.

De Graaf, Nan Dirk, and Hendrik D. Flap. 1988.
“With a Little Help from My Friends’: Social
Capital as an Explanation of Occupational Status
and Income in the Netherlands, the United States
and West Germany.” Social Forces 67:452-72.
. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts
and Careers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Habich, Roland. 1984. “Berufliche Plazierung” [Oc-
cupational Placement]. Pp. 343-65 in Lebensqua-
litét in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland, edited by
Wolfgang Glatzer and Wolfgang Zapf. Frankfurt/
M.: Campus.

. 1987. “Wege der Stellenfindung und be-
tufliche Plazierung” [Job Search and Occupational
Placement]. Pp. 143-73 in Arbeitsmarktbewegung
als sozialer ProzeB, edited by Axel Deek, Joachim
Fischer, and Ursula Schumm-Garling. Paderborn:
Arbeitskreis Sozialwissenschaftliche Arbeitsmarkt-
forschung.

Halaby, Charles N. 1982. “Job-Shift Differences be-
tween Men and Women in the Workplace.” Social
Science Research 11:1-29.

. 1988. “Action and Information in the Job
Mobility Process: The Search Decision.” American
Sociological Review 53:9-25.

Hanushek, Erica A. and John E. Jackson. 1977. Sta-
tistical Methods for Social Scientists. New York:
Academic Press.

Heider, Fritz. 1958. The Psychology of Interpersonal
Relations. New York: Wiley.

Homans, George C. 1974. Social Behavior: Its Ele-
mentary Forms (2nd ed.). New York: Harcourt,
Brace & World.

Horan, Patrick M. 1978. “Is Status Attainment Re-
search Atheoretical?” American Sociological Re-
view 43:534-41.

International Labor Office. 1969. International Stan-
dard Classification of Occupations. Geneva: In-
ternational Labor Office.

Lin, Nan. 1982. “Social Resources and Instrumental
Action.” Pp. 131-45 in Social Structure and Net-
work Analysis, edited by Nan Lin and Peter V.
Marsden. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Lin, Nan, John C. Vaughn, and Walter Ensel. 1981.
“Social Resources and Occupational Status At-
tainment.” Social Forces 59:1163-81.

Lin, Nan, Walter Ensel, and John C. Vaughn. 1981.
“Social Resources and Strength of Ties: Structural
Factors in Occupational Status Attainment.”
American Sociological Review 46:393-405.

Lin, Nan, and Mary Dumin. 1986. “Access to Occu-
pations Through Social Ties.” Social Networks
8:365-85.

Liu, William T. and Robert W. Duff. 1972. “The
Strength in Weak Ties.” Public Opinion Quarterly
36:361-6.

Marsden, Peter V. and Karen E. Campbell. 1984.
“Measuring Tie Strength.” Social Forces 63:482-
501.

Marsden, Peter V. and Jeanne S. Hurlbert. 1988. “So-
cial Resources and Mobility Outcomes: A Replica-
tion and Extension.” Social Forces 66:1038-59.

Murray, Stephen O. and Robert C. Poolman. 1982.
“Strong Ties and Scientific Literature.” Social
Networks 4:225-32.

Murray, Stephen O., Joseph H. Rankin, and Dennis
W. Magill. 1981. “Strong Ties and Job Informa-
tion.” Sociology of Work and Occupations 8:119-36.

Newcomb, Theodore M. 1968. “Interpersonal Bal-
ance.” Pp. 28-51 in Theories of Cognitive Consis-
tency: A Sourcebook, edited by R. P. Abelson.
Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.

Noll, Heinz H. 1985. “Arbeitsplatzsuche und Stellen-
findung” [Job Search and Job Finding]. Pp. 275-
303 in Mobilitdtsprozesse auf dem Arbeitsmarkt,
edited by Helmut Knepel and Reinhard Hujer.
Frankfurt/M.: Campus.

Park, Rolla E. 1966. “Estimation with Heteroscedas-
tic Error Terms.” Econometrica 34:888.

Phares, E. Jerry. 1976. Locus of Control in Personal-
ity. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.

Pindyck, Robert S. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1976.
Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Preisendérfer, Peter and Thomas Voss. 1988. “Ar-
beitsmarkt und soziale Netzwerke” [Labor Market
and Social Networks]. Soziale Welt 39:104-19.

Sgrensen, Aage B. 1979. “A Model and a Metric for
the Intragenerational Status Attainment Process.”
American Journal of Sociology 85:361-84.

. 1989. “Processes of Allocation to Open
and Closed Positions in Social Structure.” Pp. 256-
87 in Sociological Theories in Progress. New For-
mulations, edited by Joseph Berger, Morris Zeldith,
and Bo Anderson. London: Sage.

Sgrensen, Aage B. and Nancy B. Tuma. 1981. “Labor
Market Structures and Job Mobility.” Research in
Social Stratification and Mobility 1:67-94.

Treiman, Donald J. 1977. Occupational Prestige in
Comparative Perspective. New York: Academic
Press.

Tuma, Nancy B. 1985. “Effects of Labor Market
Structure on Job-Shift Patterns.” Pp. 327-63 in
Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data, ed-
ited by James J. Heckman and Bernard Singer.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Verbrugge, Lois M. 1977. “The Structure of Adult
Friendship Choices.” Social Forces 56:576-97.

Weber, Max. 1972. Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft
[Economy and Society] (Sth ed.). Tiibingen: Sie-
beck-Mohr.

Wegener, Bernd (ed.). 1982. Social Attitudes and
Psychophysical Measurement. Hillsdale, NJ: Erl-
baum.
12:31-75.

. 1985. “Gibt es Sozialprestige?” [Is Social
Prestige Real?]. Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie 14:209-35.

. 1987. “Vom Nutzen entfernter Bekann-
ter” [Benefitting From Persons We Barely Know].
K6lner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie und Sozialpsy-
chologie 39:278-301.

. 1988. Kritik des Prestiges [Critique of
Prestige]. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.

Wegener, Bernd and Nan Dirk De Graaf. 1990. “The
Reliability of Retrospective Survey Data on Job
Careers.” Unpublished manuscript, Max Planck
Institute for Human Development and Education,
Berlin.

Wiedenbeck, Michael. 1988. “Stichprobenplan und -
realisierung fiir das Projekt ‘Soziale Beziehungen
im ProzeB der Stellenfindung’” [Sample Design
and Realization For the Study ‘Social Relations in
Occupational Mobility’]. ZUMA Technical Report
88/12, Mannheim.
