American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
HE problem of relating attributes or di-

mensions of a social system to the ter-

ritory which that social system occu-
pies is a significant one whether human
ecology is defined broadly as embracing the
total exchange relationship between man and
his environment, or in its narrowest sense
as the study of the areal distribution of
social characteristics in human communities.
One dimension that can be treated profitably
in the latter sense concerns the ecological
distribution of social status within a given
community setting.

Persons of similar status, by implication,
engage in roughly similar behavior patterns
which in turn are consistent with and to a
large degree dependent upon their parallel
life styles (and/or chances). This pattern
manifests itself in many diverse settings,
only one of which is residential behavior.

*The data presented here are also utilized in
Hoiberg’s Masters Thesis (Hoiberg, 1969).
Persons of similar status, according to this
argument, tend to select residences near one
another in physical space which results in
a spatial clustering of places of residence by
those of similar social rank (Hawley and
Duncan, 1957).

Further, these similarities in residential
selection patterns augmented by an attendant
gross similarity in possessions will tend to
become symbolically characteristic of the
status levels in which they occur. Therefore,
residential areas will tend to have symbolic
meanings which are associated with the other
status characteristics of their inhabitants.
In this way, status characteristics can be
associated with residential areas even though
particular residents may deviate from what
is characteristic of any given area.

With the exception of the unlikely case
where a given area is completely homogene-
ous, there will tend to be some local varia-
tion in the status levels of a dwelling area.
This raises the possibility that there will
exist a relatively continuous variation in
both status composition and symbolic reputa-
tion as one moves across a residential area.
In this way, continuous variation in the
status of dwelling areas can occur without
violating the principle of residential cluster-
ing by status as outlined above.

One striking characteristic of both theo-
retical and empirical approaches to the re-
lationship has been the persistent tendency
to deal with space or territory in terms of
bounded units. This tendency has produced
a number of problems—problems of unit
size, boundary location, questions of internal
homogeneity (Myers, 1953) and compara-
bility between units, and questions of the
appropriateness of a given boundary system
for the study of different sets of variables.
Cartwright (1969), in a recent review of
the current state of ecology, further points
out that bounded units lack flexibility; if a
particular boundary system is held constant,
it may become obsolete and the units lose
their original homogeneity, while if the boun-
daries are adjusted to community changes,
the comparability of units over time is de-
stroyed (Kitagawa and Taeuber, 1963).
Finally, the construction of a system of
bounded units almost always involves some
kind of trade-off if more than a single cri-
terion is employed. Units cannot generally be
uniform in both area and population. In-
ternal homogeneity with respect to one varia-
ble must often be sacrificed to homogeneity
in another. These difficulties seem to arise
from two major sources: the attempt to com-
prehend a multiplicity of variables by means
of a single boundary system, and the tend-
ency for bounded units to represent changes
as occurring at arbitrary boundary lines when
in fact they may have taken place elsewhere
or be continuous across the entire territory.
It follows that these difficulties should be
avoidable by methods which relate one social
dimension to the territory at a time, and
which relate this directly, without the inter-
vention of bounded territorial units.

The isoline map (for example, see Figure
1), in which lines are drawn connecting loca-
tions at which equal values occur within
the range of a variable being related to the
territory, suggests itself as a technique which
meets the foregoing requirements. Such a
map not only provides a visual image of the
way in which a variable is distributed across
the territory, but is also a mathematical con-
struction from which it should be possible
to derive measures of those variables which
have been systematically entered into it.

The essential formal difference between
those approaches which relate other variables
to territory by means of bounded units and
those which make use of isolines lies in the
level of measurement employed on the ter-
ritorial side of the relationship. When the
territorial factor is treated as a set of
bounded units, it becomes, in effect, a set
of nominal categories, which makes it neces-
sary to aggregate measures of whatever vari-
able is being related to the territory within
these units. In the isoline map, on the other
hand, the territorial factor is expressed in
terms of a ratio scale, which does not ag-
gregate locations but retains their specific
spatial identities and interrelationships. This
difference has a number of implications.

First, if observations are to be aggregated
within bounded units, their specific spatial
relationships are lost, and only complete
enumerations or random samples within such
units can be adequately representative of
them, The observations on which an isoline
map is based are necessarily representative
of the points at which they are taken, and
since their interrelationships are not lost,
the principle that each element in the uni-
verse must have a known probability of in-
clusion in the sample is not violated by de-
partures from randomness in their selection.

Second, the level of measurement adopted
for the territorial factor influences the selec-
tion of appropriate inductive statistics in
investigating relationships between this and
other variables. If the territory is represented
by a set of nominal units, the choice of tech-
niques will be limited by this fact, while if
ratio-scale measurement of the territory is
retained, limitations on the strategies availa-
ble for investigating relationships between
the territory and a social variable will be due
to the level of measurement obtained for the
social variable.

Third, the bounded unit approach focuses
upon representing the state of a variable
within a given area as represented by a sum-
marizing measure, while the isopleth ap-
proach assumes that the differences between
Ficure 1. Isorine Map
indices are generally called isopleths, al-
though some authors use the latter term for
both types of lines. The distinction is based
upon the principle that a person standing on
a point corresponding to the 50-foot interval
on a land contour map can assume that the
ground under his feet has an elevation of 50
feet, while the person standing on a point
corresponding, for example, to the 50% iso-
pleth on a map of percent of land under
cultivation cannot assume that 50% of the
ground under his feet will be under cultiva-
tion; he can, however, expect to be located
in an area in which it is usual for half the
land to be cultivated. Similarly, of course,
the sharp transition shown on a map of per-
cent of land under cultivation where an
irrigated area meets a nonirrigated area in a
desert will be only analogous to the cliff
which would be represented by the same pat-
tern of lines on a land contour map. Both
maps, however, will make operationally de-
rived statements about rates of change over
the territory, and both will be subject to
operational verification.

The social variables to which isoline map-
ping can be applied are those which can be
conceptualized as meaningfully related to
territory and measured on at least an ordinal
level. Socioeconomic status, for example, can
be objectified in one sense only by individuals
or groups. On the other hand, neighborhood
or residential area status is an environmental
attribute. It is a feature of the surroundings
within which, not only inhabitants, but parks,
schools, churches, businesses and streets may
be found. The present study concerns itself
with the use of the isoline map as a method
of measuring and representing variation in
residential area status across a community,
and therefore reports tests of the hypotheses
that: (1) Continuous variation in the status
characteristics of neighborhoods can be repre-
sented by means of an objective status con-
tour map. Specifically, once the map is con-
structed, those subjects who deviate from it
will deviate in a comparable manner from
their immediate neighbors. (2) Respondents
will be able to assign symbolic status mean-
ings to the community’s subareas, which will
be comparable to the objective occupational
status of the subareas’ inhabitants.
The process used in this case consisted of
constructing a gridwork over a map of a
Midwestern city with a population of about
150,000, which divided it into 64 equal rec-
tangles, each about a 16-block square. These
areas were further subdivided into fourths,
producing 256 equal rectangular areas, which
covered the entire city map. When those
areas which fell outside the city limits and
those areas where no residential activity was
evident had been deleted, 154 of these areas
remained in the analysis. The geometric cen-
ters of these areas were designated as points
of observation or measurement.

Clusters were designated which consisted
of the three residences located closest to the
established reference point. This is a very
small cluster, but we wanted to expose the
method to some risks in this respect. Some
of the designated areas were only partially
occupied, and in these cases the number of
blocks within the area were enumerated, and
the block, as well as the three residences
within the block, were selected by a table of
random numbers. Measurements in these
cases were, of course, entered on the map
at the point where they occurred, rather than
at the center point of the area in which they
fell.

Once points of reference were established,
socioeconomic status scores for the clusters
surrounding these points were obtained. This
was done by simply consulting the city di-
rectory for the occupation of the head of the
household for each of the selected residences.
Each occupation was given a score through
the use of the NORC transform of the Dun-
can SES scale (Duncan, 1961), which is
based upon the income, educational level,
and relative prestige ratings of occupational
titles. For each point of reference then, socio-
economic status was expressed as the average
of the occupational scores of a cluster of three
residences.

The final task was to construct a series of
isopleths or, more specifically, status contour
lines connecting points of equal value as
interpolated from those measured and entered
on the map. Scores obtained for the various
points ranged from a low of 44 to a high of
88. Status contour lines were plotted at five-
point intervals interpolated on the basis of
the locations of the scores for each of the
previously established reference points. For
example, if one reference point had a score
of 46 and a contiguous point had a score of
54, the location of the 50-point contour
interval was determined by plotting the
scores of 46 and 54 on a sheet of graph paper
and drawing a straight line between the two
points. This simple graphing procedure de-
termines the point at which the line so drawn
intersects the 50-point line on the graph
paper and in turn its location relative to
the other two scores. This information is
then transferred to the map, and the opera-
tion is repeated for each set of contiguous
scores which have an intervening contour
interval. These interpolated points are the
ones through which status contour lines can
be expected to pass, and their locations are
in each case affected by the scores occurring
on all sides of them. Isopleths or status con-
tour lines are then drawn in. This operation
requires a small amount of skill and experi-
ence. Its basic principles are: (1) no two
lines should meet or cross, but each contour
line should either be a closed polygon on the
map or run off the map at both ends, and
(2) the series of contours lying between any
two points on the map should be continuous
(Raisz, 1938).

The construction of another map was un-
dertaken to determine the relative prestige
value of the ecological areas of the commu-
nity or, in other words, the symbolic con-
ception of the status structure of the com-
munity by a sample of its residents.

The sample of residents chosen to be
respondents for an interview were selected
on the basis of a simple random sampling
procedure. The population from which the
sample was drawn was defined as all persons
listed in the city directory, a relatively com-
plete listing of residences in the community.
Given the purposes of the study, we were
only interested in fairly strong relationships
between variables. Thus, a random sample of
50 persons, which would yield satisfactory
significance levels for such relationships, was
drawn from the population. If the primary
respondent was not at home or refused to be
interviewed, the residence immediately next
to it was selected.

Lazerwitz (1964) used a somewhat similar
method when he clustered addresses from
the city directory, from which he averaged
at least one interview per cluster after the
various “non-response” factors were encoun-
tered. In determining the degree of departure
of the “clustering” method from simple ran-
dom sampling, he found that the variance of
the “clustered” sample was on an average
only about 1.20 times larger than its simple
random sampling variance. Further, the task
at hand was the determination of the con-
ception of the status structure as it was con-
ceived by a heterogeneously located group of
residents within the city, a task which was
not interfered with by the use of this pro-
cedure.

Following the selection of the sample, an
interview requiring from 15-30 minutes to
complete was administered to each of the
respondents. The way in which the respon-
dents’ symbolic conception of the spatial
distribution of status was determined con-
sisted of first, providing him with a map of
the city with the previously established grid-
work of 64 equal areas superimposed on it.
He was then asked, for each of twenty occu-
pations listed, to give the number of the area
on the map where he thought that a person
with that occupation might reside. The occu-
pations were selected on the basis of their
heterogeneity as a group, both in the general
type of work that they do and in their rela-
tive prestige value.

For each of the 64 areas a tally was made
on the various occupational allocations re-
ceived. From this a mean NORC transform
SES score was determined for each area and
assigned to the geometric center of the area
as a basis for interpolating contour lines or
isopleths in the manner described above. The
result was a map portraying the subjective
conception of the spatial distribution of socio-
economic status in the community held by a
sample of fifty of its citizens. This subjective
map is a more generalized and less detailed
portrayal of the status structure of the com-
munity, which is at least partly a smoothing
effect due to the use of a larger gridwork in
this part of the analysis.
map were derived. The map does not pre-
tend to represent the status characteristics of
particular subjects, but only of their immedi-
ate residential surroundings. These two vari-
ables have ordinarily not been found related
to an extent producing correlations greater
than about .5 (Miller, 1964:101). However,
the SES scores of fifty respondents inter-
viewed in connection with another aspect of
the study were correlated with the score of
the status contour within which the respon-
dent lived. A Pearson r of .35 (P<.01) was
found. The same procedure was utilized for
an alternate random sample of residents of
the community and a Pearson r of 46
(P<.01) was obtained. These findings are
comparable to Kahl and Davis’ (1955) re-
port of a tetrachoric r of .46 between two
indexes which are roughly comparable to
ours, the North-Hatt occupational category
and the census tract mean monthly rent. This
comparability is brought out when our two
sets of data, dichotomized at the same point
as Kahl and Davis’, are transformed into
tetrachoric r’s, the resultant correlations of
42 (P<.01) and .61 (P<.01), respectively,
being favorably comparable to their reported
correlation of .46.

Thus while some relationship exists be-
tween the occupational statuses of these sub-
jects and the status characteristics of their
locations as represented by the map, and
although the magnitude of the relationship is
not out of context with what is usually found
to obtain between the status characteristics
of individuals and their residential areas, the
correlation found is certainly not high. The
crucial question for the validity of the map
is whether these subjects’ individual devia-
tions from the scores found for their residen-
tial locations on the map represent deviations
from the general status characteristics of
their surroundings or simply inaccuracy in
the map. This question can be answered by
comparing the subjects’ deviations from the
map with their deviations from the status
characteristics of persons living nearby. To
test the hypothesis that those subjects who
deviated from the map would also deviate in
a comparable manner from their neighbors
required us to ascertain the occupational
scores of the three neighbors on either side
of the subject, and from this cluster of six
to obtain an average SES score for the neigh-
bors at that point. When this was done it
was found that 83% of the sample either
fit in terms of both their neighbors and the
map or differed from their neighbors in the
same direction that they differed from the
map. Further, for the latter group, there was
no significant difference (t= 1.124, P< .30)
between the amount of deviation from their
neighbors and the amount of deviation from
the map. The 50 subjects’ deviations from
the map were also correlated with their de-
viations from the average status scores of
their six neighbors, yielding an r of .73 (P<
.01). In sum, the hypothesis that the status
contour method will yield accurate results
in the prediction of the status characteristics
of various locations in the community seems
to be borne out by the data.

To test the hypothesis that individuals
will be able to symbolically perceive the
status structure of the community, and that
this symbolic perception will be comparable
to the objective status structure of the com-
munity, required us to measure the degree of
correspondence between the symbolic status
contour map and the objective status contour
map. In order to do this, we designated 50
random points, and for each of these points
SES scores were obtained from the objective
and symbolic maps. The two sets of scores
were then correlated and a Pearson r of .50
(P<.05) was obtained. This permits us to
accept our hypothesis and indicates a fair
degree of relationship between the subjective
image of the status reputations of various
areas of the city held by its citizens and the
objective variation of SES as indicated by
the persons actually residing in those areas.
Again, comparing our results with those re-
ported by Kahl and Davis (1955), the tetra-
choric r between the subjective map and the
objective map was .88, which compares very
favorably with their reported correlation of
.76 between interviewers’ rating of residential
area (subjective index) and census tract
mean monthly rent (objective index). This,
in turn, lends support to the idea that status
contour analysis does lead to a portrayal of
the relationship between territory and socio-
economic status which is congruent with the
manner in which this relationship is per-
ceived by residents of the community. Sub-
jects were selected randomly and not for
their knowledge of the community. They
were asked, not to rate the status character-
istics of particular locations but merely to
suggest where persons of a variety of occu-
pations might reside. It is interesting to note
that a subjective map based upon the aggre-
gate of these responses corresponds as closely
as it does with one based upon objective
data. The correlation is as high as can usu-
ally be expected between objective and sub-
jective measures of the same _ variable
(Stinchecombe and Ofshe, 1969:116; Cap-
low, 1954:216-217).

Another method, and perhaps a better one
in evaluating the symbolic map’s general val-
idity, is to note its performance as com-
pared to the objective map in its relation to
some third variable. Lazarsfeld (1959:65)
states: “It is not the relation of the indices
to one another which is the crucial problem,
but their relation to outside variables.” Ac-
cordingly, two “outside” variables were
chosen, not so much for the substantive find-
ings involved as for the sake of testing the
comparability of the two maps in treating
outside variables. The first treats residential
status as a dependent variable in relation to
land elevation, while the second treats resi-
dential status as an independent variable in
relation to friendship choice.

An interesting question which emanates
from the utilization of contours in depicting
social status is the relationship between the
status contours so derived and the actual
geographical contours depicting the topog-
raphy of the land. Hoyt (1939) contended
that city areas at higher altitudes frequently
were characterized by high rents because
they were free from slides and floods, and
thus became fashionable and desirable resi-
dential districts. Harris and Ullman (1945)
also point out this relationship between high
land and high social status when they postu-
lated that, in general, high class residential
zones would be on well-drained high land
with a view and away from the noise, smoke,
and odor of industry. Therefore, high physi-
cal altitude seems to be associated with high
status in many instances. However, in those
cases where the pragmatic effects of floods
and slides are not relevant, height still seems
to retain its relation to status through the
symbolic cultural definition given to the en-
tire concept of height. Such a symbolic mean-
ing can be crudely displayed through the
popularity and meaning of such sayings as
“top drawer,” “high man on the totem pole,”
“top dog,” etc. An interesting empirical ques-
tion concerns the existence of a relationship
between status and physical elevation.

To test this relationship, we utilized again
the alternate gridwork that had been used in
testing a previous hypothesis to establish 50
points at which both topographical measures
of elevation and status measures could be
obtained. The status measures were taken
from both the objective and subjective status
contour maps, while the geographical eleva-
tion measures were secured from the United
States Geologic Survey’s contour map of the
City’s area. Although there is relatively little
elevation differential in this community,
there does exist a range of some 210 feet,
which, when broken down into 20-foot in-
tervals, does offer a meaningful gradient of
elevation with which the status scores can
be correlated.

The resultant correlation between status
and elevation when using the objective map
was .73 (P< .005). When the subjective map
was used, the coefficient of correlation was
raised to .78 (P< .005). Therefore, not only
does there seem to be a significant positive
correlation between the status score of an
area and the physical elevation of that area,
but the objective and subjective maps dem-
onstrate essentially parallel performance in
demonstrating the strength of the relation-
ship.

The performance of the objective and sub-
jective methods of portraying residential
status as an independent variable was exam-
ined in relation to friendship choice. That
friendship runs essentially along social class
lines is a well demonstrated empirical gen-
eralization in sociology today. Hollingshead,
(1949), for example, demonstrated that
clique formation, dating, and marriage all
essentially followed social class lines. More
recently Laumann (1966) found that persons
in all occupational classes disproportionately
found their friends in the same occupational
class as themselves. Finally, Warner’s (1949)
studies tend to use associational data as the
basis for determining the class position of an
individual. The Warner Index for Evaluated
Participation (EP) identifies the social class
group within which a person participates.
This index of participation was found to be
predictable through the use of the Index of
Status Characteristics (ISC), which was
based upon such objective class determinants
as occupation, source of income, and dwelling
area. Thus, a high correlation between (1)
objective social class criteria, as measured
by the ISC, and (2) the associations that a
person had, as measured by EP, was demon-
strated.

On the basis of such findings as these, we
can hypothesize that the SES levels of re-
spondents’ locations in the community and
those of friends’ designated by these re-
spondents will correlate positively. To ob-
tain this correlation we asked the fifty resi-
dents who comprised the sample to determine
their three closest friends and to note on the
map the area within which each of them
resided. To seek a more specific location than
this was thought to be unwise as it might
appear as an encroachment upon the respon-
dents’ privacy.

With this data in hand, a sociogram was
constructed on both the subjective and the
objective maps which connected the respon-
dent, whose exact location was known, with
each of his three friends, whose general loca-
tion was arbitrarily plotted as the center
point of the area where they were reported
as living. On the basis of this sociometric
overlay on the status contour maps, status
contour intervals of respondents’ locations
and the locations of their chosen friends were
determined. Obviously, the method used to
identify friends’ locations sacrifices some
information.

The procedure just discussed was carried
out for both the objective and subjective
maps. The coefficient of correlation which
was obtained in determining the association
between the objective status contour interval
of the respondent and the objective status
contour intervals of his friends was .59 (P<
.005). An examination of the correlation
for the subjective status scores reveals an
even higher coefficient of .69 (P< .005). It
should be noted at this point that, although
each subject made more than one choice of
a friend, the levels of significance were calcu-
lated on the basis of the number of different
subjects making the choices.

Therefore, whatever the actual relation-
ship between socioeconomic status and
friendship choice, it has been demonstrated
that the status of a respondent’s dwelling
area, as measured by “status contour analy-
sis,” is highly related to the status of his
friends’ dwelling area, as measured by the
same technique, in either its subjective or
objective form.

A question which naturally comes to mind
at this point is whether, or to what etxent,
the findings just described are an artifact
produced by a number of respondents simply
selecting their next-door neighbors, who by
virtual definition of the method would share
the same environmental SES level. One of
the difficulties dealing with this question lies
in the fact that such an occurrence would be
completely in keeping with the theoretical
basis of the hypothesis we have been testing.
Persons of similar SES are expected both to
seek similar locations and to choose each
other as friends. Moreover, if we attempt to
eliminate propinquity as a factor in friend-
ship choice by excluding nearby choices, we
will artificially retain all cases contrary to
the hypothesis, since the friend must live at
some distance from the respondent in order
to occupy a different socioeconomic neighbor-
hood. Despite these biases, the attempt must
be made, because the crucial test is whether
those friends who do not live nearby are to
be found at similar socioeconomic environ-
mental locations.

Using the grid of mile-square areas on
which friendship choices were originally en-
tered, those choices which fell within the
same square as the respondents’ residence
were eliminated. This resulted in the deletion
of about one-third of the total friendship
choices, eliminating all of those choices
which fell within one-half mile of the re-
spondents’ location and nearly all of those
which fell within three-quarters of a mile.
In that part of the data which remained, the
correlation between respondents’ status loca-
tions and those of their chosen friends was
reduced to .36 (P<.01) on the objective
status contour map and .53 (P<.005) on
the subjective status contour map. Thus,
while the hypothetical relationship between
locations of respondents and chosen friends
received less support when only physically
distant friends are studied, it remains im-
pressive when the biasing factors mentioned
above are taken into account.

It may be useful to compare the perfor-
mances of continuous and bounded unit
analysis in handling the same basic data.
This can be done by recalculating some of
the correlations reported above using the net-
work of 154 rectangular areas from which
our original observation points were taken
and comparing them with those obtained
through the status contour method. This
should provide adequate risk for the contour
method, because the bounded units are
small, about one-fourth square mile each,
and the data used to assign status scores to
the units are identical with those from which
the isoline map was derived.

When the relationship between the status
location of the respondent and the status lo-
cations of his three friends was recomputed,
using the score assigned their respective
bounded units, a Pearson r of .41 was ob-
tained, compared to the previously reported
correlation of .59, using the contour method.
This raises the question of whether the
higher correlation represents better perfor-
mance in revealing an existing relationship
or an exaggeration of that relationship. The
latter possibility could occur if the contour
method tends to provide a less exact but
potentially smoother estimate of status vari-
ation than small bounded units are likely to
do. Since the referent in either approach is
the status characteristic of the surroundings
at any residential location, we combined each
respondent’s occupational score with those
of his six nearest neighbors to give an aver-
age for those immediate surroundings in at-
tempting to answer this question. We found
that this score correlated .25 with scores de-
rived from the rectangular units and .50
with those derived from the isoline map.
On this basis, it would seem that at least
in this community, the idea of continuous
variation of socioeconomic status over the
territory gives closer estimates—both of the
status characteristics associated with partic-
ular locations and of the relationship between
residential status and friendship formation—
than does the alternate conception of status
occurring within homogeneous units and be-
ing separated by sharp breaks and jumps.

None of our findings preclude the existence
of “natural areas” or homogeneous areas en-
closed by natural, man made, or symbolic
boundaries. Most communities, indeed, have
instances of both types of variation. It seems
difficult even to state, in answerable form,
the question of which tends to predominate.
The point is simply that residential status
may be continuous, which means that the
status gradient can vary from low to high.

While bounded units emphasize the gen-
eral status characteristics of specified areas
within the community, isolines are capable,
further, of presenting an image of status
change as one moves across the community,
as well as of variation in rates of change
from one part of the community to another.
This would seem to suggest that the latter
method has advantages over the former, pro-
vided first, that variation of neighborhood
status is at least potentially continuous and
second, that an isoline map can represent
the status characteristics of residential areas
in a valid way. Status contour analysis does
appear to succeed in representing the rela-
tionship between the territory of the com-
munity and one social system variable, socio-
economic status, in a manner compatible with
the way in which the community is perceived
by its inhabitants. This, in turn, would seem
to warrant further use of methods in which
variation of social characteristics over terri-
tory is represented by contour lines or iso-
pleths, indicating the locations at which
stated intervals in their range of variation
tend to be found.

The approach we have suggested here
tends to be in opposition to the use of arti-
ficial boundary systems, but not to the con-
cept of the natural area, since it is equipped
to show both gradual changes and the rapid
changes which may be associated with the
occurrence of “natural” boundaries. As Hatt
(1946:427) pointed out long ago, “no obei-
sance need be made to the natural areas of
the city, but only those natural areas logi-
cally determined by the data, and the prob-
lem need be constructed, used and defended.”
Reiss, Jr., Occupations and Social Status.
New York: The Free Press.
Duncan, O. D., Ray Cuzzort and Beverley Duncan

1961 Statistical Geography. Glencoe, Illinois:
The Free Press.

Harris, Chauncy and Edward Ullman

1945 “The nature of cities.” The Annals 242:

7-17.
Hatt, Paul K.

1946 “The concept of the natural area.” Amer-
ican Sociological Review 11 (August) :423-
427.

Hawley, Amos and O. D. Duncan

1957 “Social area analysis: A critical appraisal.”

Land Economics 33 (November) :337-344.
Hoiberg, Eric O.

1969 “Status contour analysis: An ecological ap-
proach to social stratification.” Unpub-
lished Masters Thesis, University of Ne-
braska.

Hollingshead, August B.

1949 Elmtown’s Youth. New York: John Wiley

& Sons.
Hoyt, Homer

1939 The Structure and Growth of Residential
Neighborhoods in American Cities. Wash-
ington D.C.: Federal Housing Authority.

Kahl, Joseph and James Davis

1955 “A comparison of indexes of socioeconomic
status.” American Sociological Review 20
(June) :317-325.
Kitagawa, E. M. and Taeuber, K. E. (Eds.)

1963 Local Community Fact Book: Chicago
Metropolitan Area, 1960. Chicago Com-
munity Inventory, University of Chicago.

Laumann, Edward

1966 Prestige and Association in an Urban Com-

munity. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Lazarsfeld, Paul F.

1959 “Problems in methodology.” Pp. 39-78 in
Robert K. Merton et al., (Eds.), Sociology
Today. New York: Basic Books.

Lazerwitz, Bernard

1964 “A sample of a scattered group.” Journal

of Marketing Research (February) :68-72.
Miller, Delbert

1964 Handbook of Research Design and Social
Measurement. New York: David McKay
Company.

Myers, Jerome K.

1953 “Note on the homogeneity of census tracts:
A methodological problem in urban ecolog-
ical research,” Social Forces 32:364-366.

Raisz, Erwin

1938 General Cartography. Pp. 129-139, 243-

244. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Stinchcombe, Arthur L. and Richard Ofshe

1969 “On journal editing as a probablistic pro-
cess.” The American Sociologist 4 (May):
116-118.

Warner, W. Lloyd

1949 Social Class in America, Chicago: Science

Research Associates.
