American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
We analyze the sex composition of 815 face-to-face voluntary organizations in 10
communities to determine the extent of sex integration produced by voluntary
affiliation. The sex segregation in these groups is substantial; nearly one-half of the
organizations are exclusively female, while one-fifth are all male. Instrumental
organizations (business-related and political groups) are more likely to be sex
heterogeneous, while expressive groups are likely to be exclusively male or female.
From the point of view of the individual, the typical female membership generates
face-to-face contact with about 29 other members, less than four of whom are men.
Male memberships, on the other hand, produce contact with over 37 other members
on the average, nearly eight of whom are female. Men’s contacts are both more
numerous and more heterogeneous. We conclude that there is little support for the
sex integration hypothesis in these data, although the sex heterogeneity of
instrumental groups (especially those which are job-related) indicates that this
pattern may change as women move into the labor force in increasing numbers. The
paper explores some consequences of segregation for the organizations and the
social networks they generate.
(1965) view of voluntary groups as multilevel
integrators, researchers have argued that vol-
untary groups serve as a sort of interstitial
glue. Yet the details of exactly what is inte-
grated with what has remained remarkably un-
clear over the years. What emerges from the
literature is a picture of voluntary groups
which may represent the emergent interests of
unspecified publics in the political domain,
provide resources for useful contacts in the
economic domain, allow the expression of al-
truistic impulses in charitable activity, and
provide a variety of peripheral and ephemeral
services (Smith and Freedman 1972).

In contrast to this integrative view of volun-
tary groups, many of the early community
studies emphasized that voluntary associations
were sorting mechanisms (Hughes 1943; An-
derson 1937). As Gans (1967:61) noted, the
groups ‘‘divided and segregated people by their
interests and ultimately, of course, by socio-
economic, educational, and religious dif-
ferences.’ Of course, the integrating and sort-
ing perspectives on voluntary associations are
not actually as opposed as they might appear.
Both mechanisms operate simultaneously to
produce substantial homogeneity on some so-
cial dimensions, while hetereogeneity on other
characteristics serves integrative functions.
The question therefore becomes: which social
dimensions are integrated and which are
sorted, and in what types of organizations?

In the few studies that have dealt with the
sex of group members, the “sorting” view
clearly has dominated. In Levittown, Gans
(1967) found that men tended to sort them-
selves on the basis of their work, while
women’s charitable and social groups offered
the opportunity for social class sorting. Survey
analyses of voluntary association membership
note that men and women belong to different
types of voluntary organizations, implying
some segregation (Booth, 1972; Babchuk et al.,
1960; Rose, 1951; Hausknecht, 1962), al-
though these studies cannot assess organi-
zational composition because they are based
on samples of individuals rather than groups.

Another indirect indication of sex segrega-
tion in voluntary organizations is implicit in a
small but rich literature on women’s voluntary
“careers” (Ross, 1958; Slater, 1960; Moore,
1961; Daniels, in press; Gordon and Reische,
1982; Ostrander, 1984; MacLeod, 1984). These
studies concentrate heavily on women’s groups
and their relation to class structure (Minnis,
1952), the manifest and latent functions of the
organizations (see Meeker’s comments in
Warner, 1949:122—3), and the power exerted
by women through these groups (MacLeod,
1984). It is notable that these studies, which
examine female voluntary participation in de-
tail, all focus on sex-homogeneous women’s
groups (although some of the charitable boards
which direct these organizations may contain
men). None of the studies cited above looks
explicitly at sex segregation or heterogeneity in
voluntary organizations, but the studies pro-
vide reason to suspect that sex is not one of the
dimensions that is “integrated” by these vol-
untary groups. The literature has no answers to
basic questions about the extent of sex segre-
gation in the voluntary sector or the organi-
zational factors that are associated with
homogeneity or heterogeneity. In effect, vol-
untary association research has become bifur-
cated into non-probability (and non-
representative) studies of organizations versus
probability studies of individuals, which allow
few conclusions about organizational structure
because they take members out of their organi-
zational context.

In fact, the literature contains no systematic
study of the distribution of men and women in
groups outside the business sector. There are
several studies comparing the affiliation rates
of men and women (Scott, 1957; Booth, 1972),
but we have had no real data on how these
memberships are apportioned among organi-
zations. The few studies that have concen-
trated on organizations rather than on individ-
uals have selected very unrepresentative sub-
domains (often defined by their sexual exclu-
siveness or class position). In this paper, we
hope to remedy these shortcomings by de-
scribing the extent of sex segregation in a rep-
resentative sample of voluntary organizations
and by analyzing variation in organizational
homogeneity.

We believe this information is necessary for
several reasons. First is the importance of so-
cial morphology in classical theory (Sorokin,
1941). We are increasingly sensitized to these
issues today by advances in the study of social
networks. Mark Granovetter’s (1973, 1974)
work, for instance, points up the large impact
of social contacts on a wide variety of eco-
nomic and other opportunities. Voluntary or-
ganizations are arenas for the generation and
maintenance of social networks (Granovetter,
1973; Feld, 1981; McPherson and Smith-Lovin,
1982); the division of these networks along so-
cial and sexual lines is a crucial feature of soci-
ety which has been underappreciated until re-
cently. Members who become acquainted
through organizational activities influence one
another’s behavior (Whiting, 1980) and provide
information about matters outside their im-
mediate environments (Jones and Crawford,
1980). Since voluntary associations are likely
to be organizing foci (Feld, 1981) for weak ties,
the mix of men and women in these organi-
zations may have a powerful influence on the
character of their social networks.

Another reason for our interest in the sex
composition of voluntary organizations is that
women’s voluntary participation may be
changing as a result of changing gender roles.
Smith and Freedman (1972), in their excellent
review of the voluntary association literature,
noted that many women may be turning away
from volunteer roles as they move into paid
jobs, with a resulting decrease in the strength
of women’s clubs (see also Sieder, 1965). Two
studies of elite women’s clubs have noted
changes as more members occupy professional
jobs (Gordon and Reische, 1982; MacLeod,
1984). As more women enter the paid labor
force, they may be less likely to join expressive
single sex groups, and more likely to have vol-
untary participation patterns that are similar to
men’s—instrumental and useful for furthering
one’s career. Such a role-convergence argu-
ment would fit nicely with evidence that there
has been a reduction in sex segregation in some
other domains in post-industrial society
(Haavio-Mannila, 1967; Myrdal and Klein,
1970; Huber, 1976). Of course, the relative
stability of occupational sex segregation
(Bielby and Baron, 1984; Berch, 1982; Gross,
1968; F. Blau, 1975) would support a counter-
argument for continued segregation of volun-
tary groups.

There are leads from other literatures that
give us clues about important variables to con-
sider. The literature on urbanism suggests that
larger systems tend to be more cosmopolitan
(Wirth, 1938; Burgess et al., 1942), with the
attendant weakening of traditional forms such
as sex-role differentiation and recruitment
based on ascriptive characteristics (Waller-
stein, 1964). The greater complexity of urban
systems is postulated to break down gender-
related barriers, so that larger systems may
have less sex segregation. For instance, Rogers
and Goudy’s (1981) study of 71 communities
discovered that town size is inversely corre-
lated with occupational segregation. If the vol-
untary sector is subject to some of the same
processes as the occupational sector, then we
expect to find town size negatively related to
sex segregation.

A related issue is that of differentiation
internal to the organization. Groups in larger
cities are likely to be larger than those in other
areas; the above discussion suggests that they
may also be more sex heterogeneous. The
question here is whether sex-heterogeneous
groups will have more internal structure, such
as committees and sections. Several leads sug-
gest this pattern. First, we might speculate that
increased heterogeneity leads to more univer-
salistic role structures (Parsons, 1951). Diver-
sity in the backgrounds and behaviors of mem-
bers increases the demands on the coordina-
tion and communication functions in the orga-
nization, leading to greater formalization and
structural differentiation. Secondly, the lit-
erature on firms suggest that more formalized
organizations are less segregated (Szafran,
1982). This line of reasoning suggests that
internal structure should be associated with in-
creased heterogeneity.

Another question derived from previous
work in voluntary organizations asks whether
groups affiliated with an umbrella organization
are more likely to be sex segregated. Previous
results (McPherson, 1983b) show that these or-
ganizations tend to be larger, but we had no
evidence on the sex composition of affiliates.
Again referring to the urbanism—cosmo-
politanism argument above, we might predict
that affiliation with an umbrella organiza-
tion might exert some pressures toward a het-
erogeneous membership.

On the other hand, research on occupational
sex segregation by Bielby and Baron (1984)
suggests that association with an umbrella or-
We have argued before (McPherson and
Smith-Lovin, 1982) that interpersonal contacts
generated by voluntary affiliation can create
channels through which useful information and
influence pass. The heterogeneity of the mem-
bers in a group is especially important in this
regard. While similar acquaintances may be
more likely to form strong ties of close
friendship or kinship (P. Blau, 1977), more su-
perficial contacts (weak ties) with those who
are different from ego are likely to provide
information that was not previously available
(Lin et al., 1981, 1983; Jones and Crawford,
1980). We may usefully ask the question,
therefore, what characteristics of members
make them more or less likely to belong to
heterogeneous as opposed to single-sex
groups?

In an earlier paper, we discovered that
women belonged to smaller organizations than
men, even when we control for marital status,
education, age, work status and occupation
(McPherson and Smith-Lovin, 1982). Although
we did not have information on the composi-
tion of men’s and women’s organizations, we
were able to infer that women were segregated
into smaller, structurally peripheral organi-
zations simply because the sex differences in
organization size were so large without a cor-
responding sex difference in affiliation rate
(McPherson and Smith-Lovin, 1982:900-01).
In this paper, we have direct reports of the sex
composition of organizations, and we can ex-
plore our earlier inference: women are segre-
gated into smaller organizations.

Based on our earlier discussion of the
changing roles of women, we would expect
that working women, more highly educated
women, and younger women would be less
likely to participate in organizational envi-
ronments which are single sex (all women’s
clubs) and more likely to participate in mixed-
sex groups (although they may often be in the
minority there).

Marital status is more problematic. Being
married may pull one into sex-heterogeneous
groups with a couple structure. On the other
Ironically, one barrier to the study of social
morphology in modern times was the develop-
ment of the greatest methodological boon to
contemporary sociology—survey analysis.
With the appearance of large social surveys the
urge to study complete communities abated.
Why spend years of effort trying to contact
literally everybody in a town when a repre-
sentative sample of individuals offers cheaper,
and probably better data on many interesting
and important topics? The problem is, of
course, that researchers using surveys often
‘average out’ some important aspects of social
structure. These researchers take individuals
out of the matrix of social relations where in-
formation is exchanged, choices are made, and
influence is exerted.

In this paper, we use a technique called a
hypernetwork sample, which produces a rep-
resentative sample of organizations in a com-
munity from a probability sample of individuals
(McPherson, 1982). We have applied the hyper-:
network method to 10 communities in Ne-
braska stratified by community size. In the first
stage, a representative probability sample of
656 noninstitutionalized adults was inter-
viewed from the 10 communities. In the inter-
views, we obtained a list of all of the organi-
zations with which each individual was affili-
ated. We used a technique known as aided
recall (Babchuk and Booth, 1969) to insure that
all organizations were reported. Respondents
were encouraged to report even small, rela-
tively informal groups if these groups had an
identifiable membership. A total of 2091 orga-
nizational names were generated, representing
an affiliation rate of about 3.2. (In smaller
communities, of course, some names repre-
sented multiple reports of the same organiza-
tion.)' Of the 2091 organizations, 815 groups
which met face-to-face in the local community
constitute the sample for this analysis.”

There are several reasons why face-to-face
groups were selected for study. First, such
groups are most likely to form the foci for
interpersonal ties where important information
is passed. By concentrating on face-to-face
groups, we largely eliminate the memberships
in “mass public” organizations which link their
members only through simultaneous exposure
to mailings, pleas for contributions, etc. Sec-
ond, our concentration on groups that actually
meet in the community allows us to develop a
more coherent picture of the community sys-
tem of voluntary associations; these groups are
a representative sample of all actively meeting
voluntary groups in the community, as op-
posed to a representative sample of all of the
voluntary groups to which people in the town
belong. This fact permits us to talk about
organization-level phenomena within a
bounded population defined by the commu-
nity.

Respondents were asked whether the orga-
nization was part of a larger organization
(state, regional, national or international), how
often and when the organization met, how long
meetings lasted, where they met, how fre-
quently they participated, the size of the orga-
nization, the sex and age composition of the
organization, and questions about internal
structure (committees, dues, offices, official
records, etc.). When the organization was a
local chapter of a state, national or interna-
tional group, the local unit’s characteristics are
reported. From this data set, we can obtain a
Proportion Women 9498 9021

Homogeneity -9580 -7362
Sex Segregation Dummy 8825 7787
All-Women Dummy -9201 8467
All-Men Dummy -9582 9181

Insofar as missing data are concerned, all of the
815 groups included in our analyses had data on the
sex composition of the group. Missing data on all
other variables except Number of Committees con-
stituted less than five percent of all cases. Listwise
deletion was used for the analyses reported in Tables
3, 4, 6 and 7. The Number of Committees variable
was missing for almost 20 percent of all organi-
zations. Because of this, parallel analyses were con-
ducted using four alternative methods of coping with
missing data: pairwise deletion, listwise deletion, re-
coding the missing cases on Number of Committees
to zero (inspection of the missing cases revealed that
Number of Committees was often coded missing
when groups were small, informal associations
where the question was considered irrelevant), and
creating a dummy variable coded one when the vari-
able was missing, zero if not. None of these alterna-
tive treatments of missing data resulted in substan-
tively different results.
Since the early community studies did not con-
centrate on sex segregation in voluntary orga-
nizations, our first task is descriptive. How
sex-segregated are these groups? The answer is
that they are very segregated. Almost one-half
of the organizations are exclusively female,
while one-fifth are exclusively male (see Table
1). This result is remarkably consistent across
the 10 communities. In no town are more than
50 percent of the voluntary organizations sex-
heterogeneous. In the three smallest towns
(Pender, West Point and Geneva), more than
70 percent are completely sex segregated.
Even these figures tend to underemphasize the
degree of segregation. Some of the organi-
zations that are classified as sex-heterogeneous
have only one or two members of the opposite
sex in a large organization dominated by the
other sex. For example, some occupational or-
ganizations dominated by one sex have a small
minority of the opposite sex. Although these
groups are not classified as single-sex, they are
largely homogeneous on that characteristic. In
fact, the level of sex segregation in voluntary
organizations is greater than the level of occu-
pational sex segregation in the workplace.
(Bielby and Baron, 1984, find that 30 of 393
work establishments are all-male or all-female;
an additional 202 have completely sex-
segregated jobs within the establishment.)
Figure 1 examines in more detail the sex
400

300

Figure 2. Percent of Group Type Segregated Female or Male

PERCENT ALL MALE

80

50

40

20

distribution. Groups that select on age and
family characteristics which are uncorrelated
with sex (aged and youth-serving) are rela-
tively sex-heterogeneous.

One of the most interesting characteristics
related to sex is the time slot available for
voluntary activities. Because sex is related to
labor force participation, organizations that
meet during the daytime tend to be exclusively
female. Such organizations include social,
church, charitable, and hobby clubs. These or-
ganizations are composed primarily from the
housewife population. Table 2 illustrates this
relationship even more clearly. Of the organi-
zations that meet between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m.
(exclusive of lunchtime meetings like the Ro-
tary Club), 77 percent (40 of 52) are all female.
Organizations that meet at night or on
weekends are more likely to be sex heteroge-
neous. The relationship of available time to sex
is also conditioned by age, of course. Of the 10
sex-heterogeneous groups that meet during
working hours, five are senior citizen groups.
In these age ranges, time of day is not as cor-
related with sex because neither men nor
women are as likely to be working.

Since many characteristics of organizations
and communities are related, it is instructive to
analyze their joint relationship to segregation.*
The left-hand column of Table 3 shows the
results of an analysis that regresses a dummy
variable representing segregation (1 = segre-
gated, 0 = heterogeneous) on organization and
community variables.’ The right-hand column
shows a parallel analysis using a continuous
homogeneity measure— [1—(.5—ABS(.S=
proportion female))/.5}—that ranges between
1.0 (completely homogeneous) and 0.0 (a 50/50
sex distribution). Starred coefficients are sig-
nificant at the .05 level.

The size of the town shows a substantial
inverse relationship to segregation, supporting
the idea that the cosmopolitanism of larger
systems promotes integration. Segregation in
the voluntary sector, then, has the same re-
lationship to system size as occupational sex
segregation (Rogers and Goudy, 1981).
Smaller, perhaps more traditional systems are
more likely to create sex-differentiated roles in
both sustenance and non-sustenance activities.

Organizational type is coded into three
categories: instrumental, expressive and
mixed-function. This coding follows a sub-
stantial literature which differentiates leisure
groups (which are an end in themselves) from
instrumental groups, which serve as an exten-
sion of income-producing activities. Groups
which combine the two functions explicitly are
coded as “‘mixed” (Lundberg et al., 1934; Gor-
don and Babchuk, 1966; Goldschmidt, 1947;
Jacoby and Babchuk, 1963). Instrumental
groups are much more likely than purely ex-
pressive or mixed groups to be sex-integrated.
The similarity between the results for the re-
gression on the segregation dummy variable
and on the continuous homogeneity measure
is striking. In both analyses, instrumental
groups are twice as likely as mixed-function
groups to be integrated. Notice also that the
regression analysis eliminates the possibility
that the relatively higher heterogeneity of
business/professional groups might be due to
their locations in larger cities, their larger size,
etc.

Organizational scope does not show a con-
sistent relationship to segregation and
homogeneity. Organizations with national and
international affiliations tend to be somewhat
less heterogeneous than local groups, but state
affiliations increase heterogeneity. The sign for
the regional affiliation contrast differs in the
segregation and continuous homogeneity
analyses, indicating that regionally affiliated
groups are somewhat more likely to have at
least a token member of the minority sex (i.e.,
not be totally segregated), but are not particu-
larly heterogeneous in general. Affiliations
with larger umbrella organizations do not seem
to introduce greater heterogeneity into groups
that meet locally. If anything, there may be a
trend in the opposite direction. This finding is
consistent with the Bielby and Baron (1984)
idea that organizations spanning larger parts of
the system may not be forced by competitive
pressures to recruit from both sexes. Organi-
zations with limited scope may therefore be
constrained to recruit more generally than
groups supported by an umbrella organization.
This finding is made tentative by the fact that
the monotonic trend breaks down for the
homogeneity variable.

The number of committees in the organiza-
tion is positively related to segregation and
homogeneity, rather than manifesting the
negative relationship that earlier literature led
us to expect. Increased differentiation in the
form of internal committee structure is associ-
ated with increased segregation, net of organi-
zational type, size, affiliation with umbrella or-
ganizations, and other factors. These results
conflict with the previously mentioned re-
lationship between formalization and hetero-
geneity for business firms (Szafran, 1982) (see
discussion below).

Table 4 is a decomposition of the segregation
variable of Table 3 into its male and female
parts. Notice that city size shows a similar
pattern for both males and females. Appar-
ently, larger cities have both fewer all-male and
fewer all-female groups, further buttressing our
notion that larger systems weaken sex-role
differentiation.

The organizational-type variables, which
had large effects in Table 3, also show a similar
pattern of effects on male and female
homogeneity. In other words, instrumental or
mixed-function groups are less likely to be
either all-male or all-female than expressive
groups. Note, however, that the coefficient for
the instrumental groups is very small for the
analysis of all-male groups, indicating that if
instrumental groups are single sex, they are
much more likely to be all-male than all-
female.

The organizational scope variable shows a
clear monotonic trend for the all-male analysis,
the male single-sex groups becoming more
common as the scope of the umbrella group
increases. There is no such pattern for the
all-female groups. Organizations which are a
part of larger systems, then, tend to be all-
male. This pattern is also consistent with the
fact that organization size is positively related
to male homogeneity, but inversely related to
female homogeneity. Clearly, large size and
connection to larger systems promote all-male
groups and inhibit all-female groups. This
finding is confirmation for one of the key infer-
ences of our earlier research.

An interesting and unexpected relationship
between sex homogeneity and internal group
structure appears in Table 4. All-female groups
are more likely to have many committees (after
controlling for size and other organizational
characteristics), while all-male groups are less
internally differentiated. Perhaps because
women are excluded from high-status profes-
sions and traditionally male voluntary associ-
ations (like the Jaycees), women’s voluntary
groups operate as an alternative status sphere
(Gordon and Reische, 1982; MacLeod, 1984).
The formal leadership roles afforded by an
elaborated committee structure therefore
might be more attractive for women than for
men. Also, women’s groups which are labeled
“expressive” may in fact serve a wide variety
of community functions. These groups may
need a larger number of committees to coordi-
nate these multiple service functions than the
more single-purpose men’s groups of the same
size and composition.

In summary, the characteristics of the orga-
nizations are strongly related to sex
homogeneity. As we might anticipate after
looking at Figure 1, the type of organization
(represented by two dummy variables) is
strongly related to whether a group is single-
sex or not. Instrumental organizations are most
heterogeneous; groups with mixed instrumen-
tal and social purposes are intermediate in their
homogeneity, and expressive groups are most
likely to be single-sex. Location in a large town
also is associated with higher heterogeneity.
All-female organizations are likely to meet
monthly or irregularly, to meet during the
workday, to be small, and to be quite internally
differentiated for their size. All-male organi-
zations are more likely to meet weekly or
yearly, to meet rarely during the workday, and
are likely to be affiliated with an umbrella
organization.
Lodges (N = 109)

No. Male Members 0.0 0 41.9 35
No. Female Members 28.3 27 0.0 0
Total Members 28.3 27 41.9 35

 

* The distributions of these variables are all significantly different for males and females using a
Kolmogoro-Smirnov test (p< .001).
Table 5. Organizational Environments for Male and Female Respondents*

 

 

 

 

Female Reports Male Reports
(N=543) (N = 272)
Mean Median Mean Median
All Organizations
No. Male Members 3.6 0 30.4 16
No. Female Members 27.0 16 77 0
Total Members 30.6 20 38.1 25
Church-related (N = 234)
No. Male Members 2.7 0 18.5 9
No. Female Members 33.5 20 6.2 0
Total Members 36.2 20 24.8 16
than cross-sex contacts within the voluntary
sector. Both men and women are most likely to
contact members of the opposite sex in
business/professional, public interest, youth-
serving and elderly organizations. Men are
likely to contact women in charitable, social,
hobby, recreational and church groups as well,
but most women who belong to these types of
organizations are in heavily female envi-
ronments. The other types of organizations—
veteran/patriotic and lodges—are heavily sex-
segregated for both men and women members.
Medians are presented for comparative pur-
poses, since the variables are highly skewed.

The especially striking point about Table 5 is
the uniformly low level of cross-sex contact in
these groups. In no type of group is a woman
likely to meet more than 15 men, on the aver-
age. Cross-sex contact is only slightly more for
men in voluntary groups, with the exception of
groups for the elderly. It is important to note in
this context that our results support P. Blau’s
(1977) argument that high-status (in this case,
men) individuals are more likely to have asso-
ciations with low-status people than vice
versa.® This finding is nowhere more apparent
than in the groups for the elderly, where the
sex ratio in the general population favors
women.

It is important to emphasize that the patterns
above refer to the average man and woman. As
the contrast between the mean and median in-
dicate, these averages are actually a mix of
rather dissimilar types. The ‘‘average woman,”
in particular, is actually combining many
women whose voluntary associations are al-
most entirely within a traditional female do-
main (housewife social clubs) and a few who
belong to male-dominated groups (often
professional/business related associations).
The former are segregated almost totally into a
female world; the latter operate in voluntary
groups where they may have “token” status
(Kanter, 1977) but where they also may have a
rich network of opposite-sex ties.

One point about the differences between our
earlier research on sex and organization size
and our findings here deserves comment. In
“Women and Weak Ties” (McPherson and
Smith-Lovin, 1982), we found that the average
organization to which a male belonged had 364
members; the average female’s organization
had 113 members. In Table 5, we see that the
corresponding figures for this study are 38 and
30, respectively. There are, therefore, large
differences between the studies, both in terms
of the absolute size of the organizations, and
the sex differences in organization size. There
are two good reasons for these differences.
First, the current study included only organi-
zations that actually meet in the respondents’
community, while the earlier study included
organizations that met face-to-face in any
context (statewide or nationally). The fact that
the size difference is much smaller in the pres-:
ent study means that the main difference be-
tween the size of men’s and women’s organi-
zations (and the corresponding differences in
the size of their ‘weak tie” networks) is found
at the non-local level. For professional and
managerial people, these non-local networks
are important; for information about local
matters, they may be less so.

The second reason for the size difference in
the two studies is that this project was designed
to produce a representative sample of groups,
rather than of individuals. Our results, in fact,
mirror very well the predicted characteristics
of such a sample of groups in McPherson
(1982), which estimated the size distribution of
face-to-face groups, taking into account the
fact that smaller groups are less likely to ap-
pear in a probability sample of individuals. The
size of organizations found in a typical survey
sample of individuals is a tremendous overes-
timate of the size of typical organizations be-
cause of the proportional overrepresentation of
larger organizations, and the skewness of the
distribution.

The smaller organizations in the current
study illustrate groups commonly overlooked
in the organizational literature. The purposive
studies of organizations (Blau and Schoenherr,
1971; Galaskiewicz, 1979; Knoke and Wood,
1981) tend to catch the more formalized, larger,
long-lived organizations while the smaller, less
organized, more ephemeral groups slip through
their grasp. Special attempts need to be made
to get people to remember the Wednesday
night bridge club or the weekly quilting bee as a
group that meets regularly and provides con-
tacts among members. Our results emphasize
how different a truly representative sample of
organizations is from the voluntary sector, in
comparison to the picture that one gets from
previous research. These results bring the data
on local voluntary groups much more into line
with the data on local establishments in the
business sector (Granovetter 1984).

Table 6 shows how individuals’ charac-
teristics are related to the heterogeneity of the
organizations to which they belong. Sex is sig-
nificantly related to the sex-segregation
dummy variable, indicating that women are
more likely than men to belong to completely
sex-homogeneous groups. The equation for the
continuous homogeneity measure is also con-
sistent with this idea, but sex fails to reach
statistical significance.

The dummy variables representing marital
status also contribute significantly to the vari-
ance in segregation and homogeneity. Single
people are more likely to be in segregated,
sex-homogeneous groups, while married, di-
vorced and widowed people are less likely to
be sex-segregated in the voluntary sector. This
finding probably reflects the fact that marriage
tends to draw men and women together into
groups that have a “‘couple” structure (see Fig-
ure 1). Surprisingly, the work-status variables
are not significantly related to segregation, al-
though there is a trend for working (full-time,
part-time, and temporarily off work) people to
be in somewhat less segregated networks than
non-working (unemployed, retired, school,
housekeeper, and other) people. The variables
may lose much of their impact because of the
strong relationship between work status, sex,
marital status and age.

Education is weakly related to segregation,
with very highly educated people (more than
college graduates) being less likely to belong to
segregated groups; the effect is not significant
for the homogeneity measure. The dummy
variables representing age are not significantly
related to either dependent measure.

In summary, the individual characteristics
do not show very strong relationships to the
segregation or heterogeneity of networks
created through the voluntary sector (notice
the low R-square values). This situation paral-
lels our findings in McPherson and Smith-
Lovin (1982), where we found that
sociodemographic variables such as work
status, age, education and marital status could
not explain the large size difference in men’s
and women’s groups.

Table 7 explores the possibility that the lack
of significant relationships in Table 6 may re-
sult from a very different pattern for all-female
and all-male groups (which are lumped to-
gether in the segregation measures). Here,
marital status, work status and education all
show distinctly different relationships to the
probability of belonging to an all-female or
all-male group.

Being widowed or separated makes it more
likely that one will belong to an all-female
group; these states make it less likely that one
will belong to an all-male group. Similarly,
working full-time (the omitted category) and
being in school make it much less likely that a
respondent will belong to a sex-segregated
all-female group, but more likely that one will
belong to an all-male group. More education
(especially at the high-school-graduate/some-
college level) makes it more likely that a re-
spondent will belong to an all-female group.
However, the more education, the less likely
one is to belong to an all-male group. Age is not
significantly related to the organizational envi-
ronments in which men and women find them-
selves, but there is a trend for younger women
to be found in more heterogeneous envi-
ronments and older women to be in all-female
groups.

The general picture that emerges from the
individual-level results is one in which women
are more likely to belong to smaller, all-female
groups if they are not connected to the work-
place or to a husband who might draw them
into “couple”-oriented networks. Conversely,
all-male groups tend to be made up of less well
educated, working men, especially those who
are single.
Voluntary groups in our study are very segre-
gated: almost one-half of all groups are all-
female, one-fifth are all-male. Large com-
munities are more likely than smaller com-
munities to have sex heterogeneity in the vol-
untary sector, but less than fifty percent of
these voluntary groups are integrated even in
the larger cities (the Omaha metropolitan area
is close to a half million in population—
statistical infinity from the point of view of
groups of these sizes). Large organizations are
less likely to be all-female, and slightly more
likely to be all-male or mixed. Those groups
that recruit from the labor force or other in-
strumental domains are likely to be sex-
heterogeneous; groups which are expressive in
character are more likely to be segregated.
Groups with internal structure are more likely
to be all-female, while organizational scope
and meeting frequency seem to have complex
relationships to sex composition.

At the individual level, single males are more
likely to belong to sex-segregated groups,
while widowed or separated women are more
likely to be in all-female groups. The effects of
work status are quite different for men and
women. Employed women are very much less
likely to belong to all-female groups than em-
ployed men are to belong to all-male groups.
of this organization determines the sex of its
members. Since the organization is ‘‘feeding”
in a segregated habitat, it cannot acquire per-
sons of the opposite sex. Examples in our data
include the Nebraska Aviation Trades Associ-
ation, the International Brotherhood of Elec-
trical Workers (Lincoln Division), the United
Transportation Union (Omaha Local), the
Rural Letter Carriers Association (Pender),
and the Cumming County Pork Producers.
Compositional changes in these organizations
will await compositional changes in the re-
cruitment domain.

When a group is coupled to a sex-
heterogeneous organization (or industry), the
group will tend to be sex-integrated. Most
often in the towns studied here, the instru-
mental groups (business-related and public
interest) were recruiting from domains that in-
clude both men and women. While the sex
segregation of these organizations may be high,
it is usually not complete. The Engineering As-
sociation of Omaha may be heavily male, but
it has one female member (out of 35); the Na-
tional Association of Postal Supervisors,
Branch No. 54, similarly has a few females in
its recruitment domain, and a few female
members (3 out of 20). This fact is important,
because contacts in these types of organi-
zations are likely to form useful networks for
the women involved. Ties that these working
women have in predominately male organi-
zations are useful not only for those womens’
economic advancement, but may also have an
important function in the global integration of
the community system; these women may act
as “bridges” (Faro and Skvoretz, 1985) be-
tween local groups of strongly tied persons
(who are more likely to be homogeneous with
regard to sex).

Instrumental groups that have as their ex-
plicit function some sort of community repre-
sentation are especially likely to be sex-
heterogeneous. Every Chamber of Commerce
group in our data includes at least a few women
(6 out of 12 members in Pender, 2 out of 60 in
West Point, 7 out of 30 in Geneva, 10 out of 50
in Seward). Similarly, the Cable TV Advisory
Board in Lincoln has three female members
(out of 12). Again, these female memberships
have unusual importance, both for the individ-
ual network positions of these women and for
the integration of the community as a whole.

A corollary of the niche idea is that volun-
tary groups that select for a characteristic cor-
related with sex will be segregated. When an
organization recruits selectively, the variable
on which the recruitment is based will deter-
mine whether sex segregation will occur.
Selection variables correlated with sex, such as
housewife status, income, skill at male-
dominated sports, and so forth, will produce
sex-segregated organizations. Organizations
that select for factors that are less correlated
with sex will be less likely to be sex homoge-
neous.”

A clear example of this principle is the set of
organizations that operate at times that conflict
with sustenance organizations. Since weekday
meeting time for the organization will be in-
versely correlated with labor-force participa-
tion of members, and sex is also correlated
with labor force participation, organizations
with weekday meeting times are almost always
all female. Examples in our data are the many
rural extension clubs (designed to promote in-
novative homemaking skills), small prayer
groups, and women’s bridge clubs. In an
ecological view, all of these factors are seen as
interrelated: an expressive club formed of
housewives who are available during the
workday would be expected to resist changes
in composition or meeting time that would lead
it to compete with the other organizations at
the borders of its niche space; for example,
recruiting working women would require
moving the meeting time to nights, which
might compete with couple-oriented activities
of other organizations.

Of course, the pattern of voluntary affilia-
tions at any given point in time does not allow
us to separate the fundamental niche of an or-
ganization (that is, the population segment of
the community from which an organization
would recruit in the absence of any other orga-
nizations) from the realized niche (the actual
composition of memberships) (McPherson
1983a:520). Each organization’s niche has
evolved through interaction with other com-
peting groups (including work establishments
and families). The history of that competition
for members allows us to interpret sex
homogeneity that occurs in some domains
where the composition of the habitat is not
dictated directly by another organization (as is
the case for unions) or through competition in
time (as in daytime women’s groups). Veterans’
groups, for example, have a niche that is al-
most exclusively male (since it is structured by
the Armed Forces). Because almost all men in
this patriotic domain fall within the veterans’
organizations’ niche, the complementary fe-
male patriotic groups (exemplified by the
Daughters of the American Revolution) are
among the most sex segregated of all voluntary
associations. The female groups developed in a
vacuum, as it were, left by the veterans groups.

Social organizations, such as lodges, and so-
cial, hobby, and recreational clubs, seem ini-
tially to be an exception to the niche principle.
Why are these so heavily segregated when
their social functions would seem to indicate a
fundamental niche including the entire popula-
tion? To some extent, this segregation results
from selection on other characteristics that are
correlated with sex. For example, the funda-
mental niche of hobby and recreational groups
includes only those with interests in specific
activities. They often become single-sex be-
cause the incidence of model airplane builders
is low among women, and the prevalence of
quilters is low among men. Recreational
groups must take into consideration another
characteristic correlated with sex: physical
abilities and training. Many of the sports teams
included in this category are organized as all-
male or all-female. Note that groups that select
on age and on the presence of children (aged
and youth-serving)—two factors that are not
strongly correlated with sex—are among the
most heterogeneous group types.

Still, many groups that would seem to have a
fundamental niche that includes both men and
women are sex segregated. Purely social
groups, religious groups, and lodges all are ex-
tremely sex segregated. True, the history of
competition between men’s and women’s
groups within these arenas may explain why
such organizations stay sex segregated, but
that leads us to a prior question: why was sex
the dimension along which these groups dif-
ferentiated? How did sex (as opposed to other
characteristics) come to be such a salient di-
mension in the niche space?

The problem is similar to the issue of sex
segregation in the workplace (see excellent
discussions in Strober, 1984, and Mason,
1984). In addition to biological differences in
the sexes (perhaps creating a greater female
involvement in childbearing-associated activi-
ties), we see powerful historical forces operat-
ing to create separate male and female spheres
of activity. Social historians have noted that
one of the most profound effects of industri-
alization in the nineteenth century was the
physical and ideological separation of men’s
and women’s work (Cowan, 1983; Strasser,
1982). From the separation of their material
lives developed an ideology about differences
in male and female characteristics (Cowan,
1983:18-19). Sex thereby became correlated
with an extensive variety of dimensions in so-
cial space: time and locations available for
meeting, skills, interests, and informational
needs. Furthermore, some characteristics that
may not be correlated with sex are often gener-
ally assumed to be, because of the ideology
which followed from these many correlations.
The ‘‘doctrine of separate spheres” (Cowan,
1983:18) therefore creates sex segregation:
when interests, activities or times available are
correlated with sex, voluntary groups are ho-
mogeneous.

Sometimes social/expressive organizations
differentiate by sex because of changes over
time in their manifest functions. For example,
lodges’ primary functions were originally to
provide cooperative insurance, disability care
and burial benefits for working men
(Hausknecht, 1962:71-82). Because they were
linked to a sex-segregated (male) sustenance
activity, they were all male. This instrumental
function has been usurped by insurance corpo-
rations; now social activities are paramount.
However, the niche of the organization did not
expand to include women. Instead, these orga-
nizations have engaged the entire family in
their activities by developing women’s aux-
iliaries. A new parallel women’s organization
is formed, maintaining the sex segregation of
the original group.

We speculate that this development of sex-
segregated parallel organizations occurs be-
cause of the character of the bond between
husband and wife. In organizations for which
sociation is a critical dimension, the introduc-
tion of pairs of individuals coupled together as
powerfully as are husband and wife would fun-
damentally alter the nature of the organization.
Where one of the organizational functions is to
promote strong alliances across kinship lines,
these same sex friendships might be com-
promised by the multiplex bond between
spouses. In addition, the multiplex nature of
the husband—wife bond might place restric-
tions on some activities that otherwise occur in
single sex groups (in the same manner that
Spradley and Mann, 1975, note that a date or
spouse interrupts the joking ritual at a bar).

Organizational inertia (Hannan and
Freeman, 1977, 1984) can operate even when
organizations do not change function; the or-
ganization may not respond quickly to the
changing requirements of the environment.
This inertia may become the subject of litiga-
tion when the organization lags seriously be-
hind structural changes in the habitat, as in the
case of the Minnesota Jaycee’s dispute with its
national organization (Roberts vs. U.S.
Jaycees, 104 S.CT. 3244 (1984)). The changing
sex composition of the managerial work force
has preceded changes in the organizations that
feed in that domain. (All of the Jaycee groups
in our data are still all-male.)
Of course, it is possible that organizational
inertia may be maintained not only through
ecological factors but also through overt dis-
crimination. The ecological model is not incon-
sistent with a more conflict-based, class-
oriented analysis (Hawley, 1983). To the extent
that membership in instrumental groups has
direct economic and political advantages, men
may simply exclude women to maximize
payoff. Even the existence of secret rituals and
close social ties within expressive groups (like
lodges) may lead men to exclude women in an
asymmetric power relationship. Voluntary as-
sociations may therefore operate directly in
some instances to maintain male privilege as a
structural feature of our society.

In sum, the voluntary sector tends to reflect
the sex segregation in other domains of our
society. It divides men and women into sepa-
rate domains even more effectively than does
the occupational structure. Furthermore, it
acts to maintain the status differences that such
segregation implies, by creating networks of
weak ties that restrict men’s and women’s in-
formation and resources to the domains that
are traditional for each. In this arena, as in so
many others, separate is probably not equal.
The few members of either sex who belong to
sex-integrated voluntary associations may
have key positions, which may provide bridges
between the male and female domains. Only
presently unavailable dynamic evidence will
reveal whether these bridges will become
beachheads for the future mingling of the sexes
or remain lonely outposts for token members.
Blau, Peter. 1970. ‘A Formal Theory of Differentia-
tion in Organizations.” American Sociological Re-
view 35:201-18.

1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity: A
Primitive Theory of Social Structure. New York:
Free Press.

Blau, Peter, and Richard A. Schoenherr. 1971. The
Structure of Organizations. New York: Basic
Books.

Bleier, Ruth. 1984. Science and Gender: A Critique
of Biology and its Theories on Women. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Blood, Robert O. Jr., and Donald M. Wolfe. 1960.
Husbands and Wives: The Dynamics of Married
Life. New York: Free Press.

Boissevain, Jeremy. 1974. Friends of Friends. Lon-
don: Blackwell.

Booth, Alan. 1972. “Sex and Social Participation.”
American Sociological Review 37:183-91.

Burgess, Ernest W., W. Lloyd Warner, Franz Alex-
ander and Margaret Mead. 1942. Environment and
Education. Vol. 1, Human Development Series.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Cowan, Ruth Schwartz. 1983. More Work for
Mother. New York: Basic Books.

Daniels, Arleen. In press. Invisible Careers:
Women’s Work in the Volunteer World. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Durkheim, Emile. 1960. (1950). Professional Ethics
and Civic Morals. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

Fararo, Thomas J., and John V. Skvoretz. 1985.
“Unification Research Programs in Theoretical
Sociology: Synthesizing Two Structural
Theories.” Working paper, Department of Sociol-
ogy, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
29208.

Feld, Scott L. 1981. ‘The Focused Organization of
Social Ties.” American Journal of Sociology
86:1015-35.

Galaskiewicz, Joseph. 1979. “The Structure of
Community Organization Networks.” Social
Forces 57:1346-64.

Goldschmidt, Walter. 1947. As You Sow. Glencoe,
IL: Free Press.

Gans, Herbert J. 1967. The Levittowners, New York:
Random House.

Gordon, Janet, and Diana Reische. 1982. The Vol-
unteer Powerhouse: The Junior League. New
York: Rutledge Press.

Gordon, Wayne, and Nicholas Babchuk. 1966. “A
Typology of Voluntary Associations.” Pp. 24-30
in The Government of Associations, edited by
William A. Glaser and David L. Sills. Totowa,
NJ: Bedminster Press.

Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. “The Strength of Weak
Ties.” American Journal of Sociology 78:1360-80.

. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts

and Careers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

Press.
. 1984. “Structural Inertia and Organizational
Change.”’ American Sociological Review
49:149_64.

Haavio-Manilla, Elina. 1967. “Sex Differentiation in
Role Expectations and Performance.” Journal of
Marriage and the Family 29:568-78.

Hausknecht, Murray. 1962. The Joiners. Totowa,
NJ: Bedminster Press, pp. 71-82.

Hawley, Amos. 1983. ‘‘Human Ecological and Marx-
ian Theories.” American Journal of Sociology
89:904—17.

Heise, David R., and George W. Bohrnstedt. 1970.
“Validity, Invalidity and Reliability.” Pp. 104-38
in Sociological Methodology 1970, edited by
Edgar F. Borgatta. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Huber, Joan. 1976. ‘Toward a Socio-Technological
Theory of the Women’s Movement.” Social
Problems 23:371-88.

Hughes, Everett C. 1943. French Canada in Transi-
tion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jacoby, Arthur, and Nicholas Babchuk. 1963. ‘‘In-
strumental and Expressive Voluntary Associ-
ations.’’ Sociology and Social Research
47:461-71.

Jones, J. and G. Crawford. 1980. “‘Work and Net-
work: The Relationship of the Social Circle to the
Economic Action of Poor Men.” Paper presented
at the American Sociological Association meet-
ings, New York. August, 1980.

Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1977. Men and Women of
the Corporation. New York: Basic Books.

Kornhauser, William. 1959. The Politics of Mass
Society. New York: Free Press.

Knoke, David, and James R. Wood. 1981. Organized
for Action: Commitment in Voluntary Organi-
zations, New Brunswick: Rutgers University
Press.

Lin, Nan, William M. Ensel, and John C. Vaughn.
1983. “Social Resources and Strength of Ties:
Structural Factors in Occupational Status Attain-
ment.” American Sociological Review 46:393-
405.

Lin, Nan, John C. Vaughn, and William M. Ensel.
1981. “Social Resources and Occupational Status
Attainment.” Social Forces 59:1163-81.

Lundberg, George, Mirra Komarovsky and Mary
Alice McInery. 1934. Leisure: A Suburban Study.
New York: Columbia University Press.

Lynd, Robert S., and Helen M. Lynd. 1929.
Middletown. New York: Harcourt.

. 1937. Middletown in Transition. New York:
Harcourt.

MacLeod, Margo W. 1984. ‘Influential Women Vol-
unteers: Reexamining the Concept of Power.”
Paper presented at American Sociological Associ-
ation meetings, San Antonio.

McPherson, J. Miller. 1983a. “‘An Ecology of Affili-
ation.” American Sociological Review 48:519-32.

. 1983b. “The Size of Voluntary Associ-

ations.” Social Forces 61:1044—64.

. 1981. “Voluntary Affiliation: A Structural

Approach.”’ Pp. 325-52 in Continuities in

Structural Inquiry, edited by Peter M. Blau and

Robert K. Merton. London: Sage.

. 1982. ‘‘Hypernetwork sampling: duality and

differentiation among voluntary organizations.”

Social Networks 3:225-49.
McPherson, J. Miller, and Lynn Smith-Lovin. 1972.
‘“Women and Weak Ties: Differences by Sex in the
Size of Voluntary Organizations.” American
Journal of Sociology 87:883-904.

Mason, Karen Oppenheim. 1984. “Commentary:
Strober’s Theory of Occupational Sex Segrega-
tion.” Pp. 157-70 in Sex Segregation in the Work-
place, edited by Barbara Reskin. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.

Mayhew, Bruce H., J. Miller McPherson, Roger W.
Levinger, and Thomas W. James. 1972. “System
Size and Structural Differentiation in Formal Or-
ganizations: A Baseline Generator.” American
Sociological Review 37:629-33.

Minnis, Mhyra S. 1952. ‘Cleavage in Women’s Or-
ganizations: A Reflection of the Social Structure of
a City.” American Sociological Review 18:47-53.

Moore, Joan W. 1961. ‘Patterns of Women’s Partici-
pation in Voluntary Associations.” American
Journal of Sociology 66:592-98.

Myrdal, Alva, and Viola Klein. 1970. Women’s Two
Roles: Home and Work. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.

Ostrander, Susan. 1984. Women of the Upper Class.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Parsons, Talcott. 1951. The Social System. New
York: Free Press.

Rogers, David L. and Willis J. Goudy. 1981. ‘“Com-
munity Structure and Occupational Segregation
1960 and 1970.” Rural Sociology 46:263-81.

Rose, Arnold. 1951. “The Adequacy of Women’s
Expectations for Adult Roles.” Social Forces
30:69-77.

Ross, Eileen. 1958. “Control and Leadership in
Women’s Groups: An Analysis of Philanthropic
Money Raising Activity.’’ Social Forces
37:124-31.

Scott, John Jr. 1957. ‘Membership and Participation
in Voluntary Associations.” American Sociologi-
cal Review 22:315-26.

Sieder, Violet M. 1965. ‘‘Volunteers” in the Ency-
clopedia of Social Work. Vol. 15. New York: Na-
tional Association of Social Workers.
Slater, Carol. 1960. “‘Class Differences in Definition
of Role and Membership in Voluntary Associ-
ations Among Urban Married Women.” American
Journal of Sociology 65:616-19.

Smith, Constance, and Anne Freedman. 1972. Vol-
untary Associations: Perspectives on the Lit-
erature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Sorokin, Pitrim. 1941. Social and Cultural
Dynamics. Vol. 4. New York: American Book Co.

Spradley, James P., and Brenda J. Mann. 1975. The
Cocktail Waitress: Women’s Work in a Man's
World. New York: Wiley.

Strasser, Susan. 1982. Never Done: A History of
American Housework. New York: Basic Books.

Strober, Myra H. 1984. ‘Toward a General Theory
of Occupational Sex Segregation: The Case of
Public School Teaching.” Pp. 144-56 in Sex
Segregation in the Workplace, edited by Barbara
Reskin. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

Szafran, Robert F. 1982. “What Kinds of Firms Hire
and Promote Women and Blacks? A Review of the
Literature.’’ The Sociological Quarterly
23:171-90.

de Tocqueville, Alexis. 1969. (1835, 1840). Democ-
racy in America (edited by J. P. Mayer; translated
by George Lawrence). Garden City, NY: Double-
day.

Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1964. “Voluntary Associ-
ations.” Pp. 318-37 in Political Parties and Na-
tional Integration in Tropical Africa, edited by
James S. Coleman and Carl G. Rosberg. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.

Warner, W. Loyd, and Paul S. Lunt. 1941. The
Social Life of a Modern Community. New Haven:
Yale University Press.

Warner, W. Lloyd, and Associates. 1949. Democ-
racy in Jonesville. New York: Harper.

Whiting, Beatrice. 1980. ‘Culture and Social Be-
havior: A Model for the Development of Social
Behavior.” Ethos 8:95-116.

Wirth, Louis. 1938. ‘Urbanism as a Way of Life.”
American Journal of Sociology 44:8-20.
