@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2090507 ?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
ena to a field study of schizophrenia. I

have selected schizophrenia as the focus
of discussion for several reasons. Schizophre-
nia disables; it does not kill. Approximately
one hospital bed out of four in the United
States is occupied by a schizophrenic patient,
who has been hospitalized—on the average
—for several years. The schizophrenic is
always with us. How, and why, he comes
into existence is an enigma. When society
is faced with an unsolved health problem as
severe as schizophrenia, research is not only
worthwhile, but necessary. The strategic
objective is to gain the knowledge to con-
trol the problem. The requisite knowledge
may not be forthcoming in this generation,
but we should proceed to the task imbued
with the conviction that the rigorous applica-
tion of scientific methods will give us the
knowledge we need to solve the problem at
hand.

Te lecture may be viewed as prolegom-
health and disease. They are the clinical,
laboratory, and epidemiological methods.
Categorized briefly, the clinical method is
directed toward individuals suffering from
disease. The clinician focuses his attention
upon the patient before him. The questions
he asks, and the techniques he uses during
the examination establish, in his judgment,
the health or illness of the patient. To the
clinician “health” is the absence of disease;
“sickness” is the presence of signs and symp-
toms of disease. The laboratory method
examines fluids, excretions, or tissues taken
from the bodies of patients. The laboratory
scientist may not see the patient. He directs
his attention to the disease process reflected
in the fluid or tissue he examines. The
epidemiological method studies disease and
phenomena associated with disease in a
population of individuals; some are “sick,”
others are “well.”

Epidemiology is not the study of epidem-
ics, even though this is a common belief.
The Greek phrase “epi-demos”—concerning
the people—should be of as much interest
to sociologists as to physicians. The focus of
epidemiology is to relate the ways of living
of a population, or a specific sub-group in
it, to the observed distribution of a partic-
ular disease. The epidemiologist tries to
determine who develops the disease, when,
and under what conditions.?

Goldberger’s * researches on pellagra are
a classic illustration of epidemiological
method. In the early years of this century,
pellagra was a common disease in the south-
ern part of the United States. It was believed
to be spread from person to person by infec-
tion. Goldberger first studied pellagra in a
mental hospital. He saw that some patients
suffered from pellagra when they were
admitted, whereas others developed the dis-
ease in the hospital. Goldberger observed
close contacts between members of the staff
and the patients, but no staff members
suffered from pellagra. The patients and
staff were in intimate contact on the wards
day after day; the patients developed pella-
gra, but the staff did not. Goldberger inferred
from this fact that pellagra is not an infec-
tious disease. He then looked for something
that differentiated the two groups. He noted
that the staff did not eat with the patients.
Furthermore, the staff ate different foods.
He developed the working hypothesis that
differences in diet might explain why pa-
tients developed pellagra, but the staff did
not. Goldberger then worked with a col-
league, who tried an improved diet on a
series of women patients afflicted with pella-
gra. The women responded remarkably to
this diet. Other institutions where pellagra
was common were then studied. In one
orphanage, for example, pellagra was seen
in children above six years of age. Research
showed that children under six years of age
were given two cups of fresh milk daily;
children six years of age and older were not
given any milk, and fresh meat only once a
week. Again the experimental method was
used to test the hypothesis that diet is re-
lated to the development of pellagra. All the
children in the orphanage were given milk
every day, and fresh meat four times a week
for a year. No case of pellagra developed in
this orphanage during the year of the exper-
iment.

In another experiment, a group of mental
patients were given special diets for a year:
no one developed the disease, whereas forty-
seven per cent of the patients in a control
group, in the same hospital, had a recurrence
of pellagra. Other studies included the
experimental development of pellagra in
convicts. Diet was the answer; but what
ingredients in the diet? Goldberger, and those
who have followed him, traced the etiology
of pellagra to the vitamin B complex,
nicotinic acid, and the action of tryptophane.

This sketch indicates that the epidemio-
logical method is inductive and inferential.
The co-existence of attributes, as well as
variables, with health, or disease, is deter-
mined by studying a defined population and
its constituent parts in time, place, and cir-
cumstance. Attributes and variables per-
tinent to epidemiological study include such
things as sex, race, age, occupation, educa-
tion, diet, family composition, group customs,
and personal habits. In addition, it encom-
passes genetic composition, biochemistry,
other forms of plant and animal life, and
geographical environment. In brief, ep-
idemiology is the application of ecological
principles to the study of health, as well as
disease, in a society. Its working hypotheses
are conditional: If this, then that.

The clinical, laboratory, and epidemiologi-
cal methods have a common interest: disease
in individuals. The clinician, the laboratory
analyst, and the epidemiologist utilize the
findings of his colleagues in adjacent fields
to solve problems posed by disease. The tri-
umph of the epidemiological method has
been its utility in helping researchers trace
out, step by step, interdependencies between
the life ways of individuals and the appear-
ance or non-appearance of disease in a popu-
lation. The epidemiological method should be
useful in our efforts to unravel the etiology of
the tangled skein of human misery the medi-
cal profession refers to as schizophrenia.
young male, who had “degenerated into a
state of dementia,” was described.* Three
years later variants of this psychosis ® were
identified. By the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury dementia praecox had been incorporated
into Kraepelin’s nosological scheme. The
name “schizophrenia” was introduced into
the literature in 1911.7 The term “schizo-
phrenia” has replaced almost entirely the
earlier “dementia praecox.”

Six types of theories have been put for-
ward since 1900 to account for the etiology
of schizophrenia. The theory of a pathologi-
cal lesion in the brain was enunciated first
in 1904.8 After Noguchi,® in 1911, demon-
strated that general paresis is traceable to
an infection of Treponema pallidum, the
“schizococcus” was pursued with vigor,!°
but without success.1t The search for an in-
fectious agent in schizophrenia goes on, but
the uncritical enthusiasm of earlier days is
lacking.

The second type of etiological theory is
biochemical in origin. Biochemical explana-
tions of mental disorders are as old as Hip-
4B. Morel, Traités des maladies mentales, Paris:
Masson, 1860, p. 566.

5J. L. Kahlbaum, Gruppierung der psychischen
Krankheiten, Danzig: Kafemann, 1863.

6E. Kraepelin, Dementia Praecox and Para-
phrenia, translated from the Eighth German Edi-
tion, Edinburgh: Livingston, 1925.

7E. Bleuler, Dementia Praecox, oder die Gruppe
der Schizophrenien, 1911, translated into English by
Joseph Tinken, New York: International Universi-
ties Press, 1950; p. 1.

8A. Alzheimer, “Histologische Studien zur Dif-
fernzialdiagnose der Progressiven Paralyse,” His-
tologische und Histopathologische Arbeiten ueber die
Grosshirnrinde mit besonderer Beruecksichtingung
der Pathologischen Anatomie der Geisteskrank-
heiten, Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1904, Volume I, p. 18;
F. Nissl, Zur Histopathologie der Paralytischen
Rindenerkrankung, Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1904,
Volume I, p. 315.

9H. Noguchi and J. W. Moore, ““A Demonstration
of Treponema Pallidum in the Brain in Cases of
General Paralysis,” Journal of Experimental Medi-
cine, 17 (1913), p. 232.

10 Walter L. Bruetsch, “Mental Disorders Arising
from Organic Diseases,” in The Biology of Mental
Health and Disease (108 authors), New York:
Hoeber, 1952, pp. 303-326.

11Henry Cotton’s ill-starred “Focal Infection
Theory” may be traced to this school of thought.
For a discussion of the point, see: Joseph Zubin,
“Biometric Methods in Psychopathology,” in Paul
H. Hoch and Joseph Zubin, editors, Depression,
New York: Grune and Stratton, 1954, p. 126.
who first applied the theoretical structure of
psychoanalytic thought to the etiology of
schizophrenia.1® The psychoanalytic position
has been restated in numerous ways by more
recent writers. Its validity still rests upon
faith and assertion.

The fifth type of etiological theory is a
sociogenic one. It developed out of psycho-
genic theory. Sullivan’s 1" theory of disor-
dered relations between a child and his par-
ents represented a deviation, if not a clean
break, from the Freudian position. The most
recent variant of the interpersonal explana-
tion for schizophrenia is the “double bind”
hypothesis enunciated by Bateson and his as-
sociates.18 The “double bind” theory is based
on the proposition that schizophrenia is the
product of faulty communication between
human beings. An individual who is en-
meshed in social situations, where he receives
conflicting messages on different psychologi-
cal levels, develops deviant response patterns
to handle the messages he receives. The the-
ory assumes that schizophrenia is the indi-
vidual’s adjustment to a pathogenic family
environment—a family in which an individ-
ual “can’t win” by acting in ways our society
calls “normal.”

The sixth variety of etiological theory is
eclectic. Adolf Meyer accepted from Kra-
epelin and Bleuler the concept that schizo-
phrenia is a nosological entity, but he re-
jected their ideas of etiology.1® Meyer taught
that schizophrenia is a reaction to the forces
which impinge upon the schizophrenic during
the course of his life. Meyer insisted that
schizophrenia, and other functional mental
illnesses, have multiple etiological bases.
Every individual is a product of many forces
and experiences—heredity, body chemistry,
nervous system, family, station in life, psy-
chological experiences, and so on. The psy-
chobiological approach is represented cur-
rently by Leighton.”°

The different etiological theories of schizo-
phrenia have been substantiated only to the
satisfaction of their protagonists. As a conse-
quence, controversies revolve around the na-
ture, phenomenology, onset, and course of
this illness. What we know of schizophrenia
has been derived almost entirely from the ob-
servation of hospitalized cases. The classic
psychiatric approach has been to reconstruct,
post factum, in elaborate detail, a case his-
tory, or a few case histories. Much of this
writing has been ad hoc speculation to illus-
trate the theoretical position of the author.
When an investigator looks hard enough for
an explanation of something he sees, or
thinks he sees, he usually finds it. In the
process he may create a myth, mistake it
for reality, then vehemently defend his posi-
tion. Meanwhile, the search for knowledge is
diverted.

Current controversies over schizophrenia
are a heritage, in large part, of nineteenth
century theories of disease. Throughout the
nineteenth century, formal medical theory
taught that the etiology of all diseases could
be traced to constitutional predisposition, to
changes in tissue, or to changes in cellular
structure and function. Disease was dysfunc-
tion within the physiological system, how-
ever caused. The view was compatible with
the Morgagnian theory of pathology. Gio-
vanni Morgagni (1682-1771), the eighteenth
century founder of modern pathology, taught
that every symptom of disease reflects an
underlying lesion in the body. Morgagni
stressed pathology which could be seen, felt,
weighed, or identified by microscopic, histo-
logical, or chemical analyses. The researches

 

reprinted in A. Lief, The Commonsense Psychiatry
of Dr. Adolf Meyer, New York: McGraw-Hill,
1958, pp. 247-259.

20 Alexander Leighton, My Name Is Legion, New
York: Basic Books, 1959.
of Louis Pasteur (1822-1895), Robert Koch
(1843-1910), and other nineteenth century
scientists strengthened the doctrine that a
specific disease is caused by a particular
pathogenic organism. In the early years of
the twentieth century, every discovery in
microbiology and organic chemistry intensi-
fied the search for the specific agents which
cause disease. When the researches of Gregor
Mendel (1822-1884) became known, in the
early years of the present century, the tradi-
tional medical assumption of constitutional
predisposition in disease was bulwarked by
genetic evidence.

Schizophrenia is of so much interest to
psychiatrists that the Second International
Congress for Psychiatry, held in 1957, lim-
ited its program to this illness. In spite of
this interest—perhaps because of it—there
was not a single concept or piece of evidence
put forward by a participant that was not
rejected or challenged by someone else. Even
the name “schizophrenia” was disapproved
of by several people.?! Psychiatrists, in brief,
disagree about the phenomenology, etiology,
and therapeutic course of schizophrenia.
Moreover, there is controversy over what
points they agree or disagree. This is con-
fusing to a non-psychiatrist.

The fact is, we do not know what causes
the disease, disorder, or reaction the psychi-
atrist labels schizophrenia. Epidemiological
study may furnish the answer. I do not say
it will. At the very least, it will provide a
different perspective on the problem. When
we observe persons in their homes, their
family and friendship groupings, their neigh-
borhoods, at work and at play, we see them
in their natural habitats. When we study
persons and groups in the socio-cultural en-
vironments which enmesh them, we gain
new knowledge about their motivations, as-
pirations, frustrations, conflicts, joys, and
sorrows. Systematic and sophisticated study
of the ecology of human life may unravel
the etiological threads that lead to schizo-
phrenia. I believe a series of carefully de-
signed field studies of mental illnesses should
be planned and carried out in future years.
(1) The Study Group. The first issue re-
volves around the population to be studied.
Ideally, the entire population of a society
should be included in a definitive study.
However, we are not likely to achieve this
desideratum for a long time. The permissible
alternative is a probability sample of suffi-
cient size to keep the standard error small.
If we study a sample, other problems that
are associated with schizophrenia, such as
the age of onset, need to be considered. For
example, should persons above sixty years
of age be included? Should an Index indi-
vidual or an entire family be studied? How
far should family relationships be followed?
Numerous additional questions should be
considered in the planning phase of the
suggested study.

Every experienced field researcher knows
that before a study can succeed he must gain
the cooperation of the persons in his sample.
In a study dealing with a subject carrying
the emotional charge that mental disease 2”
does, gaining the support of a sample of in-
dividuals for the length of time essential to
the kinds of studies envisaged here is likely
to be a complicated, time-consuming, and
exhausting task. Nevertheless, from the ex-
perience we have gained in an intensive field
study of schizophrenia in Puerto Rico, I am
convinced that the cooperation of adults in
a sample can be gained. Our Puerto Rican
study requires that each person drawn in the
sample be given a two-and-one-half to three-
hour psychiatric examination. Whether the
examining psychiatrist diagnoses the sample
person as schizophrenic or as having “no
mental illness,” we study him in elaborate
detail. The schizophrenic person, as well as
one with “no mental illness’—and other
adult members of their households—is inter-
viewed by psychiatric social workers and so-
cial scientists in the home, from one-hun-
dred-and-ten to one-hundred-and-twenty-five
hours. We mention this to indicate a field
study need not be overwhelmed by the diffi-
culties of working with a population of non-
patients, who are “sick” or “well.”

Field studies of mental illnesses should
not be “one shot” operations. The population
should be studied for at least one year; but
five, ten, or possibly twenty years would be
more desirable. However, the longer the pe-
riod of observation the more difficult the
task of following individuals from place to
place. Staff problems, too, become compli-
cated in long-range studies. Nevertheless, in
my judgment, such studies are necessary.

(2) Diagnosis. Diagnosis is a field prob-
lem of primary importance. Diagnosis is not
easy even in diseases where there is an iden-
tifiable organic condition, and the clinician
or researcher has a diagnostic instrument to
aid him—such as an X-ray machine or a
chemical test. The problem is more acute in
schizophrenia. Here there is no chemical or
physical test. Diagnosis is dependent solely
upon the clinician’s judgment. A number of
different subjective factors may enter the
process: the psychiatrist’s conception of
schizophrenia, the etiological doctrine he
holds, how the person being examined thinks,
talks, gestures, and the affect he presents.
However, the subject’s reactions may be re-
sponses to his cultural experiences and his
judgments about the psychiatrist. Other fac-
tors—such as age, sex, race, religion, and so-
cial status—may enter into the diagnostic
formulation.

Psychiatrists are concerned about the re-
liability and the validity of diagnoses. The
reports of competent and responsible men
who have wrestled with these questions show
that the subject deserves attention. For ex-
ample, Hoch recently reported that the ratio
of first admissions diagnosed as manic de-
pressives in comparison with schizophrenics
reversed itself over a period of five years in
one state hospital system. Hoch attributes
this reversal not to a shift in the distribution
of disease in the state’s population, but to a
change in personnel and policy in the hos-
pital system.?? Pasamanick supplemented
this report with a statement of findings from
the University hospital with which he is
identified. Pasamanick found significant dif-
ferences between the diagnostic classifica-
tions placed upon patients with functional
psychoses from one ward to another. On one
ward, the diagnoses changed when the ward
administrator changed. The interesting thing
is that the diagnoses had been made by resi-
dents, as well as the ward administrator, who
was a trained psychiatrist.24 The point to
remember about these reports is that they
are based upon hospitalized patients.

The problem of diagnosis is more compli-
cated when a researcher is attempting to as-
sess the mental status of a non-patient group.
Leighton has furnished us some data on
what happens when this is done. In the Mid-
Town Study, New York City, six psychia-
trists were asked to read the field protocols
on fifty white, adult males. The psychiatrists
were instructed to assess whether each man
was mentally “well” or mentally “ill”; fif-
teen were placed in an equivocal category,
and five individuals were diagnosed as
“well.” However, the five men who were di-
agnosed as “well” differed for each of the six
psychiatrists. One psychiatrist’s five “wells”
were in another psychiatrist’s “sickest”
group.”> Subsequent to this experience, the
director of the project sat down with his
fellow psychiatrists and worked out an oper-
ational procedure that produced reliability
between the psychiatrists. But we do not
know if the diagnoses they made are valid,
or merely the product of consensus within
the group. These reports indicate that the
validity and the reliability of diagnosis in
functional mental disorders represent diffi-
cult problems.

Currently, psychiatry does not have a
standard test which researchers may use to
diagnose any of the functional mental ill-
nesses. A standardized, valid, diagnostic test
would enable a researcher to determine the
presence or absence of functional mental ill-
ness in individuals. Until this problem is
solved, research into mental illness will con-
tinue to be hampered. In sum, before we can
move forward with confidence in epidemio-
logical studies we need to establish criteria
to differentiate a schizophrenic from a non-
schizophrenic person. For present purposes,
we shall assume this issue can be solved by
careful planning, operational definitions,
training of a field staff, and pilot studies.

(3) The Measurement of Risk. The third
issue revolves around the question of how we
may relate socio-cultural factors to the de-
velopment of schizophrenia. This issue is the
core of the epidemiological method. Epidemi-
ological studies directed toward uncovering
the etiology of a disease often pass through
two principal phases: the descriptive and the
determinative. The descriptive phase is con-
cerned with relating the “sick” to the “well.”
The determinative phase tests inferences as
to cause, developed in the descriptive phase.
The essence of descriptive epidemiology is
the comparison of risks in a population. Dur-
ing the descriptive phase of a study the popu-
lation should be observed so carefully that a
statement of the risk of developing the dis-
ease under examination is possible.

The measurement of comparative risks is
stated as a rate. A rate is computed by divid-
ing the number of cases of the disease by the
population at risk.26 The principal measures
of risk are expressed in the concepts of inci-
dence and prevalence. Incidence is a measure
of the way a disease attacks a population,
whereas prevalence is a measure of the extent
of suffering in the population. Incidence is
defined as the number of cases of a disease
that develop in a population during a stated
interval of time. Prevalence is the number of
cases in a population at some point in time.
Prevalence includes all cases active in a pop-
ulation, whether new or old, whereas only
new cases are encompassed in incidence.
Either incidence or prevalence has meaning
only when it is viewed as a measure of the
risks individuals in a defined population en-
counter of becoming ill of a specified disease,
or suffering from it, at some point in time.27

Determination of the number of “active”
cases in a defined population during an in-
terval of time is a requisite step toward a
solution of the problem of etiology. This
means individuals who are “sick,” but undi-
agnosed and not being treated, as well as
persons who are under medical care. So far
as mental illness is concerned, we cannot
continue to base studies on treated cases
only, and then attempt to draw inferences
from this segment of the population of ill
persons, as if it represented the universe of
“sick” individuals. Who reaches a psychi-
atric facility may be more a product of the
social system than of the disease process.
Evidence is mounting that only a portion of
individuals suffering from schizophrenia, or
any other mental illness, are treated by psy-
chiatric hospitals, clinics, and practitioners.
The others are cared for by their families,
non-psychiatric physicians, ministers, drug-
gists, friends and neighbors, or through their
own efforts.
Each individual in a field study focused on
etiology ought to be examined at the begin-
ning of a period of observation and again at
the end of it. Two examinations are a mini-
mum in a one-year study. Over a longer
period, periodic examinations are indicated.
An examination at the beginning and the end
of the period of observation would provide
the elementary data essential for the calcu-
lation of “true” prevalence and incidence
rates. (I am making the assumption that a
psychiatric examination can determine a
“new” case of schizophrenia from an “old”
one. This assumption itself deserves extended
discusion.) Each rate ought to be determined
with specific factors controlled statistically
—such as age, sex, and socio-economic status.
This procedure would enable the researcher
to see if the amount of illness clusters in se-
lected segments of the population.

The cases of schizophrenia that become
active during an interval of observation
would be of primary importance from the
viewpoint of unraveling etiology. The “new”
cases enable the researcher to determine how
the disorder attacks individuals. The data
should be controlled for specified attributes
and variables, which the researcher suspects
are related to the presence or absence of the
disease. If the “‘new” cases cluster in a par-
ticular portion of the population, the re-
searcher has located a possible clue to etio-
logical factors. When this occurs the re-
searcher understandably is encouraged. This
is where he should exercise great caution. In
his enthusiasm he may misinterpret clues
and draw false inferences. A false lead will
only confound future research. Observed dif-
ferences may be a product of the research
design, or the investigator may be drawing
conclusions from incomparable data.?$
Each individual in a field study focused on
etiology ought to be examined at the begin-
ning of a period of observation and again at
the end of it. Two examinations are a mini-
mum in a one-year study. Over a longer
period, periodic examinations are indicated.
An examination at the beginning and the end
of the period of observation would provide
the elementary data essential for the calcu-
lation of “true” prevalence and incidence
rates. (I am making the assumption that a
psychiatric examination can determine a
“new” case of schizophrenia from an “old”
one. This assumption itself deserves extended
discusion.) Each rate ought to be determined
with specific factors controlled statistically
—such as age, sex, and socio-economic status.
This procedure would enable the researcher
to see if the amount of illness clusters in se-
lected segments of the population.

The cases of schizophrenia that become
active during an interval of observation
would be of primary importance from the
viewpoint of unraveling etiology. The “new”
cases enable the researcher to determine how
the disorder attacks individuals. The data
should be controlled for specified attributes
and variables, which the researcher suspects
are related to the presence or absence of the
disease. If the “‘new” cases cluster in a par-
ticular portion of the population, the re-
searcher has located a possible clue to etio-
logical factors. When this occurs the re-
searcher understandably is encouraged. This
is where he should exercise great caution. In
his enthusiasm he may misinterpret clues
and draw false inferences. A false lead will
only confound future research. Observed dif-
ferences may be a product of the research
design, or the investigator may be drawing
conclusions from incomparable data.?$

28The need for caution is illustrated by the
following incident: The biochemical laboratory of
the National Institute of Mental Health was study-
ing the urine of a sample of carefully diagnosed
schizophrenic patients and a matched sample of
non-schizophrenic individuals. The research was
directed toward the determination of the quantity
of phenolic acids excreted in a standardized interval
of time. The researchers found four compounds in
the urine from the schizophrenics that were present
in significantly higher amounts than the same com-
pounds in the urine of the control group. They
also found one compound in the urine of the con-
trols that was present in significantly higher

When the comparison of rates reveals a
clustering of illness in a particular portion of
the population and a relative absence of the
disease in other portions, the researcher is in
a position to formulate working hypotheses
regarding etiology. If coexistence is found
between the presence or absence of disease
and the way of life of an individual or social
group, then the researcher should examine
painstakingly the conditions—ecological, so-
cio-cultural, and so on—under which individ-
uals live who are high risks, as well as low
risks. By close, systematic study of the life
ways of individuals and groups the epidemi-
ologist may be able to learn how the disease
process is related to the circumstances in
which it develops. Close scrutiny of the hab-
its and customs of persons who are afflicted
with the disease being studied, as well as a
comparable series of individuals who are free
of the disease, is a variant of the “treated”
versus “control” procedures so widely used in
experimental studies. The epidemiologist
simulates experimental procedure by the
comparison of two groups of differential
risks.

Systematic field study of the processes
which give rise to schizophrenic, as well as
non-schizophrenic, behavior is indicated at
the present time. When this is done, and I
think it will be done eventually, socio-cul-
tural factors should be studied along with
heredity, biochemical processes, organic in-

 

amounts than in the schizophrenics. The researchers
thought they had a real clue until a colleague in the
laboratory, who had had experience as an agricul-
tural chemist, pointed out that the four compounds
found in the urine of the schizophrenics were
metabolites of substances in coffee. The compound
found in the urine of the normal control group
was a derivative of the oil of wintergreen. The
researchers then observed the activities of the
schizophrenics, who were hospitalized, and ques-
tioned the normal controls, who were not hos-
pitalized. They soon discovered that the schiz-
ophrenics drank several more cups of coffee each
day than the normals. Moreover, the normals
cleaned their teeth with commercial toothpastes; the
schizophrenics did not. Oil of wintergreen is a
common flavoring ingredient in toothpaste. The
chemical findings for the schizophrenics, as well as
the controls, may be attributed to the social situa-
tions in which the two groups lived. The source
of this experience is: Seymour S. Kety, “Current
Biochemical Theories of Schizophrenia,” Lecture
presented by The Yale Medical Society, New Haven,
Connecticut: Yale University, November 10, 1959.
sults, and psychological mechanisms. The
possible etiological effects of each of these
factors probably can be understood only in
their concomitant interdependencies.

From the viewpoint of sociological theory,
it would be desirable to postulate factors in
the socio-cultural matrix which, directly or
indirectly, give rise to disordered behavior in
an individual. In doing this, the theorist
should state clearly what he believes the con-
nection is between socio-cultural factors,
which impinge upon persons under defined
conditions, and specified behavioral conse-
quences. To investigate possible etiological
linkages between socio-cultural variables and
the development of schizophrenic behavior in
the individual, the investigator needs to dif-
ferentiate between independent and depend-
ent variables. This elementary principle is
overlooked commonly in psychiatric writing
and research. In this field the tendency is to
deal with many variables, on several levels,
without specification.
The called-for theoretical models should
be formulated so precisely that they can be
tested empirically in this society, as well as
in other societies and cultures. Field studies
are needed sorely in mental illness research.
The replication of each study is also neces-
sary.

I hope I have not overstressed how little
we know about schizophrenia. The question
is relative. If our ideal is the precise knowl-
edge to prevent this disease, then our
achievement is zero. On the other hand, when
we compare what we do know with zero, our
achievement is infinite. Nevertheless, the
problem is still before us: what gives rise to
the phenomena we call schizophrenia? The
answer can come only from theoretically-
oriented and _ methodologically-disciplined
future research.
