American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
During recent decades, women’s participa-
tion in the labor market has steadily
increased, but has there been a concurrent
gender convergence in unpaid domestic
work? Empirical studies document some
convergence of women’s and men’s domes-
tic work time, but women still do the
majority of housework, particularly the less
enjoyable routine tasks such as cleaning
and laundry (Bianchi et al. 2000; Bianchi,
Robinson, and Milkie 2006; Blair and
Lichter 1991; Gershuny 2000; Hook 2010;
Robinson and Godbey 1997). Because men
continue to spend more time than women on
paid work, women’s continued specialization
This article studies the relationship between household income and housework time across
33 countries. In most countries, low-income individuals do more housework than their high-
income counterparts; the differences are even greater for women’s domestic work time. The
analysis shows that the difference between rich and poor women’s housework time falls with
economic development and rises with overall economic inequality. I use a cross-national
reinterpretation of arguments from the historical time-use literature to show that this is attrib-
utable to the association between economic development and the diffusion of household
technologies and to the association between economic inequality and the prevalence of ser-
vice consumption among high-income households. Results for a direct measure of technology
diffusion provide striking evidence for the first interpretation. The findings question the
widespread notion that domestic technologies have had little or no impact on women’s
housework time. On a general level, I find that gender inequalities are fundamentally condi-
tioned by economic inequalities. A full understanding of the division of housework requires
social scientists to go beyond couple-level dynamics and situate households and individuals
within the broader social and economic structure.
separately analyze the domestic division of
labor, as it is linked not only to earnings
inequalities and women’s economic depen-
dence (Becker 1985; Budig and England
2001), but also to relationship satisfaction,
mental health, and other quality of life out-
comes (Coltrane 2000).

In recent years, research on the level and
determinants of housework time has increas-
ingly taken a comparative approach. This
important line of scholarship, exemplified by
Diefenbach (2002), Fuwa (2004), Geist
(2005), Knudsen and Werness (2008), and
Stier and Lewin-Epstein (2007), has enhanced
our understanding of the domestic division of
labor considerably. This article contributes to
this rapidly growing literature by investigating
cross-national variation in the impact of
household income, a potential determinant of
housework time that has so far received sur-
prisingly little attention in both comparative
and non-comparative work. More specifically,
I analyze cross-country variation in what I
refer to as the “‘rich—poor difference in house-
work time’’: that is, the difference in house-
work time between women and men from
the richest and the poorest 10th of a country’s
households. Borrowing terminology from the
health literature, I also refer to the extent of
these differences as the “housework—income
gradient.”

Recent housework literature treats income
primarily as a resource vis-a-vis one’s partner,
that is, as a determinant of (or proxy for) rel-
ative bargaining power. Income has received
much less attention as a resource that affords
access to domestic technologies, paid help,
restaurant meals, and goods such as prepared
food, all of which may be used to reduce
unpaid domestic work time (but see Cohen
1998; de Ruijter, Treas, and Cohen 2005; Spi-
tze 1999). Viewing income as a source of pur-
chasing rather than bargaining power may
suggest reinterpretations of the impact of
women’s relative resources (Gupta 2006). It
clearly draws attention to the fact that high-
income households will be able to reduce
the domestic workload in ways unavailable
to low-income households. This may result
in the status or class differences in housework
that have received some attention in historical
studies (Gershuny 2000; Vanek 1978) and
recent contributions by Gupta and his col-
leagues (Gupta 2006, 2007; Gupta et al.
2009).

In explaining cross-country variation in
the housework—income gradient, I draw on
the work of Gershuny and argue that the
variation can be accounted for by develop-
mental and inequality explanations. The
developmental explanation suggests that
economic development is associated with
the diffusion of labor-saving household
technologies into lower strata and will nar-
row differences in the housework time of
rich and poor households. The inequality
explanation claims that the housework—
income gradient will be steeper in societies
with high levels of wage and income
inequality, because households at the top
of the income distribution will shed a larger
portion of the domestic burden by employ-
ing paid help.
more unequal. Hence, the main goal of this
section is to identify the macro-level factors
shaping inequalities in appliance and service
use. It is clear that my argument hinges on
the assumption that household technologies
and domestic services really reduce house-
work time. I therefore briefly address wide-
spread skepticism about the time-saving
qualities of household technologies.

Doubts about whether household technolo-
gies really reduce housework time have been
around since 1974, when Joann Vanek pub-
lished her famous article on the domestic
work time of American housewives. Using
data from several time-budget studies, Vanek
showed that housewives’ domestic work time
did not fall between the 1920s and 1965,
despite the massive diffusion of household
technologies. Subsequent studies document
some decline in homemakers’ housework
time after 1965 (Bianchi et al. 2000; Bianchi
et al. 2006; Ramey 2009), but the skeptical
view retains a sizable following and is seem-
ingly supported by a recent study by Bittman,
Rice, and Wajcman (2004). Using Australian
time-budget data, Bittman and colleagues
find virtually no negative effects of actual
appliance ownership on women’s (and
men’s) housework time.' At first glance, these
results are even more challenging to the
notion that household technologies reduce
domestic work time, because Bittman and col-
leagues study the effect of appliance owner-
ship directly, while the evidence was rather
circumstantial in Vanek’s analysis. House-
wives’ domestic work time simply did not
fall during the era of appliance diffusion,
which leaves open the possibility that time
gains from automation were cancelled out
by other changes—an issue to which I will
return.

Upon reflection, however, Bittman and
colleagues’ findings do not rule out the possi-
bility that household technologies reduce
domestic work time. To see this, it is impor-
tant to note two interpretations of their results.
First, domestic technologies might not really
save labor or, put differently, they might not
enhance domestic productivity. If washing
machines do not reduce the time spent on
washing per shirt, it would not be surprising
to find that washing machine ownership and
laundry time are unrelated. Yet, neither Vanek
nor Bittman and colleagues question that most
domestic appliances are labor-saving in this
sense. Instead, these authors suggest that all
of the productivity gain associated with appli-
ance use seems to be taken in the form of
increased domestic output—and none of it in
the form of reduced housework time. A com-
mon explanation for Vanek’s findings, echoed
by Bittman and colleagues, is that the diffu-
sion of household technologies has been
accompanied by a rise in housekeeping stand-
ards. Many scholars do not think this concom-
itant rise of housekeeping standards and
appliance diffusion is purely coincidental.
Rather, they believe the rise in housekeeping
standards is a consequence of appliance diffu-
sion; macro-level versions of this endogeneity
argument point to the promotion of new
housekeeping ideals in the media and adver-
tising (Cowan 1983). Vanek (1974:120) her-
self stressed the performative qualities of
housework: “time spent in work, rather than
the results of the work, serves to express to
the homemaker and others that an equal con-
tribution is being made.”

The idea that housekeeping standards may
be endogenous to appliance use is important
and plausible. Yet, it seems rather unlikely
that all of the productivity gain associated
with appliance use would be taken in the
form of increased output. How can Bittman
and colleagues’ findings be reconciled with
the idea that some portion of automation-
induced productivity gains is taken in the
form of reduced housework time? To answer
this question, Gershuny (2004) argues that
unobserved exogenous differences—in house-
keeping standards, needs, and other dimen-
sions—ikely plague any attempt to estimate
the effects of appliance ownership on house-
work time directly. Furthermore, such unob-
served differences should be especially salient
if financial considerations play a minor role
when deciding whether to acquire a certain
technology, as is presumably the case for
most households in an affluent country like
Australia.

Unobserved differences may also account
for Vanek’s results. American housewives in
the 1960s were arguably very different from
their counterparts in the 1920s, when female
labor force participation was considerably
lower. Gershuny (2000) also proposes an
alternative explanation for Vanek’s findings,
stressing class-specific trends in housework
time. Using time-budget data for housewives
in the UK, Gershuny, like Vanek, finds that
their domestic work hours stayed roughly con-
stant until 1960, but he demonstrates that this
stability masks divergent  status-specific
trends. While housework hours decreased
considerably for low-status housewives,
high-status housewives experienced just the
opposite. Gershuny’s explanation for this pat-
tern is as follows: All classes, including the
lower strata, benefitted from the diffusion of
household technologies. For high-status
women, however, the gains from automation
were more than offset by another trend—for
a variety of reasons, including a narrowing
of the wage structure (Atkinson and Piketty
2007; Goldin and Margo 1992), high-status
women found it increasingly difficult to afford
domestic servants.

This account suggests that automation (i.e.,
the use of labor-saving technologies) is
a much more equally distributed means of
reducing the domestic workload than is out-
sourcing (i.e., the employment of paid help
or servants). In the remainder of this section,
I explore this idea more systematically and
trace the implications for cross-national varia-
tion in the housework—income gradient. My
argument rests on the observation that house-
hold appliances and domestic services differ
in two key respects: the former are tradable
goods whose production is capital-intensive,
while the latter furnish non-tradable goods
whose production is labor-intensive.

The fact that domestic appliances are trad-
able implies that cross-country variation in
their price should be limited, making access
to domestic appliances a matter of absolute
rather than relative income. The fact that their
production is capital-intensive further implies
that advances in production technology can
induce dramatic decreases in their real prices.
Such decreases have occurred in recent
decades; now, in more affluent countries,
even low-income households can afford a basic
stock of appliances. In less affluent countries,
where only those at the top of the income dis-
tribution can afford domestic technologies,
tich-poor differences in appliance penetration
and housework time should be greater.

Outsourcing-related variation in the house-
work—income gradient should follow a differ-
ent pattern. When hiring someone in your area
to clean your house or mow your lawn, the
price of this service is primarily a function
of that person’s wages (and the appropriate
taxes). Loosely speaking, this makes service
consumption a matter of relative rather than
absolute income. If your financial resources
are high relative to the wages of the geograph-
ically proximate service providers, there is lit-
tle to prevent you from making extensive use
of these services. But if your financial resour-
ces are not relatively high, you are unlikely to
outsource domestic labor. In any country,
individuals at the bottom of the income dis-
tribution will barely consume unsubsidized
domestic services. Cross-country variation
in the outsourcing-induced portion of house-
work differences will thus be shaped by dif-
ferences in high-income households’ service
consumption.

If services are what economists refer to as
normal goods, then individuals at the top of
a country’s income distribution should con-
sume more services the higher their income
and the lower services are priced. This simple
observation suggests that outsourcing-induced
cross-country variation in the housework—
income gradient will be considerable. It is
well-known that top incomes in a relatively
egalitarian country (e.g., Sweden) are much
lower than in a relatively unequal society
(e.g., the United States) (OECD 2008). The
non-tradability of domestic services further
implies that differences in wage and tax struc-
tures lead to considerable cross-country varia-
tion in service prices. Ideally, one would
explain the outsourcing-driven portion of the
rich-poor difference in housework by the ratio
of high-income households’ financial resour-
ces to service prices. Because good estimates
of this quantity are hard to obtain, it is, from
a practical point of view, rather fortunate
that it should be closely tracked by standard
measures of income inequality (i.e., the prices
of labor-intensive services are closely related
to the wages of the low-skilled, which in
turn are closely related to a country’s level
of income inequality).

The idea of a link between level of inequal-
ity and service consumption echoes Esping-
Andersen’s (1990, 1999) argument that the
low-skill service sector will flourish in coun-
tries like the United States whose institutional
framework permits high levels of inequality
(see also Freeman and Schettkat 2005).
Esping-Andersen (1990, see also Gershuny
2000) also identifies an alternative ‘“‘social
democratic post-industrial trajectory” that com-
bines service sector growth with low levels of
inequality through the subsidization and public
provision of services. Subsidies and public pro-
vision likely promote equality of access to
services and thus attenuate rich-poor differen-
ces in housework time. Empirically, however,
these public provisions are largely confined to
particular kinds of service jobs in areas such
as education and care work. When outsourcing
domestic chores such as cleaning, cooking, or
shopping, one must usually turn to the private
market.’ Because researchers who gathered
data for the 2002 wave of the International
Social Survey Programme (ISSP 2002) did
not collect information on childcare time, I do
not examine the impact of public provision of
childcare on the housework—income gradient.

This discussion yields some empirically
testable hypotheses concerning cross-national
variation in the difference between rich and
poor women’s housework time. Rich and
poor refer to women from the top and the
Hypothesis 2b specifies the mechanism under-
lying Hypothesis 2a. The empirical analysis
tests Hypothesis 2a by investigating the
country-level relationship between rich-poor
differences in housework and a country’s
level of income inequality. As for Hypothesis
2b, the ISSP contains some information on the
use of external help with housework, but the
quality of these data is questionable. I there-
fore do not examine Hypothesis 2b directly
in the main analysis (interested readers should
So far, the discussion has ignored an impor-
tant alternative perspective on the relation-
ship between income and housework time.
In the wake of Fuwa’s (2004) seminal study,
recent comparative housework literature
devotes considerable attention to Blumberg
and Coleman’s (1989) discount hypothesis.
In its original formulation, this hypothesis
claims that “‘the extent of male domination
at the more macro levels will act as a kind
of ‘discount rate’ on women’s exercise of eco-
nomic power at the more micro levels”
(Blumberg and Coleman 1989:231). Previous
studies have examined how macro-level gen-
der equality mediates the impact of three
individual-level resources: women’s relative
income, women’s paid work hours, and gen-
der ideology. Fuwa’s analysis indicates that
the impact of these variables is indeed stron-
ger in more egalitarian countries, but Knudsen
and Weerness’s (2008) recent study yields
mixed evidence. In the context of the present
study, it seems natural to view absolute
income as yet another potentially equalizing
resource. The discount hypothesis suggests
that income’s effect on the level and sharing
of housework should be stronger—that is,
the housework-income gradient should be
steeper—in more gender-egalitarian countries.
Ireland and East Germany with, respectively,
Great Britain and West Germany because the
macro variables are unavailable at the subna-
tional level.* In the case of Belgium, the
ISSP data only cover the region of Flanders
(with a few additional respondents from
Brussels but none from Wallonia). I adopt
the ISSP’s label and refer to this “country”
as Flanders. For reasons of data availability,
I have to assign the Belgian values of the
macro variables. A total of 33 countries are
available for the analysis. Only one respon-
dent per household was interviewed, so all
information, including partner’s housework
time, is based on respondents’ reports (for
a discussion of possible biases, see Kamo
[2000]). The analysis is confined to respond-
ents living with a partner. After listwise dele-
tion (i.e., exclusion of households with miss-
ing information), the sample includes 20,877
observations.> Country sample sizes range
from 255 for Switzerland to 1,157 for the
United Kingdom. I examined the sensitivity
of my main results to other missing data
techniques and the results are reassuring, par-
ticularly for the analyses of women’s house-
work time, which are the main focus of this
article. The most far-reaching sensitivity
analysis was to create multiple imputations
using Royston’s ice ado for Stata (Royston
2005) (see part F of the online supplement
for more details of this analysis).
The focal couple-level independent variable
is the household income decile. The regres-
sions use the top decile as the reference cat-
egory. Coefficients on belonging to the bot-
tom decile are my estimates of rich-poor
differences in the housework variables, with
positive values indicating that poor individu-
als spend more time on housework.° The
household income question is bracketed
rather than open-ended in about half of the
countries; in these cases, the top and bottom
income deciles can usually not be clearly
identified. However, approximately the
same fraction of households should be placed
in the extreme income groups for the esti-
mated rich—poor differences to be compara-
ble across countries. I therefore constructed
the deciles based on the order resulting
from first ordering households according to
their reported income and then, within each
reported-income group, according to their
predicted value from country-specific house-
hold income regressions.’ This procedure
guarantees that imputed income never trumps
reported income; a household with a lower
reported income is never ranked above
a household with a higher reported income.

In addition to household income, the
household-level models also include varying
sets of control variables. The reasons for
including controls are clear: I do not want to
attribute differences in housework to household
income that are really consequences of differ-
ential paid work commitment, family responsi-
bilities, gender ideology, or other factors. How-
ever, the inclusion of paid work measures may
entail endogeneity problems with unknown
consequences for the effects of interest (Jenkins
and O’Leary 1995). We should also be wary of
gender ideology, as theories of cognitive and
normative adaptation suggest that such atti-
tudes may be as much a consequence as a cause
of housework arrangements (Plutzer 1988). To
account for potential endogeneity problems,
my analysis encompasses specifications with
and without the presumably endogenous
regressors. Table Al in the Appendix lists the
covariates included in the different house-
hold-level specifications.

The following variables are included in at
least one of the household-level specifications
(see part A of the online supplement for addi-
tional information on the construction of the
measures):

Respondent is female.

Respondent's age. 1 enter a linear and
a squared term.

Respondent’s gender traditionalism. This
variable is an unweighted additive index con-
structed from five questions concerning gen-
der roles (see the online supplement for ques-
tion wordings). Cronbach’s alpha for this
index is .74. The original variables range
from 1 (“‘strong disagreement’) to 5 (“‘strong
agreement’’). I rescaled the index to range
from 0 to 1, with higher values implying
more traditional attitudes. I include an interac-
tion with respondent’s gender.

Employment of man and woman. One
household-level specification includes dummy
variables for the intensity of market work,
distinguishing among men and women
employed full-time (at least 35 hours per
week), part-time (15 to 34 hours), or less
than part-time (1 to 14 hours). In another
specification, I enter the exact number of
paid work hours rather than the categorical
measures.® According to Jenkins and
O’Leary (1995), endogeneity problems
should be especially severe when using the
metric measure.

Man’s and woman's previous absence
from paid work. These variables are con-
structed following Iversen and Rosenbluth
(2006) and reflect the paid work commitment
(i.e., no paid work, part-time, or full-time) dur-
ing four phases of family life (i.e., before birth
of first child, before the youngest child entered
school, after the youngest child entered school,
and after the children left home). The variables
are increased by .125 for each instance of part-
time employment and by .25 for each instance
of non-employment; they range from 0 for
individuals who worked full-time during all
life phases to 1 for individuals who were not
employed during all four life phases. These
variables are rather noisy measures of employ-
ment history, but they significantly improve
model fit even when current paid work time
is controlled.” They also provide the possibil-
ity of controlling for propensity to work for
pay without including measures of contempo-
raneous employment.

Respondent's education. Education dum-
mies are based on a measure of the highest
degree obtained. I collapsed the original six
categories into a three-category measure and
include an interaction with respondent’s
gender.

Household composition. | include the num-
ber of adults and children under the age of 18
years (more detailed information on the age of
children is not available for all countries).

Woman’s relative income. This variable is
based on a seven-point ordinal variable indi-
cating partners’ relative income levels. This
measure seems preferable to one constructed
from the information on respondent and
household income (see note 6).

Employment in domestic services. Individ-
uals employed in domestic services might
include their paid work hours when answering
the question about their housework hours.
Presumably, this would bias the results in
favor of the hypotheses, as service employ-
ment should be more common among poor
women, particularly in more unequal and
I measure economic development via PPP-
adjusted GDP per capita. The values for
this variable come from the 2003 edition
of the CIA Factbook. To capture the impact
of household technologies more directly, I
use data on the diffusion of eight technolo-
gies (i.e., dishwasher, tumble dryer, freezer,
microwave, refrigerator, shower, vacuum
cleaner, and washing machine) from Euro-
monitor International’s 2007 World Con-
sumer Lifestyles Databook (WCLD; Tables
1.88-1.90). For each of the eight technolo-
gies and for all countries in the sample,
the databook gives the percentage of house-
holds possessing the technology in 2006.!° I
condensed this information into a one-
dimensional automation score through a fac-
tor analysis (see Table S.B1 in the online
supplement for the original values). The
automation scores are the estimated factor
scores for the first factor, rescaled to range
from 0 to 1."!

No other data collection that I am aware of
comes close to the WCLD in terms of the
number of countries or the breadth of technol-
ogies covered. Nonetheless, there are some
limitations. First, the comparability of the
data is difficult to judge. The documentation
is scarce, but most of the data probably
come from household surveys with varying
sampling strategies, interview methods, and
question wordings. Apart from general ques-
tions of validity and comparability, two fur-
ther concems are more specific to the present
investigation. First, some households may not
own a particular technology because they can
conveniently access it in other ways (e.g.,
through shared facilities in public apartment
buildings). This may explain why washing
machine penetration is relatively low in
some affluent countries such as Sweden (see
Table S.B1 in the online supplement). The
second concern is that data on technology dif-
fusion among low-income households would
be more adequate for testing my argument
and that overall penetration levels are only
a (possibly rough) proxy for them. These
limitations, however, are clearly outweighed
by the fact that the WCLD data cover many
more countries and technologies than does
any alternative data source. More importantly,
I see no reason why the data should bias the
results in favor of Hypothesis 1b.

It is difficult to obtain a comparable mea-
sure of relative income differences within
countries. To reduce error due to measure-
ment error or to varying income concepts,
I use the unweighted average of the Gini
coefficients available from three sources:|?
(1) the Luxemburg Income Study, which
covers most of the economically more
developed countries in the sample; (2) the
dataset compiled by Branko Milanovic of
the World Bank (Milanovic 2005; World
Bank 2008), which covers all but one of
the countries in the 2002 ISSP (however,
the income concepts differ considerably
across countries and the latest year available
often lies well before 2002); and (3) the CIA
Factbook. Correlations between averaged
measure and the three original Gini varia-
bles range between .95 and .98. I would pre-
fer to have a measure of rich households’
service consumption, as this would enable
a direct test of Hypothesis 2b. It may seem
possible to construct such a measure from
six ISSP questions on the sharing of house-
hold tasks, where respondents can report
that a task is “‘usually done by a third per-
son.”’ Reports of outside help are very
rare, however, so I am reluctant to use this
information. Nevertheless, I explored the
potential of an outsourcing measure based
on these questions and the results are gener-
ally supportive of Hypothesis 2b—at least
when Cyprus, an extreme outlier, is
excluded from the analysis (see part E of
the online supplement).
This model expresses B,; as the sum of an
intercept term 10, the effects of the (varying
sets of) country-level predictors summarized
by Syuzy, and a country-specific error-
term vj).

Various strategies are available for estimat-
ing the multilevel model summarized by
Equations 1 and 2. Recent comparative stud-
ies on the division of housework favor simul-
taneous estimation by restricted maximum
likelihood methods, usually referring to them
as hierarchical linear models (HLM) (Bryk
and Raudenbush 1992). By contrast, I apply
a two-step procedure pioneered by Hanushek
(1974) that has recently been detailed and
performed well in Monte Carlo simulations by
Lewis and Linzer (2005). In a first step, I obtain
estimates of the B,,’s by running country-
specific household-level linear regressions
where u,; is an additional error component
that stems from the fact that the dependent
variable of the regression is estimated rather
than observed. uj; varies as a function of the
sample size and other characteristics of
the country samples. The error term of the
country-level regressions is heteroscedastic
even when the v,’s in Equation 2 are homo-
scedastic, implying that estimation of coun-
try-level regressions by OLS will be ineffi-
cient and yield biased standard errors.
Following the recommendations of Lewis
and Linzer, I use a Feasible Generalized Least
Squares (FGLS) procedure to address this
problem. The FGLS approach fits a weighted
least squares regression with weights

1 a2: ; 2
w= where G~ is an estimate of o
J ata?

 

from an auxiliary country-level OLS regres-
sion. a is an estimate of country-specific var-
iance of the heteroscedastic error component.
It is provided by the squared standard error of
the estimated dependent variable, that is, by
the squared standard errors of the 6 1S (for
further details, see Lewis and Linzer [2005]).

Achen (2005) discusses advantages of the
two-step approach over simultaneous estima-
tion in the context of cross-country applica-
tions. Scholars often advocate simultaneous
estimation on the basis that it borrows strength
across the level-2 units (e.g., across class-
rooms or countries). Without entering the dis-
cussion at length, it is worth noting that the
case for borrowing strength is more compel-
ling when the number of cases per level-2
unit is small, and when the level-2 units are
randomly sampled and reasonably similar to
each other. These conditions are usually
not fulfilled in cross-country applications:
Table 1 reports average weekly housework
hours of women and men in the bottom and
top deciles of the country-specific income
distributions, differences between these aver-
ages, and values of the three country-level
variables. Countries are ranked in descending
order according to the size of the rich-poor
difference for women. As I suggested earlier,
low-income women and men tend to spend
more time on housework than do their
high-income counterparts—and the magni-
tude of the difference is often substantial.
For women, the difference exceeds seven
hours per week—or one full hour per
day—in about half of the countries. It
remains to be seen whether these differences
persist when the effects of differential
employment rates and other factors are taken
into account.

The ordering of countries is roughly as
hypothesized. To see this more clearly, con-
sider the rightmost columns in the bottom
rows of Table 1, which give the average val-
ues of the country-level independent variables
for the 10 countries with the largest rich-poor
differences in women’s housework time (Top
10), the 10 countries with the smallest differ-
ences (Bottom 10), and the 13 countries that
fall in between (Middle 13). The 10 countries
with the greatest rich-poor differences have
Table 1. Rich—Poor Differences in Women’s and Men’s Weekly Housework Time

 

 

 

Women Men Macro Variables

Average Average Diff. Average Average Diff. GDP per Gini

Hours Hours (Btm Hours Hours (Btm capitain Coeff.

Bottom Top - Bottom Top - 1000 in Automation

Decile Decile Top) Decile Decile Top) USD (PPP) % Score
Slovenia 33.6 15.1 18.5* 8.0 5.8 2.2 19.2 27.3 49
Brazil 43.0 25.0 18.1* 13.0 8.4 4.7 7.6 56.7 19
Hungary 39.0 22.5 16.5* 15.6 7.8 7.8* 13.3 26.9 42
Ireland 34.8 20.9 13.9* 12.0 6.3 5.8* 29.3 34.5 87
Portugal 34.1 20.7. 13.3* 8.2 5.3 2.9 19.4 38.5 62
Chile 42.2 29.6 12.5* 12.9 8.3 4.6* 10.1 55.9 30
Flanders 31.3 194 11.9* 11.8 70 48 29.2 28.8 92
Philippines 26.9 16.5 10.4* 15.7 13.8 1.9 4.6 48.0 00
Austria 27.9 17.6 10.3* 6.3 7.3 -1.0 27.9 29.1 86
Israel 20.7 10.7 10.0* 7.3 5.2 21 19.5 36.7 84
Median. 24.7 16.4 7.3 10.0 7.0 3.2 20.1 30.8 79

Mean 25.2 174° 7.7 10.2 7.2 3.0 20.3 33.6 .67
SD 8.3 5.0 49 4.0 24 2.7 8.9 8.5 .31
Top 10 —- Mean 33.4 19.8 135 111 7.5 3.6 18.0 38.2 55
Middle 13-Mean 24.9 176 7.3 12.1 8.2 3.9 17.4 33.8 .60
Bottom 10-Mean 17.3 148 9 2.5 6.9 5.7 12 26.2 28.6 .87

 

Note: Rich—-poor difference is the difference in women’s average weekly housework hours between the
top and bottom deciles of the household income distribution (bottom — top). Housework hours estimated
from 2002 wave of the International Social Survey Programme. See text for details on the macro
variables.

*p = .05 (two-tailed test).
an average GDP of 18,000 USD, an average
Gini coefficient of 38.2 percent, and an aver-
age automation score of .55, while the respec-
tive values are around 26,200 USD, 28.6 per-
cent, and .87 for the 10 countries with the
smallest rich-poor differences.

Figure 1 takes a closer look at the macro-
level relationships. The two graphs on the
left show scatter plots, OLS regression lines,
and LOWESS fits (bandwidth = .8) of the
unadjusted difference in women’s housework
time (i.e., the values from column 4 in Table
1) against the automation score and the Gini
coefficient. The two graphs on the right depict
the relationships for adjusted differences,
which are based on level-1 regressions that
control for most of the individual- and house-
hold-level covariates listed in the previous
section, including gender traditionalism, paid
work time, and a woman’s relative income.!°
It is evident that the rich-poor difference in
women’s housework time falls with the level
of appliance diffusion and rises with eco-
nomic inequality. The LOWESS fits are close
to the regression lines, suggesting that linear
specifications of the country-level relation-
ships are appropriate. When comparing unad-
justed and adjusted differences, three things
are worth noting. First, adding controls tends
to reduce rich-poor differences, which is
why the regression lines shift downward
when compositional differences are taken
into account. This is unsurprising, as women
from high-income households tend to be
better educated and to work longer hours
outside the home, two factors commonly
associated with lower housework time. Sec-
ond, the country-level relationships are
attenuated somewhat but remain strong and
in the expected direction (see note to Figure
1 for the exact slope estimates). Finally,
many outlying countries (e.g., Brazil,
Cyprus, Hungary, and Slovenia) move
closer to the regression lines when composi-
tional differences are accounted for.
R-squared is thus substantially higher for
the regressions of adjusted differences (see
note to Figure 1).
Before turning to the parametric analysis of
country-level relationships, I briefly examine
results of household-level regressions with
the full set of control variables (specification
with categorical paid work measures). For
each of the four housework variables—her
and his absolute hours and the two relative
contribution measures—Figure 2 represents
the mean point estimates from the 33
country-specific regressions. Vertical lines
mark reference values between —10 and 10
in steps of five. Where interactions with gen-
der are included, circles indicate the average
effect for men and arrows indicate the average
effect for women.

The mean effects generally carry the sign
that theoretical reasoning and previous
research would lead one to expect. Note that
the mean effects of the relative income dum-
mies follow a curvilinear pattern. Women’s
absolute and relative contributions to house-
work do not seem to uniformly fall as their
contributions to household income rises. At
least in some countries, increases in women’s
relative income beyond a certain point raise,
rather than reduce, their domestic commit-
ments (Bittman et al. 2003; Brines 1994;
Evertsson and Nermo 2004; Greenstein
2000). Debate about the mechanisms underly-
ing this quite common result is ongoing, and it
is beyond the scope of this article to address it
in detail. It is clear, however, that my general
argument is consistent with recent contribu-
tions by Gupta (2006, 2007), who suggests
that the curvilinearities may result from the
fact that women with high relative incomes
are often women with low absolute incomes,
which leaves them little leeway to buy their
way out of doing housework. Part of this rela-
tionship between women’s income share and
purchasing power should be picked up by
the household income variables, yet part of
it will remain unaccounted for if women’s
and men’s incomes affect housework time
differently.

Figure 2 also illustrates how effects of var-
ious independent variables on men’s and
women’s absolute hours translate into changes
Rich-Poor Difference in

Rich-Poor Difference in

Wom’s HW Hrs

Wom’s HW Hrs

0

15 20

5 i510:

0

-5

15 20

10

5

25

 

Unadjusted Difference

15 20

5-10.

0

-5

Adjusted Difference

Automation score

 

 

35 45 55
Gini coefficient

LOWESS Fit

 

15 20

$340.

0

-5

25

35 45
Gini coefficient
OLS Linear Fit

 

 

55
Figure 1. Rich—Poor Differences in Women’s Housework Time against Macro Variables
Note: Rich-poor difference is the difference in women’s average weekly housework hours between the
top and the bottom decile of the household income distribution (bottom — top). Bandwidth of LOWESS
smoothes = .8. Adjusted differences are based on country-specific household-level regressions that con-
trol for various covariates (see text and Table A1 in the Appendix for details). Micro data are from the
2002 wave of the International Social Survey Programme. Household-level N = 20,877. Automation score
is the first factor score from a principal-factor factor analysis of the diffusion of eight household technol-
ogies. See text for details on the macro variables. Slope estimates/R-squared: automation score, unadj.
difference: -6.6/17.3 percent; automation score, adj. difference: —5.9/25.5 percent; Gini coefficient,
unadj. difference: .23/16.5 percent; Gini coefficient, adj. difference: .21/23.5 percent. Abbreviations:
AT = Austria; AU = Australia; BG = Bulgaria; BR = Brazil; CH = Switzerland; CL = Chile; CY = Cyprus;
CZ = Czech Republic; DE = Germany; DK = Denmark; ES = Spain; FI = Finland; FL = Flanders; FR =
France; HU = Hungary; IE = Ireland; IL = Israel; JP = Japan; LV = Latvia; MX = Mexico; NL = Netherlands;
NO = Norway; NZ = New Zealand; PH = Philippines; PL = Poland; PT = Portugal; RU = Russia; SE = Swe-
den; SI = Slovenia; SK = Slovakia; TW = Taiwan; UK = United Kingdom; US = United States.
x
a
&
&
=
<

 

Avg. R2: 21.7%

 

 

Avg. R?: 12.6%

 

21.9%

 

   

Woman’s Hrs

Avg. R?:

 

TT TT TT
Seg 9 ¥ HE ERLE Sa y AE 5 58 548 g EREMES pg aeseesaee
et HH SP PUP Ee ee
Ree cee ee te pS Sos
a4 2 5 3 2 8 3 = 3
$25 88 G2 3 ck 3 3
& 8 = Bree pee ae 3
2 e 4 ; 2
2
Figure 2. Average Coefficient Estimates from Household-Level Regressions

Note: Average point estimates from country-specific regressions estimated by OLS. For gender tradition-
alism and respondent’s education, interactions with respondent’s gender are included. In these cases,
circles depict the mean effect for male respondents and arrows that for women. Data are from the
2002 wave of the International Social Survey Programme. Household-level N = 20,877. Housework
Gap is woman’s minus man’s weekly housework hours. Abbreviations: Wom.’s = Woman’s; Prev. = Pre-
vious; HH = Household; Resp.’s = Respondent’s. Reference categories for dummy variables: male respon-
dent; man’s/woman’s paid work time: not employed; respondent’s education: low; woman’s relative
income: man earns all; household income: 10th (top) decile.
explain part of the unadjusted rich—poor dif-
ference in women’s housework: at 4.4
hours, the mean coefficient estimate of
belonging to the bottom decile is smaller
than the mean unadjusted difference of 7.7
hours per week (see Table 1). It is still sub-
stantial, however, and on par with the aver-
age effect of a woman earning a higher
(rather than no) income or working part-
time (rather than not at all).

Figure 3 summarizes the central pieces of
the empirical analysis: the country-level
FGLS regressions of the rich—poor differ-
ence in women’s and men’s housework
hours. Markers indicate the point estimates
and horizontal lines indicate the associated
95 percent confidence intervals from these
regressions. Dashed vertical lines mark ref-
erence values between —15 and +15 in steps
of five, and a darker solid line marks the
zero value. Any coefficient estimate whose
confidence interval does not intersect with
the zero line is significant at the 5 percent
level (two-tailed test).'® I rescaled all macro
variables to range from 0 (for the country
with the lowest value on a variable) to 1
(for the country with the highest value on
that variable). The estimates can be thought
of as the maximum effects for the country
sample at hand.

While it is difficult to infer the exact
point estimates and test statistics from the
figure (see Table S.C1 in the online supple-
ment for a classical regression table provid-
ing these values), the graphic representation
greatly facilitates comparisons across differ-
ent household- and country-level specifica-
tions (see Kastellec and Leoni [2007] for
a useful discussion of the advantages of
graphically displaying empirical results).
For a given macro variable (e.g., Gini coef-
ficient, GDP, and automation score), esti-
mates based on the same household-level
specification are grouped together, with the
model specification signaled by the label
on the y-axis (labels are designated M1,
M2, and so forth; see Table Al in the
Appendix for details on the included
variables). Thus, for example, the top four
points in the left graph represent the esti-
mated effects of the Gini coefficient on
tich-poor differences in women’s house-
work hours when the latter is estimated
from the household-level model with basic
controls, while the second set of four points
summarizes the results when rich—poor dif-
ferences are estimated from the household-
level model that controls for all variables
except traditionalism and paid work time.
Within each set of estimates, different
marker symbols (e.g., black or grey circles)
are used to differentiate among various
country-level specifications. Black circles
represent estimates from bivariate regres-
sions and grey circles represent estimates
from regressions with the Gini coefficient
and GDP per capita (which is why they are
missing for the automation score in Figure
3). White circles depict results from regres-
sions with the Gini coefficient and the auto-
mation score (which is why they are missing
for GDP per capita, again, in Figure 3), and
triangles represent results from regressions
with all three country-level predictors.

To summarize, one should compare esti-
mates represented by the same marker symbol
across sets of coefficients to gauge the impact
of modifying the household-level specifica-
tion. To gauge the impact of changing the
country-level specification, one should make
comparisons among the different markers
within a single set of estimates.

Results for the rich-poor difference in
women’s absolute housework hours are dis-
played in the left graph of Figure 3. Leaving
the model with all three macro-level predic-
tors (triangles) aside for the moment, all
effects go in the expected direction and,
with very few exceptions, reach or approach
statistical significance. Based on results for
household-level Model 3, the maximum effect
of economic inequality on the rich—poor dif-
ference in women’s housework time is more
than seven hours in the bivariate country-level
specification (black circles). The maximum
effects of GDP per capita and technology
\d-level

Househol

specification

i
i
:

 

M2: Full w/o trad. & paid work

JUOTOLJJIOO TUT

 

M3: Pull, paid work categories

M4: Full, # of paid work hours

MI: Basic controls

M2: Full w/o trad. & paid work

a

d

M3: Full, paid work categories

D

M4: Pull, # of paid work hours

MI: Basic controls

M2: Pull w/o trad. & paid work

M3: Full, paid work categories

M4: Full, # of paid work hours

oJOOS UOT}VUOINY

 

try-level specification:

Coun

g
z
[—
Ss
g
&
g
a
xB
3
6
°

@ Bivariate

4 All 3 Variables

@ Gini & GDP
Figure 3. Country-Level Regressions: Effects of Gini Coefficient, GDP per Capita, and Auto-
mation Score on Rich—Poor Differences in Women’s and Men’s Housework Hours

Note: Country-level FGLS estimates following Lewis and Linzer (2005). Dependent variable is the differ-
ence in women’s and men’s average weekly housework hours between households from the top and bot-
tom deciles of the country-specific income distribution (bottom — top). Micro data are from the 2002 wave
of the International Social Survey Programme. Household-level N = 20,877. Country-level N = 33. Models
1 through 4 control for different sets of household-level covariates. See Table A1 in the Appendix for
exact household-level specifications and the text for details on household- and country-level variables.
I rescaled macro variables to range from 0 to 1. Dashed branches of the confidence intervals are cut at
(-)15.5. Abbreviation: trad. = gender traditionalism.
diffusion are estimated at about minus six
hours. These effects attenuate when the Gini
and GDP per capita (grey circles) or the
Gini and the automation score (white
circles) are entered simultaneously, reflect-
ing the relatively strong correlations of
—.6 between the Gini and GDP and —.55
between the Gini and the automation score.
The effects remain sizable and at least on
the verge of statistical significance. The
maximum effect of the Gini is estimated at
more than 5.4 hours in the presence of
GDP and at 4.1 hours in the presence of
the automation score. The corresponding
estimates for GDP per capita and the auto-
mation score are minus 3.4 and minus
4.4 hours, respectively.

Figure 3 also shows that household-level
specification affects country-level relation-
ships somewhat, but not dramatically. The
comparisons of interest are now among the
results for the same country-level specifica-
tion (represented by the same marker sym-
bol), but for different specifications of the
household-level model (indicated by the
labels on the y-axis). The effects of the
Gini are weaker for Models 2, 3, and 4
than for Model 1, implying that household-
level control variables explain part of the
relationship between economic inequality
and the rich-poor difference in women’s
housework hours. For GDP and the automa-
tion score, adding household-level controls
has only small and unsystematic effects on
the point estimates. Finally, reflecting the
reduction in error variance apparent in Fig-
ure 1, the effects of all variables, including
the Gini, are estimated more precisely—that
is, with smaller confidence bands—in the
presence of household-level controls.

These comparisons across different house-
hold-level specifications suggest that endoge-
neity is not a serious problem in the present
application. Whether one uses a household-
level model without measures of gender tradi-
tionalism and contemporaneous work com-
mitment (Model 2) or one that includes such
variables (Models 3 and 4) has relatively
small effects on the estimated country-level
relationships.

A final interesting aspect of Figure 3 con-
cerns the comparison between GDP per capita
and the automation score as the two variables
intended to capture the equalizing effects of
appliance diffusion. Given their high correla-
tion of .94, both variables behave quite simi-
larly in the regressions, but the effect of the
automation score—which is an attempt to
measure the theoretically relevant process
more directly—is generally larger in absolute
value and performs better in terms of statisti-
cal significance. Results from the country-
level models with all three predictors (the tri-
angles in Figure 3) are even more telling. Due
to their high correlation, the standard errors on
both variables increase substantially when
they are entered simultaneously. The automa-
tion score, however, retains the theoretically
predicted sign and its effect becomes stronger
for all but one household-level specification.
The effect of GDP per capita, by contrast,
approaches zero or changes sign when the
automation score is included.

How are the macro variables related to
rich-poor differences in men’s housework
time? Figure 3 shows that the effects go in
the same direction as for women’s hours,
but they are generally smaller in size and
do not reach conventional significance lev-
els in the models with more than one
macro-level predictor. Given that the aver-
age rich—-poor difference in housework
hours is much smaller for men, the effect
sizes are nonetheless remarkable, especially
for the Gini coefficient. Sensitivity analyses,
however, suggest that this effect in particu-
lar should be viewed with caution.'’ The
automation score does not perform better
than GDP per capita in these regressions,
suggesting that the relationship between
economic development and rich—poor dif-
ferences in men’s housework time is driven
by processes other than diffusion of the
technologies on which the automation score
is based. This is intuitively plausible, as the
technologies considered are clearly related
to female-typed housework tasks. I must
leave the question of how economic devel-
opment is related to rich-poor differences
in men’s unpaid work time to future
research, but it seems that the prevalence
of informal food production may be one
important factor (Alber and Kohler 2008).

The results summarized in Figure 3 pro-
vide clear support for Hypotheses la, 1b,
and 2a. Examining a variety of household-
and country-level specifications, I find robust
evidence that economic development and
appliance diffusion go with smaller differen-
ces in the housework time of income-rich
and income-poor women, and economic
inequality goes with greater differences. Com-
parisons of the results for GDP per capita and
the automation score support the idea that
appliance diffusion is driving the relationship
between economic development and inequal-
ities in housework time.

In a final step, I consider a prominent
alternative to the hypotheses examined so
far. According to the discount hypothesis,
the effects of women’s micro-level resour-
ces are discounted by macro-level gender
inequality. Applied to the present study,
the most straightforward interpretation of
this hypothesis is that the rich—poor differ-
ence in women’s housework time should
be greater in more gender-egalitarian coun-
tries. This is because rich women in these
countries should realize the full potential
of their high household income, while in
less egalitarian countries, women’s income
will be discounted. Figure 4 summarizes
the results from a set of country-level
regressions, with the United Nations Devel-
opment Programme’s Gender Empower-
ment Measure (GEM), a composite index
commonly used to capture macro-level gen-
der inequality, taking the place of GDP per
capita.'® I took GEM values from Knudsen
and Werness (2008) and rescaled them to
range from 0 to 1. Higher values indicate
greater macro-level gender equality.

Results displayed in Figure 4 do not sup-
port the discount hypothesis. If anything, the
effect of household income is weaker, not
stronger, in more gender-egalitarian countries.
From a technical point of view, this is not sur-
prising, because gender empowerment is
highly correlated with GDP per capita (r =
-72 for the country sample analyzed here).
The apparent negative effect of the GEM
indeed seems to be largely spurious. It practi-
cally disappears when appliance diffusion and
economic inequality are controlled, but it
remains far from showing the positive effect
predicted by the discount hypothesis (results
represented by the triangles in Figure 4).
Because Knudsen and Weeness’s (2008)
study found stronger evidence for discounting
in the case of relative contribution measures,
it is worth noting that results are similar for
the effect of household income on the house-
work gap or a woman’s share.!°

These results raise questions about the
scope of the discount hypothesis. How does
household income differ from other resources
to which this hypothesis applies? I would like
to briefly sketch one possibility. As I argued
at length, absolute income affords access to
household technologies and services and
thus allows households to reduce women’s
domestic burdens without lowering house-
keeping standards or increasing male partic-
ipation. Reductions in female housework
time associated with time availability, gen-
der ideology, and relative income, by con-
trast, must be compensated for by the male
partner or by reductions in domestic output;
they are thus more likely to involve conflic-
tual processes of negotiation and intrahouse-
hold bargaining. It seems plausible that
macro-level gender equality conditions
such processes of negotiation, for example,
by shaping relevant preconceptions about
gender roles.
Household-level

 

specification

 

MI: Basic controls

M3: Full, paid work categories

WUOIO1JJ209 TUID

 

MI: Basic controls

Wad

 
   

  

M3: Full, paid work categories

 

 

MI: Basic controls
paid work categories

M3: Full,

9109s UOTRWOINY

     

Country-level specification

 
 

O Gini & automation score
A All3 Variables

@ Bivariate

   

@ Gini & GEM
Figure 4. Country-Level Regressions: Effects of Gini Coefficient, Gender Empowerment
Measure, and Automation Score on Rich—Poor Differences in Women’s and Men’s House-
work Hours

Note: Country-level FGLS estimates following Lewis and Linzer (2005). Dependent variable is the differ-
ence in women’s and men’s average weekly housework hours between households from the top and bot-
tom deciles of the country-specific income distribution (bottom — top). Micro data are from the 2002 wave
of the International Social Survey Programme. Household-level N = 20,877. Country-level N = 33. Abbre-
viation: GEM = Gender Empowerment Measure. Models 1 and 3 control for different sets of household-
level covariates. See Table A1 in the Appendix for exact household-level specifications and text for
details on household- and country-level variables. I rescaled macro variables to range from 0 to 1.
equity (Okin 1989), much of this literature
takes a horizontal approach, concentrating
on the impact of paid work commitment, gen-
der ideology, relative income, and variables
such as marital status that have no obvious
relationship to the vertical inequalities empha-
sized by traditional stratification research.
Class, financial resources, and socioeconomic
status are often controlled; only a few studies
place these variables at the center of the
analysis.

This study demonstrates that doing so can
enhance our understanding of the domestic
division of labor. I argue that affluent house-
holds can afford labor-saving appliances and
services more readily than can poor house-
holds and that one should therefore expect
women’s housework time to fall as household
income rises. Averaging my estimates over
the 33 countries included in this study,
women from the poorest 10th of households
spend an additional 7.7 hours on housework
each week compared with women from the
richest 10th. The average difference falls
to 4.4 hours when standard covariates are
accounted for, but this is still substantial,
on par with the effects of a woman’s paid
work time or relative income. The main
aim of the article, however, was not to
establish that there is a relationship between
household income and housework time, but
to explain cross-country variation in its
strength.

Reinterpreting arguments from the his-
torical time-use literature (Gershuny 2000),
I argue that differences between rich and
poor women are smaller in economically
more developed countries—where even
low-income households have access to
major household technologies—and_ that
differences will be greater where overall
economic inequality is high, because high-
income households in these societies out-
source larger portions of their domestic
work to the market. The empirical analysis
confirms these predictions; results for
a direct measure of appliance diffusion pro-
vide striking evidence that the equalizing
effect of economic development is really
driven by the automation of domestic
work. Data restrictions preclude an equally
compelling test of the hypothesis that the
effect of economic inequality reflects differ-
ences in rich households’ service consump-
tion, but it is worth repeating that supple-
mentary analyses, which use the limited
information on external help in the 2002
ISSP, seem supportive of this hypothesis.

On a general level, the findings remind us
that gender inequalities are often conditioned
by economic inequalities. When couples
decide—or bargain over—how to get house-
work done, their options are fundamentally
shaped by their financial resources, which
in turn interact with the wider technological,
economic, and social environment. With
respect to the result that the housework—
income gradient is steeper in more unequal
countries, it is important to see that the
prevalence of outsourcing among high-
income households is not simply a matter
of how rich these households are: it also
hinges critically on the costs of employing
paid help. These costs are related to the
more general wage structure, whose deter-
minants are the subject of ongoing debate
(see Kenworthy 2007). In the context of
domestic services, it seems especially
important to acknowledge the role of inter-
national female migration in providing an
ample supply of low-wage domestic work-
ers in many of the economically more devel-
oped countries (Hondagneu-Sotelo 2001;
Parrefias 2001).

The results of this study clearly challenge
the notion that household technologies have
had little or no impact on women’s domestic
work time. The findings square well with
recent work in economics that finds household
technologies have been an important force
behind increasing female labor force partici-
pation (Cardia 2009; Cavalcanti and Tavares
2008; Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorukoglu
2005). This suggests that politicians con-
cerned with women’s labor force participation
and economic independence should promote
access to household technologies; in many
less developed countries, this may involve
investment in basic infrastructure such as
indoor running water, plumbing facilities,
and electricity.

Additional analyses suggest that the
influential discount hypothesis (Blumberg
and Coleman 1989; Fuwa 2004), stating
that the effect of women’s micro-level
resources will be weaker in less gender-
egalitarian countries, does not apply to
household income. This invites further theo-
retical and empirical work to determine the
exact scope of this hypothesis. Future
research should also extend the present anal-
ysis in other ways. An obvious first exten-
sion would be to consider the impact of
financial resources on care time (due to
data limitations, this could not be studied
here). As I suggested earlier, such an analy-
sis should pay particular attention to possi-
ble inequality-reducing effects of public ser-
vice provision. This analysis will likely be
complicated, however, by class differences
in childrearing standards (Lareau 2003).
Second, this study is concerned with cross-
sectional differences between income-rich
and income-poor households. Because these
differences reflect individuals’ and couples’
adjustments to the status-specific constraints
they face, it would be interesting to see how
income conditions the effects of unforeseen
events that trigger a refocusing of estab-
lished time use patterns. How do poor
households and rich households react when
care demands are suddenly increased or
when financial shocks require household
members to increase their paid employ-
ment? One cannot help but suspect that the
differences observed in the present investi-
gation would be amplified under such cir-
cumstances. Finally, the nature of the
income data prevented me from separating
the effects of women’s and men’s income.
Research on the demand for domestic serv-
ices and other market substitutes for unpaid
work suggests that women’s income has
a much stronger effect on housework than
does men’s income. Women may be sacri-
ficing part of their income by buying market
substitutes for unpaid work. These questions
touch on issues of intra-household distribu-
tion of consumption that are difficult to
tackle with existing survey data. Nonethe-
less, they are clearly worthy of further
investigation. Comparative studies analyz-
ing men’s and women’s incomes separately
would be natural extensions of the present
analysis, but, at least for the moment, a focus
on gender-specific incomes seems to imply
a small-N design (see the important study
by Gupta et al. 2009).
Table A1. Independent Variables Included in Household-Level Specifications

 

 

Model 2.
Full w/o Model 4.
Model 1.‘ Traditionalism and Model 3.Full, Full, Number of
Basic Employment Paid Work Paid Work
Controls Dummies Categories Hours
Respondent’s age x x x
Respondent’s age squared x x x
Respondent female xX xX xX x
Region (Germany and UK only) x x x x
Gender traditionalism x x
(+ interaction with
“respondent female”)
Woman: paid work time x
categories
Woman: paid work time,
number of hours
Woman: employed in ISCO 512/ x xX x x
513 (models for woman’s
hours only)
Man: paid work time categories x
Man: paid work time, number of Xx
hours
Man: employed in ISCO 512/513 xX x x x
(models for man’s hours only)
Woman: previous absence from x x x
paid work
Man: previous absence from x x x
paid work
Respondent’s education x x x
(+ interaction with
“respondent female”)
Number of adult household xX xX xX
members
Number of children in x x x
household
Woman’s income share x x x
Household income decile x x x x

 

Note: See text for details on the variables. X = variable included.
An earlier version of this article was presented at the
EQUALSOC EMPLOY-FAMNET Workshop in Berlin,
May 2009. The author thanks Jens Alber, Agnes Blome,
Petra Béhnke, Johannes Giesecke, Max Haller, Jonas
Radl, Alessandra Rusconi, Chiara Saraceno, and Philip
Wotschak for their comments on earlier drafts. The com-
ments of Ulrich Kohler, Eric Plutzer, and the ASR edi-
tors and anonymous reviewers were particularly helpful
in improving the manuscript. Paula England and David
Grusky provided valuable advice when the project was
in an early stage.
shopping services may be publicly provided for cer-
tain needy groups of people (e.g., the disabled).

. A link to Stata code for replicating the main analy-
ses can be found on the author’s website (http://
www.wzb.eu/bal/usi/leute/heisig.en.htm).

. The analyses include weights that correct for the
implicit oversampling of East German and Northern
Trish households.

. I did not apply strict listwise deletion to two pairs of
variables. The first pair are the dummies for (his/
her) employment in domestic services. All results,
including the average effect of employment in
domestic services, are virtually identical when I
exclude cases where this information was missing
for at least one of the partners, or when I assign
these cases to a separate missing category. For sim-
plicity, I pooled these cases with respondents who
said they did not work in domestic services. The
second pair are the measures of (his/her) previous
absence from paid work. These measures are based
on employment status during four life phases
defined by the birth and age of children. The prob-
lem here is that it is very difficult to distinguish
between missingness due to item non-response
and missingness due to not having experienced
a particular life phase because the ISSP provides
only a single missing code. Any attempt to make
this distinction based on the limited information
about fertility history and household composition
would inevitably have to make strong assumptions.
I therefore treated missing values on these variables
as if they are due to not having experienced the
respective life phase.

. The work by Gupta and his colleagues (Gupta 2006,
2007; Gupta et al. 2009) suggests that the effects of
women’s and men’s incomes should be analyzed
separately. Unfortunately, the ISSP data are not
suited for such an analysis, because information
on personal income was collected only for the
respondent and because the income concepts in
the question on respondent income vary consider-
ably across countries (i.e., earnings versus income
from all sources).

. The dependent variable in the regressions is the
observed value of household income (i.e., midpoints
of income brackets in countries with bracketed
questions). As predictors, I include respondent’s
gender and age (linear and squared), employment
status of the man and the woman, two measures
of respondent’s previous absence from paid work
(described below), dummies for being retired
(man and woman), and number of children and
adults in the household. For education, I use the
ISSP’s original six-category measure rather than
the three-category variable used in the main analy-
sis, because cross-country comparability is not nec-
essary at this point (some categories are not
10.
11.

available for some countries). To increase predic-
tive power, I also include partner’s level of educa-
tion in these regressions, accommodating cases
with missing values by defining an additional ‘“‘edu-
cation missing” category (the main analysis omits
partner’s education because it is unavailable for
six countries). I also include a full set of interactions
between education and employment status. All
results are virtually identical when I include the
remaining variables used in the main analysis (i.e.,
gender ideology, employment in services, and
woman’s income share) or when IJ also include the
natural logarithm of the man’s and the woman’s
housework hours.

. Information on partner’s hours is not available for

Australia, the Czech Republic, Ireland, Northern
Ireland, Slovenia, and Slovakia. I retained categor-
ical measures in these cases and included an appro-
priate dummy in the country-level regressions.

. The maximum possible value for an individual

clearly depends on the number of life phases expe-
rienced; I therefore experimented with a measure
that divides by this number. The results are hardly
affected.

Cyprus was assigned the Greek values.

I obtained estimates through the principal-factor
method. I obtained factor scores for the unrotated
solution using regression scoring. The first factor
loads positively on all eight technologies and has
a high eigenvalue of about 5.2. Loadings are (often
substantially) above .7, except for the percentage of
households with refrigerators, which has a loading
of .62. The second factor has an eigenvalue of
only .85, is difficult to interpret, and shows no clear
relationship to the rich—poor difference in women’s
housework hours. The results are very robust to the
way I construct the automation score. They are vir-
tually identical when I use other factor-analysis
methods (i.e., principal component factor or iterated
principal factor), an additive index obtained by first
standardizing and then summing the eight technol-
ogy measures, or multidimensional scaling. They
are also similar when I construct the factor scores
from rotated solutions.

. An alternative measure of inequality, the ratio of the

top decile’s income/consumption to the bottom dec-
ile’s income/consumption, is available for all coun-
tries but Taiwan from the United Nations Develop-
ment Programme’s 2007 Human Development
Report (assigning the Greek value to Cyprus and
the Belgian value to Flanders). The country-level
results (available from the author on request) are
very similar to those presented in this article when
I use this measure instead of the Gini coefficient.

. Household-level standard errors are heteroscedasticity-

consistent Huber-White standard errors. Because
housework time of one hour or less is reported
for 18.1 percent of men and 1.5 percent of women,
I repeated the analysis using tobit models at the
household level. The results are virtually identical.
Part D of the online supplement reports results from
HLMs of women’s housework hours. Support for
Hypotheses la and 1b is somewhat weaker in the
HLMs that include the full set of household-level
controls. Estimated effects of GDP and the automa-
tion score are smaller in absolute value and no lon-
ger statistically significant when the Gini coeffi-
cient is controlled. However, given that the HLMs
impose strong and implausible restrictions on the
effects of the control variables, I am inclined to
attach greater weight to the two-step results
reported in the main article.

. More specifically, the adjusted differences are

based on the specification labeled “Model 3. Full,
Paid Work Categories” in Table Al in the
Appendix.

. This is because significance at the 5 percent level

implies that the 95 percent confidence interval
does not include zero and vice versa.

. The effect of the Gini on the rich—poor difference in

men’s housework hours is the only effect that is
consistently and substantially weaker when I use
multiple imputation instead of listwise deletion to
deal with missing data. See part F of the online sup-
plement for further details.

For parsimony, I present only the results for the
household-level model with basic controls and for
the full model with paid work categories. Results
for other level-1 models are similar.

The most favorable results for the discount hypoth-
esis emerge when the rich-poor difference in the
woman’s percentage share is estimated from
household-level Model 3 and regressed on all three
country-level predictors (i.e., Gini, automation score,
and GEM). In this regression, the maximum effect of
the GEM is estimated at +3.7 percentage points. At
4.2, the standard error of this estimate is large, how-
ever, and implies a p-value of .38 (detailed results are
available from the author on request).
Becker, Gary S. 1985. “Human Capital, Effort, and the
Sexual Division of Labor.” Journal of Labor Eco-
nomics 3:S33-S58.

Bianchi, Suzanne M., Melissa A. Milkie, Liana C. Sayer,
and John P. Robinson. 2000. “Is Anyone Doing the
Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of
Household Labor.” Social Forces 79:191—228.

Bianchi, Suzanne M., John P. Robinson, and Melissa A.
Milkie. 2006. Changing Rhythms of American Fam-
ily Life. New York: Russell Sage.

Bittman, Michael, Paula England, Nancy Folbre, Liana
C. Sayer, and George Matheson. 2003. ‘When
Does Gender Trump Money? Bargaining and Time
in Household Work.” American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 109:186-214.

Bittman, Michael, James Mahmud Rice, and Judy Wajc-
man. 2004. “Appliances and Their Impact: The
Ownership of Domestic Technology and Time Spent
on Household Work.” British Journal of Sociology
55:401-423.

Bittman, Michael and Judy Wajcman. 2000. ‘“‘The Rush
Hour: The Character of Leisure Time and Gender
Equity.” Social Forces 79:165-89.

Blair, Sampson L. and Daniel T. Lichter. 1991. “‘Mea-
suring the Division of Household Labor: Gender
Segregation of Housework among American Cou-
ples.” Journal of Family Issues 12:91—-113.

Blumberg, Rae Lesser and Marion Tolbert Coleman.
1989. ‘A Theoretical Look at the Gender Balance
of Power in the American Couple.” Journal of Fam-
ily Issues 10:225—S0.

Brines, Julie. 1994. ‘Economic Dependency, Gender,
and the Division of Labor at Home.” American
Journal of Sociology 100:652-88.

Bryk, Anthony S. and Stephen W. Raudenbush. 1992.
Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and
Data Analysis Methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Budig, Michelle J. and Paula England. 2001. “The Wage
Penalty for Motherhood.” American Sociological
Review 66:204-225.

Cardia, Emanuela. 2009. “‘Household Technology: Was
It the Engine of Liberation?” University of Mon-
treal. Unpublished manuscript. Retrieved April
24, 2010 (http://www.cireq.umontreal.ca/personnel/
cardia_household_technology.pdf).

Cavalcanti, Tiago V. and José A. Tavares. 2008.
“Assessing the ‘Engines of Liberation’: Home
Appliances and Female Labor Force Participation.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 90:81—88.

Cohen, Philip N. 1998. ‘‘Replacing Housework in
the Service Economy: Gender, Class, and Race-
Ethnicity in Service Spending.” Gender & Society
12:219-31.

Coltrane, Scott. 2000. “‘Research on Household Labor:
Modeling and Measuring the Social Embeddedness
of Routine Family Work.” Journal of Marriage
and the Family 62:1208-233.
. 1999. Social Foundations of Postindustrial
Economies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Euromonitor International. 2007. World Consumer
Lifestyles Databook 2007. London: Euromonitor
International.

Evertsson, Marie and Magnus Nermo. 2004. “Depen-
dence within Families and the Division of Labor:
Comparing Sweden and the United States.” Journal
of Marriage and Family 66:1272-86.

Freeman, Richard B. and Ronald Schettkat. 2005. ‘“‘Mar-
ketization of Household Production and the EU-US
Gap in Work.” Economic Policy 20:7—S0.

Fuwa, Makiko. 2004. “‘Macro-Level Gender Inequality
and the Division of Household labor in 22 Coun-
tries.” American Sociological Review 69:75 1-67.

Geist, Claudia. 2005. “‘The Welfare State and the Home:
Regime Differences in the Domestic Division of
Labour.” European Sociological Review 21:23-41.

Gershuny, Jonathan. 2000. Changing Times: Work and
Leisure in Postindustrial Society. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

, 2004. “Domestic Equipment Does Not Increase
Domestic Work: A Response to Bittman, Rice and
Wajcman.” British Journal of Sociology 55:425-31.

Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo. 1992. “The Great
Compression: The Wage Structure in the United
States at Mid-Century.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 107:1—-34.

Greenstein, Theodore N. 2000. ‘Economic Dependence,
Gender, and the Division of Labor in the Home: A
Replication and Extension.” Journal of Marriage
and the Family 62:322-35.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet
Yorukoglu. 2005. “Engines of Liberation.” Review
of Economic Studies 72:109-133.

Gupta, Sanjiv. 2006. “‘Her Money, Her Time: Women’s
Earnings and Their Housework Hours.” Social Sci-
ence Research 35:975-99.

. 2007. ‘Autonomy, Dependence, or Display?

The Relationship between Married Women’s Earn-

ings and Housework.” Journal of Marriage and

Family 69:399-417.
Gupta, Sanjiv, Marie Evertsson, Daniela Grunow, Mag-
nus Nermo, and Liana C. Sayer. 2009. “‘Housework,
Earnings, and Nation: A Crossnational Investigation
of the Relationship between Women’s Earnings and
Their Time Spent on Housework.” University of
Massachusetts-Amherst. Unpublished manuscript.
Retrieved June 24, 2009 (http://www.umass.edu/
sadri/pdf/WP/WP%20Gupta%2009.pdf).

Hanushek, Eric A. 1974. “Efficient Estimators for
Regressing Regression Coefficients.” American
Statistician 28:66-67.

Hondagneu-Sotelo, Pierrette. 2001. Doméstica: Immi-
grant Workers Cleaning and Caring in the Shadows
of Affluence. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Hook, Jennifer L. 2010. “Gender Inequality in the Welfare
State: Sex Segregation in Housework, 1965-2003.”
American Journal of Sociology 115:1480-1523.

ISSP Research Group, International Social Survey Pro-
gramme (ISSP). 2002. Family and Changing Gender
Roles III. Distributor: GESIS Cologne, Germany,
ZA3880. Data Version: March 2006.

Iversen, Torben and Frances Rosenbluth. 2006. “The
Political Economy of Gender: Explaining Cross-
National Variation in the Gender Division of Labor
and the Gender Voting Gap.” American Journal of
Political Science 50:1—-19.

Jenkins, Stephen P. and Nigel C. O’Leary. 1995. “‘Mod-
elling Domestic Work Time.” Journal of Population
Economics 8:265—79.

Kamo, Yoshinori. 2000. ‘‘‘He Said, She Said’: Assess-
ing Discrepancies in Husbands’ and Wives’ Reports
on the Division of Household Labor.” Social Science
Research 29:459-76.

Kastellec, Jonathan P. and Eduardo L. Leoni. 2007.
“Using Graphs Instead of Tables in Political Sci-
ence.” Perspectives on Politics 5:755—71.

Kenworthy, Lane. 2007. “Inequality and Sociology.”
American Behavioral Scientist 50:584-602.

Knudsen, Knud and Kari Werness. 2008. “National
Context and Spouses Housework in 34 Countries.”
European Sociological Review 24:97-113.

Lareau, Annette. 2003. Unequal Childhoods: Class,
Race, and Family Life. Berkeley: University of Cal-
ifornia Press.

Lewis, Jeffrey B. and Drew A. Linzer. 2005. “Estimat-
ing Regression Models in Which the Dependent Var-
iable Is Based on Estimates.” Political Analysis
13:345-64.

Milanovic, Branko. 2005. Worlds Apart: Measuring
International and Global Inequality. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Okin, Susan Moller. 1989. Justice, Gender, and the
Family. New York: Basic Books.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2008. Growing Unequal? Income Distribu-
tion and Poverty in OECD Countries. Paris: OECD.
Parrefias, Rhacel S. 2001. Servants of Globalization:
Women, Migration and Domestic Work. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.

Plutzer, Eric. 1988. “Work Life, Family-Life, and
Women’s Support of Feminism.” American Socio-
logical Review 53:640—-49.

Ramey, Valerie A. 2009. “Time Spent in Home Produc-
tion in the Twentieth-Century United States: New
Estimates from Old Data.” Journal of Economic
History 69:1-47.

Robinson, John P. and Geoffrey Godbey. 1997. Time for
Life: The Surprising Ways Americans Use Their
Time. University Park: Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity Press.

Royston, Patrick. 2005. “Multiple Imputation of Miss-
ing Values: Update.” Stata Journal 5:188-201.
Spitze, Glenna. 1999. “Getting Help with Housework:
Household Resources and Social Networks.” Jour-

nal of Family Issues 20:724-45.

Stier, Haya and Noah Lewin-Epstein. 2007. “Policy
Effects on the Division of Housework.” Journal of
Comparative Policy Analysis 9:235—59.

van der Lippe, Tanja, Kea Tijdens, and Esther de
Ruijter. 2004. “Outsourcing of Domestic Tasks and
Jan Paul Heisig is a predoctoral researcher at the
Social Science Research Center Berlin. In his disserta-
tion, he studies how the welfare state shapes income
dynamics among older individuals in the United States
and Germany. With Johannes Giesecke, he recently
completed a study of trends in West German job mobil-
ity that appeared in Kélner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie
und Sozialpsycholgie. He continues to study the divi-
sion of housework within the EU-funded EQUALSOC
network.
