@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089336?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
There are, however, certain common struc-
tural threads running through the fabric
of modern society. As Paul Hatt noted, the
indices developed by Warner and others to
measure social status may be generalized
to the total society, since the various
methods correlate highly with one universal
attribute—occupation.13 The present ap-
proach is, then, to ask: How does this
attribute become defined and organized, how
does it influence participation, in different
sub-areas of the metropolis?

A tentative answer is that the individual’s
social position is defined differently and his
social participation is patterned differently
as the focus shifts from the low-urban
populations to the high-urban populations.
One may envisage the low-urban areas as
somewhere between the small town and
the conventional picture of metropolitan
living. Where the local area is a social fact,
where common interests and associations ob-
tain, generalizations derived from small com-
munity studies may have validity. For here
the individual’s status will result, in part,
from participation in a known and used local
organizational structure and from family ties
that are publicly understood.

When, however, high-urban populations
are considered, social participation is organ-
ized around position in other organizational
contexts, as for example, the corporation,

13 Paul K. Hatt, “Stratification in the Mass
Society,” American Sociological Review, 15 (April,
1950), pp. 216-222.
politics, the labor union, or perhaps, as
Riesman has suggested, categories derived
from the popular culture of the mass media.!4
Here also are many individuals whose life,
aside from work, is ordered by participation
in small informal groups, and informal groups
only, floating within the vast culture world
of the market and the mass media. In such
populations the locally defined community is
largely irrelevant to status and participation.
Associations are spread geographically, but
ordered and concentrated in terms of selected
interests. Family, in this context, is still im-
portant. It is slightly more important in the
high-urban sample described. But it is prob-
ably much more private in its reference. In
fact, kin relations may be seen as growing
in importance just because of the diminished
reliance placed upon neighborhood and local
community.

What has been sketched above is a tenta-
tive model which will allow the use of con-
tributions from earlier research, (studies of
small cities, natural areas, the apartment
house family, the suburban fringe) within a
framework which integrates and orders them
in relation to one another. Such a frame of
reference also relates, eventually, to the in-
creasing importance of large-scale organiza-
tions in a society which allows many alterna-
tive life patterns for individuals at the same
functional and economic level.
the roles he might achieve, and his status
history with respect to these types of sta-
tuses, one should be able to predict closely
that person’s participation in the various
activities of society.

Second, that the social type of neighbor-
hood in which an urbanite lives is an efficient
indicator of his social participation and may
be a significant factor in its own right in
shaping his social participation. It has been
contended, for example, that social differ-
ences between the populations of urban
neighborhoods can be conveniently summa-
rized into differences of economic level,
family characteristics, and ethnicity.1 It is
our hypothesis that neighborhood popula-
tions having different configurations with
respect to these three variables will have
different patterns of social participation.

This paper will be limited to an examina-
tion of the relationship between amount of
formal association participation and certain
of the above mentioned individual status
and neighborhood differences. Other papers
are in preparation dealing with additional
aspects of individual social participation.

Following Komarovsky, all formally or-
ganized groups are included in our definition
of formal associations “. . . except economic
concerns (stores, corporations) , governmental
agencies, and schools.” ? Thus, all non-profit
formal organizations are included unless they
are part of the governmental body. “Their
functions are characterized by explicit regu-
larity and standardization—such as being
identified by a name, or having officers, or
having a written constitution, or having
regular meetings.” ® This follows generally
accepted definitions of “voluntary associa-
tions,” “formal organizations,” or “formal
groups.”
constant as far as possible, so all four of the
tracts selected contain relatively few non-
whites and few members of foreign-born
groups, as indicated by their relatively low
scores on the index of ethnic status. Census
tracts N-8 (located in the Mission district)
and M-6 (located in the Outer Mission
district) have low scores on the index of
economic status relative to the scores of the
other census tracts in the San Francisco Bay
Region. The Mission population, however,
is a rooming-house district with a relatively
low score on the index of family status,
having a low fertility ratio, many women in
the labor force, and few single-family de-
tached dwellings. The population of Outer
Mission has a relatively high score on the
index of family status and is characterized
by high fertility ratios, few women in the
labor force, and many single-family detached
dwellings. Census tract B-6 is in the Pacific
Heights district and is a high-rent apart-
ment house area, having a relatively high
economic level, but a low score on family
status. Census tract O-7 contains the district
known as St. Francis Wood and, like Pacific
Heights, contains a population having high
economic status, but like Outer Mission is
a single family home area characterized by
a high score on family status.

Selection of the Respondents. A probability
area sample was selected for each of the
study census tracts. First, a complete list
of dwelling units in each of the tracts was
compiled by means of standard block listing
procedures. Second, a sampling interval (k)
was established for each tract, and a sample
of dwellings drawn by taking a random
number from 1 to k and selecting every kth
dwelling unit thereafter. Third, within each
sample dwelling one male over the age of
21 was selected as the respondent, thus
eliminating from this study social participa-
tion differences resulting from the differen-
tial requirements of the roles of the two
sexes. Dwellings containing no males over
age 21 were removed from the sample, and
in those which contained two or more males
over age 21 one male was selected randomly
from a respondent selection table provided
on each interview schedule. In order to
assure randomness in the sample no substitu-
tions were allowed.

Response Rates. St. Francis Wood (high
family and high economic status) had the
highest per cent of completed interviews
with 90.8 per cent of the number of qualified
respondents in the sample fully completing
their interviews. Pacific Heights (low family
and high economic status) had a response
rate of 84.9 per cent, Mission (low family
and low economic status) had 83.9 per cent,
and Outer Mission (high family and low
economic status) had 83.3 per cent. Refusal
rates were higher in the two low economic
Status neighborhoods than in the two high
economic status neighborhoods, but refusals
accounted for most of the loss in completed
interviews in all four neighborhoods. People
seemed to be more suspicious of the inter-
viewers in Outer Mission than in the other
tracts, although a recent robbery in Mission
influenced several respondents not to open
the doors to their rooms until they had made
certain of the identity of the interviewer.
The resistance occurred in spite of several
articles in the metropolitan papers describing
the study, television programs featuring a
discussion of the study, advance letters to
the respondents, official credentials carried by
each interviewer, and the co-operation of the
Number of Formal Group Memberships.
One measure of formal group participation
used in many previous studies and employed
in this study is the sheer number of mem-
berships in formal associations. Table 2 con-
tains the per cent of persons in each neigh-
borhood who belong to a certain number of
formal organizations.® From Table 2 it can
be seen that in each of the different neigh-
borhoods more than 76 per cent of the men
belong to at least one formal group. This
finding is comparable to the findings of other
studies of formal group membership in
urban areas. Goldhamer® in his study of
Chicago residents found that 70 per cent of
the men belonged to one or more formal
groups, and Axelrod” found that 80 per cent
of the men in his Detroit sample belonged to
at least one formal group.

However, these figures indicate consider-
ably higher membership in one or more
formal associations than is given in some
other studies of formal participation among
urban dwellers, especially among those men
who are blue-collar workers. Komarovsky,®
for example, reports that 60 per cent of the
working class men belong to no formal
associations. Dotson ® presents similar find-
ings for a later period in New Haven. It is
not clear whether the inconsistency of our
findings with those of Komarovsky and Dot-
son is due to regional differences, Koma-
rovsky’s low response rate (29 per cent of
the questionnaires were returned), Dotson’s
small sample of men (N=50), or variations
in degree of unionization. (If memberships

5 General church membership is not included,
but memberships in church-connected groups are
included throughout this paper.

® Herbert Goldhamer, “Some Factors Affecting
Participation in Voluntary Associations,” unpub-
lished Ph.D. dissertation (microfilmed), University
of Chicago, 1942.

7 Axelrod, op. cit.

8 Mirra Komarovsky, “The Voluntary Associa-
tions of Urban Dwellers,” American Sociological Re-
view, 11 (December, 1946), pp. 686-698.

® Floyd Dotson, “Patterns of Voluntary Associa-
tion Among Urban Working-Class Families,” Ameri-
can Sociological Review, 16 (October, 1951), pp.
687-93.
Comparing the tracts with respect to the
number of formal group memberships, we
find that the high economic status tracts
contain relatively more men who belong to
a greater number of formal associations than
do the low economic status tracts. The largest
percentage (66.1 per cent) of men belong-
ing to three or more associations is in St.
Francis Wood, and the next largest percent-
age (35.6 per cent) is in Pacific Heights.
The two low economic level neighborhoods
at each level of family status have signifi-
cantly (p<.01) lower percentages of men
who report that they belong to three or more
associations with 16.8 per cent so reporting
in Mission and 12.9 per cent so reporting in
Outer Mission.

Differences between neighborhoods having
different family status, holding economic
status constant, are not consistent, although
at the high economic level St. Francis Wood,
having high family status, has a much larger
percentage of men who belong to three or
more associations than does Pacific Heights,
the low family status neighborhood. Pacific
Heights also contains a larger percentage of
In St. Francis Wood only 5.8 per cent, in
Mission 12.1 per cent, in Pacific Heights 14.1
per cent, and in Outer Mission 17.5 per cent
of the members of formal groups do not at-
tend meetings. Thus, the vast majority of
the members in each of the neighborhoods,
in excess of 82 per cent, attend at least one
meeting a year.

This finding is fairly consistent with those
of Axelrod 14 who found that 22 per cent
of the men who belong to formal groups in
Detroit attended no formal group meetings
during a three month period, although
Dotson #2 found that of the number of
memberships held by men in his sample
in New Haven as many as one-third were
inactive.

When the members in the four neighbor-
hoods are compared with respect to the fre-
quency of formal association attendance,
marked differences between neighborhoods
appear. Again, the greatest amount of formal
participation occurs among the persons who
live in the high economic status neighbor-
hoods. Men living in St. Francis Wood and
Pacific Heights who belong to formal asso-
ciations attend more frequently than those
living in Mission and Outer Mission. In
Pacific Heights 30.9 per cent of the members
attend meetings more than once a week
compared to only 8.3 per cent in Mission
(p<.01); in St. Francis Wood 26.7 per cent
of the members attend meetings more than
once a week compared to only 6.6 per cent
in Outer Mission (p<.01).

Considering those men who belong to
formal associations but who attend only
about once a year or less, it may be noted
that Pacific Heights, the high economic, low
family status neighborhood, has almost as
large a percentage of men who are relatively
isolated from social contacts in formal
groups as the two low economic status neigh-
borhoods. Since Pacific Heights, Mission, and
Outer Mission are the neighborhoods with
the largest percentages of men who do not
belong to formal groups, it is evident that
sizeable segments of the population in these
three neighborhoods are socially isolated
from this form of participation. This is con-
sistent with the general conclusion of
Komarovsky who says with respect to formal
group participation that a large segment of
the population, particularly the lower social
and economic level “. . . is cut off from
channels of power, information, growth and
a sense of participation in purposive social
action.” 1 We would add to this generaliza-
tion that even on the higher economic levels
a significant segment of those men living
in neighborhoods of low family status are
similarly isolated.

Office Holding in Formal Associations.
Generally, holding positions of leadership
in a formal association denotes more active
participation in the group than not holding
positions of leadership. Thus, a third meas-
ure of formal association participation used
in this study, and one which indicates the
relative power position of the individual
hoods, the relative number of office holders
is somewhat higher in St. Francis Wood
(high economic and high family status)
than it is in Pacific Heights (high economic
and low family status). Our findings con-
sistently show that the higher economic
status neighborhoods contain relatively more
men who belong to formal associations, more
members who frequently attend meetings,
and more members who hold office in formal
associations when compared with neighbor-
hoods of a lower economic level.

The differences by family status are not
so large nor so consistent, although at the
high economic status level, the lower fam-
ily status neighborhood contains a higher
percentage of men who are socially isolated
with respect to formal association participa-
tion by all three measures of participation
used here than the higher family status
neighborhood contains.
Education, Occupation, and Income.
Thus far in the analysis the discussion
has been limited to the formal association
participation of men as that behavior is
related to the social type of neighborhood
in which the men live. In effect, we have
been assigning to each man his neighborhood
scores for economic and family status, and
relating his formal association behavior to
these scores. However, the neighborhoods
are not completely homogeneous with re-
spect to economic and family status; that
is, each man by some measure of his own
individual economic or family status does
not necessarily have a score which equals
the average for his neighborhood. A neigh-
borhood’s score has been referred to as a
unit variable, and an individual’s own score
as a personal variable.1* In this section
we wish to explore further the relationship
between economic position and formal asso-
ciation by tabulating these two types of
variables simultaneously.

Since the most significant and consistent
findings concern economic and not family
status, the study neighborhoods have been
grouped so that the two low economic
status neighborhoods, Mission and Outer
Mission, are together, and the two high
economic status neighborhoods, Pacific
Heights and St. Francis Wood, are together.
Education, occupation, and annual family in-
come were taken as measures of personal eco-
nomic status. As is shown in Table 5, the
high economic status neighborhoods contain
relatively more men with higher education,
with white collar occupations, and with
higher incomes; and the low economic status
neighborhoods contain relatively more men
with lower education, blue collar occupa-
tions, and lower incomes. However, there is
a small percentage of men living in the high
economic status neighborhoods who have
either relatively low education, blue collar
jobs, or relatively low incomes, that is, who
Tasie 5, PER Cent oF MEN Havinc SELECTED Socro-
Economic CHARACTERISTICS BY NEIGHBORHOOD

 

 

Socio-Economic

Neighborhood

Characteristics
High
Economic
Low Status

Economic (Pacific
Status Heights
(Mission and
and Outer St. Francis
Mission) Wood)

 

Characteristics PerCent Per Cent
Education

Some college or more 9.6 50.4
Completed high

school only 24.6 25.6
Some high school 23.7 13.1
Grade school or less 42.1 10.9
Not ascertained 0.0 0.0
Taste 6. Per Cent or Men Wuo ATTEND ForMAL
ASSOCIATION MEETINGS FREQUENTLY BY NEIGH-
BORHOOD AND INpIvinuAL Socio-Economic
CHARACTERISTICS *

 

 

Neighborhood
Characteristics

High
Economic
Low Status
Economic (Pacific
Status Heights

(Mission and
Individual and Outer St. Francis
Socio-Economic Mission) Wood)
Characteristics Per Cent Per Cent

 

Education
Some college or more

 

46.4
tion, occupation, and family income. Com-
paring the percentages within each
neighborhood, the general tendency is for
relatively more frequent attenders to have
higher education, white collar occupations,
and higher incomes. This, of course, is
consistent with the findings of many studies
which have related such measures to formal
association participation.

Of particular interest here, however, is
the comparison of amount of formal asso-
ciation participation between neighbor-
hoods, holding personal education, occupa-
tion, and income constant. For example,
a larger percentage of the men who have
been to college are frequent attenders in the
high economic status neighborhoods than
in the low economic status neighborhoods.
This is also true of the men in the less
educated categories. At each of the educa-
tional levels the men living in the higher
economic status neighborhoods are more
likely to be frequent attenders than are the
men living in the lower economic status
neighborhoods. (3x?=15.78, p<.01)

Although not statistically significant, a
similar tendency can be seen when personal
occupation and income are held constant.
Men with high occupations are more likely
to be frequent attenders if they live in the
high economic status neighborhoods. The
same is true for the other occupational
groups. For example, men who are service
workers and laborers are more likely to be
frequent attenders if they live in the high
economic status neighborhoods. A similar
tendency occurs between the two neighbor-
hoods when comparing men who have similar
incomes. Those who live in the high eco-
nomic status neighborhoods are somewhat
more likely than those who live in the low
economic status neighborhoods to be fre-
quent attenders at formal association
meetings. Thus, differences in formal asso-
ciation participation still exist when compar-
ing the low with the high economic
status neighborhoods, even when certain

measures of personal economic status are
cantralled
lives may itself be a factor in the kinds of
pressures which are brought upon the
individual to participate in formal associa-
tions.

In the first instance the lower economic
status persons who live in high economic
status neighborhoods and the higher eco-
nomic status persons who live in low
economic status neighborhoods may be the
“deviants” who are found in many stratifi-
cation studies; that is, they may be those
whose objective class position does not
seem congruent with their own placement
of themselves. The economic characteristics
of the neighborhoods in which they live,
however, may give important objective clues
regarding their group identification and,
thereby, give indications of certain kinds of
behavioral and attitudinal correlates.

The second case would involve the effect
of the neighborhood in determining the
role expectations of the individual after the
individual became a part of the neighbor-
hood. For example, persons living in high
economic status neighborhoods may come
under much greater pressures to participate
in certain types of associations than do
persons living in low economic status neigh-
borhoods. Neighborhood improvement asso-
ciations, civic groups, welfare and charitable
organizations, etc., are more likely to have
members from high economic status neigh-
borhoods than from low economic status
neighborhoods.

Family Characteristics. Within each of
the four neighborhoods the number of
formal association memberships, as well as
the frequency of attendance at formal
association meetings, was tabulated against
marital status, age of children, employment
status of wife, and type of dwelling (single
family detached vs. two or more family
dwelling). Although other writers report
relationships between formal association
participation and these variables, we find
no consistent trends when making compari-
sons within each of the neighborhoods.

Age Differences. Many writers have
investigated the relationship between age
and formal association participation. Axel-
rod,!® for example, in his Detroit study finds
that formal association membership starts out
relatively low in early adulthood, reaches
a peak in the forties, and then declines
to a new low by the sixties. He also finds
this same pattern for the very active par-
ticipants. Goldhamer found that when
participation is measured by frequency of
attendance, the young men tend to exceed
the older men and that participation tends
to decline in the oldest age group (fifty and
over).16 From his study of persons aged
65 and over living in a California community
of retired people, McKain noted that
formal association participation declined
with advanced years; about 50 per cent of
those over age 65 reported that they gave
less time to associations than they did
when they were 50 years of age, only 1
per cent said that their social activities
had increased.17 These findings have been
interpreted by some as indicating a struc-
tural relationship between the adult life
cycle and formal association participation:
ties with formal associations preventing
many formal associations in the twenties;
consolidation of occupational position, a
home and a family leading the individual
to join associations in the thirties; formal
associations becoming an end in themselves
in the forties and occupying more time;
children grown to adulthood, retirement,
and loss of physical stamina and vigor re-
sulting in less and less formal association
participation at the older age groups.1®
Annual formal association attendance by
age is given in Table 7 for each of the four
study neighborhoods in San _ Francisco.
These data require a revision of the above
view, and constitute some evidence of the
degree of difference in life styles of seg-
ments of the population at different levels
of economic status. In each of the high
economic status neighborhoods the per cent
of men who are active participants increases
with increasing age. No such relationship,
however, occurs between age and formal
association participation among the men who
live in the low economic status neighbor-
hoods. On the contrary, in these neighbor-
This paper has attempted to relate amount
of formal association participation to some
of the social types of neighborhoods in which
men live and to certain social roles which
men occupy. A brief review of the findings
follows:

1. Although the four urban neighbor-
hoods studied were widely divergent with
respect to economic level and extent of
family life, over three-fourths of the men
hold membership in at least one formal
group, and a relatively small percentage of
these are inactive.

2. Men living in the high economic status
neighborhoods belong to the greater number
of associations, attend more frequently, and
hold office more than men living in low
economic status neighborhoods.

3. Comparing the two high economic
status neighborhoods, the low family status
ings in Webber’s study.1® In Orlando, Florida
he found that the older age group, which
he defined as 70 or older, had a slightly
greater nonmembership and slightly lower
incidence of membership in two or more
associations. However, he found the opposite
relationship in a generally higher economic
status community, West Palm Beach, where
those under age 70 reported considerably
higher nonmembership, and somewhat lower
proportions in one or more associations.
He also found that persons over age 70 in
the latter community were more likely to
attend five to nine meetings per month.?°

In addition (see Table 7) the reported
relationships between participation and
neighborhood still hold within the three
different age groups. The largest percentages
of men who are frequent attenders live in
Pacific Heights and St. Francis Wood,
and Pacific Heights has a relatively larger
number of men who attend seldom or never
than does St. Francis Wood.
OCIOLOGICALLY, a distinction is
S customarily made between urbanism

as a physical, ecological phenomenon
and urbanism as a social-psychological state
—in Wirth’s classic phrase a “way of life.”
The physical aspects have been measured
by population size, density, heterogeneity,
land values, and other data relating to the
environment; the social-psychological as-
pects have been measured less often and
less precisely by scales of “neighboring,”
extent of rationality, impersonality, etc.
Both rural and urban residence location
(ie., ecological ruralism or urbanism) are
believed to be generally, but not inevitably,
associated with the rural and urban social-
psychological patterns—their “ways of life.”
This paper poses two questions: (1) whe-
ther suburbanism as an ecological phenome-
non is also accompanied by suburbanism as
a social-psychological state, that is, by
suburbanism as a distinct way of life; and
(2) what conceptual approaches are likely

* Revised version of a paper read at a meeting
of the Eastern Sociological Society, April, 1955.
neighborhood contains relatively more men
who belong to no formal associations, who
never attend meetings if they do belong,
and who do not hold office than does the
high family status neighborhood. No such
relationship appears when comparing the
two low economic status neighborhoods.
4. Within each of the neighborhoods per-
sons of higher economic status, as indicated
by their own individual educational level,
income, and occupation, generally have a
greater amount of associational participation
than do individuals of lower economic status,
However, holding individual economic status
constant, persons living in the high economic
status neighborhoods still have more asso-
ciational participation than those living in
the low economic status neighborhoods.
Thus the economic characteristics of the
neighborhood population as a unit may be
an important indicator of the economic
reference group for those living in the neigh-
