@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Patrimonial states and their chartered East India companies propelled the
first wave of European colonialism in Asia during the seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries. The metropolitan principals of these organizations faced
special problems in monitoring and controlling their own colonial agents.
Focusing primarily on the Dutch United East Indies Company and second-
arily on its English counterpart, I argue that the network structure of each
organization affected the degree to which relationships between patrimonial
principals and their agents could serve as a disciplinary device. Dutch de-
cline was imminent when alternative opportunities for private gain, avail-
able via the ascending English East India Company, allowed Dutch colonial
servants to evade their own patrimonial chain and encouraged its organiza-
tional breakdown. Features of network structure determined whether colo-
nial agents saw better alternatives to the official patrimonial hierarchy, when
they could act on them, and whether principals could respond.
petitors were central challenges, of course,
although they could be taken too far, even
from the colonialists’ perspective. For, as
Coen’s metropolitan critics reminded him,
“there is no profit at all in an empty sea,
empty countries, and dead people” (quoted
in Meilink-Roelofz 1962:232). Within these
not unimportant limits, however, colonialists
also faced dilemmas inherent in their own or-
ganizational structures; it is this complex of
issues that is highlighted here.

I argue that network structures mediated
principal/agent relationships among early
modern European colonialists. The capacity
of principals in Europe to control their agents
in the colonies depended on specific struc-
tural relationships—simultaneously political
and economic—that bound them together. In
the Dutch case, the principals first disposed
of resources that the agents required, and
agents lacked viable alternatives to the net-
work channels that linked them to the Neth-
erlands. But a seismic shift in that opportu-
nity structure opened the way for heightened
principal/agent problems and undermined
group discipline, contributing to the demise
of Dutch hegemony and the rise of the En-
glish empire in the eighteenth century. This
was clearly an outcome of global historical
In its first, triumphant, phase, the seven-
teenth-century Golden Age (Gouden Eeuw),
the Netherlands established an unpreceden-
ted position of world power. Dutch develop-
ments during this period illuminate the gen-
eral character of the first wave of European
colonial enterprise. The basic structure of
early modern European colonialism was cre-
ated when merchant capitalists and their
home states joined together to charter large-
scale monopoly companies aimed at global
commercial and imperial dominance. The
Dutch pioneered key aspects of the chartered
company form with the foundation of the
United East Indies Company (Vereenigde
Oost-Indische Compagnie, or VOC) in 1602.
The VOC merged individuals’ assets into a
single permanent ongoing enterprise, and
was invested with sovereign rights over for-
eign territory and vassals. Chartered compa-
nies were quintessentially patrimonial forms,
conjoining economic and sovereign political
goals at the behest of the ruler’s personal dis-
cretion.!

Once launched, the VOC soon became an
organizational template for other metropoli-
tan merchants and rulers, inspiring, among
others, the English East India Company and
the many French Compagnies des Indes
Orientales. It remained one of the most suc-
cessful of the many hybrid colonial enter-
prises whose licensed mercantile ambitions
and fields of operation spanned the globe,
ranging from the spice and cloth trades of
Indonesia and India, to the Brazilian sugar
industry and the African slave trade. Thus the
Dutch case is indispensable for sociolo-
gists—a key to our understanding the forma-
tion of the global colonial system in the sev-
enteenth century and clarifying the causal
factors that made for organizational success
in that system.

We can also investigate factors that led to
failure and systemic transformation. By the
end of the eighteenth century, the close of the
Dutch ancien regime, the patrimonial struc-
ture was severely strained. It soon gave way
altogether. In the metropole, the European
center of the global colonial system, it was
replaced by differentiated profit-making en-
terprises, twinned with a power-wielding
state. In the colonies, the developmental
story is not so neat. A cursory glance at the
post-Company situation in Indonesia, the
central pillar of the Dutch empire, reveals
new and unstable modes of colonial domina-
tion. But there also, ancien regime styles of
accumulation and rule were displaced, and
Dutch colonialism moved away from Com-
pany rule and toward a more bureaucratic,
socially interventionist system.”

Clearly, exogenous shocks played a part in
the sagging performance and ultimate col-
lapse of the partnership between the Dutch
state and the VOC. Particularly salient were
the growing economic and military power of
other metropolitan state-company duos and
the collapse of social formations indigenous
to so-called colonial target areas. Metropoli-
tan Dutch developments were also important.
Here, I treat these processes as external pres-
sures and opportunities, bracketing their
causes analytically, in a kind of “thought ex-
periment.” The empirical questions I address
are: What endogenous developments under-
mined the Dutch colonial system? To what
extent, in particular, was the troubled rela-
tionship among colonial rulers themselves a
problem? How did these internal processes
The organization of early modern European
colonialism in general, and Dutch colonial-
ism in particular, was an ambitious effort to
accumulate capital and project power abroad.
As such, it involved several levels of agency
relationships, ties that may be said to exist
“when a principal delegates some rights . . .
to an agent who is bound by a (formal or in-
formal) contract to represent the principal’s
interests” (Eggertsson 1990:40-41). Expan-
sion by means of extending and multi-
plying agency relationships was a two-edged
sword. While it promised gains in the
principal’s efficacy and reach, it also created
problems of monitoring agents’ activities and
enforcing compliance through sanctions.
Following Simon ([1947] 1961) and Wil-
liamson (1975), I begin by assuming that
both principals and agents tend to act in in-
tendedly rational fashion, and opportunisti-
cally, to advance their own individual gains
(exogenously specified). If social actors see

3] use the term “Indonesia” anachronistically,
since no single nation-state existed during the pe-
riod under examination. Nor did “India” or “the
Indies” have exact geographical referents; from
the western European vantage point, these words
referred vaguely to the lands east of the Cape of
Good Hope and west of the Azores.
an attractive opportunity, they will pursue it,
even if they must contemplate guile. “Prom-
ises to behave responsibly that are unsup-
ported by credible commitments will not,
therefore, be reliably discharged” (William-
son 1991:92). Whence the principal’s prob-
lems with its agents, and the need for incen-
tives and sanctions. I am provisionally work-
ing, then, from within that branch of utilitar-
ian theory that views information gaps and
enforcement problems as consequential to
the analysis. Later in this paper, I will pro-
blematize these essentially rational-actor as-
sumptions. But for the moment, the discus-
sion assumes that they hold.*

Certain organizational arrangements can
help minimize the problem. Principals will
be drawn to any arrangement that makes
agents easier to check up on, that brings
agents’ aims more closely into line with
theirs, that increases agents’ dependence on
them, that decreases collusion among agents,
and that enables the principal to mete out re-
wards and punishments to maximum effect.
On one end of the spectrum of organizational
options lie command structures, or hierar-
chies, which tend to lend continuity and sta-
bility to ongoing enterprises; on the other,
ideal-typical contracts, which promise
greater flexibility. The two types are best
seen as poles bracketing a continuum that in-
cludes many forms of contractual hierarchies
or hierarchical contracts.5 Furthermore, these
arrangements may be complexly and imper-
fectly articulated: One of the arguments in
this paper is that vulnerable command struc-
tures may be strengthened when they are
complemented by, and rest upon, certain
types of tacit contractual supports—and
weakened when they do not.

Patrimonial systems embody several spe-
cial twists to the relevant principal/agent re-
lationships—two are important here. First,
the substantive content of roles and ties is
multivocal. That is, key agents were del-
egated multiple and interrelated organiza-
tional goals, including what we think of as
economic ends (extracting surplus resources
and making profits), as well as the coercive
goals of maintaining and extending sovereign
reach. The top Dutch colonial agents were,
by virtue of their singular positions, simulta-
neously traders and rulers. The metropolitan
principal therefore faced the ticklish task of
strengthening the power of these agents to
insist that surplus pass through the restricted
set of nodes leading back home, while mak-
ing sure that wily agents did not evade that
patrimonial chain for their own ends. Thus
patrimonial principal/agent ties present more
complexities than the employer/employee or
manager/worker relationships in capitalist
firms with which most contemporary princi-
pal/agent models are preoccupied. Managing
patrimonial agents was always a political and
economic quandary, requiring multivocal or-
ganizational innovations if colonial rule were
to remain in place.

The second twist derives from the multiple
headship of patrimonial systems and the
varying degrees to which the principals’
goals are integrated with one another. In the
broadest sense, patrimonial systems in early
modern Europe were dual ones, in which a
ruler (or rulers) and state-sponsored corpo-
rations jointly carried out systemic political
tasks and shared the prerogatives of sover-
eignty. Policy was severally steered by mon-
archs or (in the Dutch case) stadholders and
by the corporate elites of the urban, provin-
cial, and national estates.® This duality was

6 Each of the Dutch provincial States appointed
a stadholder (often, however, the same indi-
vidual), Dutch stadholders were at one time like
provincial governors, but the stadholderate be-
came more powerful after the Netherlands had
asserted independence from Habsburg Spain in
structurally unstable, as monarch and corpo-
rate elites strove to subordinate one another.
When one side was relatively successful, pat-
rimonial governance veered toward a unitary,
one-headed system of rule. But the practice
of consolidating and extending rule by del-
egating sovereignty ensured that patrimonial
systems continually threatened to parcellize
into multiple, segmented headships. Colonial
systems, in which the capacity to exercise
military force devolved down to agents, were
particularly liable to fragmentation because
agents could more easily generate the power
to act as principals and thus as competitors
to their own principals. This tendency gave
another turn of the screw to the daunting task
of managing patrimonial agents.

Like other European patrimonial states, the
early modern Netherlands exemplified these
two endemic characteristics: multivocal roles
and parcellized power. A few remarks are in
order regarding the latter feature, particularly
with respect to the relationship among the
metropolitan principals. Elsewhere I have ar-
gued that potential governance problems
were minimized at the outset of the first
wave of European colonialism, circa 1600,
by the Netherlands’ special brand of estatist
patrimonialism, which helped make the
Dutch the most successful players in the
Asian mercantilist game (Adams 1994). The
Dutch metropolitan state and the VOC were
segmented in corporate bodies dispersed
throughout localities and provinces, but these
bodies were controlled by members of a he-
reditary patriciate—a merchant-regent elite.
(The patriciate, particularly those based in
Amsterdam, also controlled the navy, the
“Jast instance” military backup for Company
ventures.) The stadholders were margin-
alized throughout the era of Dutch commer-
cial hegemony (1602 to 1672). Thus the re-
lationship between the corporate state and
the small VOC directorate, the Heren XVII
(the Seventeen Gentlemen) was relatively
harmonious. Both drew their members from
the same regent patriciate, and in fact many
men held positions in both bodies. The VOC
was basically a one-headed organization dur-
ing this period, a signal advantage when the
Netherlands’ leading European competitor,
England, was saddled with a political system
torn between the crown and the patrimonial
elite in Parliament. In England, this split en-
couraged conflict among contending princi-
pals in the metropolitan wing of the English
East India Company (EIC).

A quick juxtaposition with the then two-
headed EIC should clarify the relative advan-
tages of the Dutch situation. The English
Company merchants saw crown patronage
and exercize of royal prerogative as essential
but dangerously unpredictable. And for good
reason: James I licensed rival traders (for a
fee) to the East Indies in 1604 and 1617,
against the charter the crown itself had given
the EIC in 1600. The Company was forced to
compensate the new contenders, and thus in-
directly the crown, to resecure its monopoly.
Charles I similarly authorized Sir William
Courteen to set up arival company in 1632 to
trade to Goa, Malabar, China, and Japan. The
struggle between the EIC and the Courteen
company lasted for several years, severely
weakening the EIC abroad. Thus, in England,
monarchs routinely violated Company trust,
while the Parliaments of the day suspected
the EIC of royalism and doubted the legality
of privileged monopoly companies tout court
(Hill 1961:37-42; Brenner 1993:170-81).

The EIC stayed afloat and navigated the
Scylla and Charybdis of ruler and estates
(unlike some of the French companies, for
example), but only with difficulty. Episodic
contention between the Crown and Parlia-
ment, the two putative heads of international
commercial/colonial policy, continued to un-
dercut the Company’s ability to enforce its
monopoly and to hold together its own mer-
chant sponsors. The EIC’s prospects im-
proved under Cromwell, whose 1657 charter,
modeled on the VOC’s, endowed the EIC
with its first permanent joint stock organiza-
tion. This arrangement was reaffirmed by
Charles II after the Restoration. But the
backwash of the metropolitan struggle be-
tween monarch and estates continued even
beyond the Glorious Revolution of 1688.7
Two- or multi-headed organizations can
perform well under certain circumstances.
Business partners in a competitive capitalist
firm share residual claims on the firm’s prof-
its and are thus constrained to cooperate be-
cause of their shared bottom-line goal. They
may also be disciplined by the economic en-
vironment: All else being equal, a capitalist
firm will presumably go bankrupt if it fails
to perform efficiently, since it is competing
with other firms.’ But patrimonial principals
in early modern Europe enjoyed much more
social latitude for nonoptimizing behavior.
Even when engaged in joint enterprises, they
were wont to aim at goals that were contin-
gently compatible at best (the monarch seek-
ing territorial aggrandizement and members
of the estates pursuing mercantile profit, to
put one common situation crudely). Call it
the “Hydra Factor’: The multiple heads or
principals lacked institutional mechanisms to
resolve the resulting uncertainties and in-
fighting.

This factor influenced the comparatively
gradual consolidation of the EIC. Although
the English and Dutch companies were
launched within two years of one another,
the English company was much slower to
develop an organizational identity and per-
manent capital. The leisurely rhythm of
company development was also imposed by
the EIC’s inability to best the Dutch in the
Spice Islands. The EIC was pushed back
onto the Indian subcontinent at a very early
stage, where it expanded more slowly. From
1600 to 1610, when the VOC sent 76 ships
to Asia, the EIC sent only 17; from 1610 to
1620 the respective figures are 117 and 77;
from 1620 to 1630, 141 and 58; from 1630
to 1640, 157 and 59; and from 1640 to
1650, 164 and 75 (Gaastra and Bruijn
1993:182). These figures register the lower
initial capitalization of the EIC and the po-
litical troubles that beset it during the sharp-
est disaccord between Crown and Parlia-
ment.?

In contrast, the Dutch Company thrived
from early on. During the era of Dutch he-
gemony (1600 to 1672), the VOC turned a
profit without receiving direct economic in-
puts from the States-General or other metro-
politan state bodies. The Company ploughed
profits back into its own coffers, while typi-
cally paying a 10-percent-plus annual divi-
dend to shareholders after 1630 and passing
along money to the state, such as the 1.5
million guilders it paid the States-General in
1647 for the renewal of its charter until
1672 (De Korte 1984:6). In return, the
States-General staunchly supported the
VOC’s monopoly privileges (Algemeen
Rijksarchief 1.01.07 #1235, #1237, #1244;
Israel 1989:103; Elias 1923:39-44), In addi-
tion, the VOC proved able to offer its home
state a backup naval force, which pressed
the Iberian empire in the East and helped
force Spain to negotiate a truce, and eventu-
ally a permanent peace, with the Nether-
lands.

So far I have focused on the metropolitan
pole of colonial rule, concentrating on the
period in which its patrimonial organization
was launched. As the colonial system got
underway and state-sponsored corporate
bodies like the chartered companies took
off, the relationship among metropolitan
principals became more adversarial. The
VOC in particular could act as a state within
a state—so various Dutch regents com-
plained, or exulted, depending on whether
they controlled one of the coveted director-
ships. But the Seventeen Gentlemen were
also the principals of the Dutch East Indies
Company, and in that role they confronted
the intractable independence of their own
colonial agents. Governor-General van Rie-
beek, head of the VOC’s East Indies opera-
tion, put this in a nutshell when he chided
his metropolitan superiors in a 1714 letter:
“The Gentlemen in the Fatherland decide
things as they see fit, but we do things here,
as we best understand and decide them”
(quoted in Gaastra 1991:68).
At the outset of the colonial project, the nuts
and bolts of the Dutch East Indies system
worked as follows. The Seventeen Gentle-
men would send two to three Company fleets
a year to their main outpost in Indonesia—
Batavia (present-day Jakarta in Java). These
fleets carried goods and precious metals for
trading, men to replenish the colonial ser-
vants (who were continually dying off), and
instructions to the colonial government. Each
trip took between seven and nine months
each way, sailing via the Cape of Good Hope
to Batavia and back. Once unloaded in Indo-
nesia, the materials, men, and instructions
fell under the jurisdiction of Batavia’s top
colonial agents: the members of the Indies
Council and its chairman, the Governor-Gen-
eral, together known as the High Indies Gov-
ernment (Hoge Regering). These agents, or
company servants, as they were called,
would then dispense the cargos to the lower
rungs of the colonial hierarchy.!° These
lower levels included the VOC’s roving mer-
chants and its settlements and “factories”
(factorijen).

Of particular interest here are the topmost
agents in Asia—approximately 100 Com-
pany merchants, factory heads, and men in
the highest positions in the High Indies Gov-
ernment—that VOC records counted as the
decision-making elect in the late seventeenth
century.!! Their numbers were a drop in the
bucket compared to the 13,000 Company ser-
vants in Asia at the end of the 1600s or the
25,000 a century later, but most of these
lesser servants were sailors and soldiers who
had virtually no chance of rising in the hier-
archy to occupy major decision-making po-
sitions, notwithstanding popular Horatio
Alger-style tales of humble cabin boys as-
cending through VOC ranks to the post of
Governor-General. !2

From Indonesia, VOC merchants and their
assistants transported some of the incoming
specie and goods to India, Japan, Persia, and
eventually China. Since there was little de-
mand for European commodities at this early
stage of imperialism, precious metals, both
in bar form and in specie (coin), played an
important role in this trade. In China, for ex-
ample, the VOC sold silver imported from
Europe and invested the profits in Chinese
silk. The silk was then shipped to Japan and
traded for gold and copper. The gold and
copper were exchanged for textiles in India.
Buying cheap and selling dear was a funda-
mental source of VOC profits, not simply at
the endpoint of the European staple market,
but at every stage along the way.

The VOC had fully 30 factories in the East
Indies by the end of the seventeenth century.
These were not factories in the modern
sense, of course; they were points of collec-
tion for goods from specific local trades and
organizing nodes for exercizing control over
prevailing production relations. On Ceylon
and the Moluccan islands, VOC factors orga-
nized extraction within coerced tributary re-
lations. There spices were the commodity in
question; cloves, nutmeg, cinnamon, and
mace composed the heart of-the monopoly.
The VOC later applied this schema to cof-
fee-growing, which it engrossed in Batavia’s
hinterlands, after they were “pacified” in the
1680s. In other factories, the Company did
not function in this feudal-lordly fashion, but
instead ordered goods on consignment from
indigenous merchant/brokers, to be delivered
at piece rates. This was the case in the facto-
ries in India, where the VOC bought local
textiles. Finally, some goods, like Chinese
tea, were delivered by means of inter-mer-
chant contacts in Batavia.

Once appropriated, the Indies goods would
pass through Batavia, to be shipped back to
the Netherlands on one of the large, armed,
return fleets. On arrival, the return cargoes
would be held in VOC warehouses until the
time came for the Company’s periodic and
highly profitable auctions, releasing the
goods to the European market. Some of the
monies realized would then be allotted for
organizational running costs, some for share-
holder dividends and directors’ cuts, while
the rest was ploughed back into expanding
the Company capital. The whole trade cycle,
from the original investment decisions to the
final realization of profits, stretched over two
years—more if one takes into account the ul-
timate source of the specie, which was not in
the Netherlands, but derived from the Ameri-
cas and Japan.!3

The trade cycle was also fraught with un-
certainty. The genius of the VOC lay in the
novel steps it took to reduce risk. On the one
hand, the unprecedented scale of its capital
base and operations enabled it to manage
supply and demand, and to cut out traditional
middle markets that had raised a whole se-
ries of intermediary risks (Musgrave 1981).
One striking aspect of the Dutch East Indies
system was the VOC’s ambitious defense of
a triple monopoly. That the Company laid
claim to a world monopoly on certain spices
is well known, as are its state-sanctioned
claims to all Dutch trade east of the Cape of
Good Hope. But the VOC also asserted do-
minion over what was dubbed the “country
trade,” intra-Asian commerce in key com-
modities, and tried to impose this on its own
servants as well as on indigenous and Euro-
pean merchants.!4

'3 Van der Wee (1981), and Prakash (1985:11-
13) discuss the role of bullion in the VOC’s Asian
trade. Prakash calculates that between 1651 and
1657, goods made up 45 percent of the total of
bullion and commercial goods received at
Batavia; the figure for 1700 to 1750 drops to
about 33 percent. Chaudhuri (1978, app. 5) shows
that the situation was similar for the EIC.

'4 In this it differed markedly from the EIC,
whose early aspirations to interport Asian mo-
nopoly were thwarted by inadequate capitaliza-
tion and by infighting among metropolitan prin-
cipals that strengthened metropolitan interlopers.
The EIC permitted its own servants to trade in
Asia, a practice that was initially a symptom and
source of organizational weakness. Furber (1976,
chap. 6) compares the “country trade” patterns for
the Dutch and English empires.
As we would expect of a multivocal patri-
monial structure, the Dutch East Indies
Company’s capacity to muster massive force
was key to its success. The VOC undertook
some extraordinary coercive interventions,
like Governor-General Jan Pieterszoon
Coen’s selective extermination of the Band-
anese Islanders, and the military attacks that
ousted the English East India Company from
the Archipelago; but the Company also de-
pended on dull daily compulsion to carry on
business as usual. At every stage, military
pressure helped the VOC maintain the inter-
locking institutional arrangements for ex-
tracting and realizing surplus. Force was ap-
plied at the point of production (most impor-
tantly in the spice monopoly process) and at
the point of exchange, in dealings with in-
digenous merchants and brokers. As the
VOC’s holdings expanded, so did its need for
effective coercion. And in all cases, the cred-
ible threat of force guaranteed the general
tules of the game, from the bogus treaties
mandating relations of vassalage with local
potentates to the rule of law that secured the
VOC’s monopoly in the Netherlands. Rela-
tions of force and fraud were not external to,
but were constitutive of, the Dutch patrimo-
nial colonial chain.!>

The VOC managed to militarily enforce its
world monopoly on cloves, near monopoly
on nutmeg, mace, and cinnamon, and to con-
trol the pepper trade against a formidable ar-
ray of contenders, both European and Asian,
in Dutch-Indonesian trade and intra-Indone-
sian commerce. By the mid-seventeenth cen-
tury, the VOC had consolidated its hold and
was trading widely, not only in spices, but
also in Chinese, Persian, and Indian silks,
Japanese copper, Indian sugar, and other
commodities.

The VOC extended its organizational ca-
pacity by substituting Company hierarchies
for middle markets and negotiating hierarchi-
Because Batavia was the central economic,
military, and communication node connect-
ing the VOC’s Indies outposts, the link be-
tween the metropolitan directorate and the
Batavian leadership was critically important
to the functioning of the whole colonial sys-
tem. In the social network literature, central-
ity is understood in a number of ways. One
dimension, “‘betweenness,” is a useful start-
ing point for my purposes. If betweenness is
taken to indicate the extent to which a unit
must traverse the unit of reference in order
to reach other units, then units (or actors)
that are central, in the sense of high between-
ness, are the most likely to be situated on
unique chains joining peripheral actors
(Freeman 1979). These units or actors are
strategically situated, and strategic position
in a network is one ingredient of power ad-
vantage.

Figure 1 renders the colonial situation in
the early to mid-1600s as starkly as possible,
while preserving the essential logic of the
organizational structure. No Company actor
holds a truly central position. The Seventeen
Gentlemen and the Batavian elite both occu-
pied positions of intermediate centrality on
all paths to realizing their economic gains;
they were both brokers, that is, intermediary
actors, who could “facilitate transactions be-
tween other actors lacking access to or trust
in one another” (Marsden 1982:202).
Equally important, they depended on each
other for brokerage services. The mutual and
symmetrical dependency inscribed in the
heart of the VOC’s hierarchy undercut the
potential power advantage of the metropole
over Batavia.

Figure 1 also contrasts the VOC’s organi-
zation with that of its archrival, the English
East India Company. The EIC had multiple
East Indies headquarters—Bombay, Madras,
Calcutta, and others. Each main settlement
was headed by a Governor General or Presi-
dent and a Council composed of senior mer-
chants. There was no English colonial equi-
valent to Batavia, in India or elsewhere. In
the English case, the metropolitan directors
and the multiple East Indies headquarters
were brokers, but the metropole alone occu-
pied the central position in the overall orga-
nization and gained a potential power advan-
tage as the less dependent member of a lop-
sided exchange relation.

It was not that opportunism, shirking, and
free-riding magically disappeared from the
EIC’s ranks. Far from it: The metropolitan
director Sir Josiah Child could still charge
the EIC’s Madras servants with “perverting
or misconstruing, procrastinating or neglect-
ing our plain and direct orders to you, as if
you were not a subordinate but a coordinate
power with us” (quoted in Chaudhuri 1978:
77). But control was a matter of degree (pun
intended). Unlike the VOC, the EIC Court of
Directors’ central position allowed it to ma-
nipulate similarly situated dependent nodes
and play them off against one another, for
example by procuring reports about corrup-
tion in one colonial settlement from another
one not beholden to it.'© Thus for all its prob-
lems with multiple metropolitan principals
jostling for supremacy, the EIC had fewer
difficulties dictating specific courses of ac-
tion to its top colonial servants than did the
VOC. Recall, however, that the EIC was also
a feebler organization than the VOC in the
early seventeenth century, because of the
two-headed structure of English patrimonial-
ism prior to the Glorious Revolution. So the
EIC did not—yet—offer Dutch Indies ser-
vants serious competition or a possible alter-
native employer.
VOC servants used their middleman posi-
tions to capture some of the abundant surplus
for personal advantage. In fact, such eco-
nomic opportunism among Company ser-
vants was a persistent feature of the Asian
establishments. Practices like diluting the
precious metals that arrived in Batavia, skim-
ming off a percentage of goods bound for
VOC warehouses, taking a brokerage per-
centage from indigenous suppliers, or de-
frauding the Company on its return cargo,
were widespread. They were also very lucra-
tive. Gerard Demmer, for example, whose
salary was set at 350 fl. (guilders) a month,
sent over 165,000 fl. to the Netherlands in
1652, and 57,000 in 1654. Pieter
Sterthemius, director of the Bengal factory,
made 200 fl. a month, but carried 52,000 fl.
with him at his repatriation (Gaastra
1991:95). Particular factories were popularly
known as the best sites for graft, and direct-
ing one of these outposts was viewed as a
plum job. These practices extended all the
way up the colonial hierarchy to the Gover-
nor-General himself.!7

Even more important for VOC servants’
prospects of gain was what historians have
designated the “private trade.” The term “pri-
vate” is a misnomer, however: This trade ac-
tually revolved around VOC employees who
had access to Company monopoly goods be-
cause of their privileged intermediary posi-
tion, and who traded in these goods on the
side. This semiprivate contraband trade un-
folded at the direct expense of Company
commerce, since servants skimmed off mo-
nopoly and monopsony products and were
loath to enforce Company political dictates
when such restrictions interfered with the
sideline trade. Private trade also took place
at all points in the colonial network, although
it was specially concentrated in some spots,
such as the Bengal-Batavia link (Prakash
1985). How did the Seventeen Gentlemen
keep the problem in bounds? Surprisingly, to
a “modern” eye (or at least to a rational-le-
gal bureaucratic one), they did not do so by
means of sharply graded monetary incentives
keyed to effort or output. The Gentlemen
paid their servants an ungentlemanly pit-
tance, even at the highest levels, and counted
on their making money on the side. Nor did
the Company insist that its servants post for-
feitable bonds, which might have provided a
potential negative sanction on malfeasance. !8

Instead, I argue, the network of brokerage
relations enabled the VOC principals to
maintain some measure of cartel discipline.
This structural feature was a crucial element
in the Seventeen’s measure of disciplinary
success in the early years of colonialism. At
this early stage, stylized in Figure 1, the elite
at all colonial nodes still depended on the
Dutch home base for key economic broker-
age services, as well as for the political pro-
tection they needed to conduct their semipri-
vate trade. There was no plausible “‘alterna-
tive employer” or outlet for the fruits of the
VOC servants’ clandestine commerce. Some
profits or goods, such as precious stones and
jewels, could be smuggled back home on
VOC ships, but sending anything beyond a
limited amount was risky, and required adroit
collusion with ships’ crews and a whole
chain of metropolitan officials, arranged
from a long way away.!? The employees in
Asia who wanted to transfer larger amounts
of funds to the Netherlands could do so
legally, by depositing their money in the
VOC’s Batavian treasury or in the treasuries
of Ceylon and the Cape of Good Hope (and
other VOC offices after the mid-eighteenth
century). In return, employees could draw
bills of exchange, which were then shipped
to Europe on the Company’s return fleet and
cashed by relatives, agents, bankers, or the
repatriating employee himself in Amsterdam
or one of the five other towns equipped with
a VOC chamber (De Korte 1984).

The agents’ dependence on these mecha-
nisms for transferring their profits enabled
the principals, the VOC directors, to enforce
conventional limits to profiteering. Besides
policing their home harbors, the Seventeen
Gentlemen also sought to hold down the
overall amount of transfers. In 1636, they
decided that Batavia would only be allowed
to accept a fixed amount of money for bills
of exchange, an amount far below what VOC
servants demanded. Although that edict and
subsequent proclamations were often evaded
and the directors increasingly acknowledged
that “‘a strict observance of these rules would
stimulate their servants to seek other ways—
for instance via the English company—to
transfer their money” (Gaastra 1994:3), the
Seventeen continued monitoring individual
servants. They would generally agree to cash
in a servant’s chips, but would refuse to pay
up when they thought the amount requested
was exorbitant.2° Thus what counted as cor-
ruption or “free-riding” on the Company or-
ganization was both contested and conven-
tional: It was a matter of tacit, elastic, con-
tractual limits that the actors themselves ne-
gotiated after the fact within a patrimonial
context.

Precisely because of Batavia’s centrality,
the Batavian elite benefited disproportion-
ately, in an economic sense, from this lim-
ited tolerance of Asian agents’ opportunistic
ventures. For a time, therefore, the Batavia
elite gained leverage over both the metropole
and the subordinate settlements. Marsden
(1982) argues that an actor’s gains in power
stemming from brokerage behavior are due
to net excesses of inflows of resources over
outflows. Betweenness is particularly impor-
tant with respect to the inflows, since an ac-
tor that is centrally positioned in this sense
can take commissions—cuts whose fractions
can go up as the number of workable indi-
rect ties goes down—just as Batavia did.
This feature helps clarify why the Batavian
elite fought so hard against the Seventeen
Gentlemen’s attempts to establish analogues
to their services elsewhere in the East Indies.
Such innovations would have undermined the
Batavian High Government’s capacity to
squeeze out commissions, such as those no-
toriously characteristic of the Bengal-Batavia
shipping link, and would have given the Sev-
enteen more political leverage, including the
capacity to force intermediate nodes to com-
pete with each other.”!

Batavia’s privileged position meant that
the Seventeen Gentlemen lost some of their
precious control over the more peripheral
nodes below Batavia in the hierarchy, even
at this early stage of the Dutch colonial en-
terprise. The metropolitan directorate did
have the final say in promoting men from
middle-level Company ranks, and peripheral
colonial outposts, to Batavia, the higher and
more central node.?? The Seventeen Gentle-
men sought to use this leverage to strengthen
the link between promotion and doing well
for the Company as a whole, not just for one-
self and one’s family. But given the immense
problems of monitoring performance, it was
lucky for the Seventeen that corruption was
restrained by tacitly negotiated deals that
rested on the lack of established alternative
outlets for servants’ gains.
trade within acceptable bounds. In the early
stages of the empire, the Batavia High Gov-
ernment and the lower-level company ser-
vants in the Indies needed the VOC’s metro-
politan organization economically (as the
pipeline to the consumer market in Europe
where most of the Company’s profits were
realized and as the only reliable channel for
converting resources into currencies good in
Europe) and politically (as the military guar-
antor of unmolested private trade). But as
English private traders and the English East
India Company established themselves, this
dependency diminished.

English competition escalated sharply in
the quarter century after 1660, just after the
EIC was endowed with its first permanent
organization and capital. Chaudhuri’s (1978)
quantitative history of EIC trade attests to the
Company’s improving fortunes during this
period, showing that the value of the EIC’s
total annual imports rose to £. 800,000 in
1684. But imports fell to only £. 80,000 by
1691 in the wake of English interloping and
the punishing Mughal War (1686-1689).
Two events that set the stage for the next re-
vival were the Glorious Revolution of 1688,
which ushered in a unitary regime in En-
gland, and the acquisition of a new farman,
or imperial license to trade, in 1690 under
the auspices of Aurangzeb, Emperor of the
Mughals. The EIC’s auspicious position was
consolidated when its contending companies
finally merged in 1708.and the English
joined other battered European belligerents
in calling a halt to the War of the Spanish
Succession. In both periods, 1660 to 1683
and 1710 to 1760 (the latter era ending with
the EIC’s assumption of territorial power in
Bengal), the happy conjunction of new op-
portunities and renewed capacity to make the
most of them enhanced the EIC’s commer-
cial performance. After 1710, the EIC (in
conjunction with private traders) specialized
in reexporting India piece goods, and
later, spectacularly, trade in tea, of which
England’s annual consumption per head rose
some six- or seven-fold between 1725 and
1760 (Wilson 1965:308).

For now, my argument treats the ascent of
the EIC and its corollary, the rise of sideline
traders, as an exogenous variable. As such, it
posed a direct threat to the VOC by cutting
into its profits and undermining its capacity
to obtain the necessary quota of trade goods
to support its position in Europe.”? It also
presented a more subtle, but equally damag-
ing threat, by providing new and appetizing
opportunities that sabotaged the control that
the Seventeen Gentlemen had over their
Asian agents. The rise of the EIC and of En-
glish private traders offered new opportuni-
ties for Dutch agents to make a guilder on
the side. Private trade was easier to carry on,
particularly for the top servants at peripheral
outposts close to English turf. These prac-
tices extended all the way up the hierarchy
to the Governor-General. For example, Gov-
ernor-General Jacob Mossel was heavily tied
up with British country traders (Furber 1976:
281). Conveying the profits back home was
also simplified. VOC servants could now
convert their gains into cash and bank them
in the metropole by shipping them through
either the English hierarchy, the VOC, or
both.”4 And although pursuing the English
route involved additional steps and risks of
apprehension, these inconveniences were
counterbalanced by the greater amounts of
clandestine goods that could be converted.
These new opportunities affected the for-
mal hierarchy in a twofold way. On the one
hand, the Batavian elite used its privileged
brokerage position to tighten its grip on what
was becoming the central position in the
Dutch colonial network by the late seven-
teenth century. The Seventeen now held an
intermediate slot, structurally similar to the
EIC’s Court of Directors. On the other hand,
VOC officials situated at peripheral colonial
nodes found that they could dodge the more
central nodes in the Company hierarchy, in-
cluding Batavia itself, relying on the English
instead, to their own (and their families’)
economic advantage. “If we allow the En-
glish freely to conduct this back and forth
trade,” warned one prescient VOC officer, “it
would be an inwardly-eating cancer [for the
Company]” (quoted in Winius and Vink
1991:58). The VOC was becoming a Hydra,
a many-headed politico-economic organiza-
tion, with one principal at home, another in
Batavia, and still others in the periphery of
the organization. Where was the new Her-
cules who could cut a few heads down to size
without slaying the beast? Figure 2 schema-
tizes the emergent situation.

We have seen that betweenness made a dif-
ference in a node’s capacity, in this case
Batavia’s, to control resource inflows. When
it comes to brokering outflows, the flip side
of how network position contributes to in-
creased power, what matters more than
betweenness is closeness—the number of
nodes that a unit must traverse to reach other
nodes (Marsden 1982; Freeman 1979). To be
close to most other actors in a system is to
have relatively little need for any particular
node’s brokerage services. This dimension of
centrality is correlated with autonomy, or in-
dependence: relative freedom from the con-
straints imposed by having to depend on any
particular actor. In this sense, the Batavian
officials were growing more autonomous
from their home base, while the officials un-
der Batavia in the hierarchy were simulta-
neously breaking away from Batavia’s influ-
ence. This twofold structural shift heralded a
general breakdown of VOC cartel, or group
discipline.

To counter the breakdown, the Seventeen
Gentlemen had more than one logical option.
They could have proffered the carrot, by rais-
ing wages. A variant of this strategy would
have involved acknowledging agents’ rights
to private trade and then taking a cut of their
agents’ new-found fortunes, which was basi-
cally the English solution. Or they could
have increased situational sanctions—in
other words, brandished the stick. A helpful
analogy is to the reservation utility, the next-
best package of resources for workers that
becomes available when alternative employ-
ment opportunities appear. When the reser-
vation utility increases, incentives (such as
wages) or monitoring levels must also im-
prove if employee performance is to be sus-
tained.25

The Seventeen Gentlemen were not will-
ing to increase incentives, and they experi-
enced heightened problems applying nega-
tive sanctions. The Seventeen certainly had
the de jure right to fire agents whose malfea-
sance reached levels that commanded their
attention. De facto power was another story.
The principals had always had problems
gaining accurate information because of the
great distances involved and agents’ years-
long delays in filing reports; these monitor-
ing problems were now exacerbated by the
breakdown in cartel discipline. Periodic re-
ports of rampant corruption did provoke the
Seventeen to send representatives to deal
with the problem. What could be more un-
derstandable than sending new brokers to
discipline old, errant ones; and what less sur-
prising than the novices’ speedy fall from
grace? The first serious disciplinary effort
was made in the 1680s, when the Seventeen
sent the allegedly incorruptible Hendrik
Adriaan van Rheede tot Drakestein to inves-
tigate the Indian factories and vested him
with extraordinary powers of punishment.
Van Rheede estimated that during a few short
years, from 1678 to 1686, graft and private
trade by the VOC’s Bengal servants had cost
the Company as much as fl. 3.8 million. The
upshot was that a few highly-placed employ-
ees lost their posts. Nevertheless, “as soon as
van Rheede left Bengal, everything returned
to the old footing,” as one highly-placed met-
ropolitan VOC servant sourly observed.?°
Furthermore, the High Indies Government
was able to insist that Van Rheede’s investi-
gations give a wide berth to Batavia. This
success can be interpreted in two ways. It
may have been a dramatic sign of Batavia’s
politico-economic muscle, vis-a-vis the met-
ropole, now solidly entrenched. In support of
this interpretation, note that Batavia also re-
sisted the Seventeen’s renewed attempts to
establish direct connections that bypassed
the High Government’s broker role between
Indies factories or merchants and the met-
ropole. The High Government squeezed out
and, by 1718, abolished the direct Amster-
dam-Ceylon-Bengal link (Winius and Vink
1991:60). Alternatively, Batavia’s success
may testify to top colonial officers’ links to
and influence with the Seventeen Gentlemen,
as high officers linked to factions in power
in the Netherlands used their positions to
dodge charges of corruption (Blussé 1986,
chap. 8). Both stories are probably true. The
point is that the Company’s metropolitan
principals had never considered offering the
carrot; now they were failing to wield the
stick as well.

At this stage, strategically situated VOC
agents had generated sufficient power to act
as principals, and thus as potential competi-
tors of their principals. Given the opportu-
nity, such agents could divert organizational
resources through an alternative set of nodes
for their own benefit rather than that of their
principal. As some VOC agents began to do
this, articulating their economic ends inde-
pendently of their metropolitan principal’s
politico-economic goals, their actions
forged new links in the colonial chain and
began to unravel the several strands of patri-
monial position. The agents’ autonomous
economic activity was still directly secured
by force, to be sure, but in some areas that
force was increasingly delivered by the En-
glish Company. The VOC was witnessing
the genesis of new contractual relations
within its hierarchy, but the tacit contract fa-
vored by some of its agents had been negoti-
ated with another metropolitan principal.
Depending on how one looks at it, Simmel’s
(1950) tertius gaudens, or laughing third
party, arrived in English garb, or in the form
of the VOC’s own agents. In any case, the
joke was on the VOC. Formal hierarchical
authority was still nominally in place circa
1795, in the waning years of the Dutch an-
cien regime, but it was no longer an effec-
tive disciplinary device.
agents could not exit the Dutch colonial sys-
tem, and they were constrained by metropoli-
tan control over cashboxes and promotions.

The rise of the English Company put an end
to VOC dominance. In part, straightforward
commercial competition infringed on the
Dutch company’s bailiwick. But, as I have
tried to show, the presence of the EIC also
opened new opportunities for Dutch colonial
servants to evade their own patrimonial chain.
In particular, it nourished Batavia’s central-
ity and autonomy, and allowed agents at pe-
ripheral colonial nodes to step up their pri-
vate commercial and financial transactions,
now via the British and the Dutch hierarchies.
This heralded the breakdown of VOC cartel
discipline. In theory, such structural alterna-
tives could be engendered endogenously or
exogenously to any given network.

When any alternative path raises agents’
reservation utilities, all else being equal,
agents can be expected to pursue the alterna-
tive opportunities, in the absence of an effec-
tive response on the part of metropolitan
principals. Diverse responses were possible
within the framework of patrimonial princi-
pal/agent relations. In contrast to the VOC,
as we have seen, the English Company low-
ered its resource dependence on any single
colonial node, thereby augmenting its capac-
ity to keep any one node in line, while al-
lowing its agents to take a higher cut of the
surplus, effectively raising agents’ wages.
The EIC stumbled on this two-pronged ap-
proach, which could only be dubbed a strat-
egy in retrospect, and was relatively success-
ful for a time.

A crucial qualification concerns the scope
conditions within which the above argument,
or any fundamentally utilitarian approach, is
valid. Agency problems are most likely to
emerge when agents are not normatively
committed to the organization. Contrary to
the thrust of the work of Simon ([1947]
1961) and Williamson (1975, 1991), there-
fore, uncertainty should never be assumed to
entail opportunism. This qualification is par-
ticularly important in the historical context
of patrimonial systems, which depended not
only on material incentives and force, but
also on principals’ and agents’ pursuit of
family honor and position. “Agency is more
than a tie” in such situations: To borrow
Harrison White’s (1985) evocative phrase, “it
is a context for ties that cast shadows of com-
mitment” (p. 189). Dutch regents possessed
lineage property in patrimonial state offices
and their spinoff corporations: VOC director-
ships passed from generation to generation
as part of the political privilege controlled by
urban regent patrilines. And because family
and kin relations are privileged conduits for
the strong sentiments on which normative
commitment is founded, metropolitan elites
tried desperately to keep their top colonial
agents from pulling away and founding In-
donesian political patrilineages of their own.
They failed, and power parcellized along
family lines. Had they succeeded, it seems
likely that agents’ politically secured private
accumulation would have been limited.

The full implications of the principal/agent
problems for the Dutch colonial system are
too complex to explore here. For the metro-
pole, which has been my focus, the implica-
tions included lower profits, loss of military
capacity and organizational flexibility, all of
which undermined Dutch commercial hege-
mony. These dynamics and implications
should be further explored, for they were de-
velopmentally consequential in the widest
sense. The rise of trade conducted by Com-
pany men as well as interlopers—in fact, all
private traders who operated within the shell
of patrimonial corporations but who were in-
creasingly independent of their hierarchies—
paralleled and reinforced similar trends and
tensions in the metropole. Clio is a known
ironist, and she delights in unintended
consequences. The world colonial network,
formed by competing but unwittingly linked
chartered companies, was the womb in which
revolutionary European challenges to patri-
monialism were nurtured.
Alexandrowicz, C. H. 1960. Treaty and Diplo-
matic Relations between European and South
Asian Powers in the Seventeenth and Eigh-
teenth Centuries. Leiden, The Netherlands: A.
W. Sythoff.

Algemeen Rijksarchief den Haag [National Ar-
chives, The Hague] 1.01.07:#1235, #1237,
#1244.

Arasaratnam, Sinnappah. 1958. Dutch Power in
Ceylon, 1658-1687. Amsterdam, The Nether-
lands: Netherlands Institute of International
Cultural Relations.

. 1986. Merchants, Companies and Com-
merce on the Coromandel Coast, 1650-1740.
Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.

Blussé, Leonard. 1986. Strange Company: Chi-
nese Settlers, Mestizo Women and the Dutch in
VOC Batavia. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Foris.

Boxer, C. R. 1965. The Dutch Seaborne Empire,
1600-1800. London, England: Penguin.

. 1979. Jan Compagnie in War and Peace,
1602-1799: A Short History of the Dutch East
India Company. Hong Kong: Heinemann Asia.

Brenner, Robert. 1993. Merchants and Revolu-
tion. Commercial Change, Political Conflict,
and London’s Overseas Traders, 1550-1653.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Chaudhuri, K. N. 1965. The English East India
Company. London, England: F. Cass.

. 1978. The Trading World of Asia and the

English East India Company, 1660-1760. New

York: Cambridge University Press.

. 1986. “The English East India Company
and Its Decision-Making,” Pp. 97-121 in East
India Company Studies: Papers Presented
to Professor Sir Cyril Philips, edited by K.
Ballhatchet and J. Harrison..-Hong Kong: Asian
Research Service.

Coase, Ronald H. 1937. “The Nature of the
Firm.” Economica 4:386-405.

Coen, Jan Pieterszoon. 1919. Bescheiden Omtrent
zijn Bedrijf in Indie. Vol. 1. Edited by H. T.
Colenbrander. ’s-Gravenhage, The Nether-
lands: Martinus Nijhoff.

De Korte, J. P. 1984. De Jaarlijkse Financiele
Verantwoording in de VOC. Leiden, The Neth-
erlands: Martinus Nijhoff.

Eggertsson, Thrainn. 1990. Economic Behavior
and Institutions. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Ekelund, Robert Jr. and Robert D. Tollison. 1981.
Mercantilism as a Rent-seeking Society. Col-
lege Station, TX: Texas A & M University
Press.

Elias, Johan E. 1923. Geschiedenis van het
Amsterdamsche Regentpatriciaat. Den Haag,
The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.

Freeman, Linton C. 1979. “Centrality in Social
Networks: A Conceptual Clarification.” Social
. 1994, “Private Money for Company
Trade. The Role of the Bills of Exchange in
Financing the Return Cargoes of the VOC.”
Itinerario 18:65-76.

Gaastra, Femme and J. R. Bruijn. 1993. “The
Dutch East India Company’s Shipping, 1602-
1795, in a Comparative Perspective.” Pp. 177—
208 in Ships, Sailors and Spices: East India
Companies and their Shipping in the 16th, 17th
and 18th Centuries, edited by J. R. Bruijn and
F. S. Gaastra. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
NEHA.

Gintis, Herbert and Tsuneo Ishikawa. 1987.
“Wages, Work Intensity, and Unemployment.”
Journal of the Japanese and International
Economy 1:195-228.

Gould, Mark. 1992. “Law and Sociology: Some
Consequences for the Law of Employment Dis-
crimination Deriving from Sociological Recon-
struction of Economic Theory.” Cardozo Law
Review 13:1517-78.

Greif, Avner. 1994. “Cultural Beliefs and the Or-
ganization of Society: A Historical and Theo-
retical Reflection on Collectivist and Individu-
alist Societies.” Journal of Political Economy
102:912-S0.

Hill, Christopher. 1961. The Century of Revolu-
tion: 1603-1714. New York: W. W. Norton.
Israel, Jonathan I. 1989. Dutch Primacy in World
Trade, 1585-1740. Oxford, England: Claren-

don.

Keay, John. 1991. The Honourable Company: A
History of the English East India Company.
London, England: Harper Collins.

Kiser, Edgar and Xiaoxi Tong. 1992. “Determi-
nants of the Amount and Type of Corruption in
State Fiscal Bureaucracies: An Analysis of
Late Imperial China.” Comparative Political
Studies 25:300-31.

Lazear, Edward P. [1987] 1989. “Incentive Con-
tracts.” Pp, 152-62 in The New Palgrave: Al-
location, Information, and Markets, edited by
J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, and P. Newman. New
York: Norton.

Levi, Margaret. 1988. Of Rule and Revenue. Ber-
keley/Los Angeles, CA: University of Califor-
nia Press.

Marsden, Peter V. 1982. “Brokerage Behavior in
Restricted Exchange Networks.” Pp. 201-18 in
Social Structure and Network Analysis, edited
by P. V. Marsden and N, Lin. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.

. 1976, East Indian Fortunes: The British
in Bengal in the Eighteenth Century. Oxford,
England: Clarendon.

Marshall, P. J. 1976. East Indian Fortunes: The
British in Bengal in the Eighteenth Century.
Oxford, England: Clarendon.

Meilink-Roelofsz, M. A. P. 1962. Asian Trade
and European Influence in the Indonesian Ar-
chipelago between 1500 and about 1630. The
Hague, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.

Musgrave, Peter. 1981. “The Economics of Un-
certainty: The Structural Revolution in the
Spice Trade, 1480-1640.” Pp. 9-21 in Ship-
ping, Trade and Commerce: Essays in Memory
of Ralph Davis, edited by P. L. Cottrell and D.
H. Aldcroft. Leicester, England: Leicester Uni-
versity Press.

Nightingale, Pamela. 1970. Trade and Empire in
Western India, 1784-1806. Cambridge, En-
gland: Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change
in Economic History. New York: W. W.
Norton.

Prakash, Om. 1985. The Dutch East India Com-
pany and the Economy of Bengal, 1630-1720.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Root, Hilton L. 1987. Peasants and King in Bur-
gundy: Agrarian Foundations of French Abso-
lutism. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: Univer-
sity of California Press.

Rowen, Herbert H. 1988. The Princes of Orange.
The Stadholders in the Dutch Republic. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Schama, Simon. 1977. Patriots and Liberators.
Revolution in the Netherlands 1780-1813. New
York: Vintage.

Schutte, G. J. 1974. De Nederlandse Patriotten
en de kolonien. Een onderzoek naar hun
denkbeelden en optreden, 1770-1800.
Groningen, The Netherlands: H. D. Tjeenk
Willink.

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1984. “Equi-
librium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device.” The American Economic Review
74:433-44.

Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg
Simmel. Edited by Kurt H. Wolff. Glencoe, IL:
The Free Press.

Simon, Herbert. [1947] 1961. Administrative Be-
havior. 2nd ed. New York: Macmillan.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. [1987] 1989. “Principal and
Agent.” Pp. 241-53 in The New Palgrave: Al-
location, Information, and Markets, edited by
J. Eatwell, M. Milgate and P. Newman. New
York: Norton.

Stinchcombe, Arthur. 1990. Information and Or-
ganizations. Berkeley/Los Angeles, CA: Uni-
versity of California Press.

Taylor, Jean Gelman. 1983. The Social World of
Batavia. European and Eurasian in Dutch
Asia. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin
Press.

Thompson, James D. 1967. Organizations in Ac-
tion: Social Science Bases of Administration.
New York: McGraw-Hill.

Thomson, Janice E. 1994. Mercenaries, Pirates,
and Sovereigns. State-Building and Extraterri-
torial Violence in Early Modern Europe.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Van der Wee, Herman. 1981. “World Production
and Trade in Gold, Silver, and Copper in the
Low Countries, 1450-1700.” Pp. 79-86 in Pre-
cious Metals in the Age of Expansion, edited
by H. Kellenbenz. Stuttgart, Germany: Klett-
Cotta.

Watson, Ian Bruce. 1980. Foundation for Empire.
English Private Trade in India 1659-1760.
New Delhi, India: Vikas.

Weber, Max. [1922] 1968. Economy and Society.
2 vols. Edited by G. Roth and C. Wittich. Ber-
keley/Los Angeles, CA: University of Califor-
nia Press.

White, Harrison C. 1985. “Agency as Control.”
Pp. 187-212 in Principals and Agents: The
Structure of Business, edited by J. W. Pratt and
R. J. Zeckhauser. Boston, MA: Harvard Busi-
ness School Press.

Wijnaendts van Resandt, W. 1944. De Geza-
ghebbers der Oost-Indische Compagnie op
hare Buitencomptoiren in Azie. Amsterdam,
The Netherlands: Liebaert.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1975. Markets and Hier-
archies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications.
New York: Free Press.

. 1991. “The Logic of Economic Organi-
zation.” Pp. 90-116 in The Nature of the Firm.
Origins, Evolution, and Development, edited
by O. E. Williamson and S. G. Winter. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Wilson, Charles. 1965. England’s Apprentice-
ship, 1603-1763. London, England: Longman.

Winius, George D. and Marcus P. M. Vink. 1991.
The Merchant-Warrior Pacified. The VOC
(The Dutch East India Company) and its
Changing Political Economy in India. Delhi,
India: Oxford University Press.

Young, Robert. 1969. “The British East India
Company’s Pepper Trade at Sumatra, 1730-
1760.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of His-
tory, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA.
