American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
MERICAN cities are entering the mature
A years of their age cycle. For most
cities, their future is apparently
limited to two alternatives. Some may con-
tinue to grow slowly and in greater competi-
tion with their neighbors, and others, suc-
cumbing to new political, social and economic
forces, will suffer net losses in population.
The populationists also tell us that there
is no inevitability about future growth or
decline for any particular city.1 The con-
trolling factor, in view of the low birth rates
and the relatively narrow area for further
progress in life expectancy, is net in-migra-
tion; a factor whose effective influence on the
future growth of any one city is largely con-
ditioned by the availability of job oppor-
tunities there and of attractive living condi-
tions at relatively reasonable costs. In other
words, the future growth or decline of a
city now, more than ever before, is in the
hands of the city itself.

In view of the fact that future growth
in most cities must be secured in competi-
tion with other cities, the only apparent
inevitability in the picture, the question of
future policy with respect to growth might
now be opportunely raised in most cities.
Does the city want to continue to grow; is
it satisfied merely to maintain its present
size (a process in itself involving change
if only to the extent of off-setting normal
business mortality with its attendant loss
of job opportunities); or is even the pros-
pect of slow and gradual decline necessarily
fraught with any great disadvantages to
most of the people and institutions of the
city?
The purpose of this paper is to throw
some light, purely of an empirical nature, on
what is at stake in such a general policy
decision by a city. The effects of growth or
non-growth in population on city well-being
are measured with reference to two groups
of cities: (1) a group of nine growing cities
selected as having a moderate rate of growth
(6.9 per cent) from 1930-1940, or approxi-
mately the same as that for the United States
as a whole,? and (2) a group of nine non-
growing cities which had a net loss of 1 per
cent over the decade.? Because the activities
of the central cities are intimately bound up
with their metropolitan areas, only those
cities were selected whose metropolitan areas
showed a similar population trend. The
metropolitan areas of a group of growing
cities experienced a 10.9 per cent increase
from 1930 to 1940, whereas the metropolitan
areas of the non-growing group experienced
only a 1.3 per cent increase. The selected
central cities were neither among the larger
nor the smaller cities; all 18 ranging in size
from 100,000 to less than go0,000.* Because
non-growth in American cities is a com-
paratively recent phenomenon and most data
are available for census years, the period,
1930-1940, was selected. In view of the fact
that no group of sizeable American cities
experienced appreciable decline in absolute
numbers of population, this paper is confined

? The selected growth group includes Baltimore,
Md.; Wilmington, Del.; Oakland, Calif.; Nash-
ville and Chattanooga, Tenn.; Fort Worth, Texas;
New Orleans, La.; Minneapolis, Minn., and In-
dianapolis, Ind., with a total population of 2,919,924
in 1930 and 3,120,873 ten years later.

*The non-growth group includes Boston, Fall
River and New Bedford, Mass.; Rochester, N.Y.;
Scranton and Pittsburgh, Pa.; Duluth, Minn.; New
Haven, Conn.; and Toledo, Ohio, with a total
population of 2,705,277 in 1930 dropping to
2,677,642 by 1940.

“In 1940, 29.7 per cent of all urban population
was in cities within these population ranges.
to a comparison of non-growth cities as
against moderate-growth cities. It is believed,
however, that opposite effects revealed in
a comparison of these two groups would be
even more accentuated if the non-growth
group had showed a definite decline in popu-
lation. In a sense, these non-growth cities
can be considered as declining cities inas-
much as they were unable to retain the gain
in population that the factor of natural in-
crease would have given them.

The effects of non-growth and moderate
growth on city well-being are measured in
this paper with respect to their impact on
four categories of city functions and wel-
fare: (1) secondary employment activities®
such as building and real estate, retail
trade, transportation and public utilities; (2)
municipal government; (3) population com-
position and social well-being, and (4) phy-
sical appearance,
In measuring some of the effects of pop-
ulation growth and non-growth on various
economic activities, the conditions obtained
at the beginning of the period (1929-1931)
were contrasted with those at the end of the
period (1939-1941) for both groups of cities.
Only the comparative percentage changes
are of significance as no attempt has been
made to adjust the absolute figures to allow
for change in national business conditions at
the beginning and end of the period.

Effects on Construction and Real Estate
Activities, The building industry is a major
125 per cent rise in their building activity
(see Table IT).

The value of new non-residential construc-
tion—factories, office and other public
buildings, stores, etc.—declined in both
groups of cities between 1930-1940. The
decline in non-growing cities, however, was
more drastic (over 58 per cent) than in the
moderately growing group (17 per cent). On
the other hand, there was no notable dif-
ference in the behavior of the two groups of
cities with respect to expenditures for re-
pairs and alterations

In general, these statistics indicate that
within the city.” Accordingly, a decline in
new building presumably will affect adversely
the volume of transactions in real estate.®
Although it was not possible, in this study,
to measure the effects on realty values, the
effect of a static or declining population is
towards “a vacant margin of houses which
will, by the competition, weaken the rents
and values of all homes.”® This depression
of realty values was dramatically illustrated
in the declining textile centers of New Eng-
land where the plight of the property owner
was reflected in pleas of “for rent at your
price.”2°

Effects on Retail Business. Population
non-growth and growth have differing effects
on retail sales volume, number of retail out-
lets, and employment in retailing.

In 1939, the retail sales of 9 non-growing
cities were 23.3 per cent less than they were
in 1929, while they declined only 7.2 per
cent in dollar sales volume in the 9 growing
cities (see Table III). The number of all
types of retail stores increased in both grow-
ing and non-growing cities and the U.S. The
increase in the selected non-growing cities
(4 per cent), however, was appreciably less
than in the growing cities (12 per cent).

In most cities, the retail activity is second
only to manufacturing on the basis of num-
bers employed, In the selected cities, retail
employment constituted almost one-sixth of
all employment in 1930. Opposite effects on
the number of employees was noted in the
growing and non-growing groups of cities.
Whereas retail employment increased 12 per
cent in the growing cities, it decreased 9 per
cent in the non-growing cities. In absolute
numbers, this amounted to an increase of
some 24,000 employees as against a decrease
of some 18,000 employees.

It is interesting to note the change from
1929 to 1939 in sales per retail establishment
between the two groups of cities. In 1929,
the average sales per establishment were
greater in the non-growing group. However,
the sales per establishment in the growing
group decreased 17 per cent in 1939 as
against 1929 and decreased 26 per cent in
the non-growing group. Even this differential
rate still left the non-growing cities with
more sales per establishment (17 per cent)
than the growing cities. Whether the average
for the growing cities will in time equal or
exceed the average for the other group is
purely conjectural. It may be that the
superior opportunities in growing cities en-
courage so many more new retail ventures
that the share of the available sales left
for each will always be less than in the non-
growing cities, or that relatively more margi-
nal establishments (tending to depress the
average sales per establishment for the city
as a whole) are able to survive in the grow-
ing cities,

Effects on Public Utilities. The public
utilities cater to the mass urban market and
generally they respond similarly to trends
in this market. Hence, the effects of urban
growth and non-growth on the public trans-
portation system can be assumed to be
generally typical of the effects on other
utility services, such as electricity and gas
and communication,

To provide the funds to maintain its
services, city transportation systems depend
almost entirely upon income derived from
the revenue passengers they carry. Measured
from the viewpoint of this key factor, the
group of non-growing cities experienced a
decline of 8 per cent compared with an
increase of 3 per cent in the selected grow-
ing cities (see Table IV).

It is apparent that in a stagnant city local
carriers can expect to operate under growing
difficulties, Even under conditions of non-
growth, there is still a general shift of popula-
tion from the central core of the city to its
outskirts. This means new demands for
expanded service at greater cost without any
comparable rise in the number of revenue
passengers.

Effects on Banking and Finance. Financial
and banking institutions, although they had
only 1 to 3 per cent of the gainfully occupied
in the selected cities in 1930, provide a
useful overall index of the relative levels of
economic activity through bank debit statis-
tics, These statistics confirm other findings.
In the growing group of cities, total volume
of bank debits in 1940 were 9 per cent less
than, in 1930, but in the non-growing group
the decline was 26 per cent (see Table V).
per cent respectively in the growing and non-
growing city groups.

Banks, building and loan companies, and
other local lending institutions derive much
of their business from mortgage investments
and loans on land and other real property.
Since, it has been shown that population
non-growth is accompanied by lowered
demands for new housing, there is likely to
be diminished real estate activity and a cor-
responding deflation in realty values. Hence,
forces of decline let loose in one segment of
the economy tend to have cumulative effects
in the others.

Effects on Professions. Even though pro-
fessional persons as a group average as
much as 8 to 9g per cent of the employed
population in urban centers, they contribute
to civic leadership and community well-being
out of proportion to their numbers.

Using the number of lawyers and doctors
as an index to the professional group as a
whole, it seems evident that professional
persons are sensitive to the lack of op-
portunities in non-growing cities and tend to
favor cities with expanding opportunities, In
1930, the non-growing cities had 176 doctors
per 100,000 population as against 178 in
1940, a slight increase, while in the growing
cities the 1930 ratio, 188 per 100,000 pop-
ulation increased to 200 in 1940, The num-
The effects of population growth and non-
growth on the conduct of municipal govern-
ments are examined in terms of the relative
changes in expenditures, revenues and taxes,
and debts between 1930 and 1940.

Effects on Expenditures. Although cessa-
tion in population growth apparently has not
meant a corresponding halt in the rising
level of expenditures by municipal govern-
ments, there is evidence to indicate that the
non-growing cities have, at least, managed to
keep their increases at a rate less than that
for growing cities, Whereas the governments
of the growing cities increased their total
expenditures in 1940 (160 million dollars)
by §2 per cent from 1930 (105 million
dollars), the comparable increase in non-
growing cities was 33 per cent (from 156
million dollars in 1930 to 208 millions) .1?

On a per capita basis, the difference in
the rate of change in expenditures between
the two groups of cities was less marked.
Even on this basis, however, the non-grow-
ing cities experienced less increase (34 per
cent as against 43 per cent—see Table VI).

Without definitive study, it is dangerous
to conclude from these changes in per capita
expenditures that per capita costs rise more
rapidly in a growing city. The different rates
might be found to grow out of relatively
greater improvements in the quality of
governmental services in the growing cities.
The historical fact that the non-growing cities
3.6 per cent in the growing cities as against
2.1 per cent in the non-growing cities. On a
per capita basis, however, total revenues
increased 3.1 per cent (from $77.22 to
$79.68) in the non-growing cities as against
a decrease of 3.3 per cent (from $55.82 to
$54.09) in the other group.

The increase in per capita revenues for
the non-growing group was partly achieved
through placing a heavier burden on the
property owners residing in non-growing
cities relative to the property owners of grow-
ing cities than was true even in 1930 (see
Table VII).

It will be noted that whereas the per
capita revenues from the general property
tax increased in the non-growing cities, they
declined almost 5 per cent in the growing
group. Furthermore, the per capita revenues
from this source were more than 50 per cent
greater in the case of the non-growing cities.

The increase in per capita total revenues
and property tax revenues was a reflection of
a much greater increase in tax rates in the
non-growing cities. From 1931 (comparable
data were not available for 1930) to 1940,
the tax rates increased 66 per cent (from
$15.19 to $25.12) in the non-growing cities
as compared to a 10 per cent increase (from
$13.02 to $14.32) in the growing group.’®
Rosina Mohaupt, taking a much larger
sample of 301 cities over 1930 and 1940,
found that tax rates in the growing cities
increased 12 per cent as against 24 per cent
for the cities experiencing decline in popula-
tion, and that the assessed values decreased
less in the growing cities (19 per cent as
compared with 26 per cent).

Other phases of the revenue picture do not
presage lessening difficulties for non-growing
cities, Philip Hauser has pointed out that
“the general financial picture of slow grow-
ing cities will be further darkened by the
fact that relative decreases in population will
result in decreases in amounts of federal and
state grants, as a result of which still further
burdens may be thrown upon tax-payers.”+

Effects on Debts. The bright spot in the
financial picture of cities over the decade
1930-40 was their ability to effect substan-
The relative changes in the age groups of
the selected non-growing and growing cities
between 1930 and 1942 were measured with
reference to five groups: up to 20 years of
age, 20 up to 45 years, 45 to 65, and 65 years
and over. Generally, both groups of cities
experienced declines in their population in
the youngest ages with the non-growing cities
showing a relatively greater rate of decline,
and both groups of cities showed increases
in the older ages with the non-growing cities
showing a relatively greater rate of increase
(see Table IX).

The differential rates of decline in the
youngest age group is partly a reflection of
comparative birth rates. Birth rates, which
were higher in the non-growing cities in 1930
(21 births per 1,000 population as compared
to 18.5) declined so rapidly over the decade
that by 1940 the birth rate in these cities
was lower than in the growing cities (16 as
gained slightly in the 30-45 age group;
whereas the reverse was true in the case
of the non-growing cities.

The implications of these facts are parti-
cularly pertinent with reference to the nature
of leadership of the community. Those in
the age group 30 to 45 years of age are old
enough to assume, or begin to assume posi-
tion of sufficient responsibility to have a
voice in community affairs and not so old
that they are disinclined to respond to new
ideas and prospects of future accomplish-
ment. In short, in this group are the younger,
progressive leaders and those recognized as
about to assume leadership. Apparently, the
non-growing cities are losing this element of
their population with the result that leader-
ship tends to remain in the same, but more
aged and conservative hands.
appearance of the city. The appearance of
the city will be more important to the city’s
well-being in the future than it has in the
past. As has been pointed out, city growth
in the future will depend on the ability to
attract persons from the outside, an attrac-
tion founded on expanding job opportunities
and relative desirability of living conditions.
The visible key to these living conditions is
the appearance of the city: the quality and
efficiency of its thoroughfares, the sprightli-
ness of its business areas, the attractiveness
of its residential areas, the distribution and
maintenance of its park and recreational
facilities, and the promise of work in prog-
ress such as high-speed expressways, slum
clearance and construction, new offices and
government buildings.

The evidence cited in previous paragraphs
all tends to make it difficult for the non-
growing cities to cultivate and maintain their
best appearance. With declining sales volume,
the downtown area is not apt to spend money
on modern construction to replace obsolete
structures, The government of the declining
city, faced with poorer prospects for new
revenues (largely derived from an increasing
population and a rising tax duplicate) will
not be encouraged to indulge in new public
construction. It is more apt to reduce its
expenditures for capital improvements such
as new government buildings, modern high-
speed traffic arteries, parks and recreational
facilities to an absolute replacement mini-
mum, and hoard diminishing income to meet
higher operating expenses.

In residential areas, rising vacancy rates
and lessening demand will have their de-
pressing effects on rental values and on ade-
quate maintenance. Vacant properties and
poor up-keep are blight infections which,
once they make their appearance, provide
their own cycle of debilitating spread.

In general conclusion, it seems apparent
from the evidence revealed by this study
that it is well worth the effort of the individ-
ual city or the metropolitan area of which
it is a part, to take a positive approach to
the two chief factors controlling future pop-
ulation growth. These factors, previously
cited, are the provisions of additional job
opportunities and of relatively attractive liv-
ing conditions. Conceivably, many of the
desirable effects of an expanding population
could be duplicated by a corresponding
expansion of real income for a stationary
population. This could result generally from
increasing productivity accompanied by a
high level of economic activity or from in-
creased stability of the existing economy
from the viewpoint of seasonal and cyclical
fluctuations. Failing all these alternatives, it
behooves cities and their metropolitan areas
to develop techniques at least to ease the
attendant adverse effects of a stationary or
declining population.
