American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Although sociologists have long been dissatis-
fied with market explanations of earnings, up
to World War II they did little research on the
subject. Since that time they have made prog-
ress in explaining how social and cultural
forces influence pay by demonstrating two
types of effects on earnings: (a) ascriptive ef-
fects as indicated by the worker’s race, sex,
age, ethnicity, and social class position, and (b)
structural effects as indicated by labor unions,
market resources of firms, occupational and
enterprise monopolies, and governmental
controls (Berg, 1981).

In early studies of newly industrializing
societies, sociologists (Abegglen, 1958; Lam-
bert, 1963; Chaplin, 1967) contrasted local
ascriptive payment systems (e.g., paying work-
ers according to their social status) with west-
ern market systems (e.g., paying workers ac-
cording to their skill and productivity). Later,
Dore (1973), Cole (1979), Marsh and Mannari
(1976), and others revised this strategy because
some ascriptive payment systems seemed to
represent rational responses to local economic
conditions. Paying workers according to their
age, then, could maximize enterprise produc-
tivity and worker security over the long run
more than rewarding them for their skills
(Taira, 1970). Researchers also found the as-
sumption of a single local labor market to be
inadequate. The pay determinants of craft
workers (Scoville, 1973) sometimes did not ex-
plain pay in the service or large manufacturing
sectors (Marsh and Mannari, 1976;
Tachibanaki, 1982).

As the world economy expands, explaining
local payment systems becomes more complex
because managers learn about payment sys-
tems in other countries and experiment with
them in their own countries. Especially in
newly industrializing countries, managers
weigh how they might combine local payment
practices with innovations from abroad in
order to maximize productivity and profits. It
is a challenge to students of comparative labor
markets to explain how different payment
systems are melded to meet singular local con-
ditions.

This research analyzes the payment system
devised by the Hyundai Motor Company of
Korea, a new industry in a newly industrializ-
ing country that is competing for world auto-
mobile sales. The Korean case is important
because it represents a response to four un-
usual circumstances: (1) a very rapid pace of
national industrialization, (2) a religious cul-
tural heritage that legitimizes hierarchical re-
lationships between groups, (3) a case of expo-
sure to both eastern and western payment
systems, and (4) a case of massive technologi-
cal dependency on foreign countries.

In this paper we describe: (1) these four con-
ditions and hypothesize how they might influ-
ence the company’s payment system, (2) the
research methods and statistical procedures,
(3) the organization of the factory, its labor
force, and its payment system, (4) the results of
a multiple regression analysis of the factors
underlying the payment system of Hyundai,
and (5) why management devised a payment
1. Rapid Industrialization. In 1961, 49 percent
of Korea’s gross domestic product (GDP) was
in agriculture, 13 percent in manufacturing,
and 38 percent in the services. By 1981, the
GDP for manufacturing almost tripled to 37
percent, while that for agriculture declined to
20 percent, and that of service rose to 43 per-
cent (Bank of Korea, 1980, 1983). In this period
the country sustained an unusually high annual
rate of GNP growth: 9.3 percent. Today,
Korea is a relatively advanced industrial na-
tion. In terms of life expectancy, adult literacy,
per capita energy consumption, per capita
GNP in U. S. dollars, and percent of labor
force in manufacturing, Korea’s position is
above that held by Italy in 1960 (Form,
1976:25). Korea’s explosive growth strained
traditional labor markets, called for a large and
new industrial labor force, a forced-draft pro-
gram to train it, and new inducements to keep
it committed to an industrial way of life (Moore
and Feldman, 1960).
2. The Confucian Ethic of Authority. Rapid
industrialization undoubtedly strained
traditional relationships sanctioned by Confu-
cian ethics of hierarchy. The ethic embodies
three principles and five basic norms called
Samgang Oryun. Samgang governs hierarchi-
cal relations between king and subject, hus-
band and wife, and father and son. Oryun deals
with righteousness between king and subject,
distinctions between husband and wife, filial
piety, order between old and young, and good
faith between friends. Koreans also practice an
elaborate stratification etiquette unparalleled
in the East. Together, the ethic and etiquette
encourage defining the enterprise as a family
system: employers should act as responsible
parents toward their employees and workers
should be loyal and not be overly concerned
with monetary rewards.
Governmental-industrial relations policies
seem designed to implement the Confucian
ethic. Labor—-management conflict is frowned
upon and labor unions are discouraged. All
enterprises with 100 or more employees must
have labor-management councils (Nosa
Hyeobeuihoe) made up of an equal number of
labor and management representatives. The
Council’s functions are to improve produc-
tivity, train workers, resolve disputes, promote
workers’ interests, improve safety and the
work environment, and increase labor-
management cooperation. The government's
Factory New Community Movement
(Gongjang Saemaul Undong) is the Council’s
ideological fulcrum. The Movement’s slogan
is: ‘Treat employees like family; do factory
work like my family’s business.” Together,
Confucian ethics and governmental policies
should incline managers to reward workers
more for their social status (age, family obliga-
tions, seniority) than for their training, skills,
productivity, and work experience.

3. Financial and Technological Dependency.
Since 1960, Korea has been especially depen-
dent on other industrial countries (Lim, 1982).
By January, 1984, Korea’s total foreign bor-
rowing amounted to 42.6 billion U.S. dollars
(Jungang Ilbosa, 1984), a sum approximately
equal to the government's budget in 1982. Fi-
nancially, Korea depends primarily on Japan
and secondarily on the United States. Korea’s
industries have also depended on the two
countries for most of its new technology. Con-
trary to dependency theory (Griffin and Enos,
1970), Korea is a case of a dependent country
that became industrialized while it raised its
standard of living (see Barrett and Whyte,
1982: 1086). Korea is now beginning to compete
successfully for overseas markets with Japan,
Taiwan, the United States, and Brazil. It is
Korea’s technological dependence, especially,
that should expose it to some Japanese and
American industrial and personnel practices.
4. Exposure to Eastern and Western Pay Sys-
tems. The recruitment, training, and pay sys-
tems of Korea’s advanced industrial sector
represent a mix of practices found in new in-
dustrial societies, Japan, and the West.
Korea’s historic antipathy toward Japan in-
hibits managers from openly acknowledging
Japanese influences. Yet, because Japan has
dominated much of Korea’s big business since
1894, residues of Japanese personnel practices
remain. Large Korean companies have
adopted one Japanese practice (Cole, 1971:71)
of having three levels of supervisors evaluate
each worker's performance and grade it on
three levels. Many Korean managers and
workers also praise the practice of permanent
employment found in some large Japanese
firms.

Personnel practices at Hyundai illustrate a
mixture of eastern and western practices found
in most large Korean firms. Want-ads for
workers were posted in newspapers, in the
cafeteria, and on factory gates. Yet, as in the
West (Granovetter, 1974), only a minority of
Hyundai's workers learned about openings
through the mass media; the remainder were
informed by relatives or friends working in the
plant. Hyundai added a “premodern” pater-
nalistic touch (Bendix, 1956), however. Once
an applicant was hired, two employees had to
vouch for his identity (all production em-
ployees were males) and financial soundness.
Recommenders had to agree to compensate the
company for any damages to property the new
employee might cause.

Other personnel practices were consonant
with modern western ones however. One-half
of the employees were given an entrance ex-
amination to determine their suitability for em-
ployment; one-quarter were provided job
training by the company; and the rest were
selected for their previous vocational training
or qualified work experience. On the basis of
their test scores, work experience and training,
workers were more or less permanently as-
signed specific jobs. Finally, supervisors as-
signed pay raises on the basis of individual job
performance. Hyundai’s managers, however,
voiced both a traditional ideology of responsi-
bility toward their workers and an ideology of
individual merit, productivity, and perfor-
mance.

How might these four cross-cutting factors
affect the pattern of manual workers’ earnings?
Two polar possibilities are: payment according
to the workers’ social status and obligations, or
payment according to job skills and market
demands. When many large Japanese firms
confronted conditions similar to Korea's con-
ditions today (workers from rural areas, short-
age of skilled labor, and high market demands
for goods), they opted for the social status or
age-graded nenko system that (a) paid workers
according to their age and family obligations,
(b) guaranteed them life-time employment, and
(c) trained them continuously to acquire new
skills. Korean managers were aware of this
system and could have adopted it, but they
chose not to. Assuming a rational calculus on
their part, we conclude that they thought they
did not have to and that other systems would
serve them better.

An important concern for Korea’s managers
was how to obtain and retain young skilled
workers. Nenko employers offered these
workers job security in exchange for immedi-
ate high wages. Other employers had to pay
especially high wages to attract the skilled, but
few could do this (Taira, 1970). We suggest that
perhaps the more rapid pace of Korean indus-
trialization, the greater financial and techno-
logical contact with foreign countries, and the
greater governmental pressure to expand pro-
duction rapidly (van Helvoort, 1979) created
such a turbulent labor market that even man-
agers in the advanced sector had to up-bid the
pay of skilled workers. This is typical in new,
rapidly industrializing countries (Brown, 1977,
Ch. 2).

Confucian values and residues of Japanese
practices could have convinced managers to
place some weight on social status (age, marital
The above considerations suggest that Hyun-
dai would pay workers primarily for their
human capital: skills, vocational training, and
previous work experience. Where skilled
workers are in short supply, expanding enter-
prises like Hyundai would be especially hard
pressed to retain them without higher pay.
Training them in specialized work, moreover,
would further increase their market worth.
Though semiskilled and unskilled workers are
in greater supply than the skilled, even the
nonskilled receive some training; in a tight
labor market, therefore, efforts must be made
to reduce worker turnover. Management
traditionally does this by rewarding them for
their seniority, offering them as much overtime
as possible, and upgrading their skills (Rees
and Shultz, 1970:122). We expected this pat-
tern to emerge at Hyundai. Under some condi-
tions, seniority and repeated cost-of-living ad-
justments almost eliminate earnings dif-
ferentials among the skill levels (Lambert,
1963:116, 140). We did not expect this to hap-
pen because demand for skilled workers in
Korea was almost insatiable. It is true that
fringe benefits tend to reduce labor turnover.
Given the relative youth of Hyundai's labor
force, we did not expect fringe benefits to
greatly affect its mobility.

In short, we expected the basis of pay at
Hyundai to tilt toward the western pattern of
paying workers more for their human capital
than for their social status. We expected earn-
ings to be based more on workers’ occu-
pational skills, vocational training, and previ-
ous work experience than on their age, marital
status, family obligations, seniority, and formal
education. The influence of seniority is least
The significance of a case for study depends
upon its importance in the economy and on its
representativeness. The Hyundai Group is the
largest single private enterprise in Korea, em-
ploying about 80,000 workers. According to
Fortune, in 1983 it was the 41st largest corpo-
ration in the world outside of the United
States. Hyundai consists of 28 companies en-
gaged in shipbuilding, engineering and con-
struction, international trading, vehicles, elec-
tronic and electrical equipment, machinery and
metal products, construction material, furni-
ture, and shipping. Most of the personnel prac-
tices investigated in this study, such as pay-
ment system, bonus for overtime work, fringe
benefits, recruitment, and training are applied
in all of Hyundai’s companies. These practices
are also typically found in the advanced indus-
trial sector of Korea, such as shipbuilding,
steel fabrication, machinery and metal prod-
ucts, the areas in which Hyundai operates.
Hyundai thus represents the advanced-core in-
dustrial sector of the country.

This research examines the pay system of
the Hyundai Motor Company. In 1967 Hyundai
established an automobile assembly plant in
Ulsan and by 1976 it was expanded to produce
the entire vehicle. From 1968 to 1983, em-
ployment rose from 488 to 7,966 workers. By
1983, Hyundai became the largest Korean pro-
ducer of vehicles, turning out 140,000 auto-
mobiles, buses, and trucks. Because public vo-
cational schools were unable to fill the urgent
demand for trained industrial workers, Hyun-
dai joined the government’s drive to train
workers. Its Vocational Training Institute
trained workers for other companies, but it
also trained about one-fifth of its present labor
force, the bulk of whom were assigned un-
skilled and semiskilled jobs. Hyundai's main
plant is located in Ulsan, a city on the East Sea
(Sea of Japan), about 200 miles southeast of
Seoul. In response to industrial expansion, the
city’s population boomed from 92,000 in 1963
to 451,000 in 1983.

Hyundai was organized somewhat like a
military establishment. Employees were re-
quired to have their hair cut short and wear the
grey Hyundai uniform. Their rank was re-
vealed by the shape of their name tags which
were pinned on the left breast pocket. Produc-
tion workers (chickwon) were directly super-
The study universe included all (2,811) non-
supervisory manual workers engaged in direct
production who had been employed for at least
one year. All were male. In order to obtain a
sample that represented the main manufactur-
ing functions and the entire range of occu-
pational skills, we assigned all departments to
four strata of increasing skill. Two departments
were randomly selected from each stratum.
Since we wanted about a ten-percent sample
and anticipated some loss in the interviewing
process, we selected 330 names. The average
optimum allocation of these workers to the
eight departments was computed and they were
randomly sampled from personnel lists, using a
table of random numbers. Workers were asked
to return a questionnaire that asked them about
their socioeconomic background and occu-
pational history, and included a request for an
interview. We had 91-percent return. Bae
interviewed 299 workers, almost all of whom
were cooperative. These interviews provided
information on the worker's: hourly wage and
monthly earnings, ascriptive and human-
capital characteristics, job search behavior,
and attitudes toward the payment system,
labor unions, and management’s personnel
practices. In addition, interviews were con-
ducted with personnel managers who provided
information on recruitment practices, pay
scales, fringe benefits, promotion practices,
and their perceptions of how workers regarded
their personnel and pay practices.
Hyundai hired its workers after they had com-
pleted their military service. The company
gave some vocational training to about one-
quarter of its employees.

Hyundai’s manual workers averaged five
years of tenure; the range was one to fifteen
years. Typical of automobile plants elsewhere,
only one-fifth of the workers were skilled; the
remaining nonskilled worked primarily on as-
sembly lines, automatic machines, and simple
inspection operations. Both the distribution of
occupational skills and functional operations at
Hyundai were similar to the auto plants that
Form (1976:49) had studied earlier in four
countries.

When analyzed by skill, most worker char-
acteristics in Table 1 revealed statistically sig-
nificant differences by the chi-square test.
Compared to the less skilled, the skilled had
more education, more vocational training, pre-
Management and clerical employees were paid
monthly salaries while production and service
workers were paid hourly rates. Total earnings
for workers included wages, bonuses, seniority
allowances, and fringe benefits. When hired,
the worker’s standard hourly wage (SHW) was
a function of education and military service.
Graduates from middle school (nine years) who
did not finish military service received 430 won
(about .55 U.S. dollars). If military service was
completed, as it was almost universally, an
additional 55 won (13 percent) was added to the
SHW. High-school graduates (12 years) re-
ceived 15 won more than middle-school gradu-
ates, and those graduated from vocational high
school received 20 won more than middle-
school graduates. The highest starting wage of
505 won was only 17 percent more than the
lowest. The SHW was increased by 20 won
after three months of training and increased
annually at the beginning of the year. New
SHWs were based on the government’s wage
policy, the financial condition of the company,
and competitive wage rates. All workers re-
ceived about 55 percent of the average allotted
increment as an adjustment for inflation and
company productivity. The remaining 45 per-
cent was assigned on the basis of job perfor-
mance. Low merit increases were assigned to
20 percent of the workers; middle merit to 60
percent, and high merit to 20 percent. Thirty
percent of the average SHW increment was
based on the evaluations of the three super-
visors (chojang, banjang, and kisa) and 15 per-
cent by the department chief (bujang).

Total monthly earnings included hourly
wages multiplied by number of working hours
(adjusted for overtime), bonus, and seniority
allowance. Those with one year of seniority
received 10,000 won (about 13 dollars), 20,000
for two years, 30,000 for three and four years,
and 40,000 for five years or more. Employees
usually received bonuses four times a year
The mean monthly earnings of Hyundai’s
workers in 1983, including bonuses, were
355,000 won, about 456 U.S. dollars. When
overtime and benefits are excluded, the earn-
ings approximated the national average for
manufacturing employees. Although Hyun-
dai’s workers often complained about being
forced to work overtime, their overtime earn-
ings made them a relatively affluent. In
1983, their earnings exceeded the national
monthly average for manufacturing workers
(Bank of Korea, 1983) by 56 percent. Total
monthly earnings ranged from 192,000 to
545,000 won, the highest being 2.84 times that
of the lowest. This range is high even for
Japanese workers (Funahashi, 1973:390; Cole,
1971:77) and it is inconceivable for western
employees for whom the range very rarely ex-
ceeds 50 percent (Form 1976:47).

The Hyundai payment system contained an
anomaly. Entering wage rates were based on
education and vocational training and not skill
but the pay range for education was low—only
12 percent. The range in monthly earnings for
all workers was much higher, however. It is
true that seniority benefits affected the range,
but since seniority pay rates were the same for
all workers, they would tend to equalize earn-
ings slightly. The maximum award for five
years of seniority (40,000 won) accounted for
less than two percent of the basic monthly pay
of current assembly workers. Two other im-
portant factors affected individual earnings:
amount of overtime and changes in SHW.
Since overtime rates were the same for all
workers, main variations in pay rates resulted
from supervisors’ evaluations of individual
performance: this determined 45 percent of the
annual change in the SHW. Since we could not
obtain data on supervisors’ evaluations, the
bases of the evaluations had to be inferred.

How much variation in individual perfor-
mance should be expected for automobile
workers? The technology of automobile man-
ufacturing does not permit large variation in
individual productivity (Edwards, 1979). Most
productivity increases result from technologi-
cal and organizational improvements. Assem-
bly lines move at a set pace. Parts-making ma-
chines are preset to make pieces automatically
at set rates, but operators do vary a bit in their
ability to change worn chisels and make minor
machine adjustments. Most testing and in-
specting is done with set gauges and proce-
dures, but some tasks require more skill than
others. Greatest variations in individual pro-
ductivity occur among skilled workers, but
evaluating their performance is difficult be-
cause their work is not standardized.

Altogether, these technological consid-
erations suggest that variation in SHW should
be small (perhaps no more than five percent)
for assemblers, no more than 15 percent for
operators of automatic machines, testers, and
inspectors, and probably 30 percent for
skilled workers.' Wage differentials between
the skilled and unskilled should increase over
time, moreover, because the skilled continue
to improve their productivity for a longer pe-
riod of time (Reynolds, 1974:120).

The research problem is to ascertain
whether, in their evaluations of individual
performance, supervisors rewarded produc-
tivity as reflected in the worker's skill, vo-
cational training, and previous work experi-
ence, or whether they rewarded social status as
revealed by the worker's age, marital status,
formal education, and plant seniority. Plant
seniority is the most difficult variable to inter-
pret. While it can be interpreted as work expe-
rience that increases productivity, the infer-
ence must be guarded. Experience for an as-
sembler has a rapidly declining productivity
curve, while that for a skilled worker has a long
rising curve. Where genuine internal labor
markets exist, all workers become more valu-
able over time because they are continually
trained for more skilled jobs. Hyundai’s man-
agement, however, had not systematically up-
graded workers in 15 years. Since 90-percent
of the workers remained at their initial job
level, and if, over time, the pay rates of assem-
bly line and craft workers were raised equally,
we may conclude that individual productivity
was not the probable basis of supervisory
evaluations.

Two important parameters of payment sys-
tems are the range in pay for different skills,
functions, and seniority cohorts, and the pay
range within a given function, skill, and
seniority cohort. In western firms, skill or pro-
ductivity are the main determinants of pay
rates, so little overlap normally exists in the
pay rates of unskilled and skilled labor.
Moreover, workers with the same skill in a
given firm typically receive wages that vary in
a narrow band; the lower the skill, the nar-
rower the band. Over the years, wage rates for
skilled workers in American automobile firms
have ranged from 25 to 50 percent more than
those of assemblers. Assemblers with the most
seniority have received less than five percent
more than assemblers with the least seniority.
For skilled workers, the highest seniority rates
have been about 15 percent above the lowest
(Form, 1976:47; UAW, 1980, 1983). Brown
(1977, Ch. 3) has shown that such pay-rate
differentials have remained very stable over
the years. In short, the payment norm in west-
ern enterprises has been: wage hierarchy be-
tween skill levels and wage “equality” within
levels.

What is the range in pay at Hyundai for skill,
technological function, education, and senior-
ity? In Table 2, the skill ratio (skilled + un-
skilled) in SHW is 1.15; for technological func-
tion (craft + assembler), 1.10; for education
(high school + primary school), .98; and for
seniority (five years or more + less than two
years), 1.40. All these ratios are slightly higher
when calculated for total monthly earnings, but
their relative positions remain the same.
Hyundai's skill ratio for SHW is less than half
of that typical of the West and the same is true
for technological function. The small pay range
for education approximates the western norm,
but the range for seniority is twice that of west-
ern automobile firms.

Data in Table 3 further reveal a much wider
pay range within skill level, technological
function, and seniority cohort than is typical of
western firms. In Hyundai, the highest SHW
for unskilled workers was 82 percent higher
than the lowest. In contrast to the western
case, at Hyundai the ratio declines as skill level
increases. The highest paid machine tender re-
ceived 90 percent more than the lowest, while
the difference was 55 percent for craft workers.”
Curiously, the highest SHW for workers with
2-5 years of seniority was 69 percent more
than the lowest, while the ratio was lower for
The correlation matrix of the earnings vari-
ables in Table 4 shows that seniority correlated
most with SHW (.77), followed by skill, age,
and marital status which are of moderate size
(.40). Not surprisingly, skill, education, and
vocational training are moderately related, but
skill and seniority are weakly so. Skill is nega-
tively associated with age and marital status.
Multiple regression analysis is needed to de-
termine the independent contribution of the
variables.

Data in Table 5 show that the seven variables
that determine SHW and monthly earnings, re-
spectively, contribute to 65 and 40 percent of
the total variance.3 The standardized betas re-
veal that the best predictors of SHW are
seniority and skill, followed by marital status
and vocational training. Age, education, and
years of previous work experience have no
independent effect on SHW. Seniority is the
most powerful determinant of SHW, with a
standardized beta of 0.59, but the contribution
of skill is also important, at 0.43. Apparently,
management also rewarded marital status, be-
cause with all other variables controlled, the
married received five percent more won in
their SHW than the single. While vocational
training was most important in hiring, it was
least important later on.

In the regression of total monthly earnings
(see Table 5), the standardized beta for skill
level (0.45) was higher than that for seniority
(0.37). Marital status contributed even more to
monthly than to hourly earnings, but vo-
cational training was not statistically signifi-
cant. The relative rise in the contribution of
skill and marital status to monthly earnings
probably reflects selectivity in the allocation of
overtime work. The negative correlations of
skill and technological function with age sug-
gest that older and less skilled workers were
more concentrated in the assembly and
machining departments. If the skilled were as-
signed more overtime than the less skilled, this
may account for the higher contribution of skill
than SHW to total monthly earnings. This
could represent management’s way of reward-
ing skilled workers in a tight labor market
without raising their rates of training and hiring
more skilled workers.

A measure of monthly overtime was calcu-
lated by multiplying 26 days by eight hours and
removing the bonus from the previous monthly
pay. The regression of the log of overtime on
the determinants of pay revealed that skill had
the largest standardized beta (.35) followed by
marital status (.25). No other variable was
statistically significant. Separate regressions
were run for each skill level. None of the vari-
ables was statistically significant.
Table 5. Multiple Regression of Log of Standard Hourly Wage and Total Monthly Earnings

 

 

Independent Variables

Unstandardized (Standardized) Coefficient

 

Hourly Wage

Total Monthly Earnings

 

 

Years of seniority 117 (.59) -118  (.37)
Skill level 069  (.43) -118  (.45)
Marital status -051 (17) 104 (.21)
Vocational training -007. (.11) -001 (—.01)*
Age —.003 (—.10)* —.004 (—.09)
Years in previous jobs .006  (.05)* —.001 (—.00)*
Education —.003 (—.04)* —.002 (—.02)*
Constant 6.2 12.2
Multiple R? 81 65
Adjusted R? 65 40
F-value 47 17
N 299 299

 

* Not significant at the

-05 level.
trial labor was scarce. The average seniority at
Hyundai was only five years and, perhaps sig-
nificantly, the maximum seniority benefit was
for five years of service. If management could
induce workers to remain for five years, the
chance of their leaving would be greatly re-
duced, especially if additional seniority was
informally recognized in the annual evaluations
of work performance. Additional overtime was
an added incentive for workers to stay. Tilting
overtime in favor of married workers further
enabled management to stabilize its unskilled
and semiskilled labor force. With respect to the
skilled, management was reluctant to assign
them a SHW that was much above that of the
other workers. This was management's public
statement that it recognized the importance of
the workers’ family obligations. The company
met the skilled workers’ demand for equity by
assigning them even more than average over-
time work. Obviously, management could have
trained more skilled workers, but it chose not
to do so.

The variance in earnings explained by un-
ambiguous social status variables (age and
marital status) was lower at Hyundai than in
comparable Japanese factories (Marsh and
Mannari, 1976:120-—56; Funahashi, 1974:390),
while the human capital variables (skill, vo-
cational training, and seniority to some extent)
explained more. Hyundai’s pay system seemed
to fall somewhere between Japan's nenko sys-
tem and the western market system. Hyundai’s
workers apparently preferred this western tilt
in their particular situation. In the interviews
we asked them to rank the importance of four
determinants of pay: seniority, education, re-
sponsibility or skill, and the physical demands
of the job. Responsibility clearly ranked first,
followed by seniority and physical demands
which ranked almost equally, and education,
which ranked a weak last.

The administration of the payment system
generally supported the workers’ beliefs. While
SHW skill differentials were low, the skilled
monthly earnings were typically 22 percent
more than the unskilled, a ratio that ap-
proaches that of the American automobile in-
dustry (UAW, 1980, 1983). This bonus for skill
was almost permanent because it was in effect
almost from the time the skilled were first
hired. Though the skilled were attracted to
other enterprises, they could not easily surpass
their present earnings by moving. In 1982, only
8.5 percent of all production workers quit
Hyundai. This turnover rate is low for U.S.
firms and it is also low for Japanese nenko
firms. Cole (1971:116) and Marsh and Mannari
(1971:804) reported annual turnover rates be-
tween 17 and 23 percent for automobile and
engine production firms.

Company loyalty was not a major consid-
eration in workers’ decisions to stay. In the
interviews, only 18 percent indicated that
Hyundai was better to work for than other
companies. Three-quarters had thought about
quitting and 30 percent had actually engaged in
some form of job search. Finally, almost
two-thirds of all workers thought that they
should not work for the same company until
retirement. Belief differences by skill level
were trivial. Both workers and management
were not altogether happy with the present
payment system, however. Both voiced their
approval of Japan's nenko system. About
three-quarters of the employees preferred to
work for a company and supervisors who
showed personal concern for the workers’
welfare more than for a company that de-
manded nothing extra from its employees but
was unconcerned about their personal lives
(see Marsh and Mannari, 1976:354, for the
questions asked). Workers felt that they lived
up to nenko obligations: they worked hard,
long, and loyally for Hyundai, but management
would not guarantee them job security, train
them for better jobs, provide a dependency
bonus, or show concern for their personal
problems.

In the interviews, management reported that
workers were unreasonable and ungrateful.
Management felt it behaved responsibly, in ac-
cord with the Confucian tradition. It paid well,
provided full-time work, shared profits (a
bonus equal to four months’ pay), provided
some food and housing subsidy, and recog-
nized loyalty and family responsibilities by re-
warding seniority and by providing the married
with more overtime. In short, management
demanded trust from their workers, and work-
ers demanded formal guarantees.

From the workers’ perspective, management
had them trapped. Almost half concluded that
no promotion was possible for them at Hyun-
dai. The others thought that perhaps in ten
years they might be promoted to chojang or
bangjang. But even these were dreary produc-
tion jobs that paid only 12 percent more in
basic monthly pay. Workers also felt ambiva-
lent about the overtime situation. Although by
Korean standards the amount of overtime was
not excessive or inhumane, workers felt that
they had insufficient leisure to enjoy their
families. They had become so dependent on
overtime earnings, however, that they did not
like the prospect of reducing them and their
present earnings.

Management's strategy was self-conscious.
Its pay policies gave the company financial and
operational flexibilty, contained labor turn-
over, and demonstrated a sense of social re-
sponsibility. By balancing rewards for skill,
seniority, and marital status, management did
not violate any group’s sense of equity.4 Over-
time earnings, bonuses, and other benefits
raised earnings above those of most other in-
dustrial employees. Though Hyundai’s per-
worker costs were above the national average,
savings were made in the size of its labor force
and training costs. In 1979, the company re-
leased 3,000 workers and it did not want to do
that again. Yet if the automobile market were
to turn very soft, management could release
workers because it was not bound by custom
or contract to keep them. Management could
minimize lay-offs by simply reducing overtime
work, however. On the other hand, if the
market continued to expand, management
could consider developing an internal labor
market.

Almost all recent observers of Japanese
firms that embrace the nenko system have ob-
served that their managers prefer a more flexi-
ble system that reduces the proportion of per-
manent employees and pays workers more for
their skills than for their social status. The
nenko system worked well when skilled labor
was in short supply, the market was expanding
predictably, and manufacturing technology
was changing slowly. Workers could gradually
improve their skills and pay with increasing
experience and age. Today, faced with a pool
of young skilled workers, changing world
markets, and rapidly changing technology, the
preferred payment system would reduce life-
time employment and tip the status—skill bal-
ance toward increasing rewards for skill.
Hyundai’s payment strategy seems to have at-
tained that balance.

This study confirms the view that managers
in rapidly developing countries rationally eval-
uate alternative payment strategies when de-
signing their own. Though Hyundai's managers
were aware of Japan’s nenko system and the
West’s market-driven system, they devised a
system that balanced the two to fit their local
situation. The rapid pace of industrialization
and turbulent world markets (in this case
automobile) created such a fluid labor market
that management became convinced that it
could not fully implement either payment sys-
tem. The traditional tenets of Confucian ethics
seemed to have had at best only an indirect
impact. By rewarding seniority and marital
status, management recognized the workers’
social status obligations, and by carefully dis-
tributing overtime work, management re-
warded skill while it retained a trained labor
force.

This study suggests that sociologists must
pay more attention to how labor and manage-
ment respond to local labor markets in the
context of their separate and joint traditions
and experiences. Though labor economists
have stressed the importance of the local labor
market, they have not examined how labor,
management, and their institutions respond to
it as it changes. This is what sociologists are
best equipped to do.
——. 1983. Economic Statistics Yearbook. Seoul.

. 1984. Monthly Bulleting 33 December. Seoul.

Barrett, Richard E. and Martin King Whyte. 1982.
“Dependency Theory and Taiwan: Analysis of a
Deviant Case.” American Journal of Sociology
87:1064-89.

Bendix, Reinhard. 1956. Work and Authority in In-
dustry. New York: Wiley.

Berg, Ivar (ed.). 1981. Sociological Perspectives on
Labor Markets. New York: Academic.

Brown, Henry Phelps. 1977. The Inequality of Pay.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Chaplin, David. 1967. The Peruvian Industrial Labor
Force. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Choi, Jang Jip. 1983. Interest conflict and political
control in South Korea: a study of labor unions in
manufacturing industries. PhD Thesis. University
of Chicago.

Cole, Robert E. 1971. Japanese Blue Collar: The
Changing Tradition. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

. 1979. Work, Mobility, and Participation.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Dore, Ronald. 1973. British Factory—Japanese
Factory. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Edwards, Richard. 1979. Contested Terrain: The
Transformation of the Work Place in the Twentieth
Century. New York: Basic Books.

Form, William H. 1976. Blue-Collar Stratification:
Autoworkers in Four Countries. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

1978. ** Working-Class Divisions and Political
Consensus in France and the United States.” Pp.
263-96 in Comparative Social Research, 4 edited
by Richard F. Tomasson. Greenwich, CT: JAI.

Form, William and Fred C. Pampel. 1978. “Social
Stratification and the Development of Urban
Labor Markets in India.’’ Social Forces
57:119-35.

Freeman, Richard E. 1979. Labor Economics. En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Funahashi, Naomichi. 1974. “The Industrial Reward
System: Wages and Benefits.” Pp. 361-97 in
Workers and Employers in Japan, edited by
Kazuo Okochi, Bernard Karsh, and Solomon B.
Levine. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.

Granovetter, Mark. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of
Contacts and Careers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Griffin, Keith B. and J. L. Enos. 1970. ‘Foreign
Assistance: Objectives and Consequences.” Eco-
nomic Development and Cultural Change
18:313-27.

Inkeles, Alex and David H. Smith. 1974. Becoming
Modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Jungang, Ilbosa. 1984. January 25 Jugang IIbo (Cen-
tral Daily News).

Lambert, Richard D. 1963. Workers, Factories, and
Social Change in India. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Lim, Hyun-Chin. 1982. Dependent development in the
world system: the case of South Korea. PhD The-
sis, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Moore, Wilbert E. and Arnold S. Feldman, (eds.).
1960. Labor Commitment and Social Change in
Structural models of suburban development and black population growth are
developed for each of the post World War II decades. Changes in the determinants
(region, age, distance to the central city, socioeconomic status, area, job
concentration and population size) of black growth across the post-war decades are
examined within the context of changing black-white relations. In addition, the
reciprocal issue of change in the effect of black suburbanization on suburban devel-
opment (population, job and areal growth) is examined. The basic thesis is that
change in the process of black suburbanization has occurred during the post war
decades in response to the changing Civil Rights climate. Maximum likelihood model
estimates are generated for each decade using samples of all suburbs which had at
least 10,000 population during each decade. The analysis shows that the determi-
nants of black growth and the role of black suburbanization in suburban development
have changed across the decades.
national total of suburban residents (17 to 20
percent) but since World War II through 1980,
the percent suburban population has increased
from 20 to about 40 percent (Muller, 1981:51).
By 1970, almost all of metropolitan growth
(95.6 percent) was due to the growth of fringe
populations (U.S. Census of Population, 1970).

The suburbanization of commerce and in-
dustry has paralleled suburban population
growth. The deconcentration of economic ac-
tivities began in the 1920s with the increased
use of the automobile but it wasn’t until after
World War II with the increasing movement of
retailing to the fringe that job suburbanization
became a noticeable phenomenon. Suburban
employment has accelerated in each decade
since World War II, especially during the 1970s
