http://www.jstor.org/stable/2087967 ?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
ject by the artificiality of the experimental
situation makes it unnecessary for the ob-
server to attribute much complexity to the
subject. It is such a simplified version of
learning theory which these social scientists
employ and such a simplified picture of the
experimental situation to which they compare
culture.

The crude hedonism which infers reward
from overt acts in unconstructed social
situations directs attention away from the
questions to be answered in understanding
individual behavior. These include the rela-
tion of the social and psychological aspects
of individual behavior, especially the rela-
tion of psychological motivation to social role,
and the problem of creativeness or change,
both social and psychological.

To conclude, none of the writers has
succeeded in getting beyond supplying new
labels for events after they occur. They
reason in a circle by inferring drive, cue, and
26 One suggestion of the relation of direct learn-
ing to personality is given by A. Kardiner: “If we
were to stop our consideration of basic personality
structure with those systems which, though they
originate in actual experience, become the uncon-
scious basis for projective systems, we could be
justly accused of omitting several very important
sources of ‘learning,’ which play a prominent role in
the adaptation of the individual. There is a large
contingent of data imparted to the child by direct
tuition. To this group belong all explanations about
the outer world, how to deal with it, and the rela-
tions of man to it, and the conventionalized atti-
tudes which govern the relations of people to each
other. These systems are consciously inducted,
much of their content being subjected to demon-
strations of a kind, and in some instances are modi-
fiable.” The Psychological Frontiers of Society,
New York: Columbia University Press, 1945, p. 31.
of the family and, in turn, of the marriage
relationship. The interactional point of view
—essential to any scientific analysis—de-
fined the locus within which the analyst
must operate in the development of a
social psychology of marriage. The intro-
duction of the interactional point of view
provided the framework within which to
develop a social psychological analysis but
did not, however, provide the essential units
in that analysis. Burgess defined the unit as
the person, using Park’s definition of the
person as an individual who has status.
Others have used as units the individual,
wishes, mechanisms, and roles, largely in
terms of what particular version of social
psychology they adhered to. Thus the de-
velopment of a social psychology of mar-
riage is intertwined with the development
of social psychology.

Central in any social psychological analy-
sis is the problem of motivation. Motives may
be variously conceived from inherent bio-
logical patterns of response, on the one
hand, to needs and desires growing out of
previous satisfying experiences on the other.
Acceptance of a biological frame of reference
leads to the positing of a number of in-
stincts or drives of which sex becomes the
central focus in the analysis of marriage.
This singling out of one inherent motivating
element is paralleled in “wish” analysis by
the placing of primary emphasis upon a
single need or desire as the wish for re-
sponse.

Emphasis upon a single motivational ele-
ment has raised the question of the ade-
quacy of any social psychological theory
based upon such a simple motivational
background. There has been no doubt some
gain in understanding the marriage rela-
tionship out of a realization of the transi-
tion from satisfactions derived from the
realization of institutional goals to affec-
tional and “response” goals, but the positing
of a single unit seems unduly limited. Never-
theless, social psychological theory has had
little more to offer until recently. The cur-
rent tendency upon the part of social psy-
chologists to recognize the social origin of
some needs, and the high degree of modifia-
bility of those which have an inherent
basis, promises more adequate classifications
of motivational elements of which several
units may become useful tools in marriage
analysis.* Whether the needs expounded by
Murray © will furnish the desired context is
of minor importance to the fact that the
marriage analyst must look to a more com-
plex series of socially derived motivational
units as a part of his social psychological
kit.

Closely allied to motivational analysis is
that of the understanding of personality.
Varieties of personality analysis have in
part arisen out of the isolation of psychology,
psychiatry, and sociology, the traditional
fields within which social psychological theo-
ries have been developed. More recently
anthropology has served as a catalyst in
fusing together the theories of the psycholo-
gist, the sociologist, and the psychiatrist.

The most typical approach to the analysis
of personality upon the part of psycholo-
gists is that of trait analysis. Trait analysis
is cross-sectional in approach and may op-
erate with either qualitative or measured
traits or characteristics. The classic example
of the application of this approach to the
analysis of marriage is that of Terman in
his contrast of unhappy wives with happy
wives and of unhappy husbands with happy
husbands.®

Psychiatry, dominated as it has been
by psychoanalysis, has approached the study
of personality longitudinally. In this respect
it has had much in common with the socio-
logical point of view, and yet there are a
number of clearly defined differences. In
the first place, psychoanalysis has tended
to use as the core of its analytical frame-
work the conception of the Oedipus com-
plex, explaining the attachment between
father and daughter and mother and son
in terms of the sex instinct, although sec-
ondarily recognizing the role of the cultural
heterosexual pattern.” This leads to the
interpretation of marriage relations in terms
of the patterns of displacement by which
through associational links other persons,
normally siblings and cousins of the oppo-
site sex, become the substitute for the parent,
with eventual selection of the marriage mate.
The implications of this are that marriage
represents a re-enactment of the parent-
child relationship; its successes and failures
reproducing those in the psychogenic de-
velopment of the personality.®

There has developed considerable contro-
versy with regard to the functioning of the
sex impulse and of incestuous desires in the
development of the Oedipus complex. Hatred
and hostility toward the parent of the
same sex is regarded as the consequence of
the conscious recognition of him as a com-
petitor for physical intimacy with the parent
of the opposite sex in the form of bodily
contacts, caresses, sleeping with, etc., and
of unconscious desires for incestuous rela-
tions. Fromm® has emphasized rebellion
against authority, instead of the operation of
the sex impulse, as basic to the hostility in
the Oedipus complex. What is more plausible
as an explanation is the operation of the
heterosexual pattern expressed in part in the
tendency of parents to show preference for
children of the opposite sex since such ex-
pressions are not only in accord with cul-
tural expectations but also because of the
tendency to identify the child of the opposite
sex with the spouse. Even in popular par-
lance it is the little boy who is Mama’s sweet-
heart, and Daddy is widely used to designate
the masculine lover.!° This recognition of
the cultural origin of the Oedipus relation-
ship has recently gained wide acceptance.

A further influence upon the understand-
ing of psychogenic conditioning is to be
found in what may be called positional dy-
namics, initiated and developed in part by
Adler in his “position-psychology.” Accord-
ing to Adler, the order of birth of the child
sets the stage for the development of the
style of life. The result has been the de-
velopment of a typology based upon the
four recurrent positions in birth order: the
oldest, middle, youngest, and only. These
four positions derive their dynamic qualities
out of the variations in competitive configu-
rations with reference to the parents, but also
(except for the only child) out of the fact
that the parents are not the same persons
with regard to emotional development, at-
tachments, social experiences and obligations
as each child is born. The significance of this
typology lies in the differentiation of roles
in the family constellation which provides
the initial context for the patterning of the
personality.!?

Psychoanalysis has also contributed an
understanding of the ways in which the in-
dividual meets the problems of adjustment
through the utilization of mental mecha-
nisms. Particularly useful in the under-
standing of personality functioning are the
mechanisms of rationalization, idealization,
introjection, repression, projection, reaction-
formation, displacement, transference, sub-
limation, identification and symbolization.
These the Freudians consider dynamisms in
that they represent devices by which the
personality unconsciously eliminates or re-
duces inner tensions.

In addition to the mechanisms, psycho-
analysis has contributed a number of con-
cepts in the understanding of the dynamics
of personality. One of these, the unconscious,
is of course crucial for psychoanalytic theory
since much, if not all, of the struggle between
the instinctual tendencies (the id) and the
internalization of cultural norms (the super-
ego) is resolved through the utilization of
the mechanisms already mentioned. This
struggle, for Horney and other neo-Freud-
ians, takes place instead between divergent
trends within the personality, of which the
earlier character structure plays an important
role somewhat comparable to Freud’s id,
but for Horney this structure is developed
in the early experiences of the individual
and not biologically determined as Freud
assumed.18

Other concepts of particular importance
are: regression, ambivalence, and fixation.
Of these three concepts, that of ambivalence
is probably the most significant. While
ambivalence refers to the existence and func-
tioning of contradictory emotional attitudes
toward the same object, the polarity of love
and hate is the most widely accepted and
the most useful in the understanding of
social interaction.

Sociologists have tended toward the ac-
ceptance of the distinction made by Park
between the individual and the person. Thus
the personality becomes defined in terms
of the role of the individual in the group.
This conception of personality has a natural
history beginning in part with the statement
by William James that the individual has
as many selves as there are persons who
recognize him and carry an image of him
in their minds. This same general notion was
further elaborated upon by Cooley, whose
“Jooking-glass self” provided the descriptive
formula for the development of the indi-
vidual’s conception of himself out of the
attitudes of others toward him. Mead car-
ried the analysis further through the distinc-
tion between the “I” and the “me” aspects
of self. In Mead’s conception the “me” as-
pect of self consists of the attitudes of
others in the community which have become
an essentially permanent part of the per-
sonality in the form of a generalized other.
The “I” aspect consists of the response of
the individual to the attitudes of the com-
munity as this response appears in his
experience, i.e. in memory.

The most significant element in the dis-
tinction between the “I” and the “me”
made by Mead is the recognition that role-
taking is more than an immediate response
to the defining gestures of others in whose
presence the response finds expression, but
that out of these elemental experiences of
role-taking the individual incorporates
within his personality the expectations of
others in the form of the generalized “other.”
Thus the classic conflict between the indi-
vidual and society is resolved into a conflict
between the “I” and the “me.” In this,
Mead is at one with the Freudian conception
of the conflict between the id and the
super-ego, with this difference: for Mead
the conflict is between the ego or “I” and
the “me,” whereas from the Freudian stand-
point the ego functions as a mediating
agency between the id and the super-ego.4

Whatever may be the basic differences
between the Meadian and Freudian con-
ceptions of the internalized conflict between
the several aspects of the self, both recog-
nize the individualized and generalized as-
pects of role-taking. What the Freudians fail
to recognize, and Mead left undeveloped, is
the notion of multiple patterns of role-taking
in response to the varied demands of the
groups in which the individual aspires to
membership. Conflict between the id and
the super-ego or between the “I” and the
“me” turns out to be conflict between the
roles developed in one group of which the
individual is a member and those developed
in another group or other groups.!®

The concept of role-taking as basic to
the idea of personality has been facilitated
by the work of the anthropologists. Out of
the recognition of cultural patterns has come
the realization that personalities within a
given cultural context tend to gravitate to
a relatively homogeneous type. Without at-
tempting to analyze the dynamics of person-
ality formation, Ruth Benedict developed the
typical types of personalities in each of four
pre-literate cultures toward which all per-
sons tended to gravitate within each of these
societies.1° Later, Kardiner and Linton under-
took to trace out the relationship of child-
hood experiences to personality traits in a
number of pre-literate groups.’’ The net
result has been to emphasize the significance
of role-taking upon the part of the indi-
vidual in response to the social expectations
which impinge upon him in terms of the
organizational systems which prevail in
every society of which age, sex, occupation,
and the family are universal. The character
of the expectations with reference to each
of these systems provides the framework
for the channeling of the responses of the
individual and determines the pattern of
personality.

Anthropology has also contributed to the
understanding of the role of culture in the
definition of some of the fundamental as-
pects of personality. Particularly important
in this connection are the contributions of
Margaret Mead to our understanding of
adolescent development as culturally condi-
tioned and the differentiation of sex roles
as a consequence of cultural definition rather
than of anatomical structure.!8

This brings us to a convergence of points
of view which may be defined somewhat as
follows: Social psychological analysis is
concerned with the understanding of person-
ality. Personality connotes a pattern of re-
sponses by which the biological individual
organism attempts to manipulate his environ-
ment in the interest of the satisfaction of
his needs. These needs are in part the deriva-
tives of the organic demands of the organism,
and in part the introjection of early group
experience. Both the derivatives of organic
demands and the needs structured by early
social relations are defined by cultural form-
ulas. Personality formation, therefore, con-
sists of role-taking in which the individual’s
satisfactions are channeled as well as his
needs in so far as these can be conceived of
as social rather than biological in origin. The
pattern of personality, accordingly, is the
functional relationship between the lines of
genesis of role-taking throughout the life
span of the individual.

In simpler societies, these lines of genesis
are relatively homogeneous for all individuals
within a society, as the work of recent an-
thropologists has made clear. In all socie-
ties the family of origin has played a critical
part in the definition of lines of genesis
as the mediator of culture, as the psycho-
analysts particularly have stressed. Modern
life introduces a multiplicity of cultural
definitions and of group memberships, as
sociologists have made clear. The result is
that the personality of an individual in
modern society is not a single line of genesis
but a series of intertwined lines of genesis
often both harmonic and discordant in
character. In other words, within each per-
sonality, as a counterpart to the pattern of
expectations of each of the associations by
which co-operative activities are carried on
in a society, there develops a co-ordination
of attitudes and behavior patterns through
which the individual achieves membership
and status. But since the associations are
multiple, the lines of genesis are multiple;
ie., the individual takes different roles, de-
pending upon the context of his desires for
achieving and maintaining membership and
status in the respective associations.

Not all of the associations are of equal
importance either in the life experiences of
the individual or those of the collectivity.
The associations, and in turn the lines of
genesis, take on a hierarchical arrangement,
partly as a reflection of the cultural pattern
and partly in response to the differential posi-
tion of many individuals within the cultural
context with reference to the contending
elements within the complex whole of modern
society. Nevertheless, the family tends fairly
uniformly to dominate the other associa-
tions in society and this is reflected in the
dominance of the line of genesis developed
in the family over the other lines. This in
part is the significance of the Freudian theory
of the super-ego. What the Freudians failed
to recognize, however, is that the super-ego
is the role of the individual developed in the
family. This role performs a policing func-
tion with reference to the roles developed in
the other associations to which the indi-
vidual belongs.

In any social psychology of marriage the
unique unity, the dynamic relationship be-
tween husband and wife, becomes the focal
point for analysis. The interplay of the
personality of each with the other was first
described in terms of wishes, attitudes, and
sentiments, which were thought to charac-
terize the personality and to constitute the
essential elements in the relation between
husband and wife. Adjustment, accordingly,
was a matter of concurrence and accommo-
dation between the wishes, attitudes and
sentiments of the two persons, but the ex-
planation of this concurrence and the re-
sultant behavior lies in the genesis of the
social-psychological elements constituting
the personality, since one sees in marriage
only the resultant behavior of a long inter-
actional process which begins almost with
the birth of the individual.1®

Studies of the processes of interaction
provide the conceptual framework for the
analysis of the dynamic relationship between
the characteristics of the personality in
terms of needs, behavior patterns, and psy-
chological mechanisms. These characteristics
have covered a wide range which may be
illustrated by such varied terms as: romantic
attitudes, personal adaptability, insight,
frustrations, economic standards, desire for
response.?°

In addition to the conceptualization of
the interactional units, processual analysis
also leads to the differentiation of areas or
levels of interaction. Thus appear such
terms as: sexual, response, cultural back-
ground, temperament, control techniques.
Such differentiations have in common the
assumption that the patterns of interaction
differ with reference to the fundamental
areas or levels within which interaction oc-
curs in terms of the motivational or attitudi-
nal organization of the married persons.”*

Much of the more recent research has
tended to revolve about the understanding
of personality of the marriage partners more
than the interactional patterns, although it
is obvious that the two can not be divorced
from each other and that, therefore, the dif-
ferences are matters of emphasis. Here two
somewhat independent lines of analysis have
developed, one emphasizing the traits of
personality as revealed by cross-sectional
analysis, and the other the genetic pattern
of personality.

Studies of success and failure in marriage
have tended to place greater emphasis upon
traits than upon lines of genesis. Thus such
personality characteristics as neurotic ten-
dencies, lack of self-confidence, critical and
inconsiderate attitude toward others, etc.,
make for unhappiness in marriage. Similarity
of cultural background has been found to
make for adjustment, and dissimilarity for
conflict. At first sight, such factors may seem
to have little relationship to personality since
the descriptive terminology is often situa-
tional rather than psychological, as may be
illustrated in rural versus urban residence
prior to marriage. Nevertheless, in the in-
terpretation of such situational elements it
becomes apparent that their significance lies
in their symbolization of variations in atti-
tudes upon the part of the two persons in-
volved in marriage interaction. Much the
same comment would hold for factors re-
garding social participation (e.g., level of
education, religious practices, number of
friends), economic status (e.g., occupational
class, savings prior to marriage, income
level), and sex (e.g., sex education, pre-
marital sexual experience, orgasm capacity
of the wife) .??

Factors relating to the affectional rela-
tionship discovered in studies of marriage
adjustment have tended to be related to the
genetic rather than the trait conception of
personality. Thus attachment and hostility
toward parents and siblings, and the relation-
ship of these attitudes, tend to be linked up
with the Freudian conception of the Oedipus
and Electra complexes which imply a genetic
pattern. Also the significance of the rela-
tionship between order of birth and marriage
success lies in the functioning of the genetic
pattern as symbolized by birth order.”
Studies of courtship add further clarification
of the role of the early affectional attach-
ments to dating and courtship experiences
and by projection to marriage adjustment.*4

In the area of marriage conflict, one
study has emphasized the relationship be-
tween the genetic development of personality
and the character of conflict in marriage.
Here the emphasis is upon the position and
role of the child in the family of origin as the
determining factor in the definition of per-
sonality and in turn the relationship of
this definition to the patterns of marriage
conflict.25> The corresponding analysis of
marriage accord is still to be made, but
enough is available to support the convic-
tion that the social psychology of marital
adjustment is concerned with personality
patterns rather than isolated traits and what
is significant is the personality in its totality;
that is, the whole of the life experiences of
the individual considered as a unity rooted
in the past and penetrating into the future as
determining factors in the development of
the marital adjustment pattern. Thus the
character of marriage adjustment is the re-
sultant of the convergence of two lines of
genesis of personality formation which either
because of their basic harmonic character
lead to successful marriage adjustment or
because of their fundamentally discordant
patterns eventuate in marriage failure.

All of this implies an organic conception
of marriage relations in which the affectional
experiences, needs and satisfactions consti-
tute a core of the life history of the individ-
ual. The continuity of the affectional pattern
has its counterpart in the coherency of the
adjustment to other social groups in the
struggle of the individual for need satisfac-
tions in harmony with definitions whose
essential character is most appropriately
described in terms of their genetic develop-
ment.

Thus the family social psychologist has
utilized a number of the theories and con-
cepts of psychoanalysis, but structured by a
cultural context and implemented by role
analysis in the dynamics of marriage inter-
action.

We have reviewed the development of the
social psychology of marriage both from the
standpoint of its theoretical framework and
research findings. There remains the task of
considering some of the salient methodologi-
cal problems and some of the areas where
research is urgently needed.

It is generally accepted that the goal of
science is the development of a conceptual
framework which may function as an imple-
ment in the prediction and control of phe-
nomena and that the avenue to the achieve-
ment of this goal is through research. In
what respects and to what degree has re-
search contributed to the achievement of
this goal in the area of the social psychology
of marriage?

Commenting upon a paper read by Cot-
trell at the annual meeting of the American
Sociological Society in December 1947,
Burgess had this to say: “Research at pres-
ent on marriage and the family is scattered
and sporadic. As a result our research find-
ings are relatively meager, not too reliable,
with big gaps in the area uncovered. . . .
Studies have been carried on by individuals
working independently on their projects with
only the tools of concepts and methods
available in their particular discipline.””?¢

It has been one of the objectives of this
paper to show how an integration of social
psychological theory is developing which
provides the conceptual framework for a
more comprehensive approach to research
in the field of marriage, the absence of which
Burgess implies is responsible in part for the
unsatisfactory character of present research.
The next step is to translate this integrated
theory into research practice through the
utilization of common procedures in order
to achieve comparability of data so that the
validity of interpretation and theory may be
more effectively tested.

But further developments of this con-
ceptual framework and through it the build-
ing of more comprehensive theories of mar-
riage dynamics depend upon a number of
achievements. First, there needs to be a
further clarification of theories and concepts
within the fields from which they originate.
Second, greater interdisciplinary integration
and clarification of differences in concepts
toward a consensus of definition and mean-
ing are needed. Thus the concept of “role”
is used widely in psychiatry, sociology, cul-
tural anthropology, psychosomatic medicine,
and psychology, and a consensus of defini-
tion which is gaining acceptance should con-
tribute toward a common frame of reference
for analysis and interpretation. Often, too,
there may exist basic similarities in theories,
but these are overshadowed by differences in
terminology. Thus it is thought by some that
terminology is responsible for the differentia-
tion of situationism from field theory, where-
as others would regard each as independent
points of view.?” Third, there is need of
greater utilization in the marriage field of
this synthesis of conceptual framework,
based upon what Burgess has called a multi-
disciplinary approach. For example, such a
unified point of view has quite as much to
offer to personality research as it has to
marriage research. We now have greater
unity than ever before in family oriented
personality theory (psychogenic determi-
nants of personality) but few if any studies
showing the behavioral patterns resulting
from types of marriage interaction. We have
much data on the effects of personality upon
marriage; little on the effects of marriage
upon personality. Thus, for example, a wife
rejected and intimidated and psychologically
beaten by her husband may develop an over-
anxiety pattern similar to that which a child
develops in parent-child relations where re-
jection occurs. Thus research in both of these
fields may yield empirical findings of equal
value to both students of personality and the
family.

In the past, each researcher in the field of
marriage has tended toward the role of an
empire builder improvising his theory in the
process, or using the seine or basket method
of collecting data in the hope that a portion
of what he caught would turn out to be use-
ful. More recently the trend has been toward
using single elements of widely-held theory
as hypotheses for rigorous testing within
circumscribed areas. Use of the basket
method of collecting data raises grave ques-
tions regarding the bias and selectivity of the
population which responds. Rigorous testing
of hypotheses within circumscribed areas
produce negative results unless the data
verify the hypothesis, since the structuring
of the research instrument must be such as
to preclude the evolving of new hypotheses,
otherwise it will fail as a potentially nullify-
ing device.

Another problem which confronts the re-
searcher is that of experimental control. De-
signing of direct experiments is confronted
with such obvious difficulties in the area of
marriage as to make elaborate discussion
fruitless. The nearest approach to experi-
mental control would seem to be limited to
what Chapin has called the cross-sectional
and ex post facto designs both of which
result in great losses in the size of the groups
studied as a consequence of the matching
process by which the control group is
constituted.?8

In the hope of achieving more satisfactory
control in the study of marital adjustment
we are experimenting with the twin-study
method in analyzing the marital adjustment
of twins. In the interest of comparability the
names of pairs of twins are being taken from
high school graduating classes in key cities
throughout the United States. These are be-
ing sent questionnaires made up of four
groups of questions dealing with background
data, early family experience, dating and
courtship experience, and personality. Thus
age is essentially homogeneous and each per-
son will be followed through a period of five
years and then a second five-year period
within which time many will have married.
Data will be obtained through both ques-
tionnaires and interviews, initially from the
twins and subsequently from those persons
they marry. Through the use of the twin-
study method we hope to achieve consider-
able control, in that identical twins growing
up in the same family would be assumed to
be as close together in psychogenic condi-
tioning as any two siblings could conceivably
be. Fraternal twins of the same sex would
constitute the next step in the continuum of
psychogenic conditioning, followed by fra-
ternals of different sexes who might be ex-
pected to differ from each other to a degree
approaching non-twins separated in age to
a minimum degree.

It is hoped that our findings will throw
light upon a number of areas and theories of
marriage dynamics. For example, what are
the criteria of mate selection which operate
in the choice of one twin as over against the
other? If the parental love image is the
determining factor in mate selection, then in
the marriage of an identical twin is the mar-
riage partner in love with both twins? Fur-
thermore, there seems to be evidence that
less dating experience in the case of twin
girls as compared with non-twin girls limits
the range of choice in mate selection. Do
these limited affectional contacts make for
unhappiness in marriage? Also, when the

28F, Stuart Chapin, Experimental Designs in
Sociological Research. New York, 1947.
marriage mate of a twin is thrown into
affectional rivalry with the other twin, does
he accept this because of the cultural defini-
tion of attachment (twins are supposed to be
more attached to each other than are other
siblings) or rebel against it in response to
denial of affectional needs?

A few findings from a pilot study on the
affectional relations of twins within the fam-
ily of origin are of interest. Rivalry and
jealousy for attention from the parents is
most pronounced between fraternal twins of
the same sex, intermediate for identical
twins, and least between fraternal twins of
opposite sexes. This suggests that children of
the same sex are most likely to experience
rivalry and jealousy for the attention of the
parents when differentiation between twins is
easily made, as it is between fraternals, and
when because of sex identity they desire
attention from the same parent.

A serious impediment to research in social
psychology of marriage is to be found in the
dearth of clinical materials in the form of
detailed microscopic studies of marriage.
The social psychologist has on the whole
been timid in his approach to first-hand and
intimate materials regarding marriage. In so
far as he has engaged in counseling, it has
been upon a relatively superficial basis and
has not yielded case studies comparable to
those of the psychiatrists in other areas. At
times it would almost seem that he has es-
caped the problem by engaging in contro-
versies regarding the virtues of directive
versus non-directive techniques until he has
immobilized himself from doing anything
more than the most casual type of inter-
view.”9

The scientific study of the social psy-
chology of marriage is rapidly converging
out of the contributions of a number of dis-
ciplines as we have pointed out. What are
some of the areas and problems which prom-
ise fruitful research from this synthesis of
point of view? Only a few of these can be
considered here.
1. Affectional Need-Satisfactions. We
should know more about the various affec-
tional interactional patterns the individual
passed through genetically from infancy,
through mid-childhood, adolescence, court-
ship, and marriage, to later maturity. Studies
of behavioral adjustments resulting from the
interaction of combinations of types of affec-
tional patterns in marriage also should yield
data of value. In connection with this whole
field of study, we need to know more about
the functioning of the basic emotions in-
volved in marriage interaction.°°

2. Dynamics of Mental Mechanisms in
Marriage. The study of the field of symbolic
and substitutive behavior as it operates in
marriage from both the interpersonal and
social-personal level would furnish more
comprehensive analysis of patterns of inter-
action and the role of affectional and other
need-satisfactions in marriage. These can be
most effectively studied clinically by the
family social psychiatrist.

3. Genetic Patterns of Family Relation-
ships. Study of the genetic pattern of parent-
child roles within the family and its correla-
tion with the genetic pattern of husband-
wife roles and the resultant interactional
pattern.

4. Factors in Marriage Adjustment. Valu-
able studies have been made in the area of
factors making for success and failure in
marriage, but we need to know how these
factors become dynamically transmitted into
those marital configurations which spell the
difference between success and failure in
marriage.

5. Cultural Orientation of Freudian The-
ory. A number of psychoanalytic theories
can be restated in terms of the cultural set-
ting through empirical findings such as is
now being done in the area of courtship.**

6. Testing Methodology. Wallin? has
studied volunteer subjects as a source of
sampling bias and similar studies could be

30 Jessie Bernard, op. cit., pp. 379-418 (discus-
sion on the theory of love).

81 Robert F. Winch, op. cit.

82 Paul Wallin, “Volunteer Subjects as Source of
Sampling Bias,” American Journal of Sociology, 54
(May 1949), 539-544,
made of paid subjects and of clinical groups.
Burgess and Wallin have tested the validity
of certain prediction techniques in a forth-
coming study.°? Interviewing techniques
likewise could well be subjected to testing
in which both experimental variations were
introduced and the results of one type of
technique checked against those of another.

7. The Social Psychology of Sex. We
know a great deal about the discrete ele-
ments of sexual experience, their frequency
and distribution, but there have been only a
few studies which throw light upon how sex
functions in either a social or marriage
interactional context.3+

8. Heterogamous Marriages. A neglected
area for research has been that of marriages
of persons of different religious faiths, differ-
ent races, wide social class differences, and
differences in age grade.

9. Factors in Success and Failure of Sec-
ond Marriages. Marriage adjustment studies
have been primarily concerned with first
marriages. Comparisons of first and second
marriages might well be expected to throw
into sharper relief many of the factors
thought to be of significance in success and
failure of marriage.

The convergence of social psychological
theory has provided us with a more adequate
conceptual framework for the analysis of
marriage. This convergence has grown out
of the realization that marriage behavior is
human behavior, the understanding of which
comes from not one but several provinces.
Is it not possible that conscious co-operation
in research between the several disciplines
responsible for this synthesis of analytical
framework may be the next step in expand-
ing the frontiers of scientific knowledge of
marriage?
