@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Ethic thesis to the United States has

two aspects that go far to explain its
attractiveness to many American sociologists.
On the one hand, the tracing of economic
attitudes and behavior to religious values
and beliefs is a nonobvious but intuitively
interesting linkage. As such, it seems to pro-
vide a persuasive instance where sociology
has developed insights that are not apparent
to the layman. At the same time, the primary
application of the hypothesis to the United
States makes this more than a purely theo-
retical exercise. The division of the American
population into one quarter Catholic and
three quarters Protestant, it is argued, must
be taken into account if we are to understand
such nonreligious features of American life
as its stratification and mobility system, eco-
nomic organization, and socialization prac-
tices.

The single, most influential writing on
the Protestant Ethic hypothesis is probably
Gerhard Lenski’s The Religious Factor
(1963).1 As a widely available and forcefully

Te application of Weber’s Protestant

* This investigation was carried out through the
University of Michigan’s Detroit Area Study. I am
indebted to Edward O. Laumann with whom I col-
laborated in designing the 1966 Detroit Area Study.
Many of the specific problems involved in replica-
tion and reanalysis were solved by James House
and Paula Pelletier, who worked as research as-
sistants on this part of the project. Gerhard Lenski
kindly furnished advice on use of certain codes
from his 1958 study.

1The 1963 Anchor edition is not simply a reprint
of the original 1961 Doubleday edition but contains
important changes in analysis and writing. All ref-
erences in this paper will be to the 1963 edition.
written book, Lenski’s work has been fre-
quently cited.2 No doubt a major reason for
its impact is that it reports strikingly posi-
tive findings and concludes that the Protes-
tant Ethic thesis is relevant to contemporary
America, that Protestant-Catholic differences
in secular attitudes are both large and mani-
fold (more so in fact than class differences),
and that these indirect effects of religion in
America seem to be on the increase rather
than the decrease. One other characteristic
of Lenski’s work that distinguishes it from
most other efforts in this area is its concern
to measure social psychological attitudes and
values that intervene between religious iden-
tification and larger macro-social processes
such as occupational mobility.®

Despite its intriguing nature, the Amer-
icanized version of the Protestant Ethic
thesis, and more specifically Lenski’s con-
clusions, have met with some criticism. At

2 For example, the article on “The Sociology of
Religion” in the new and highly regarded Interna-
tional Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1969,
Volume 13, p. 412) describes The Religious Factor
as “perhaps the most successful attempt to apply
survey research to the sociology of religion,” and
briefly notes the positive findings of the book.

3 Most other work on this topic investigate only
the general connection between religious membership
and socioeconomic variables such as income. See
Glenn and Hyland (1967), which includes a fairly
complete set of references to earlier studies. For
more recent analyses emphasizing socioeconomic
status, see Glockel (1969) and Warren (1970).
Featherman (1969) provides one of the few analyses
(other than Lenski’s) which include intervening so-
cial psychological variables, though the intervention
in this case is between different points in the
achievement process for adults.
the theoretical level, questions have been
raised as to whether Weber really intended
to argue that the Protestant Ethic was an
important cause of the rise of capitalism,
and, even if so, whether he expected the
Protestant-Catholic distinction to continue
to lead to similar economic differences in the
twentieth century.* More practical questions
have focused on whether such gross cate-
gories as “Catholic” and “Protestant” are
analytically useful in the United States,
since there are important ethnic lines within
American Catholicism and both ethnic and
denominational differences among American
Protestants. Finally, at the empirical level
enough contradictory findings have appeared
to raise some doubts about the reliability of
the positive findings reported in The Re-
ligious Factor (see especially Greely, 1964).

The present paper will not attempt to deal
with the first type of question, but will as-
sume that whatever Weber may have in-
tended, it is not unreasonable to determine
whether there are Protestant-Catholic differ-
ences in beliefs and values relevant to eco-
nomic advancement. We will deal briefly at
one point with the second type of question
on ethnic and denominational differences
within the major religions, but that is also
not our primary focus. The analysis and
findings described here are mainly relevant
to the third question, namely, the reliability,
and therefore validity, of reported Protes-
tant-Catholic differences, using Lenski’s

4The wide disagreements on this point indicate
that The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capi-
talism (Weber, 1930) can be read in different ways.
I myself see Weber’s citation of religious differences
in education and business (pp. 38-40) as suggesting
continuation into the twentieth century of Protes-
tant-Catholic differences in secular values. That
Weber, as a careful scholar, emphasized the com-
plexity of any causal analysis of capitalism does not
mean that he lacked a bold thesis himself. In any
case, the impact of Weber’s writing on the Protes-
tant Ethic has certainly been largely based on this
thesis, whether or not Weber himself would today
subscribe to it.

5 Glock and Stark (1965) have particularly em-
phasized denominational differences within Pro-
testantism. Their dependent variables, however, are
religious and moral values closely tied to the origins
of American denominations, and they do not deal
with values linked to the Protestant Ethic hypothe-
sis. See Warren (1970) for a careful analysis of de-
nominational differences in education, occupation,
and income. An original review of The Religious
Factor (Rosen, 1962) questioned the lack of atten-
tion to ethnic differences.
earlier results as the focus of investigation.
More simply, we shall present results from
both a replication and a reanalysis of Len-
ski’s findings, with a review along the ways
of the original findings themselves.

Lenski’s research was carried out in 1958
within the framework of the Detroit Area
Study, a continuing survey research and
training unit of the University of Michigan.
It was appropriate that in 1966 the Detroit
Area Study included as part of another re-
search effort an attempt to replicate and ex-
tend certain small but important aspects of
the investigation reported in The Religious
Factor. However, the replication was by no
means complete and exact, and several limi-
tations must be stressed at the outset.

First, almost the entire focus of the 1966
replication was on the Weberian hypothesis
developed and tested by Lenski in Chapter
3 (“Religion and Economics”) of his book.
The book deals with several other topics,
such as “Religion and Politics,” which are
not relevant at all here, and with still other
topics such as “Religion and Family Life,”
that are relevant but are tested only slightly,
if at all, by the present data.

Second, this replication began more as an
“extension” than as a simple replication. We
hoped to duplicate Lenski’s results and then
to carry out—more carefully than his sample
and techniques allowed—several further
analyses, for example, on the relevance of
ethnicity to religious differences. We did not,
therefore, repeat quite all the questions
needed for a full replication even of the eco-
nomic aspect of the 1958 DAS survey, and
we did not attempt seriously to follow his
exact ordering of questions.

Third, replication is not a simple concept
and can obviously never be carried out per-
fectly.6 Apart from sampling error, which
can be estimated, and real changes over time,

6 The term “replication” is used here to refer to
the deliberate repetition at a later point in time of
part or all of a completed piece of research in order
to determine whether the same results obtain. This
usage is related to but not the same as that com-
mon to experimental designs (Fisher, 1951:58-60).
A helpful discussion of the present usage appears in
Lykken (1968). The type of replication used here
would probably be termed “operational replication”
by Lykken, as opposed to “constructive replication,”
which does not attempt to duplicate the research
procedures of the original investigation but rather
to operationalize the relevant constructs in other
ways.
Both the 1958 and 1966 data are based on
samples from the metropolitan Detroit popu-
lation—city and surrounding suburbs. The
Detroit SMSA defined by the Bureau of the
Census actually consists of three counties,
but in both 1958 and 1966 thinly populated
outlying parts of the counties (plus the city
of Pontiac) were not included in the survey
sample boundaries, primarily to reduce time
and costs.7 The sample area was defined to
be somewhat larger in 1966 than in 1958 in
order to accommodate expansion of actual
suburban areas, but the percentage of the
total SMSA population included in the total
sample area was quite similar for the two
years: 87% in 1958 and 85% in 1966. Sub-
urban towns that had experienced recent
growth were all included in the 1966 boun-
daries, and it does not appear likely that im-
portant parts of the “1958 population” had
moved beyond the 1966 boundaries, Thus,
we regard the total populations available for
the two studies as essentially the same, ex-
cept for whatever long-distance migration

7 Information on the 1956 sampling was obtained
from Lenski (1963:16-17) and from “Sampling De-
sign for the 1957-58 Detroit Area Study” (1959).
Neither of the above sources specified the lower age
limit for the 1956 sample, referring simply to
“adults.” The lower cut-off of 21 mentioned below
is found in the “Interviewer’s Instruction Booklet”
for the 1957-58 study. Information on the 1966
sampling appears in Schuman (1967).
may have taken place between the Detroit
SMSA and the rest of the United States
during the intervening eight years.

Although the geographically defined popu-
lations were essentially the same for the two
studies, the 1966 survey screened out parts
of the general population that were included
in 1958. We need to indicate the likely effect
of this differential screening on comparisons
between the two sets of results.

The sample used in 1958 involved essen-
tially a cross section selection of occupied
dwelling units from the geographic area
described above. Within each dwelling unit,
all persons age 21 and over were listed and
one was selected at random for interview.
No type of household appears to have been
screened out. Of the 750 households selected
for interview, 656 resulted in complete inter-
views—a response rate of 87%.

The sample in 1966 drew a cross section
of occupied dwelling units, but considered
eligible for random selection within house-
hold, only white males, ages 21 through 64,
born in the United States or Canada. A
total of 1,013 cases were obtained, with a
response rate of 80%.® Each of the screen-
ing factors requires brief consideration. In-
cluded in parentheses is the number of cases
that were excluded from the sample as or-
iginally drawn because of the criterion dis-
cussed.
Lenski’s 1958 results. One of his most strik-
ing conclusions is that differences be-
tween “socio-religious groups” are generally
heightened when third generation Americans
are studied separately.

. Exclusion of Women (N=268) and of
Native-Born Men over 65 (N=92): In the
chapter directly replicated by the 1966
study, certain of the tables are confined to
men, and others include both sexes. There
is no indication that results differ by sex
where questions are relevant to both sexes.
The same applies to age, except that the
finding reported above on third generation
effects suggests that Protestant-Catholic
differences may well increase among younger
people. Nonetheless, possible specification
by age or sex must be allowed for and will
be discussed below after presentation of
major results.

. Differences in response rates: The difference
between the response rates for the two
years is partly a function of the restriction
of the 1966 sample to working age males—
a particularly difficult category to reach.
It may also reflect the general downward
trend of response rates reported in most
studies over the past two decades. Insofar
as the latter is the case, the difference may
reduce comparability between the obtained
samples for the two years. While there is
no particular reason to expect such an ef-
fect, especially given the relatively small
percentage difference, the possibility cannot
be ruled out. It provides a good example
of the difficulty of achieving “literal repli-
cation” (Lykken, 1968).
The 1958 survey asked men and working
women to answer for themselves, and wives
to answer in terms of what they would want
in their husbands’ job; the 1966 survey, as
mentioned earlier, did not include women.

Lenski considers the 5th alternative the
one best representing the “Protestant Ethic”
as conceived by Weber, the 4th also a par-
tial indicator of the Ethic, and the Ist a
popular but questionable approach to oper-
ationalizing the same construct. The 3rd
alternative, and to a lesser extent the 2nd,
are regarded as “completely in opposition to
any conception of the Protestant Ethic”
(Lenski, 1963:87).

Lenski notes “how strong a hold the Prot-
estant Ethic, in the classical sense, has on all
segments of the American population”:
nearly half of the 1958 sample ranked the
5th alternative highest, and two-thirds se-
lected either the 5th or the 4th alternative.
Our results in 1966 are almost identical,
with 47% of the sample making the 5th
alternative first choice, and another 27%
selecting the 4th alternative.

Turning to differences by religion, Lenski
reports that the following percentages of the
three religious groups rank first the “classic
Protestant Ethic” alternative (“the work is
important and gives a feeling of accomplish-
ment”): 2° Protestants, 52%; Jews, 48%;
Catholics, 44%. The difference of 8 percent-
age points between Protestants and Catholics
is not great, but it meets the .10 level of
significance (one-tailed) used in The Re-
ligious Factor. The small Jewish subsample
does not differ significantly (p>.10, one-
tailed) from either of the other categories.
Lenski also notes, without presenting data,
that “application of controls for class posi-
tion of respondents and of their parents, and
for the education of respondents . . . revealed
that the differences between white Protes-
tants on the one hand and Jews and Catholics
on the other are greater among the better
educated and in the middle classes than
among the less well educated and the work-
ing classes.” (Lenski, 1963:91).

On the other hand, Lenski finds that Jews
and Catholics are high on alternatives 1 and
4 which refer to chances for advancement
and high income. He reports only the per-
centage for the two alternatives combined
and without controls: 11 Jews, 45%; Cath-
olics, 40%; Protestants, 31%. This differ-
ence confirms Lenski’s belief that there are
two somewhat separate though related sys-
tems of work values which deserve to be
distinguished. Protestants tend to be higher
on the “classic” Protestant Ethic, while Jews
and Catholics are higher on the more con-
temporary version. Finally, Lenski notes that
all the reported differences are small and
cannot account for the major part of the
relative economic success of Protestants and

10Tt is not completely clear that totals for re-
ligious groups were used, but absence of qualifica-
tions makes this likely. Here as elsewhere in this
paper, Lenski’s fourth “socio-religious” category of
Negro Protestants is omitted; all respondents in-
cluded in the three categories shown are white.

11 This assumes that each percentage stands for
first choice of one alternative or the other—an
assumption implied but not explicit (Lenski 1963:
91). The percentages here, it should be noted, are
largely determined by the preceding set, but the
determination is not complete since there were two
other possible response categories to the question.
Jews as against Catholics. Perhaps for this
reason, he does not include results for this
question in his summary table comparing the
size of differences by religion with the size
of differences by social class (Lenski, 1963:
326).

Our own findings on this question are re-
ported in Table 1. The results successfully
replicate Lenski’s work in part. A somewhat
greater proportion of Protestants than Cath-
olics give first rank to the sense of accom-
plishment and worth of work. The difference
of 5 percentage points between the two
groups would not be significant for Lenski’s
sample sizes, but just makes the 10% level
of significance (one-tailed) for our larger
subsamples. There is also a trend for Cath-
olics to be higher (by 4 percentage points)
than Protestants on first choice given to in-
come or chances for advancement. Lenski’s
finding that Jews were highest on first choice
of advancement or income, and Protestants
lowest, does not hold up well. The differences
are slight and Jews are actually lowest on
these combined responses (and highest on
the “classical” Protestant Ethic response).

As noted above, Lenski reports, but does
not present, data showing that the religious
factor operates more strongly among the
middle-class and better educated. We have
created social class (occupation and income)
and educational controls as close as possible
to those generally used by Lenski.1? Com-
parisons between Protestants and Catholics
within class and educational categories for
the work-values question are shown in Table
2. (There are too few Jews to allow for such
controls.) Our results bear out the 1958
finding that differences between Protestants
and Catholics are primarily located within
the upper stratum. Among the upper-middle
class and the college-educated, Protestant-
Catholic differences increase slightly over
that found for the total samples, while only
small, though consistent, differences occur

12 The social class and educational criteria used
in the two surveys and the resulting distributions
are shown below, with cases omitted where classi-
ficatory information is lacking:
The 1966 study used the same occupational group-
ings as Lenski, but raised the cutting point for
income by $2,000 to take account of changes in
income level between 1958 and 1964. Partly as a
result of this change, the 1966 “social class” dis-
tribution is somewhat different from Lenski’s. There
is also a slight difference in occupational distribu-
tions as such, since Lenski’s combined middle-class
categories account for 43%, as against 47% for
the 1966 sample. This may represent a change in
the Detroit occupational structure, but may simply
be a result of sampling error plus the 1966 exclu-
working at some job. But others say that
they would be a lot happier if they didn’t
have to work and could take life easy. How
do you feel about this? Why is that?” Re-
spondents were then coded into one of three
general categories: 1. a completely positive
attitude toward work, which emphasizes its
intrinsic rewards or its moral character; 2.
a neutral attitude, which involves a prefer-
ence for working, but one based on extrinsic
factors, such as boredom with too much
leisure; 3. a negative attitude, which in-
volves a frank assertion by the respondent
that he would be happier if he did not have
to work,

The 1958 survey found the following per-
centages of males in each religious group
expressing a positive attitude toward work:
Jews, 42%; Protestants, 30%; Catholics,
23%. The difference between Protestants
and Catholics here is significant at the .10
level, according to the table Lenski provides
(1963:372). He also reports that controls
for generation, region of birth, and class
show Protestant-Catholic differences to be
on the increase rather than on the decrease.
“Catholics who were northern born, third-
generation Americans were much more likely
to have a negative attitude toward work than
were first- and second-generation immigrants
(36% vs. 14%)” (p. 90). The opposite trend
occurred among Protestants for positive at-
titudes toward work (30% vs. 24%). More-
over, positive attitudes toward work were
directly correlated with social class for Prot-
estants, but the correlation was inverse for
Catholics (see Lenski, 1963:98, Table 10).
Lenski interprets this to mean that Protes-
tants take a more positive attitude toward
more demanding and rewarding positions,
while Catholics show a more positive attitude
toward positions that are less demanding
and hence less rewarding. None of the above
controls are applied to Jews because of small
sample sizes, and there is no comment on
the largest percentage differences in 1958
for the question, those between Jews and
both Protestants and Catholics.

Our own findings on this question are
shown in Table 3, alongside Lenski’s results
where these were reported in detail. The
value of placing results from both years
together is to allow direct comparisons of
trends in subgroup differences. Absolute per-
cents for any given subgroup should not be
compared, however, since as explained earlier
the 1958 survey included parts of the popu-
lation excluded in 1966. For the present
question, the populations are somewhat closer
than usual, since Lenski presents these data
also only for males, but there are still differ-
ences by age and birth place.

Our results do not replicate those of
Lenski’s with regard to Protestant-Catholic
differences. We find only a trivial and unre-
liable difference on this question for the two
religious groups as a whole, When genera-
tion is introduced as a third variable, we
find slight and probably unreliable effects
opposite to those reported by Lenski. When
social class is introduced as a third variable,
there is little variation of any kind in nega-
tive attitudes toward work. There is a ten-
dency for positive attitudes to increase with
Lenski's Findings

T

1966 Findings

 

 

 

 

 

Religious Group Pos. Neut. Neg. N Pos. Neut. Neg. N
Protestants 30% (not separated) (-) 32% 585 11% (481)
Catholics: 23. (not separated) (-) 33 5S 12 (421)
Jews 42 (not separated) (-) 34 55 10 (29)
By Generation:
Protestant,
3rd Gen. or 30% (not separated) (40) 33% 54% 14% (259)
More
Protestant,
2nd Gen. or 24 (not separated) (37) 36 56 8 (125)
Less
Catholic,
3rd Gen. or (not separated) 36 (22) 32 57 11 (190)
More
Catholic,
2nd Gen. or (not separated) 14 (69) 35 52 14 (219)
Less
By Class:
Protestant:
Upper
Middle 36% 52% 12% (25) 46% 46% 9% (145)
Lower
Middle 32 $7 11 (19) 26 64 10 (84)
Upper
Working 23 56 21 (39) 28 59 12 (172)
Lower
Working 30 33 37 (27) 22 68 10 (78)
Catholic:
Upper
Middle 19 56 25 (16) 39 53 8 (95)
Lower
Middle 18 57 25 (28) 34 57 9 (88)
Upper
Working 18 64 18 (38) 30 56 15 (171)
Lower
Working 33 48 19 (21) 30 $5 15 (66)
36% $2% 12% (25)

32 57 11 (19)
23 56 21 (39)
30 33 37 (27)
19 56 25 (16)
18 57 25 (28)
18 64 18 (38)

33 48 19 (21)
Shifting from attitudes toward work to
values about consumption, Lenski “inquired
into the manner in which families use their
income.” One question concerned installment
buying: Changing the subject a bit, do you
think it’s a good idea or a bad idea to buy
things on the installment plan? Lenski re-
ports 46% of his total sample in favor of
installment buying, 38% against, with the
balance not decided. In 1966 we find 47%
for, 50% against, and 3% other. The differ-
ences here are not great and could easily
result from differences in sample design (e.g.,
Negroes included in 1958 but not in 1966),
changes over time, or a combination of
sampling error and format variation.1%

Lenski reports the following percents by
religious groups in terms of disapproval of
installment buying: Jews, 56%; Protestants,
44%; Catholics, 40%. The Protestant-Cath-
olic difference is not reliable even at the .10
level (one-tailed), but Lenski does find the
same interaction with generation reported
earlier: Catholics closer to immigrant status
(1st and 2nd generation) are more disap-
proving of installment buying than are
Catholics in or beyond the third generation;
the opposite is true among Protestants. Table
4 presents the 1958 findings, along with com-
parable percentages from the present study.

13This question was included at the end of a
five-minute attitude form which the respondent
filled out himself mid-way in the hour interview.
The form was completed entirely within the larger
interview and does not result in loss of respondents;
such a procedure was used primarily to allow ob-
servations of the house to be made by the inter-
viewer for purposes unconnected with the present
replication. The 1958 and 1966 questions were
worded identically, but the 1958 version included
an interview box for “unsure” if volunteered; the
1966 item did not offer such a choice explicitly.
This latter minor difference in format occurs also
for the “attitude toward work” question discussed
earlier.
Our overall findings by religion show even
less of a Protestant-Catholic difference than
the small one reported by Lenski. We also
found a reversal for Jews, with the latter
less rather than more disapproving of in-
stallment buying than the other two groups.
This was such a puzzling finding that it led
us to check our entire coding procedure for
the question, but a count based on the
original 29 raw questionnaires for the sub-
sample of Jews confirmed the finding already
reported.1+

14 A control for occupation shows that this favor-
ability toward installment buying is much stronger
among Jewish businessmen (7 of 9 favoring) than
The Religious Factor presents the results
for several relevant attitude questions which
we did not attempt to replicate exactly in
the 1966 study. Lenski’s findings on these
questions will be briefly reviewed, with our
reason for omitting the question or the re-
sults of modifying it also noted.

(a) Belief in the Possibility of Success:
Lenski asked two questions designed to de-
termine whether a respondent believed it is
possible to rise from the working-class to
the middle-class and whether he believed
that ability rather than family connections
makes for success. He reports that with class
held constant (dichotomized into Middle-
class vs. Working-class), over 10% more
Protestants than Catholics hold such beliefs.
We did not attempt to replicate these ques-
tions because we could not see a clear con-
nection between them and Weber’s central
focus on the Protestant Ethic. As Lenski
himself had earlier stressed, the concern with
work that supposedly developed out of early
Protestant views had to do not with the
striving after extrinsic success, but with posi-
tive satisfaction in pursuing one’s vocation
in this world.

(b) Divine Concern with Economic Striv-
ing: A somewhat more relevant question
seemed to be one that asked whether “God

 

among Jewish professionals (4 of 11). We suspect
that this question may be ambiguous to some
businessmen, and that they may interpret it as
indicating favorability toward allowing installment
buying by customers, rather than in terms of per-
sonal preference.
is more pleased when people try to get ahead,
or when people are satisfied with what they
have and don’t try to push ahead.” But
Lenski found only a five percentage points
difference between Protestants and Catholics
on this question, though in the “right direc-
tion.” He also reports that the question was
difficult for respondents to answer and that
many tried to avoid the forced choice. For
these reasons, the question was not included
in the 1966 study.

(c) Use of Leisure Time: In another
chapter of The Religious Factor, Lenski re-
ports data from an earlier (1953) Detroit
Area Study, which shows a trend for Protes-
tants to say they would use extra leisure
time productively (e.g., social service work,
reading, gardening) rather than indulgently
(e.g., loafing, going to movies, shopping).
This seems to be directly relevant to Weber’s
conception of a puritan work ethic, and we
included the following similar (although not
identical) question in our study immediately
after the question on whether the respondent
would be happier working or not working:
“Suppose you did have a lot of free time.
What would you most like to do with it?”
Responses were coded into two basic cate-
gories of “Productive” (mainly self-improve-
ment in content) and “Indulgent” (mainly
casual social contacts, sports, and recrea-
tion). Differences by religion in 1966 are
shown below:
Protestants (28%) than Catholics (19%)
gave more than one reason for saving. We
did not find this numerical result as pertinent
to the thrift argument as other questions,
and therefore did not attempt to repeat the
long series of inquiries used to obtain it.

(e) Follow-up to Installment Buying:
After the question on installment buying re-
ported earlier, the 1958 study asked: “Why
do you feel this way?” Lenski reports that
in explaining their disapproval, Protestants
more often cited moral reasons than Catho-
lics: 30% of the working-class Protestants,
as against 18% of the working-class Cath-
olics. Figures for middle-class respondents
are not given, but by implication are less
clear. Of the additional attitude questions
treated in this section, this is the only one
which seems both directly relevant to the
main argument and somewhat promising in
terms of reported results. It is unfortunate
that we were not able to include it in the
1966 study.
work as a necessary evil and emphasize secu-
rity rather than achievement. The Benjamin
Franklins of today should presumably be
men who wish to escape from the union rank
and file, not contribute to its solidarity.

Lenski focuses on the lower middle class
(clerks and salesmen) as the place in the
social structure where union membership is
possible but not taken for granted. He finds
that 38% of the Catholics in the middle
class (N= 27) belong to unions, while only
15% of the middle class Protestants (N = 33)
have such membership. (No difference ap-
pears among working class men.) Our results
do not replicate the white collar difference:
among clerical and sales workers we find
that 23% of the Protestants (N=66) and
23% of the Catholics (N=49) belong to
unions.

The 1958 study did not include other ques-
tions on union involvement. But Lenski re-
fers to other surveys done through the De-
troit Area Study and elsewhere which show
Protestant-Catholic differences. He cites the
1952 Detroit Area Study data showing that
Protestant union members attend union
meetings less often than Catholics and also
say they are less “interested” in their union
than Catholics. We did not repeat either of
these questions exactly, but we did ask union
members whether they felt “very involved”
or “not very involved” in their union. Ex-
actly 28% of the union members (177 Prot-
estant union members, 166 Catholics) of
each religious group claimed to be “very
involved.” A control for occupational level
did not change this indication of no differ-
Respondent's Father's Occupation

Occupational Middle Upper Working Lower Working Farmer

Cath. Cath. Prot. Cath.

         
 
 

Prot. Prot. Cath. Prot.

   

Level

     

Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Upper Working

Lower Working

 

Total

N
earlier results only with regard to Jews. As
Table 5 shows, we find no difference at all
between Protestants and Catholics on this
measure.

(c) Budgeting: Lenski was interested in
discovering whether Protestants were more
likely than Catholics to budget family ex-
penditures. He found, however, no difference
between the two religious groups on this
question, and we therefore did not attempt to
replicate the question.

(d) Vertical Mobility: We have saved
until last the question of “vertical mobility,”
which Lenski treats first. Although it is obvi-
ously important to discover such differences
if they exist, their origin is bound to be
ambiguous. Even given the same attitudes
and values, groups starting from different
points will end at different points.

Lenski reports on the conflicting evidence
in this area, and then presents data (p. 85)
from the 1958 study showing greater Protes-
tant than Catholic intergenerational mobility
among white males. His data are not un-
ambiguous, and this is an area where there
is a fair amount of replication, often with
larger national samples and using more re-
cent analytic techniques.1> Nevertheless, we
A problem with comparisons of “Protes-
tants” and “Catholics” is the vague and
omnibus nature of such labels. For one thing,
“Protestant” covers many different denomi-
nations and sects in America, and Weber was
at pains to detail differences as well as sim-
ilarities among these. In addition, within re-
ligious groups, individuals differ widely in
the depth of their involvement, and if indeed
it is religion that is a source of attitudes and
values, we might expect these variations in
involvement to lead to variations in adher-
ence to the “Protestant Ethic.”

Lenski handles the first problem by argu-
ing that “denominational groupings within
Detroit Protestantism no longer consti-
tute self-contained socio-religious groups”
(1963:21). He notes that his 1958 data show
large “amounts” of marriage and friendship
across denomination lines, and that half the
Protestant respondents were in favor of de-
nominational mergers. Most significantly, he
reports that dependent variables in his data
show few differences by denomination that
are not simply accounted for by class posi-
tion or regional background (1963:396-
398).

Our own larger sample allows a somewhat
more adequate analysis of denominational
effects, and shows them to be about as im-
pressive as simple Protestant-Catholic differ-
ences. Using only the four denominations on
which we have at least 75 respondents, and
employing the Work Values question dis-
cussed earlier, we obtain the results shown
in Table 7. Even with controls for three
indicators of socioeconomic status, five of the
six between-denomination comparisons are as
large as the original Protestant-Catholic dif-
ference we reported in Table 1, and four of
the six are as large as the Protestant-Catholic
difference reported for this question in The
Religious Factor. It is not clear that the
ordering of denominations is what a careful
reader of Weber would anticipate, since
the more “Calvinistic” Presbyterians score
closest to the Catholics, while the Lutherans
are unexpectedly high in giving the classic
Protestant Ethic response. However, it does
appear that “Protestants” constitute a rather
heterogeneous category, and that at the very
least we must expect responses for that cate-
gory to vary depending on the varying pro-
portions of these denominations in different
parts of the United States.1¢

16 We also attempted to learn to what extent a
control for ethnicity affected the Protestant-Catholic
difference reported in Table 1. We included our
three religious groups (Protestants, Catholics, Jews)
and also eight nationality groupings (based on a
question about “What nationality background do
you think of yourself as having—that is, besides
being an American?”) as predictors in a single
Let us turn now to individual differences
in personal involvement in religion. Lenski
deals with the important issue of depth of
commitment by constructing one index of
“associational involvement” in the church as
a formal organization, and another index of
“communal involvement” in the informal but
encompassing subcommunity of co-religion-
ists. The former is operationalized by fre-
quency of attendance at church services, the
latter by the degree to which primary rela-
tionships are limited to members of the same
religion. (See Lenski, 1963:23, for details of
index construction.) He shows that the two
indices are only slightly related to each
other, hence can usefully be treated as sepa-
rate measures.

Although Lenski makes a convincing case
for the general importance of “communal
involvement” as a vehicle for religious influ-
ence, it turns out that the index does not
distinguish within religious groups in terms
of economic attitudes and behaviors. He con-
cludes that “the churches, rather than the
sub-communities, are the primary source of
the differences in economic behavior” be-
tween Protestants and Catholics (pp. 124-
125).

As the above quotations suggest, associa-
tional involvement does appear to be an im-
portant specifying variable for the 1958 data.
In most of the questions where comparisons
were possible, frequency of church atten-
dance among Protestants was positively asso-
ciated with the Weberian “spirit of capital-
ism.” There was no, or even a slight, negative
relationship for the same variables among
Catholics. The quantitative results for each
question are not presented by Lenski in
tabular form, but most of the questions which
are reported to show the relationship in-
volve social positions (e.g., self-employment)
rather than values or attitudes. In particular,
neither the question on what is valued about

 

multiple classification analysis. With nationality
controlled, the original five point percentage dif-
ference between Protestants and Catholics on the
Work Values question is halved. Thus ethnicity
does seem to be a relevant variable, as Rosen
(1962) and others have argued. Both ethnic and
denominational effects are much slighter when the
dependent variable shifts to the “attitudes toward
work” question. Apparently the latter variable is
simply not a useful one in this study, for as we
saw earlier it fails to show any significant relation
to religion,
work, nor positive attitudes toward work as
against leisure, showed any relation in 1958
to degree of associational involvement. This
lack of a relation is not treated by Lenski
as a negative finding concerning the influ-
ence of the religious factor on economic be-
havior, but rather as a sign that “the Protes-
tant churches have allowed the doctrine of
the calling to be neglected.”

Our own findings, reported in Table 8,
differ considerably from Lenski’s, insofar as
comparisons can be made.

1. Lenski reports that the “work values”
question showed little relation to associa-
tional involvement; we find a consistent
trend for the more actively involved among
both Protestants and Catholics to say that
the significance of the work is their main
concern in choosing a job. This may simply
reflect uncontrolled variations within crude
class categories that are related to associa-
tional involvement.

2. For attitudes toward work, we find a
relation that Lenski apparently expected:
positive attitudes going with frequent church
attendance among Protestants but not among
Catholics. However, Lenski’s own findings
appear to have been in the opposite direction.

3. Lenski finds both occupational self-
employment and disapproval of installment
buying greater among more actively involved
Protestants. We find weak trends in the op-
posite direction for both religious groups.

4. Lenski reports that both membership
and interest in unions are least among active
Protestant church-goers. We find opposite
trends.

More generally we find little systematic or
meaningful difference in the effect of associa-
tional involvement on Protestants and Catho-
lics. We have not been able to attempt repli-
cation of certain questions used by Lenski
in this analysis because they were not in-
cluded in the 1966 survey, but the results
we can check are not encouraging.

Lenski reports several other ways in which
some of the dependent variables under dis-
cussion seem to be influenced by type of
religious commitment. For example, he finds
that a “devotional” orientation, as indicated
by personal prayer and concern to determine
God’s will when making decisions, is posi-
tively associated with a commitment to work.
But in this instance, as elsewhere in these
“Protestant Protestants Catholics

Ethic" Middle Class Working Class | Middle Class Working Class

Response

     
   

Active Marg. Active Marg. Active Marg. Active Marg.

 

          

(79) (154) (58) (201) (144) (37) (155) (85)

Intrinsic work val-

       
 
  

      
      
       
    
   

uation in job choice 67% 43% 38% S4% 43% 42% 29%

Positive attitude

toward work 43 32 37 38 31 29

Disapproves of in-

stallment buying 43 46 46 48 60

Presently self-

employed 16 22 27 4 6
*

Member of union™” 31 19 36 61 67

Very involved in
union

  
 

23
omitted women, the foreign born, and men
over 65, and it also had a somewhat lower
response rate than did the 1958 study. It is
conceivable that these differences in target
populations account for some of the differ-
ences in results. Although we have not at-
tempted a complete reanalysis of Lenski’s
1958 data, we have done so using age, sex,
and nativity controls on the initial Protes-
tant-Catholic differences for three main
items: “work values,” “attitudes toward
work,” and “installment buying.” It it worth
noting that the reanalysis proved a great
deal more difficult than anticipated, because
of the problems encountered first of all
merely in reproducing the original results
reported in The Religious Factor, before pro-
ceeding to introduce sample controls. In only
one of the attitudes reviewed here were we
able to obtain Lenski’s published results per-
fectly, although in the other two cases the
discrepancies were minor and very likely due
to differences in placement of one or two
cases. The possible explanations for such
minor discrepancies are manifold: errors in
our, or Lenski’s, use of computing equip-
ment; errors by Lenski in preparation of
tables or at later stages in writing; errors by
us in interpretation of Lenski’s codes and
recodes; actual damage to the data over the
intervening decade. The whole effort left us
with a healthy respect for the variability of
percentages for reasons other than either
sampling or measurement error, and with a
sense of how easily borderline significance
levels can be altered in this size sample by
minor changes in coding conventions (for
example, inclusion or not of missing data
when calculating percents). We suspect that
these problems in reanalysis are not unique
to Lenski’s data, and that only with the
greatest care is it possible to transmit data
and codes in reliable form from one investi-
gator to another.

When controls for age, sex, and nativity
were applied to bring Lenski’s sample to es-
sentially the same composition as the 1966
replication, the results did in fact tend to con-
verge. For the “work values” item this means
that in the 1958 tables rerun using only
21- to 64-year-old, native-born males, Prot-
estant-Catholic differences were reduced to
almost the exact sizes of the 1966 results
given in Table 1. For example, “the work is
important . . .” shows a 6% Protestant-
Catholic difference in Table 9, as compared
with our 5% difference in 1966. Thus our
earlier report of a successful replication for
this item holds and is even improved when
the 1958 and 1966 samples are brought more
closely into line.

The two other items in Table 9 show a
similar movement toward the 1966 results
when similar age, sex, and nativity controls
are applied. This means, however, that Prot-
estant-Catholic differences for these items
tend to disappear among 1958 native-born
men under 65. For the “attitude toward
work” item, the original difference reported
by Lenski appears to come entirely from
men over 64 and men born outside the United
States—relegating the result either to the
record of a disappearing generation or an
indicator of the religious correlates of old age.
Because of the difficulties noted above in
Most of our conclusions about an intrinsi-
cally religious factor must, therefore, be neg-
ative. But not quite all, for a single question
on work values repeated in 1966 did, as
already reported, replicate Lenski’s results;
moreover, stronger findings were produced
in favor of his hypothesis than were apparent
in his own 1958 data. Also, the question
seems theoretically closer to the conceptual
meaning of the “Protestant Ethic” than most
of the other variables introduced by Lenski.
It is possible, of course, that the finding is
due to chance, given the large number of
results that have been reviewed here. But it
is important to avoid Type II as well as
Type I errors, and for that reason the “work
values” result bears closer examination.
The 1966 difference between Protestants
and Catholics in their basis for evaluating
jobs has proven surprisingly tenacious. In
particular, under a variety of controls Protes-
tants, significantly more often than Catholics,
rank as most important their attitude that
“the work is important and gives a feeling
of accomplishment.” Examination of this re-
sponse using combinations of socioeconomic
background factors has specified the religious
difference, but in the process generally
sharpens rather than eliminates it. Several
such controls are shown in Table 10.

The difference on this question is rather
clearly located in upper middle-class and, to
a lesser extent, upper blue-collar occupa-
tions. These occupational differences in turn
are not much changed when either respon-
dent’s education or father’s education is held
constant. An interesting interpretation of the
results might note that the three occupational
areas in question—professional, managerial,
and craftsmen—are probably the most non-
routinized parts of the occupational struc-
ture. They are types of occupations that can
be entered both for intrinsic reasons relating
to the content of the work and for extrinsic
reasons having to do with advancement in
income and status. Religious sources of
values could thus operate to fill these posi-
The 1966 Detroit Area Study replication
of parts of the 1958 Detroit Area Study has
called into question conclusions derived from
the earlier survey that bear on “religion and
economics.”’ Four explanations are available.

(1) There may have been a genuine change
in Protestant or Catholic attitudes and values
during the intervening eight years. This ex-
planation seems the least plausible one to
me, because the variables involved do not
appear subject to rapid change on the basis
of transient events. Lenski’s own conclusions
point toward gradual widening of Protestant-
Catholic differences.

(2) Variations between the two surveys
may result from the more limited population
defined by the 1966 study. Women, men over
64, and the foreign-born were deliberately
excluded, and the response rate was also
somewhat lower in 1966. There is little in

17 The application of significance tests to complex
survey analysis has been attacked and defended
regularly at least since Hanon Selvin’s (1957) “A
Critique of Tests of Significance in Survey Re-
search.” However, none of the more controversial
issues are involved in the present point, which con-
cerns only the loss of clear meaning to conventional
significance levels as an analyst scans many tables
and selects for interpretation the few that are
“significant.”
Lenski’s analysis to suggest that these factors
should affect major conclusions, but our re-
analysis of Lenski’s 1958 data does seem to
point to such special but not especially
meaningful subpopulations as the source of
some of his findings.

(3) Lenski’s results may point toward re-
ligious differences of a much more specific
and limited character than he expected and
concluded. This is the import of the one suc-
cessful replication in 1966, which concerns
a single but strategic question on work values
and locates the religious difference mainly
among men in professional and managerial
occupations. Those interested in the Protes-
tant Ethic hypothesis would seem well ad-
vised to follow up this result, staying close
to whatever the item represents. It must also
be kept in mind that the difference discovered
here is by no means a large one.

(4) There is the real possibility that all
the differences reported by Lenski, as well
as the one most successfully pursued in the
1966 data, are due to “chance.” The reader
who has followed the detailed comparison
of the 1958 and 1966 results may have noted
by now that the original findings presented
by Lenski were by no means uniform and
large in their implications for a “religious
factor” in the economic realm. For a num-
ber of variables introduced by Lenski, there
were no reliable differences even in 1958,
and in other cases the differences barely met
the rather lenient demand of a one-tailed
significance level of .10. In still other cases,
there were no 1958 differences between Prot-
estants and Catholics as a whole, but dif-
ferences appeared in certain subgroups when
controls were applied. Such subgroups were
often quite small, and selective attention to
them capitalized on sampling error. A more
general problem that runs through The Re-
ligious Factor is a tendency to assume a basic
Protestant-Catholic difference as fact, and
therefore to interpret negative findings as
adding specific nuances in meaning to the
nature of this fact, rather than as calling it
into general question. For example, when
“communal involvement” turns out to be un-
related to economic values, Lenski’s conclu-
sion is that “the churches, rather than the
subcommunities, are the primary source of
the [religious] differences in economic be-
havior” (1963:124-125). But another, and
at least equally reasonable conclusion, would
have been that an important linking hypo-
thesis had been tested and disconfirmed, rais-
ing the problem of whether the earlier find-
ings meant what they seemed to mean about
religious differences.

While the specific implications of this
paper have to do with the Protestant Ethic
thesis as developed by Lenski, there is surely
a larger implication concerning the place of
replication in empirical sociology. The Re-
tigious Factor was an original and stimulat-
ing work, and while the analysis carried out
within it seems somewhat problematic in
1969, the primary issue lies not with the
book but with the need to strengthen tradi-
tions that make replication an assumed part
of sociological research. This is particularly
true when the original finding is a nonobvi-
ous but intuitively interesting one. As with
all science, the development of sociology can
be greatly stimulated by unexpected results,
but the more remarkable an empirical find-
ing, the more it requires careful scrutiny and
systematic replication.
Fisher, Ronald A.

1951 The Design of Experiments. New York:
Hafner.

Glenn, Norval and Ruth Hyland

1967 “Religious preference and wordly success:
Some evidence from national surveys.”
American Sociological Review 32 (Feb-
ruary):73-85.

Glock, Charles Y. and Rodney Stark

1965 Religion and Society in Tension. Chicago:

Rand McNally.
Glockel, Glen L.

1969 “Income and religious affiliation.” Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology 74 (May) :632-
649.

Greely, Andrew M.

1964 “The Protestant ethic: Time for a mora-
torium.” Sociological Analysis 24 (Spring):
20-33.

Lenski, Gerhard

1963 The Religious Factor. Garden City, N.Y.:

Anchor Books.
Lykken, David T.

1968 “Statistical significance in psychological re-
search.” Psychological Bulletin 70 (Sep-
tember) :151-159.

Rosen, Bernard C.

1962 “Review of The Religious Factor.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 27 (February):
111-113.

Schuman, Howard

1967 “Sampling memorandum on the 1965-66
Detroit area study.” Multilith. Ann Arbor:
Detroit Area Study.

Selvin, Hanan

1957 “A critique of tests of significance in
survey research.” American Sociological
Review 22 (October) :1957.

Warren, Bruce

1970 The Relationship Between Religious Prefer-
ence and Socioeconomic Achievement of
American Men. Ph.D. dissertation, Univer-
sity of Michigan.

Weber, Max

1930 The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism. New York: Charles Scribner’s
Sons.
