American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
SOCIOLOGIST visiting Germany in the
A spring and summer of 1945 inevitably

is strongly impressed by the spectacle
of a nation crushed and disorganized as a
result of defeat in history’s greatest war.
With the added impact of the atomic bomb
the challenge to sociology becomes over-
whelming. “Culture lag” ceases to be a trite
classroom phrase. With explosive force a
question is pressed upon us. Can sociology
catch up to physics before man blows him-
self from this planet as a biological reject,
too bright in some respects and in others
not bright enough?

The following impressions are recorded
not in rigorous scientific terms but as an
attempt to bring observations while still
fresh into some sort of order with the aid
of sociological principles. The total world
picture reveals contrast, confusion, contradic-
tion, inconsistency and paradox on every
hand. The relation between two countries
alone is a sufficiently embarrassing challenge
to the infant science of sociology.

It is the purpose of the writer to ponder
upon war and peace in terms of the relation-
ship between those who live in the United
States and those, about half as numerous,
who live in Germany. Japan, not Germany,
is now in the headlines but Germany was the
first challenge of the war to social science
applied to conquest.

Are there sociological laws which can guide
us in our core problem—the handling of a
defeated Germany conquered at a cost of
many thousand American lives and many
billion American dollars? Sociology knows
as yet no laws such as those which describe
the flight of a 16-inch shell. Yet from the

 

* (Editor’s Note:) Professor Kirkpatrick has re-
cently concluded a period of government service in
the European theatre.
welter of sociological ideas and generaliza-
tions, principles may be selected which under
various names are part of the mental stock
in trade of most sociologists. They lie some-
where between platitudes and heresy, some-
where between generalizations so broad that
they apply to everything and nothing and
the scientific laws of physics that permit
prediction and control. Slowly these prin-
ciples expressed in varied terms have evolved
as a product of clear, honest, abstract think-
ing by social scientists too numerous to
mention. They are the means to more precise
generalizations which will predict the con-
sequences of certain treatment of a con-
quered people and give deeper insight into a
world confused and contradictory.

During the war unrestricted sociological
thinking about Germany would be inap-
propriate. It is dangerous to think about
one’s feet while dancing or to question
assumptions while in a fight. Now, however,
with the streets cleared of celebration debris
and with the temptation growing to limit
our horizon of vision to new automobiles, is
the time for hard thinking, unclouded by
war hysteria. There are ten generalizations
which seem most pertinent.
and hospitality in Germany. German officials
across the table may seem much like thought-
ful Americans who would make good neigh-
bors and friends back in Milwaukee. Old
ladies in Dortmund do not look or act like
human fiends. War dehumanizes an enemy;
peaceful association tends to restore the
awareness of common humanity. Germans
in their ruined cities love their children,
worry about missing husbands and sons,
ingratiate themselves with conquerors who
command work and bread, wash the windows
of ruined homes, gather flowers beside bomb
craters and stand patiently in long lines for
a daily ration of about a third of what the
average American would eat per day. They
are confused, afraid, bewildered and hate
Nazis not only because they love liberty
but also because the Nazis lost a war and
left them a legacy of ruined cities, the
“Hitler Monuments.”

It is hard, of course, to banish the thought
that only a special biological breed could
have produced the concentration camps. But
the German breed shows no special depravity
in Milwaukee or among American officers
with German names. Germans are probably
just what we would be if some puckish fairy
exchanged each one of us at birth for a Ger-
man child. It is mere sociological realism to
say even of S.S. men, “There but for the grace
of a U. S. environment go I.” From a
sociological viewpoint we should open our
minds to the full implication that Germans
are human beings collectively capable of
love and loyalty, hatred and cruelty, act-
ing the roles which as changelings we,
happily American born, would have played.

It may be objected that regardless of
appearances and potentialities the Nazi
virus both poisoned and debased the Ger-
man people, No attempt is made to minimize
the potency of the Nazi poison, but ignor-
ance of our generalization makes it easy to
forget the natural resistance of human nature
as developed in intimate groups. From the
beginning the family and the church were
foes of the Nazi, perhaps because each seeks
to influence nervous systems while young
and plastic. It is human nature for youth
to be attracted to the novel, dramatic and
revolutionary changes, but millions of young
Germans remember National Socialism as an
established, stogy and conventional way of
life, perhaps comparable to dull Sunday
school activity, repressive of imagination and
curiosity. The war brought coercive, monoto-

_ nous work, Youth is skeptical of authority
which has comic as well as sinister aspects.
German lads now mimic the goose step drill
of their Hitler Youth days. There is evidence
of early clashes between Nazi and non-Nazi
youth. It is cheering to learn that small
children sang on the streets, “Alles geht
voriiber, alles geht vorbei, auch geht Adolph
Hitler und der Partei.”

It is human too to want the simple neces-
sities of life such as work, food, and family
companionship, and to show skepticism
toward policies and appeals which seemed
far removed from or hostile to simple human
values. Jokes and jingles are not made up
to deceive conquerors but rather arise slowly
in the folk consciousness of simple human
beings. Mining folk of the Ruhr may well
be honest in their assertion that they sus-
pected from the beginning that National
Socialism could mean for them merely hard
work, war and disaster. A jingle runs as
follows:
neighbors, tribesmen, fellows or comrades;
while out-group members are traitors,
heretics, inferior breeds, cruel enemies and
sub-human dangerous animals.

All social living with its controls, com-
petition and frustration arouses hate as well
as love. It is natural and simple therefore
to displace disturbing hate to out-groups
and their members. If no out-group is con-
veniently at hand, one can be created (there
are always the Jews). Cruelty to out-group
members does not count. An S.S. guard
who has tortured and butchered helpless
prisoners might well return after a hard
day’s work to fondle his children and
tenderly embrace his wife, Psychologically
he might be similar to a Chicago stockyard
worker who sticks pigs and hangs them on
hooks. Pigs and dehumanized out-group
members do not rate the moral consideration
due in-group members. Humans are cruel to
out-groups and accent that out-group sub-
human status of the enemy to justify ruth-
lessness. If what we kill is not a lower
animal we must make it sub-human to sleep
well at night.

Americans too can engage in the cumula-
tive rationalizing of repressed guilt feelings
at behavior which would be condemned if
directed against members of the in-group, A
German riddled with a burst of .30 caliber
bullets has a fuzzy beard and looks very
young to die. He had a grenade. Well, he
might have had a_ grenade. Anyhow
he is a Kraut and they are a sneaky, cruel
lot, A Fraulein wooed with somewhat muscu-
lar ardor cries in spite of chocolate and
cigarettes. Maybe she wasn’t a prostitute,
but most German women are immoral and
look at what German men have done. An
American observer regarding vast prison
pens along the Rhine-fields hazy with
hundreds of thousands of German prisoners
of war, commented that it was raining and
that the half-naked prisoners had no shelter.
An American major wrathfully growled,
“They’re Germans, aren’t they?” Given the
ethical dualism of in-group relationship it
was quite proper that no more was said.

Our thinking about Germans is of neces-
sity colored by an in-group bias. The bomb-
ing by Germans was cruel and inhuman;
our own bombing on a far vaster scale,
resulting in casualties to women and children
higher than we care to think about, we re-
gard as justified because the Germans started
it and because it seemed a means to end
the war more quickly, The Germans could
and did use the latter argument with the
naive assumption that a war should end in
a German victory. We, too, like a war to
end, but with a victory of our own in-group.
There are plenty of Americans who worried
lest the destruction of German cities was not
great enough to punish an enemy out-group.
Had our own cities suffered comparable
destruction we would develop, as did the
Germans, an accentuated interest in a dis-
tinction between military and non-military
objectives.

Probably the most important manifesta-
tion of in-group bias is in connection with
the concepts of criminality, aggression and
punishment. There is justification for the
trial and hanging of many Nazis directly
associated with cruel and wanton maltreat-
ment of fellow human beings. It might
provide a deterrent, express the outraged
humanitarianism of the great majority of
civilized countries, crystallize sentiment into
international law, further international
cooperation in a congenial task and above all
to release some of the pent-up hatred engen-
dered by the war which otherwise might find
less worthy victims, From a sociological point
of view, however, there seems to be danger
in identifying leadership in aggressive war
with criminality. It is not easy to be sure
that men are tried as aggressors rather than
leaders of an out-group. Definitions of ag-
gression are almost invariably colored by in-
group bias of which we are not readily
aware. Not all forms of aggression are as
blatant as the Pearl Harbor attack. Mem-
bers of a group branded as aggressors very
commonly reverse the charge and with an
entire world at war an impartial opinion is
hard to obtain. Certain victory by force of
arms does not guarantee objectivity that
rises above in-group out-group relationships.
Leaders of victorious groups are rarely
labeled criminal aggressors. The moral seems
to be “Win Wars.”

To persons concerned with the building
of international morality and law on a firm,
rational international foundation which can
gradually encroach on the traditional doc-
trine of national sovereignty, the trial of
certain kinds of war criminals could be as
embarrassing as was the Reichstag fire trial
to one Hermann Goering. Can the Allies
be certain that no skeletons could be dragged
from their respective closets by a smart
lawyer well-versed in history? Can a trial
by victors be free of bias?

The writer happens to believe that mem-
bers of the Axis powers were aggressors
by any reasonable definition but is not con-
vinced that international law has risen far
enough above in-group ethics to identify
wartime political leaders with concentra-
tion camp butchers and to justify treatment
of both as war criminals. Even the latter
group could raise plenty of questions con-
cerning obedience to demands and acts done
under coercion with sanction of sovereignty
which, by definition, is authority above or at
least independent of outside judgment and
punishment.

(3) It is inevitable that in-groups and
out-groups have different conceptions of
reality. Only the most immediate common-
sense impressions have existence independ-
ent of a social point of reference. The man
lying stiffly with up-pointed toes is dead,
but as hero and comrade or enemy and swine,
that is a sociological matter. Extent of
atrocities, war guilt, war causation, and
other weighty problems of our time are
intimately related to the simple fact that to
Germans Americans are an out-group and
the reverse. It may be added that even false
beliefs are important. Millions of people
died because of Nazi myths.

While it is a handicap in waging a war
to perceive the other fellow’s point of view,
the shaping of an enduring peace does de-
mand an awareness of this point of view.
Germans in their present confused and be-
wildered state do not agree in their concep-
tions of reality but these conceptions on the
average differ from those of Americans. Ger-
mans are more aware than we that the
original declaration of war between Western
powers came from England and France.
Some contend that the original bombings
of civilians were not directed against the
great Allied powers and hence did not call
for retribution, Even anti-Nazis aware of
concentration camp horrors may argue that
the Allied bombings constitute a comparable
crime against humanity. Incidentally the
German estimates of the loss of life among
German civilians due to Allied bombings
reach fabulous totals. Their accounts, for
example, of the Dresden bombing are not
pleasant unless it be assumed that women
and children as members of the out-group
are also fair game to Allied fliers. There
is often an inability to understand why in-
dustrial targets were spared while civilian
dwellings were ruthlessly destroyed. There
is the suspicion in the minds of Germans
that the British preparations for British
indiscriminate long-range bombing were
made before German air-attacks on Rotter-
dam and Coventry. Educated anti-Nazis
profoundly suspicious of Nazi propaganda
often became suspicious of all propaganda
including that of the Allies. Fed on fantastic
atrocity stories circulated by the Nazis it
was easy for many Germans to become blind
to the grim realities of Buchenwald and
Dachau.

Often the best offense is attack. There
are anti-Nazi intellectuals in Germany who
point an accusing finger, who meet the
charge of collective German guilt by the
counter-charge “You also are guilty of
bringing agony to Europe. You knew in 1933
as much of Nazi brutality as did we. You
were in a position to see even more clearly
the rising menace of Nazi militarism, In
1936, when Hitler marched into the Rhine-
land, you had justification and power for
crushing the monster before it attained its
full growth. Instead there was placation,
appeasement, Munich, and the betrayal of
Czechoslovakia. You, too, were not willing
to pay the price before the price of freedom
and democracy had risen to an appalling
figure. There is collective guilt, yes, but that
guilt rests on the shoulders of the entire
civilized world.”

Two dilemmas, clear to the outside world,
they are reluctant to face. Why did millions
of Germans die fighting bravely against the
Allies and yet relatively few die fighting
Nazi oppression? If Germans always really
believed that Nazis were their real enemies
and the enemies of the civilized world why
the glib excuse “What could we do?” Ger-
man soldiers could die fighting against over-
whelming odds, but for Hitler. Yugoslav
civilians could and did fight Nazi oppression
when resistance seemed hopeless. Germans
who say they could do nothing merely could
do nothing without paying a price in terms
of comfort, security, and above all a re-
nunciation of blind in-group loyalty.

A second dilemma pressed home also
brings perspiration to the brows of intel-
ligent Germans trying to justify their ways
to the world and to themselves, Why, if
Germans knew nothing of concentration
camp horrors and other Nazi brutalities, did
they so fear their oppressors that they could
take no stand against them? Objectively
viewed there are answers, especially the
answer that the noose was drawn so slowly
about the necks of the German people that
the price of resistance did not seem worth
paying until the price became too high to
pay.

The verdict of history will ultimately be
given but until divergent conceptions of
reality based on in-group out-group relation-
ships are reconciled that verdict will not be
unanimous.

(4) Groups in an in-group out-group re-
lationship, especially that of war, undergo
a kind of circular interaction which sharpens
hostility, dehumanizes the other party and
accentuates the cleavage between contrast-
ing conceptions of reality. Group A holds
Group B a menace. B aware of this false
belief so acts as to give some validity to
the belief, thus prompting A to beliefs and
acts promoting the vicious circle of aliena-
tion, B is cruel, thus justifying cruelty for
A which justifies it for B. Since only the
worst accounts of the out-group are credible,
such accounts get a hearing and strengthen
the inclination to expect the worst and with
increasing cause. All this is unfortunate if
A and B are armed with atomic bombs. It
should not be forgotten that the process of
circular interaction has a positive side and
that under certain conditions it is profitable
to repay evil with good. This truth so called
Christians preach but rarely practice.

It has been the fashion of the American
press to portray the apparent cordiality of
many Germans toward their American and
British conquerors as a sneaking hypocritical
attempt to curry favor and plot renewed
aggression, There is reason to think, how-
ever, that V-E Day brought Germans not
only the relief from war and Allied bomb-
ings but also a sense of relief from Nazi
oppression. At the end of the war the United
States was in a position to make millions
of friends among the German people. It was
a disillusioning experience for Germans who
regarded Americans as liberators and who
had been led by Allied propaganda to expect
food and freedom, to experience a non-
fraternization policy, an assumption of col-
lective international guilt and a food ration
about a third of that consumed by Ameri-
cans and less than that provided by Nazi
oppressors. Starvation of Germans even if
justifiable and to some extent necessary,
curtailed good-will. Lack of distinction be-
tween Nazis and non-Nazis brought be-
wilderment as did apparent lack of under-
standing of the trials of the German people
during the last twelve years. The attitude
has already developed which could be ex-
pressed “Oh well—if you don’t want to be
friends.”

Hostility and friendship then develop in
vicious or benign circles. Rarely does a re-
lationship between inter-dependent groups
remain static. There is need of clearer
realization that Germany and the United
States will either become increasingly
friendly or move from a quiescent phase
of suspicion, hatred and bitterness to open
hostility if and when Germany regains the
power to become an active foe. It is not
easy to be friendly without giving Germany
progressively the power to become an effec-
tive foe. It is not easy to pursue a policy
of blame, contempt, and punishment without
giving incentive to hostility albeit for the
time impotent. Is the United States to be a
friend or foe of Germany? If destiny decrees
increasing friendliness between the United
States and Germany it would be desirable
to reinforce the trend by a policy sufficiently
prompt and consistent to bring political
benefits, If Germans are to be our eternal
enemies let us match Russia in ruthlessness
and realism.

(5) A fifth pertinent generalization is
that in proportion to intensity of hostility to
an apparent out-group there is increasing
broadness and blindness of generalization.
An American officer after months of in-
tensive combat, stated that he would like
to see every German killed—man, woman
and child. To the rabid anti-orientalists
Japs are Japs, and decorated American Nisei
in uniforms may be refused admission to a
barber shop. To some southerners all Negroes
are alike and are not worthy of the effort
required for making distinctions as to in-
telligence, education and character. A cat
was kicked in New York because he had a
moustache that looked like Hitler’s. The
Gestapo tortured or killed entire families for
the actions of family members. A Lidice
may suffer as a whole for the action of a
single villager. Hate ramifies from culture to
breed, from leaders to followers, from par-
ents to children. The American frontier
created the phrase “The only good Indian
is a dead Indian.” The German people may
suffer like their victims for this peculiarity of
human nature.

It is easy and simple and lazy to regard
Germans as out-group members sharing
equally undesirable traits. This was the
attitude of Hitler towards Jews. This is the
co-fallacy in other racial doctrines. This is
the basis of a million forms of injustice.
It is a way of thought basically hostile to
the individualism of our democratic creed
yet often practiced in the name of democracy.
Germans differ, as do Americans, and there
are even differences among Nazis. It should
be remembered that Nazi party membership
increased from some 500,000 to some 10
million during the course of the Hitler
regime. Members of youth organizations
graduated automatically at a certain age into
party membership. Party membership was
required of many officials and persons in
public life. Party membership for many
Germans meant lack of moral courage but
not necessarily acceptance of the Nazi creed.
It is granted, of course, that the efforts of
some Germans to justify party membership
are fantastic. A former official in the Reichs-
bank, for example, asserted that he was a
fervent anti-Nazi at heart yet he joined
the party. There was no selfish motive back
of this, of course, he merely wanted to bore
from within and use his high position to
restrain Nazi activities.

Granting the common human tendency
of Germans to justify themselves and their
works what are some of the varieties of
Nazi? There is the Nazi gangster—cunning,
ruthless, and fanatical. There is the slick
business man or perhaps official who is op-
portunistic, unprincipled and quick to
seek favor of the party in the interest
of jobs and profits, Such men quickly
switch their loyalties to Allied officials
and are puzzled if hypocrisy, boot-
licking and bribery fail to work. There
are intelligent, educated Germans who went
along but with protest and with guilt feelings
now sharpened by the ruin of Germany and
the verdict of the world. There are the fair
weather Nazis who liked patriotic thrills,
the excitement of demonstrations, magical
solutions of economic problems, fruits of
easy victories, and ego expansion through
vicarious success. They now feel deceived
and betrayed, not because Naziism was in-
herently evil, but because its apparent suc-
cess did not continue. There is the German
nationalist feeling so strongly about the
fatherland that he could accept Hitlerism
not because it was good but because it was
generalized as German. There were Nazi
idealists, especially among women and
children, who responded to the language of
love used for purposes of hate. Theirs is
almost a religious disillusionment.

Non-Nazis include the dull Hausfrau who
never quite knew what it was all about,
who left politics to her husband and thought
only of family and food. Sociological think-
ing was not in her line but stupidity, igno-
rance and laziness of mind can reap the
consequences of sin. There is the little man
of the Ruhr—Catholic, trade-unionist, per-
haps both, who is suspicious of Hitler’s
picture above the director’s desk and
honestly convinced from the beginning that
Hitler would bring to the little man of
Germany work, war and ruin. Less cynical
and apathetic was the ardent anti-Nazi
genuinely willing to accept German defeat
as the price of liberty, And there are, of
course, a few of the fighters surviving the
concentration camps, perhaps hating Hitler
less now than do the inactive foes of Nazi-
ism whose hate festered because it did not
find expression in action and_ sacrifice.
There are plenty of Germans who hate Hitler
now because they hate themselves.

What does it mean to generalize about all
Germans as a hated out-group and to ignore
distinctions calling for mental effort? Merely
that the innocent are punished with the
guilty, that friends are treated like foes and
cease to be friends, that a war is waged
to defeat a people rather than a menacing
ideology and that one of the most character-
istic traits of the Nazi mind is allowed to
flourish in our own thinking and lead us
perhaps to folly such as brought the ruin
of the German nation.

(6) There is a tendency to deal with out-
groups in terms of symbols very commonly
personified. Caricatures of Hitler, Hirohito
and Mussolini absolved people from the
mental effort required for a sober analysis
of the Axis powers. To haul down a swastika
flag is easier than to exorcise the Fascist
demon from the nervous systems of con-
temporary human beings. It is easier to think
of victory as the end of a terrible war than
to analyze the fruits and costs of victory.

The pertinent implication now is that
there is a danger of assuming that removal
of the symbols of Fascism constitutes a defeat
of Fascism, The charred body of Hitler (if
it be his) or the battered body of Mussolini
hanging in a public square are symbols of
defeat but still symbols rather than reality.
Adolph and Benito still exist in the nervous
systems of millions of people. There is a
sociological immortality about ideas and
ideals both good and bad. To pull down one
flag and haul up another is a pleasant
symbolic experience but it does not mean
that the things for which one flag stands
have automatically replaced all things
symbolized by the other flag. It is true, of
course, that if war is purely a matter of
deciding by force which group wins and
which loses, then defeat brings victory and
victory is its own reward.

Much has been said and written about
the importance of winning the peace but
little about how to do it. It still needs to be
pointed out that the alleged war and peace
aims, beyond mere military victory, will not
be fully attained by symbols such as sur-
render ceremonies, victory parades, con-
tinued gestures of hatred, new boundary
lines, or even signed documents describing
organization and procedure for the preserva-
tion of peace. The test will be the kind of
people that survive the war, how they think,
how they feel and how they really act toward
each other. If there are Germans basically
in sympathy with the alleged war aims of
the Allied powers they would share ulti-
mately in a true victory. Has the victory
been real?

(7) Another pertinent generalization is
that in the course of conflict between in-
groups and out-groups there is a tendency
to borrow characteristics of the opponent.
The Germans bombed Rotterdam and
Coventry and ultimately the Allies car-
ried to maturity terror as an_ instru-
ment of air war. There are implications
of fighting fire with fire which go far beyond
the extended reach of modern Allied flame-
throwers.

There are two implications which are
worth emphasizing. One is the danger of
more or less unconsciously borrowing Nazi
ideas and methods in the very process of
defeating Naziism. The displacement of
Japanese from the West Coast is not dis-
similar to some of Hitler’s grandiose re-
shuffling of peoples. Among soldiers who
risked their lives defeating Hitler anti-Semit-
ic statements are not uncommon. The
Nazis looted in a grand manner. Persons
on the Allied side may come to think that
that was not such a bad idea. The Nazis
worked effectively through puppet govern-
ments. There is some reason to think that
administrative convenience can be placed
above principle.

Censorship was a feature of Nazi policy.
Practiced among the Allies as a military
necessity the temptation arises to use it as
a weapon against a political opponent or
to conceal mistakes and ineptitudes, A
propaganda of truth was proposed as a
weapon against the Goebbels machine but
unfavorable or unpleasant truths do not
always make effective propaganda. It is
easy to weight effectiveness more and more
heavily as over against truth.

The Nazi built a mighty war machine,
partly as an end in itself. We could forget
that military power is a means to an end.
The military mind dominated Germany. In
America the military mind could make in-
creasing claims to competence in non-
military matters, The essence of the Nazi
creed in a word was reliance upon force and
fraud. Often in the history of the world
people have come to worship the gods of
those they conquered.

Another implication of the inter-borrowing
of peoples at war is less immediate. A war
is a means of getting acquainted the hard
way. Prolonged occupation of Germany
would ultimately give more Americans more
first hand knowledge about Germany and
Germans than would be acquired in a cor-
responding number of years of peace, G.I.’s
will unlearn playing with German children
some of the things they thought they learned
while shooting at German fathers, It is a
hard and costly and inefficient way of getting
acquainted but a series of world wars, if
the atomic bomb permitted a series of wars
rather than one, could conceivably estab-
lish through inter-borrowing a cultural uni-
formity without which formal peace
organizations may not actually work. Con-
tinued thought and concern about people we
have come to know through conquest would
speed up the unification of the world.

(8) Another generalization follows from
the basic concept of an in-group out-group
relationship, namely, that learning and
leadership are most effective when identified
with the in-group, Children often imitate
playmates more readily than adults. Hitler’s
book “Mein Kampf” could circulate freely
in America not only because of our tradition
of the freedom of the press but also because
it seemed inconceivable that the symbol of
an out-group could be taken seriously. The
message and influence of the stranger, the
foreigner, the outsider and the enemy, other
things being equal, are relatively lacking in
influence. Hirohito as an in-group leader
has been an effective tool in Allied hands.

There are many practical implications in
this. We can best transmit the essentials of
our democratic heritage to Germans by
means of Germans who are recognized
members of the German in-group and yet
thoroughly familiar with the ideals which
we feel Germans should know for our safety
and theirs. If distinctions are made between
Germans, German leaders can be found to
run the schools and edit the newspapers that
will ultimately shape the German mind and
function not as hated puppets but as ex-
ponents of the best in the German heritage.

It is probable that much of our propaganda
is discounted because it is ours and has an
authoritative, moralistic and emotional char-
acter, Posters in German cities portray heaps
of corpses and assure Germans that they
are indirectly guilty of the torture and death
of hundreds of thousands of such victims.
It might be far better merely to present
irrefutable first hand factual evidence to
leading Germans and let them gradually in-
form the mass of German people who other-
wise for a much longer time might evade the
grim truth by the comfortable rationaliza-
tion that it was Nazi propaganda all over
again with selected evidence, faked photo-
graphs and distorted truth. The Germans
have been shown plenty of pictures of dead
bodies by Goebbels before and now feel that
credulity led to their betrayal and downfall.

There is plenty of raw material with which
to work within Germany. Naziism is dis-
credited and new values are resurgent. There
is some evidence that people are turning to
religion which is little restricted by in-group
barriers. An artistic revival could flourish
with encouragement. There is work to be
done and Germans have rarely been accused
of sloth and indolence. Of course much de-
pends on the basic decision as to whether
Germany is to be friend or foe. If Germany
is to be a permanent foe it would be mere
realism to stop talking about re-education
and reduce Germans to the status of ignorant,
superstitious peasants. That would be an end
to the Krupps and Beethovens that Germany
has offered the world,

(9) Another generalization is that in the
process of social change there is a tendency
to move in the direction of some kindred
and therefore congenial pattern of living.
American officers and officials have been
startled by the docility, obedience and disci-
pline of the Germans under the occupation.
This phenomenon means simply that one
sociological law may take precedence over
another. Cultural congeniality may have
priority over in-group learning and leader-
ship. Order and discipline are understandable
and congenial to Germans even if adminis-
tered by outsiders and conquerors.

But the implications of this generaliza-
tion are far broader. They involve not only
Germany but the two great power systems
remaining in the world, namely Russia and
the United States. Any person attempting
to play a sociological role must honestly
attempt to answer the question “What is
this vague thing called Fascism which sup-
posedly we fought in fighting the Axis powers
and how does it relate to the pattern of life
in communist Russia?” Germans with a
cynical sense of humor and a great desire
to drive a wedge between the Allies compare
Nazi Germany and Communist Russia by
saying “It is colder in Russia.”

It is reasonable to assume that Fascism,
whether of the Italian or German variety, is
no one thing but rather a pattern of values,
methods and varied features of social organi-
zation. The outstanding components are:
“(1) Dictatorship; (2) Closely regulated
State-Capitalism (a collectivistic capitalism) ;
(3) A one-party political organization; (4)
An organic theory of social organization, ac-
cording to which the individual is merely
a cell in the body politic; (5) The leadership
principle operating through a hierarchy
pledged to obedience and discipline; (6)
Intense nationalism; (7) Militarism; (8)
Suppression of civil liberties for the social
good as seen by dictator and party; (9)
Repressive machinery, including spies, secret
police, and a party militia; (10) Reliance
upon propaganda and censorship to create
uniform Fascist attitudes; (11) A legal sys-
tem based not on contract or individual rights
but rather indicating the minimum which
must be done in service of the state; (12)
The identification of education and propa-
ganda; (13) The indoctrination and disci-
pline of young people through youth organi-
zations; (14) The maintenance of emotional
excitement (‘high moral tension’) by fre-
quent public spectacles and ceremonies; (15)
Acceptance of evidence and imprisonment
as political weapons (penal islands and con-
centration camps); (16) The inciting of
hatred against real or alleged political
enemies; (17) A patriarchal theory of family
life which lays stress upon reproduction;
(20) Purely nationalistic ethics.”*

One could argue that any system is Fascist
in proportion to the number of Fascist
traits and their intensity. It is startling to
note the numerous points of similarity be-
tween the Soviet system and the now defunct
Nazi regime. It is true that Russia went
in for government ownership rather than
government regulation, that the race doctrine
is replaced by a class doctrine and that the
original Communist ideology was interna-
tionalistic rather than nationalistic. In Russia
there was a more tolerant attitude toward
the evolution of democratic reforms and the
conception of family life is feministic. Never-
theless, the resemblances are striking es-
pecially in view of recent Russian national-
ism. Germans in general have a tremendous
fear of the Russians based on a guilty con-
science regarding atrocities which took place
in Russia. Yet both German business men
and German workers talk of a swing in Ger-
many toward Communism. Discounting
propaganda, there is still sociological justi-
fication for the claim that the Russian brand
of totalitarianism could be congenial and
understandable to Germans in spite of ruth-
less excesses committeed by Russians. To
have that which has been discredited under
another and contrasting name could be an
attractive possibility to bewildered and dis-
illusioned Germans. Given sheer power Rus-
sian nationalistic communism like Naziism
can make converts.

Whether Germans are converted to Com-
munism in Russian zones or subjected to
vengeful mass deportations leaving only a
helpless peasant country there remains the
problem of adjusting the Capitalist-Demo-
cratic power system to the Totalitarian-
Communist-Soviet system, Russia will grow
stronger economically, There will be a vast
relative increase in population. In Germany
and the Balkans there will be a frontier be-
tween the two great power systems. We have
proven twice our unwillingness to see Eng-
land defeated by a continental power regard-
less of the diplomatic background including
perhaps British mistakes. We should not
allow wartime feeling against Germany to
become generalized to the point that German
warnings about the congeniality of National
Socialism and Russian Communism are
arbitrarily dismissed as false propaganda
designed to split the democratic solidarity
of Allied nations. It would be ironic to find
a bloody war fought against the playing of
certain roles resulting in the continuance
of the play with merely a new and stronger
cast.

(10) The final generalization is that hu-
man beings have certain common require-
ments for individual and social adjustment;
namely, clear-cut aspirations with the pos-
sibility of realizing these aspirations in ways
commanding social approval. A_ similar
thought is expressed by the proposition that
people need a task, a plan, freedom and
responsibility. Lacking such, it is hard for
an individual or a nation to live without
venting confusion and frustration in aggres-
sive behavior against others.

Fundamentally we must destroy Germans
as hardened criminals beyond redemption
or readjust them as decent citizens of the
world. It is not sensible to follow both poli-
cies at the same time with the same people.
If some Germans are to be accepted as poten-
tial friends they need to have clear-cut aspira-
tions which can be realized with the approval
of the civilized world. In spite of in-group
complacency there are millions of Germans
who have guilt feelings and the aspiration to
make amends through acceptance of construc-
tive punishment. Germans might aid in the re-
construction of Europe given the proper
policy in a way which would give them their
own self-respect as well as the respect of the
world, A confused and bewildered people
need a clarification of aspirations that can
only come with a clearly expressed and a
consistently enforced policy on the part of
their conquerors.

For the mental hygiene of Germans it is
unfortunate that they were conquered not
by one but by several nations. Even were
they conquered by the United States alone
they might have suffered from confusion
and uncertainty of aspirations due to the
conflicting trends of public opinion char-
acteristic of a democracy. Furthermore,
policies that come with war inevitably clash
with those pertaining to peace.

It has been argued that processes of
learning and leadership coming from within
a group are most effective. Yet there is
danger that the stigma of defeat, humiliation,
starvation, and punishment by outsiders
could fall on a democratic movement de-
veloping within Germany just as the Weimar
Republic suffered from the generalized
identification of social conditions with the
leadership during these unhappy periods. It
will be a difficult task to associate that which
we approve with realizable aspirations rather
than confusion and frustration,

There is danger in applying the wealth
of sociological evidence concerning delin-
quents and criminals to problems of collec-
tive criminology. Yet it is unlikely that
peoples any more than persons are reformed
and adjusted by preaching and punishment.
In our own society juvenile delinquents can
be reformed by the stimulation of clear-cut
socially acceptable aspirations realized
through participation in constructive group
activity. Society must provide either patience
and scientific understanding or pay the price
in terms of police, prisons, and the usual
costs of continued crime, The United States,
and indeed the world, can pay for reform
or pay for war.
mal arrangements? Policy should be con-
sistent yet it should change with circum-
stances, Perhaps it is as absurd to expect
military men to lay the foundations for an
enduring peace as it would be to expect front
line infantrymen to perform delicate surgery
and carry out a public health program. All
situations in this contrasting world are in
relation to other situations. What to do
about Germany is related to Russia and to
unknown thoughts in Stalin’s mind. People
react to a certain stimulus, say aerial bomb-
ing, in a certain way but others show exactly
the opposite reaction. The rebuffed friend
may become the bitterest foe. Truly the soci-
ologist and psychologist deal with the most
complicated natural phenomenon to be found
in the known universe.

No clear-cut blueprint for the handling
of Germany in the interest of a peaceful and
civilized world emerges from the application
to the situation of some existing sociological
principles, Four conclusions, however, seem
to follow from the assumptions and reason-
ings of this article.

(a) The people of this earth have com-
mon, human characteristics, in spite of indi-
vidual and cultural differences, which make
for harmony and understanding when the
barriers established by in-group out-group
relationships and the corresponding di-
vergent conceptions of reality are removed.
Communication, contact and access to the
same facts may be more important for
peace than world trade or world federa-
tion. The tremendous power and prestige
of the United States should be used
to force removal of restrictions upon the
getting-acquainted-process between the com-
mon peoples of the earth, Freedom of
press, speech and travel can to some extent
be purchased by food and loans and the
taste for such freedom grows with its ex-
ercise. There are ways of getting acquainted
more effective and less expensive than those
provided by war.

(b) There is danger of a Fascist or at
least a totalitarian victory in spite of the
overwhelming success of American arms. It
can come from dealing with symbols rather
than with reality, from a subtle and devious
borrowing from the enemy, from indiscrimi-
nating generalizations and from ignoring the
fact that war makes strange bed-fellows,
and from stimuli to the Fascist pattern in-
herent in postwar maladjustments.

(c) There is need for prompt, clear-cut
decisions and policies to guide ourselves and
the Germans whom we have defeated but
not exterminated. The seeds of future wars
can be sown in the very act of making peace.
The historian of the future will trace the
origins of World War III to the present day
and to precious days and weeks already
past. To be effective as friend or foe requires
promptness and the paying of a price. The
United States is in the best position to experi-
ment with friendliness in its dealings with
the world, but if internationalism proves
a delusion a nationalistic policy should be
prompt and consistent. National survival
depends on friends as well as foes, If man-
kind should achieve the supreme folly of
a war between the United States and Russia
it would be better to have Germans as
friends,

(d) The final conclusion is that sociologi-
cal thinking as defined in this article is part
of the price that must be paid for all things
of value. H. G. Wells, who prophetically
wrote of atomic bombs many years ago,
also wrote of the “race between education
and catastrophe.”’ Such men of clear vision
see mankind not walking but running toward
a precipice and .must shout warnings in a
strange and complicated language. We are
told that the price of the atomic bomb was
two billion dollars. As much or more could
well be spent on the fostering of social sci-
ence, This is the first installment of the price
which must be paid for a peace which is
becoming synonymous with the survival of
the human race.
