@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2091282?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
since the appearance of Bettelheim
and Janowitz’s pioneering study which
established a theoretical and empirically
validated link between social mobility and
prejudice.t In the intervening period nu-
merous independent assessments of the em-
pirical connection between mobility and
attitudes toward minorities have been at-
tempted. Reconsidering the findings reported
in Dynamics of Prejudice in the light of the
cumulative evidence, Bettelheim and Jano-
witz found much to confirm their original
claims. As they put it, “New studies strongly
support the view that under advanced in-
dustrialism downward personal mobility op-
erates against the general social trend toward
ethnic tolerance.” ?
The mechanisms believed to underlie the
empirical relationship between downward
social mobility and prejudice have been

Nise a decade and a half has elapsed
The disruption of social connections and
standards of living occasioned by collective
economic disasters is mirrored in the per-
sonal disaster of downward social mobility.
The frustrations of adopting new life ways
may well be vented in hostility toward “a
group in relation to which one’s own group
can feel a comfortably self-righteous sense
of superiority and at the same time a group
which can be plausibly accused of arrogat-
ing to itself an illegitimate superiority of
its own.” 4 Both Jews and Negroes have
traditionally served as such scapegoats in
the United States, although it is perhaps
only the Negro toward whom the down-

3 Emile Durkheim, Suicide, translated by John A.
Spaulding and George Simpson, Glencoe, Illinois:
The Free Press, 1951, p. 252.

4 The phrase, though not the intent of this pas-
sage, is from Talcott Parsons, “Certain Primary
Sources and Patterns of Aggression in the Social
Structure of the Western World,” in his Essays in
Sociological Theory, revised edition, Glencoe, Illi-
nois: The Free Press, 1954, p. 318.
wardly mobile can feel ‘a comfortably self-
righteous sense of superiority.” Thus, the
weakening of personal control through the
sense of failure, the loss of position, and
the dissipation of personal ties accompany-
ing downward mobility finds expression, in
the absence of adequate social restraints, in
hostility toward Negroes and establishes a
link between downward mobility and preju-
dice.

The connection between upward mobility
and prejudice is more tenuous than the one
between downward mobility and prejudice,
especially since “a moderate amount of up-
ward mobility is widespread and in a sense
typical or ‘normal.’” > There is “no reason
to suppose that moderate upward mobility
would create high levels of social and per-
sonal disruption.”® But extreme upward
mobility is another matter; Durkheim again
provided a convenient statement of its con-
nection to loss of personal and social control
and, hence, to suicide, hostility toward out-
groups, and other resolutions of anomic
conditions. Referring to the passage cited
above, he noted:
The individual experiencing a rapid or ex-
treme rise in social status may encounter
a loss of personal control corresponding to
the loss of social control incurred by socie-
ties experiencing economic booms. If not
caught in a web of debts and monthly in-
stallments as he attempts to acquire too
rapidly the material possessions appropriate
to his newly achieved standing, he may ex-
perience a sense of insecurity as he copes,
in ignorance of the appropriate behaviors,
with his new class position. These insecuri-
ties and frustrations of extreme mobility
may find release in hostility toward minori-
ties, establishing a link between upward
mobility and prejudice.

To this point, we have sketched a view
which leads one to expect mobile persons—
especially downwardly mobile persons—to
have greater prejudice toward Negroes than
those who live out their lives in the com-
fortable and familiar class of their fathers.
This view is the one espoused by Bettelheim
and Janowitz and is not inconsistent with
the views expressed by others on the rela-
tionship between mobility and prejudice.
Now we wish to pose an alternative view,
one which implies that individuals form their
attitudes by striking a kind of average be-
tween the views appropriate to their class
of origin and the views appropriate to their
class of destination.

There is often a competitive element in
the logic of racial prejudice: majority groups
and even minorities in positions of power
protect their interests from invasion by
“outsiders.” “It is when a Negro invades
a new region that race riots occur; it is when
he seeks a place in a new occupation or a
new profession that he meets vigorous op-
position. . . .”8 Further, there is a con-
servative element in racial prejudice, a re-
sistance to social change which tends to fix
the position of groups in the social fabric.
“Every effort of the Negro—to take the most
striking example—to move, to rise and im-
prove his status, rather than his condition,
has invariably met with opposition, aroused
prejudice and stimulated racial animosi-
ties.”® For as depressed groups improve
But the competitive element does more
than structure the distribution of prejudice
with respect to social class. Once prejudices
appropriate to one’s class position are ac-
cepted, they may become traditions which
are passed by childhood socialization from
one generation to the next. As Park ob-
serves, “Tradition into which we are born,
and which we imbibe with our mother’s
milk, is infused with prejudices.” 14 And
so the young are infused with the prejudices
appropriate to their class of origin. If a per-
son maintains throughout his life a con-
stant class membership, attitudes ingrained
in childhood socialization may be largely
retained, changing but slowly with secular
trends in the society at large. But if he un-
dergoes either upward or downward social
mobility, he may find the attitudes appro-
priate to his class of origin are no longer
appropriate to his class of destination. How-
ever, he will not quickly learn the ways
appropriate to his new position; social mo-
bility is extensive and the attitudes appro-
priate to his class of origin will be more or
less randomly reinforced as he meets others
who have experienced similar mobility. This
pattern of unsystematic reinforcement is
precisely the one which will maintain a
learned response for the longest period, so
that the socially mobile person will but
gradually assume the attitudes appropriate
to his class of destination. In a sense, he
will strike a balance between the attitudes
appropriate to his class of origin and his
class of destination, although over his life-
time he will gradually swing toward the sys-
tematically reinforced attitudes appropriate
to his achieved position. Thus, consideration
of the structure of competition and social-
ization does not lead one to postulate the

10 Loc. cit.
11 Ibid., p. 230.
Excepting Dynamics of Prejudice, per-
haps the best known study of the relation-
ship between social mobility and prejudice
is Greenblum and Pearlin’s secondary analy-
sis of the Elmira study of the 1948 Presi-
dential campaign. A small part of the basic
data from this secondary analysis is pre-
sented in Table 1, which shows by father’s
and breadwinner’s occupation the percentage
who would prefer not to have Negroes as
neighbors in response to a standard survey
item.!? As one can see from the table, 64.2
per cent of stable nonmanual respondents
preferred to keep out Negroes, while 70.8
per cent of nonmanual respondents with
manual origins preferred not to have

12 Specifically, the data show the percentage of
respondents who selected Negroes from a checklist
(which also included Protestants, Catholics, Jews,
Italian-Americans, and Irish-Americans) in response
to the following stimulus: “Suppose a family from
any of these American groups were about to move
next door. Are there any of them you would prefer
not to have as neighbors?” Multiple choices were
permitted. See Joseph Greenblum and Leonard I.
Pearlin, “Vertical Mobility and Prejudice: A Socio-
Psychological Analysis,” in Reinhard Bendix and
Seymour Martin Lipset, editors, Class, Status, and
Power, Glencoe, Illinois: The Free Press, 1953, fn. 6.
Negroes as neighbors. The difference of 6.6
(=70.8—64.2) per cent might be taken as
presumptive evidence that the upwardly
mobile respondents were more prejudiced
than the stable respondents, confirming a
proposition derived from the consideration
of the potential deterioration of personal
controls in the process of upward mobility.
Such an interpretation is, however, prema-
ture: on the basis of this difference alone
one cannot distinguish between the effect of
father’s occupation per se and the effect
of intergenerational mobility. The theory
evolved from consideration of the structure
of competition and socialization would like-
wise predict the upwardly mobile to be more
prejudiced than the stable nonmanual re-
spondents. The upwardly mobile were reared
in an environment presumably more con-
ducive to anti-minority prejudices and may
not yet have assimilated fully the attitudes
appropriate to their class of destination.
The real evidence that there is in the
Elmira data a genuine “mobility effect”
apart from the additive influences of class
of origin and class of destination comes from
comparison of the percentages of down-
wardly mobile and stationary manual work-
ers who prefer to keep Negroes out of their
neighborhoods. We find that 63.2 per cent
of the downwardly mobile respondents and
55.9 per cent of the stable manual respon-
dents express anti-Negro sentiments. The
difference of —7.3 (=55.9—63.2) per
cent, calculated in the same direction as the
previous difference for nonmanual respon-
dents of different class backgrounds, indi-
cates that the effect of father’s occupation
among manual respondents is just the re-
verse of the effect observed among non-
manual respondents. This is, of course,
precisely the condition which indicates that
an additive model—such as the one derived
from considering the structure of competi-
tion and socialization—does not fully ac-
count for the data. Apparently, recourse
must be made to the hypothesis derived
from the contemplation of personal and so-
cial controls in order to account for these
data. One way of testing the significance of
the presumed “mobility effect” is to examine
second order differences. In the present case,
the second order difference of 13.9 [=6.6—
(—7.3)] per cent yields a ratio of 1.74
when divided by the standard error of the
second order difference.'* This ratio is sig-
nificant at the 0.05 level and might be rela-
tively convincing evidence of the presence
of a “mobility effect” in the Elmira data if
they were not suspect on other grounds.
Inspection of the marginal totals in the
upper panel of Table 1 reveals that both
father’s and respondent’s current occupa-
tional status are positively related to preju-
dice. That is, the higher one’s class of origin
or class of destination the more likely that
one prefers to exclude Negroes from one’s
neighborhood. Of course, such an association
is not contemplated by either of the theo-
retical orientations discussed above, but that
is not the main point. There is just too much
independent evidence that prejudice toward
Negroes is inversely associated with current
occupational status for us to contemplate
seriously the possibility that the zero order
associations revealed by the Elmira data
are substantively correct. We cannot, of
Probably the most sophisticated study of
the relationship between prejudice and social

 

pation. These results, like the zero order associa-
tions presented in the text, are obscured by the
presentation of the data, but may be derived from
Greenblum and Pearlin, op. cit., Tables IT and III.
Further evidence will be found in Bettelheim and
Janowitz, Social Change and Prejudice, op. cit.,
Table 21 (A), p. 328, and in Robin M. Williams,
Jr., et al., Strangers Next Door: Ethnic Relations
in American Communities, Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1964, Table 4.11, p. 53.
However, data from the Detroit area study cited
by Bettelheim and Janowitz, op. cit., Table 6 (I),
p. 22, show no monotonic relation between cur-
rent occupation and anti-Negro prejudice. The
lower white collar (clerical and sales workers) and
lower blue collar (operatives, service workers, and
laborers) groups are most prejudiced, while the
upper white collar (professional and managerial
personnel) and upper blue collar (craftsmen and
foremen) are more tolerant. If Negroes are exert-
ing pressures for clerical employment in white
collar bureaucracies, these findings may well be
consistent with the theory evolved from the con-
sideration of competition and socialization. The
low level of prejudice among craftsmen may well
be due to the fact that Negroes pose no threat to
them, being systematically excluded by union poli-
cies from the traditional crafts but not from the
assembly line jobs classified as lower blue collar.

15 One hypothesis, of course, is that in small
towns such as Elmira the working classes have
greater exposure to Negroes and discover their
prejudices are unfounded. Actually, many manual
workers in such places may in fact already have
Negroes for neighbors and, hence, the item might
reflect residential segregation rather than prejudice.
Indeed, rejection of Negroes as neighbors is a better
indicator of the acceptance of discriminatory prac-
tices than of deep-rooted prejudices—two variables
which may vary somewhat independently of each
other because one may practice discrimination for
economic reasons as well as for ones rooted in
prejudice. For this reason, we might well have
studied in the text agreement with the statement
that, “Generally speaking, Negroes are ignorant
and lazy,” an item with greater face validity as an
indicator of prejudice. However, analysis of this
item reveals no significant mobility effect (although
the second order difference is in the expected direc-
tion) and we wished in these initial sections to
evaluate published evidence that supports the pres-
ence of a mobility effect.
mobility is Silberstein and Seeman’s study
in the metropolitan area of Morgantown,
West Virginia. Prejudice toward Negroes
was measured by the anti-Negro scale devel-
oped in The Authoritarian Personality; the
relationship of this measure to father’s and
current occupation is shown in the upper
panel of Table 2. In their analysis of these
materials, Silberstein and Seeman adopted
the expedient of performing separate ana-
lyses for respondents in manual and non-
manual occupations, thus making it impos-
sible to separate the effects of mobility per
se from the effects of father’s occupation.
Our own arrangement of the data in Table 2
overcomes this difficulty; unfortunately,
however, we cannot study the significance
of the second order differences as we did in
reviewing the Elmira study because Silber-
stein and Seeman do not report the standard
deviation of the anti-Negro scale within
combinations of father’s and current occu-
pation. The data in the upper and lower
panels of Table 2 do, however, permit us to
fit an additive model to the data and then to
inspect the deviations from this model. Let-
ting P be the individual’s anti-Negro scale
score, letting F take on the values 0 and 1
depending upon whether or not a respond-
ent’s father was manual or nonmanual and
letting S take on the values 0 or 1 depend-
ing upon whether or not the respondent’s
current occupation is manual or nonmanual,
we find that the regression of P on F and S

is given by P=12.45-10.78(F)—1.01(S).
As expected, the regression reveals that the
relationship of current occupation to preju-
dice is an inverse one, even after controlling
for father’s occupation. The net effect of
father’s occupation is, however, positive and
nearly as large as the net effect of current
occupation. This curiosity has no obvious ex-
planation and makes us as suspicious of
these data as we were of the Elmira data
studied above. Of course, we cannot evaluate
the statistical significance of either net re-
gression coefficient since we do not know the
standard deviation of the anti-Negro scale
scores.

The regression equation presented above
may now be used to determine whether or
not there are any substantial effects of mo-
bility after taking into account the additive
effects of father’s and current occupation.
We note, for example, that the anti-Negro
scale score for stationary nonmanual work-
ers expected on the basis of the regression
equation is 12.45-+-0.78—1.01=12.22, since
both F and § take on the value 1 for sta-
tionary nonmanual workers. The observed
mean on the anti-Negro scale for stationary
nonmanual workers is 11.9, so that this
stable group is slightly less prejudiced than
one expects on the basis of class of origin
and class of destination. The remaining com-
parisons of the actual means with those ex-
pected on the basis of the regression equa-
tion are shown in the second and third panels
of Table 2. Although the additive model ex-
pressed by the regression equation tends to
reproduce the actual mean anti-Negro preju-
dice scores for each combination of father’s
and current occupation quite well, the ob-
served deviations are exactly the ones postu-
lated by the theory of personal and social
controls. That is, the upwardly and down-
wardly mobile have more prejudice than
one expects on the basis of their class of
origin and their class of destination. Al-
though again we are lacking the required
sums of squares for testing the statistical
The inconclusiveness of the Elmira and
West Virginia studies suggests the need for
new studies of the relationship between so-
cial mobility and prejudice. Here we report
the results of an investigation based on a
national survey completed in December,
1963, by the National Opinion Research
Center. A representative sample of the non-
institutionalized adult population of the
United States was drawn for this survey by
multi-stage area probability sampling to the
block level and quota sampling within blocks
according to age, sex, race and employment
status. From the total sample size of 1413,
we excluded all 187 Negro respondents and
also 44 white respondents who did not re-
spond to one or more of the items studied
below. In all, 1182 cases remain for analysis.
The findings may be generalized to the adult
white population and are, to the best of the
authors’ knowledge, the first data bearing on
the relationship between occupational mo-
bility and prejudice which represent a na-
tional cross-section.

To measure prejudice, we constructed an
eight-item Guttman scale of Pro-Integration
Sentiments based on favorable (pro-Negro)
responses to items referring largely to inter-
racial contact. The items included, for ex-

16 Jn the original source, it is claimed that mo-
bility has no effect on anti-Negro prejudice. See
Fred B. Silberstein and Melvin Seeman, “Social
Mobility and Prejudice,” American Journal of So-
ciology, 65 (November, 1959), p. 261.
ample, questions about the segregation of
public transportation, bringing Negroes
home to dinner, and inter-marriage laws.
The coefficient of reproducibility for the
scale was 0.93; the minimum marginal re-
producibility was 0.67; thus the scale
achieves (100) (0.93—0.67) /(1—0.67)=79
per cent of the possible improvement over
predictions made from the marginals alone.
After allocating all observed scale patterns
to one of the nine perfect scale types, scores
ranging from zero to eight were assigned to
the scale positions. The high scores were as-
signed to scale patterns most favorable to
Negroes; accordingly, unlike the data dis-
cussed previously, a low rather than a high
score is indicative of prejudice. Since the
items formed a Guttman scale by the usual
criteria, one can think of the scores on the
scale of Pro-Integration Sentiments as just
the number of responses favorable to Ne-
groes on an eight-item test. Mean scores
may, likewise, be interpreted as the average
number of responses favorable to Negroes.!7

Mean scores on the Pro-Integration Senti-
ments Scale are presented in Table 3 by fa-
ther’s and main earner’s occupation. (Main
earner’s occupation was used so that women
could be assigned to an occupational class.)
As one can see from the total row and total
column in the upper panel of Table 3, both
father’s and main earner’s occupation have
positive, though not perfectly monotonic,
zero order associations with pro-Negro atti-
tudes. Consequently, they are inversely asso-
ciated with prejudice as one would ordinarily
expect and as the theory about competition
and socialization would seem to require.
Further discussion of these results is post-
poned momentarily in order to introduce the
derivation of the expected values shown in
the second panel of Table 3.

In order to generate the mean prejudice
scores expected by the additive model de-
tived from the theory of competition and
socialization, the occupational categories
identified in Table 3 were represented as
dummy variables and the multiple regression
of Pro-Integration Scale scores on them was
computed.’® The equation is of the form

17 For further discussion of this scale, see Don-
ald J. Treiman, “Status Discrepancy and Prejudice,”
American Journal of Sociology, 71 (March, 1966).

18 Daniel Suits, “The Use of Dummy Variables in
where P=the Pro-Integration Scale score;
X,=1 if the respondent’s family’s main
earner is upper white collar and 0 otherwise;
X2=1 if the main earner is lower white
collar and 0 otherwise; X3—1 if the main
earner is upper blue collar and 0 otherwise;
X4=1 if the main earner is lower blue collar
and 0 otherwise; each Z;=1 if the respond-
ent’s father was in the similarly defined oc-
cupational categories for fathers and 0
otherwise; and N=1 if the respondent re-
sides outside the census South and 0 other-
wise.

By adding the region of residence variable
we were able to take into account one of the
primary factors affecting norms of tolerance
and intolerance toward Negroes, to wit, the
cultural differences which still linger between
South and North long after the abolition of
slavery. This seemed particularly advisable
in view of Bettelheim and Janowitz’s caution
that to study the effects of mobility “in na-
tional samples is highly complex, because
the norms of the many social groupings be-
come much harder to identify.” 1°

The solution of the regression equation
described above yields the following net re-
gression coefficients:
Number of Cases

 

Upper white-collar 119 32 57 14 6 228
Lower white-collar 29 10 15 6 1 61
Upper blue-collar 95 47 179 54 8 383
Lower blue-collar 31 12 64 37 5 149

Farm 68 36 124 49 84 361

* Source: NORC Survey SRS-330.

** Occupational groups were formed by effecting the following combinations of the major occupation
groups of the United States Bureau of the Census (census categories shown in parentheses): Upper white-
collar (professional, technical, and kindred workers; managers, officials, and proprietors, exc. farm) ;
lower white-collar (clerical and kindred workers; sales workers) ; upper blue-collar (craftsmen, foremen,
and kindred workers; operatives and kindred workers); lower blue-collar (service and private house-
hold workers; laborers, except farm and mine); farm (farmers and farm managers; farm laborers and
foremen).

*** Constructed according to methods described in the text; adjusted for region of residence (South
vs. other).
tions (e.g., the coefficient for lower white
collar fathers is slightly higher than that for
upper white collar fathers), in general the
pattern of coefficients implies that net of
region and father’s occupation, pro-Negro
sentiments increase as one ascends the oc-
cupational ladder; and likewise, net of region
and current occupational status, pro-Negro
sentiments increase as one’s father’s occupa-
tional status increases. In passing, it is of
interest to note that the position of farmers
in the ordering of occupational groups by
level of prejudice differs for main earner’s
and father’s occupation. (The mean Pro-
To fully understand the patterning of the
net regression coefficients, especially those
implicitly defined for farmers and farm
origin, one probably must complicate one’s
conception of the role of father’s occupation.
Occupational origin is not a simple measure
of exposure to class values, for, in addition,
it may serve to define one’s present position
in the labor market. The net regression
coefficients imply, for example, that blue
collar workers with farm origins are the most
prejudiced; this is the group most likely to
be threatened by competition with Negroes
for jobs. Thus, one seems obligated to recog-
nize that father’s occupational class, when
it serves to define one’s position in the labor
market (as in the case of farm origins), may
exhibit influences not expected solely from
the exposure to class values that it also
implies.

In any event, our present interest is
chiefly in evaluating the relative merits of
the two theories considered above, and not
in accounting for the relative magnitudes of
the net regression coefficients. To do this we
must calculate the level of pro-Negro senti-
ment expected from the additive model for
each combination of father’s and main
earner’s occupation. The mean Pro-Integra-
tion score predicted by the regression equa-
tion for individuals in the ijth cell (represent-
ing the intersection of the ith main earner’s
occupation and jth father’s occupation cate-
gories) is
some effect on our results; otherwise the
differences between the corresponding entries
of any two rows or columns in this panel
would be identical.

In the third panel of Table 3, one can see
that discrepancies between the actual means
and those expected from the additive model
(adjusted for region of residence) are some-
times fairly large. Although these discrep-
ancies suggest that the additive model only
partially describes the data, closer scrutiny
is required before we can claim that there
are any “mobility effects” above and beyond
the additive effects already observed in the
coefficients of the regression equation. First,
we note that the largest deviations of the
actual and expected values tend to occur in
cells where the means are established on a
few cases. Thus, some of the discrepancies
may be due to sampling error. Second, the
discrepancies do not appear to exhibit any
clear pattern. Hence, even though there may
be statistically significant interactions in
these data, their substantive importance is
not clear; any interpretation of them is likely
to be ad hoc and unsupported by a well de-
fined theoretical conception.

The discrepancies in Table 3 are sum-
marized in Table 4 according to type of
mobility. The weighted average discrepancy
observed along the major diagonal of panel
three in Table 3 reflects whether or not stable
persons have more or less Pro-Integration
sentiments than expected from the additive
model; the weighted average discrepancies
observed above and below the major diagonal
of panel three of Table 3 reflect, respectively,
whether downwardly and upwardly mobile
persons have more or less Pro-Integration
sentiments than expected from the additive
model. The data exhibited in Table 4 clearly
show that, while downwardly and upwardly
mobile persons have—as one predicts from
the theory of personal and social control—
In this paper we have contrasted two com-
plementary views about the formation of
prejudice. Studies in Elmira and West Vir-
ginia give at best minimal support to the
idea that the downwardly and perhaps the
upwardly mobile are more prejudiced than
stable persons, while a new analysis based on
a national sample provides no support at all
for this view. The other view, based on con-
siderations of competition and socialization
rather than on the weakening of personal and
social controls, found no support in the
Elmira and West Virginia studies since cer-
tain zero and second order effects operated
in directions contrary to it. But, since other
studies have shown that socioeconomic
status tends to be inversely related to
prejudice toward Negroes, this failure to
support the additive model postulated in the
theory built around a consideration of com-
petition and socialization may possibly be
attributable to faulty data. The new study
reported in this paper clearly lends support
to this latter alternative. In sum, it seems
fair to conclude that the evidence supporting
the theory of personal and social control is
at best tenuous, while that supporting the
notions derived from a consideration of com-
petition between groups for status and so-
cialization practices is more substantial.

All the conclusions and hypotheses ad-
vanced in this paper are intended to refer to
anti-Negro prejudice, although they might
also apply to attitudes toward other minori-
ties which have objectively low status.
Prejudice directed toward Jews and other
minorities with objectively high status may
well prove to be an entirely different case.?1
Further studies can profitably examine the
theoretical stances discussed here by: (a)
collecting attitudes toward other minorities;
(b) conducting surveys large enough to per-
mit more detailed tabulations by a variety of
controls; (c) carefully distinguishing be-
tween endorsements of discriminatory prac-
tices and the expression of basic prejudices; 7?
and (d) introducing direct measurements
upon the intervening mechanisms theoretic-
ally presumed to connect mobility, status,
and ethnic hostility.?8

21 Bettelheim and Janowitz found zo relationship
between socioeconomic status (measured by occu-
pation) and anti-Semitism (ibid. pp. 160-161).
Williams, et al., op. cit., p. 54, report positive asso-
ciations between occupational attainment and pre-
judice against Jews, while negative relationships
can be derived from the Elmira data (Greenblum
and Pearlin, op. cit., Tables II and III, pp. 486-
487). An inverse association is also found between
current occupation and anti-Semitism in the West
Virginia study, but, unlike the Elmira data, these
data show a positive association between father’s
occupation and anti-Semitic prejudice (Silberstein
and Seeman, op. cit., Tables 1 and 3, pp. 260-262).
Needless to say, these conflicting results demand
resolution by an investigation based on a large
and representative sample.

22¥For example, our own work reported herein
suffers from the fact that most of the items in the
Pro-Integration Scale are better measures of the
acceptance of discriminatory practices than of
fundamental prejudices.

23 The link between social mobility and prejudice
is usually made, as noted above, by positing that
the loss of personal controls and the lack of social
controls accompany mobility and are the interven-
ing variables which give rise to prejudice. Measure-
ments upon these variables and the social psycho-
logical feeling states presumed to accompany them
must be made if the relationships between status
variables and prejudice are to be fully unraveled.
