@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
HIs paper will report a part of the re-

I sults of an experimental design which

attempted to measure some of the ef-
fects of Intercultural Workshop experiences
upon the ethnic distance reactions of the
members of the workshop. The experimental
group was selected from the graduate stu-
dents who had enrolled for a summer session
at the University of Southern California in
1948, and who after careful screening had
been admitted to an education course con-
ducted as an Intercultural Workshop that
continued for six weeks. This research was
based on a pilot experiment conducted in
1947 and it included a follow-up study made
in May 1949. The persons admitted to the
workshop had given tangible evidence of
their interest in ethnic and racial problems,
in fact, most of them had creditable records
as teachers in interracial schools and neigh-
borhoods.

The control group was selected from the
graduate students who were enrolled at the
same time not in the Intercultural Workshop
but in other education courses, such as the
methods, history, and principles of educa-
tion in which racial questions did not con-
stitute the subject matter.2 The members
of the experimental group and the control
group were matched on the following points:
(1) level of university education, (2) type
of occupation, (3) years of occupational
experience, (4) income level, (5) age, (6)
sex, (7) race and ethnic backgrounds, (8)
urban and rural backgrounds, and (9)
religious backgrounds.

While it was not feasible to follow the
identical, individual matching method, thirty-
two members of the Workshop group were
fairly well matched as a group with thirty-
two members of the non-Workshop graduate
students as a group. In other words, here
were two groups of similar graduate students
enrolled for the same period of time in the
same Summer Session in education courses.
Presumably both groups were primarily
interested in improving their methods of
teaching. The experimental group experi-
enced special workshop methods, while the
control group experienced the standard edu-
cation course methods.

One hypothesis of this study was that
participation in an intercultural workshop
for six weeks would result in a measurable
decrease in ethnic distance reactions on the
part of the members toward ethnic groups.
A second hypothesis was that this decrease
in ethnic distance reactions would not be
temporary but would have lasting charac-
teristics. A third hypothesis was that two
groups of graduate students in two different
workshop groups in two different Summer
Sessions would experience somewhat similar
changes in ethnic reactions.

At the beginning of the six-weeks’ Summer
School in 1948 both the experimental group
and the control group of 32 graduate stu-
dents filled out the Bogardus Ethnic Distance
Scale, fourth edition. At the end of the
six weeks both groups filled out the same
Scale again. There was no evidence that
any one remembered the second time how
he had filled out the Scale the first time.
Some individuals in the Workshop Group
expressed the belief after the second exercise
was completed that they had filled out the
Scale in the same way as they had done
the first time, but when they had the oppor-
tunity to compare both exercises they were
amazed to discover the changes that they
had undergone. The first exercise was not
returned to either group or discussed between
the first and second exercise of filling out
the Scale.

The Intercultural Workshop had Dr. E.
Franklin Frazier, professor of sociology of
Howard University, as lecturer and discus-
sant, and the services of a number of other
important resource persons. The members
discussed the lectures and other materials
informally and worked together on selected
projects which were in turn presented to the
group and frankly discussed. Audio-visual
materials were presented which dealt with
racial tensions and methods of reducing
them. A number of trips were made to
observe tension-producing situations and ten-
sion-reducing procedures first-hand. The
members ate together regularly at least once
a day and otherwise seemed to develop a
definite group spirit. While the Workshop
group and the control group were predom-
inantly Caucasian they included a small
number of Negro and Mongoloid members
who were in the minority, thus paralleling in
a general way a situation that exists in many
communities in the United States.

The method of obtaining the Ethnic Dis-
tance Quotient of both groups was as fol-
lows: The Ethnic Distance Quotient was
first obtained for each individual by finding
the arithmetic average of his reactions to 30
ethnic groups listed on the Scale.2 Then
the arithmetic average was found for the
E.D.Q.’s of the 32 members of each group.

The E.D.Q. of the experimental group was
found to be 1.65-++ at the beginning of the
Workshop period and 1.44-+ at the close.
The members as a whole therefore at the
close of the Workshop period showed a de-
crease of .21 in ethnic distance, out of a
possible decrease of .65-++ which for the
sake of convenience will be referred to as
a decrease of 21 points. The difference
between these scores was unquestionably
significant, for the critical ratio was 7.2.
Thus, the first hypothesis seems to have been
well supported by the results, especially if
the reliability and validity of the Bogardus
Social Distance Scale be accepted as being
fairly high. Even though the ethnic dis-
tance quotients of the experimental group
members were low when they entered the
Workshop, these quotients were decreased
appreciably and significantly.

But how did these results compare with
the ethnic distance quotients of the control
group during the same six-weeks’ period?
At the end of the six-weeks’ period the
E.D.Q. of the control group was found to
be 1.731-+ which, when compared with
the score of 1.727-+ at the beginning of the
period, indicates no appreciable change.
When the decrease of 21 points in the E.D.Q.
of the experimental group is compared with
the absence of change during the same period
on the part of the control group, further
proof is evident that the first hypothesis of
this paper is supported in a measurable
degree. In other words, to the extent that
the Intercultural Workshop experience was
the only major difference in the ethnic ex-
periences of the groups being considered
during the given Summer Session, it may be
viewed as the major factor that explains the
decrease in distance that experimental group
exhibited.

At the beginning of the six-weeks’ period
the control group as a whole had an E.D.Q.
of 1.72-+ as compared with the E.D.Q. of
1.65 of the experimental group. This score
was 7 points greater than that of the 32
members of the experimental group. If the
students from whom the members of the
control group were selected had been very
much more numerous it might have been
possible to have obtained a control group
with the same ethnic distance scores at the
beginning as the Workshop group expressed.
Moreover, such a selection would not have
been representative of non-workshop grad-
uate students in education. It is to be ex-
pected that the Workshop members at the
beginning of the Workshop would show a
lower score inasmuch as each one before
being admitted to the Workshop had already
evinced an interest in reducing racial
tensions.

It may be noted that the average ethnic
distance score of the experimental group,
namely, 1.65-++ was noticeably lower than
the score of the 1,950 persons who in 1946
filled out this Scale and who were selected
on a stratified sampling basis from six dif-
ferent regions of the United States.® Their
score was 2.13+-, which means that the
E.D.Q. of the 1948 experimental group was
48 points less than the E.D.Q. of the more
representative persons from various parts of
the United States who filled out the Scale
in 1946. Thus, the E.D.Q. of the experi-
mental group at the beginning of the Work-
shop period was in itself relatively low when
compared with what might be considered a
more representative sampling of the total
population of the country. This low E.D.Q.
is to be explained in part perhaps because it
represented experienced members of the
teaching profession who were definitely in-
terested in improving interracial conditions.

Regarding the second hypothesis it may be
reported that in May, 1949, or nine months
after the Intercultural Workshop of 1948
had ended and after the second E.D.Q. of
the group had been obtained, the Scale was
given to the members again. This time the
Scales were filled out and returned by mail.
Twenty-eight members of the thirty-two of
the 1948 experimental group returned the

6 E. S. Bogardus, “Changes in Racial Distance,”
International Journal of Opinion and Attitude Re-
search, 1 (December 1947), 55-62.
Scales. The arithmetic mean of the twenty-
eight members in May, 1949, was found to
be 1.43--. The three scores (at the begin-
ning of the Workshop, at the end, and nine
months later) were 1.65+, 1.444 and
1.43-+-. These results indicate that the de-
crease of 21 points experienced during the
Workshop period was fully maintained nine
months later. As far as they go, they lend
support to the second hypothesis: that the
decrease in racial distance which occurred
during the intercultural workshop experi-
ence would have lasting characteristics.

With reference to the third hypothesis,
attention may be called to the fact that the
Ethnic Distance Scale was filled out by an
Intercultural Workshop group at the Uni-
versity of Southern California at the begin-
ning and at the end of a six-weeks’ period
in the summer of 1947. During this Summer
Session the E.D.Q. of the Intercultural Work-
shop group decreased from 1.84+ to 1.63-++,
or again it so happens (by coincidence it
may be contended) a decrease of 21 points,
which is the same as experienced by the 1948
Workshop group.” It will be observed that
the 1947 group had a higher E.D.Q. at the
beginning than did the 1948 group, an E.D.Q.
of 1.84-++ as against 1.65+-. Since 1.00 is
the lowest possible E.D.Q. obtainable (ac-
cording to the method of scoring used), the
1947 group in experiencing a decrease of 21
points in ethnic distance showed a percentage
decrease in distance of about 25 per cent as
compared with a decrease of 32 per cent
on the part of the 1948 Workshop. Adequate
data are not available to explain this dif-
ference although there was evidence that
the members of the 1948 Workshop de-
veloped an even greater rapport than did
the preceding Workshop during the six-
weeks’ period.®

The individual members of the 1948
Workshop varied considerably in the changes
in their ethnic distance quotients. Two per-
sons showed a slight increase in distance,
four stood practically still in their reactions,
and the E.D.Q.’s of four showed a decrease
in distance of 40 points or more. The
E.D.Q.’s for the remainder varied above or
below the average, some slightly and others
more definitely. All these variations may be
accounted for chiefly on the basis of person-
ality differences. Interviews with members of
the Workshop indicated that most of them
were aware of some change in their ethnic
attitudes. A few were surprised to find that
they had undergone a greater change than
they had realized.

The interviews were enlightening and
set patterns for several hypotheses to be
tested later, but they were not complete.
However, they did reveal what some of the
Workshop members believed to be the main
factors that had brought about a change in
their ethnic reactions. From the analyses of
those interviewed the most frequently men-
tioned factors in the Workshop experience
were the first-hand acquaintances that were
made with members of ethnic groups other
than their own group. When this acquaint-
ance was mutually agreeable it seems to have
played a major role in the experiences of the
Workshop members. A second factor fre-
quently mentioned with emphasis was the
role of first-hand observations through field
trips of the living conditions with which some
ethnic groups were contending. A few Work-
shop members stated that they previously
had supposed that a person could get out
from under untoward living conditions if he
wanted to and that he was to a definite
degree responsible for these unfavorable
conditions, but that field trips had helped
them to realize how some persons had prac-
tically no way of escape into a life of
relative freedom. A third factor named as
being influential was the intensive study of
a particular race relations situation. A fourth
outstanding factor included the new factual
data and the larger view and vision that
had been presented in the Workshop by the
director, the lecturers, the resource people,
and the authors of books and articles. A fifth
factor was a new conceptual framework
that some members received from the Work-
shop activities. For example, a theory was
developed by one member which submerged
all ethnic and racial groups as products of
semantics or of prejudices and left all human
beings without any insuperable racial char-
acteristics, without racial dividing lines, and
with only individual differences.

In computing the E.D.Q.’s for each ethnic
group of the 30 ethnic groups named on the
Scale by taking the arithmetic averages of
the E.D.Q.’s of the members of the experi-
mental group from the “before” and “after”
tests, it was found that many variations had
occurred. The E.D.Q. accorded one ethnic
group had been increased during the Work-
shop period, no appreciable change had
taken place in the E.D.Q. of five groups,
while considerable change (up to and more
than 21 points) was noticeable with refer-
ence to the majority of the ethnic groups.
There was some indication that the Work-
shop had engendered in some members a
generally more friendly attitude toward all
ethnic groups than had existed at the begin-
ning. The interview data as a whole indicate
that prime moving forces in bringing about
a decrease in ethnic distances were the spirit
of fairness in which the Workshop was con-
ducted and the rise of friendliness in and
through the daily informal discussions. “As
the Workshop developed,” said one partici-
pant, “we came to feel a spirit of working
together at problems that involved us all
and a disappearance of any awareness of
so-called racial differences.”® Moreover, the
absence of either an authoritarian or a
laissez-faire group atmosphere and the man-
tenance to an outstanding degree of a demo-
cratic group atmosphere evidently played a
major role in reducing a sense of racial
differences.

This experiment in measuring changes in
ethnic reactions needs to be repeated in
various parts of the country and with differ-
ent ethnic groups. Further precision is
needed in obtaining identical individual
matching in order that every possible factor
that might explain changes in ethnic reac-
tions may be taken into consideration.
