@SAGE As)A
Stress, Illness Behavior, and the Sick Role

Author(s): David Mechanic and Edmund H. Volkart
Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 26, No. 1 (Feb.,
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2090512
Accessed: 20-06-2016 20:04 UTC
with the relative influence of stress as

compared with the tendency to adopt
the sick role upon the frequency of known
illness. It was undertaken to resolve some
questions posed by research purporting to
find a direct relationship between stress and
“illness in general,” i.e., regardless of spe-
cific diagnosis.

Hinkle and Wolff,) for example, studied
the long-term patterns of health and illness
among 2934 employees of a large organiza-
tion which had maintained excellent medical
records for its personnel. They found that,
over long periods of time, the frequency of
known illnesses (including the more com-
mon ones) was closely associated with vari-
ous occupational and social conditions which
frustrated the needs and aspirations of the
individuals studied, and which placed heavy

T HE research reported here is concerned
or conflicting demands upon them, or both.
As a consequence, they regarded social and
interpersonal stresses as major etiological
factors in “all forms of illness,” and they
concluded, “In the population in general,
those who are attempting to adapt to such
difficult life situations are those who exhibit
a major proportion of the illnesses occurring
in the adult population.” ?

Such research, valuable as it is, fails to
distinguish between two analytically sepa-
rate phenomena: the development of illness
states (symptoms, disease processes) on the
one hand, and the act of coming under medi-
cal care on the other. Severe or prolonged
stress may, indeed, produce physical symp-
toms,’ but this alone does not mean that all
such “sick” persons will seek medical care
with the same regularity. Thus it may be
premature to assume that differential fre-
quencies in medical visits and diagnoses re-
flect proportionate differences in stressful
experience or actual sickness, at least until
the selective processes by which sympto-
matic persons become patients are better
understood.

If, in research, we fail to control for such
selective processes, misleading etiological hy-
potheses may be formulated on the basis of
known patient populations that have a sys-
tematic bias. For example, persons who fre-
*Talcott Parsons, The Social System, Glencoe:
The Free Press, 1951, especially chapter 10.

5 This is not the place to develop the complexities
and implications of the Parsonian formulations. A
few characteristics of the sick role as described by
Parsons should, however, be noted: (1) that the
person adopting this role is expected to seek com-
petent medical care and take all measures necessary
to get well, and (2) that the person is released from
his usual role responsibilities in order to facilitate
his recuperation and return to usual roles in the
near future.

Empirically, the ideal model of the sick role is
often not fully realized. Persons often seek medical
aid obtaining only partial release from usual respon-
sibilities, while others obtain full release (i.e., they
do not report to work, go to bed, etc.), but fail to
consult physicians. Furthermore, persons are more
or less motivated to get well and resume usual ac-
tivities with varying rapidity. The contingencies of
social structure and group expectations and influ-
ences are highly important in determining whether
a person will assume the sick role and, if he does, in
what manner, For a fuller discussion of the vari-
ables and how they operate in various settings, see
David Mechanic, “Illness and Social Disability:
Some Problems in Analysis,” Pacific Sociological
Review, 2, (Spring, 1959), pp. 37-41. For a discus-
sion of the sick role in a military setting, see David
M. Schneider, “Social Dynamics of Physical Dis-
ability in Army Basic Training,” in C. Kluckhohn,
H. A. Murray, and D. M. Schneider, editors, Per-
sonality, in Nature, Society, and Culture, Second
edition, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1956, pp.
386-397.
desirability of the sick role, under various
conditions of stress, may motivate persons,
consciously or unconsciously, to seek its pro-
tection. He writes “Illness may be treated as
one mode of response to social pressures,
among other things, as one way of evading
social responsibilities.” ®

The import of the foregoing is to suggest
that a more systematic approach to the phe-
nomena of reported illness must explicitly
distinguish between two variables: (1) stress
factors that may produce physical symp-
toms; and (2) the inclination that different
symptomatic persons may have to seek medi-
cal treatment, i.e., to adopt the sick role.
The purpose of the present research was to
investigate both of these variables, sepa-
rately and in combination, and their bearing
on frequency of reported illness. Our con-
cern, then, is with the social phenomenon of
illness behavior, rather than with biological
disorders simply considered.

By illness behavior we mean the way in
which symptoms are perceived, evaluated,
and acted upon by a person who recognizes
some pain, discomfort, or other signs of or-
ganic malfunction. Two persons having much
the same symptoms, clinically considered,
may behave quite differently; one may be-
come concerned and immediately seek medi-
cal aid, while the other may ignore the
symptoms and not consider seeking treat-
ment at all. Various researches’ have re-
ported the existence of differential patterns
of illness behavior, as we conceive of it, but
The research was conducted with fresh-
man males at a large Western university.
They were selected as subjects because they
were of approximately the same age, and
lived and ate their meals in the same univer-
sity dormitory. Because of school require-
ments, the academic demands made upon
them were also substantially similar. At the
same time, even though these freshmen were
highly selected for admission, it could be as-
sumed that many of them would find the
college environment stressful, because of
such factors as academic and social competi-
tion, and perhaps the first prolonged separa-
tion from family and friends.

The medical records of these subjects,
during the summer following their first year
as students, were examined jointly by a
physician and a sociologist. Various data
were taken from the records, but for present
purposes the most important item was the
number of visits each student made to the
University Health Service during his fresh-
man year.?

Then, during the second week of the first
quarter of their sophomore year, a question-
naire was administered to the subjects. It
dealt with their perceptions and experiences,
the stresses they felt, their difficulties, satis-
factions, worries, and usual illness behavior
during their freshman year. The respondents
included 614 students, 94.3 per cent of the
total possible population.1° To insure that no
significant bias was introduced by those who
failed to return the questionnaire, their medi-
cal records were compared with the records
of the group studied. No significant differ-
ences in number of visits were revealed.

The specific variables used in this study
included (1) frequency of visits to a medical
facility for diagnosis and treatment; *! (2)
stress; and (3) inclination to adopt the sick
role. Since (1) has already been described,
let us now consider the measures of stress
and tendency to adopt the sick role.

The concept of stress has not been ade-
quately or precisely defined in the behavioral
sciences.!? In general, it seems to signify a
state of affairs characterized by anxiety, dis-
comfort, emotional tension, and difficulty in
adjustment; it may be temporary and situa-
tional, or protracted and recurrent. In the
present study, stress was operationally de-
fined as the subject’s report of the frequency
with which he was bothered by “loneliness”
and “nervousness.”’ These were chosen as in-
dicators of stress because they appear to be
closely associated with self-concern, sensi-
tivity to environmental threats, and difficul-
ties in dealing with relatively routine life
situations. These indicators also seemed
appropriate because of the age factor. Erik-
son,}* for example, has suggested that feel-
ings of “aloneness” and “isolation” are par-
ticularly indicative of stress among adoles-
cents. Presumably, the adolescent’s loneliness
reflects his dissatisfactions or discomfort
with his interpersonal relations, and conse-
quently with himself and his own perform-
ance.

Nervousness, on the other hand, may re-
flect concern with performance, and the an-
ticipation of possible failure in those areas
of life where high aspirations have been set.
Moreover, both loneliness and nervousness
imply excessive self-concern and the latter
may augment the former by trapping the
person in a “vicious circle.” A case in point
would be the person who is so concerned
about the adequacy of his performance that
his nervousness interferes with his ability to
do well. Implicit in what has been said is the
assumption that perception of oneself as
nervous and lonely is itself stressful, as well
as being an indicator of other stresses.

Accordingly, the respondents were asked
the following two questions:

During the past school year, how often were
you bothered by: 14

(1) Nervousness (2) Loneliness
Very often Very often
Fairly often Fairly often
Not very often Not very often

Never Never
In order to evaluate the validity of this
index, the responses were analyzed with re-
gard to such other responses as might be re-
garded as indicators of stress: worry, diffi-
culty in college, general dissatisfaction,
perception of the college environment as
stressful, and being troubled by headaches,
indigestion and inability to sleep. Statisti-
cally significant relationships, at better than
the .001 level, were found between the stress
index and all of these.!> It can be said with
some confidence, therefore, that this index
discriminates between various levels of stress
on the part of the respondents.

The second variable considered was the
inclination to adopt the sick role. In our view
this concept points to a more or less learned
pattern of behavior influenced by situational
contingencies, and indicates the probability
with which individuals will react to a given
set of symptoms.’® Persons with a high in-

15 The chi-square, a non-parametric statistical
technique, was used throughout the analysis. In all
cases (where df=1) the Yates correction for con-
tinuity was used. Two-tailed probabilities are re-
ported even though a priori predictions were made.
The reported chi-square is, therefore, a highly con-
servative estimate of relationships. Because of the
crudeness of many of the indices used, and hence
their low sensitivities, the 10 per cent level will be
accepted as evidence of statistical significance.

Since almost all freshman males are included in
the study, it can be argued that probability statistics
are not applicable. From another point of view,
however, the group studied is a sample of college
freshman attending universities of similar social
structure which provide easily accessible medical
services. It is believed that generalization to sub-
sequent classes of freshmen at the university studied,
as well as some others, would involve relatively
small error. Since the magnitude of error is un-
known, however, degree of significance will be used
here primarily as a heuristic “indicator” of relation-
ships worthy of attention.

16 Tt seems clear that differences in the tendency
to adopt the sick role are functions of learning, ex-
Responses to these questions were weighted
equally and scored, the scores ranging from
“0” (highest inclination to adopt the sick
role) to “9” (lowest inclination to adopt the
sick role). The scores were dichotomized in
such a way as to achieve the most equal divi-
sion of the population. When this was done,
a high tendency to adopt the sick role was
defined by a score of 0-5, and a low tendency
by a score of 6-9. The measure of the tend-
ency to adopt the sick role has definite weak-
nesses, which are worthy of note. In seeking
information on the likelihood of students’
reporting to the Health Service, we are tap-

 

perience, availability of medical resources, etc. The
researches of Koos and Saunders (see above foot-
note 7) indicate striking differences that are pat-
terned along class, ethnic, and cultural lines. In-
volved also may be such factors as familial pres-
sures, strength of dependency needs, stress, and the
desire for various secondary gains.
17 Our subjects were also asked how likely they
would be to be absent from classes in each of these
situations. Students’ reports of tendency to be ab-
sent from class were significantly associated well
beyond the .001 level with the measure of inclina-
tion to seek medical help. The chi square value with
one degree of freedom was 89.81.

18 Considering the subtleties of illness behavior
and secondary gain, this measure is fairly crude.
The scores, therefore, do not readily lend themselves
to meaningful, fine, distinctions. Where dichotomies
have been used in the analysis, however, the data
have been examined to insure that important effects
are not being obscured.

19 This assumption merits some qualification. It
may be justifiably argued that persons who have
considerable experience with illness and doctors
learn to become more sensitive to a variety of
symptoms and indicators of illness as well as to the
possible threatening attributes of early symptoms.
This extra-sensitivity might be one factor influenc-
ing a high inclination to seek medical care. The
possible extent of this influence among a population
as young as the one studied remains an empirical
question.
A second analysis dealt with the relation-
ship between stress, as measured, and fre-
quency of known illness. In line with previ-
ous research findings,” it was predicted that,

20 While the sample includes 614 students, infor-
mation for all students on all variables is not avail-
able. Some students either failed to respond to some
questions or responded in such a way that it was
impossible to classify them on one or more variables.
The reader should notice, therefore, that the total
N reported in Tables 1-5 varies from 592 students
to 598 students.

21 Cf. footnote 3 above as well as the extensive
bibliography in Janis, op. cit. For some other ex-
amples of the stress literature concerned with social-
psychological experiences, see J. Ruesch, “Social
Technique, Social Status, and Social Change in III-
ness,” in C. Kluckhohn and H. Murray, editors,
Personality in Nature, Society, and Culture, New
York: Knopf, 1948, pp. 117-130; S. Wolf and H. G.
Wolff, Human Gastric Function: An Experimental
as stress increased, usage of the Student
Health Service would also increase. Table 2
presents data bearing on this hypothesis. As
predicted, persons under greater stress were
more likely to seek medical aid than persons
under low stress.

The data thus indicate that, taken singly,
both the expressed inclination to adopt the
sick role and stress are associated with fre-
quency of visits to a medical facility. But
from Parsons’ viewpoint, as previously dis-
cussed, stress may not only precipitate symp-
toms, but may also be involved in the tend-
ency to adopt the sick role. If this is true,
the data should reveal a significant relation-
ship between stress, as perceived, and the
measured tendency to adopt the sick role;
that is, persons who report high stress should
also report a high tendency to adopt the
sick role. Table 3 presents data bearing on
this hypothesis. As the data show, there is a
slight reversal between the medium high and
medium low stress groups with reference to
inclination to adopt the sick role. However,
these interrelationships. It reveals that, for
the high tendency group, stress is signifi-
cantly related to medical visits; and that,
while there is an observable tendency in the
same direction among low tendency persons,
the results are not statistically significant.

In general, then, the effect of stress on
frequency of visits to a medical facility is
clear. In the high tendency group, 73 per
cent of persons under high stress were fre-
quent visitors, i.e., made three or more visits
during the period observed, while in the same
group only 46 per cent of low stress persons
were frequent visitors. In the low tendency
group, 42 per cent of high stress persons
were frequent visitors, as compared with only
30 per cent of the low stress persons. That
even a small relationship between stress and
medical visits is found in the predicted direc-
tion for the low tendency group suggests
that the effects of stress cannot be regarded
as unimportant.

However, as we have previously indicated,
persons with a high tendency to seek medi-
cal aid will probably visit a medical facility
with fewer and less acute symptoms than
will persons with a lower tendency. Thus,
even if stress does produce symptoms, its
effects on medical visits will largely depend
on the person’s illness behavior. Low tend-
ency persons are probably no less affected
symptomatically by stressful experience, but
they will be less likely to seek medical relief.

The problem can be more clearly perceived
if the data in Table 4 are reorganized with
magnitude of stress as the controlled vari-
able. Table 5 presents the data in this form,
and it indicates that, regardless of magnitude
of stress, the tendency to adopt the sick role
exerts a significant effect on actual medical
visits. In each stress group, persons with high
tendency to adopt the sick role were more
frequent visitors to the health service than
were persons with low tendency. In sum, the
probability that persons will be frequent
visitors to a medical facility is largely a func-
The inclination to adopt the sick role, a
variable heretofore not investigated in
studies of stress and illness, has been the
major focus of this study. The frequency
with which 614 males used the Student
Health Service during their freshman year
was established directly from their health
records. In addition, their responses to ques-
tionnaire items allowed for the construction
of indices of “tendency to adopt the sick
role,” and “stress.” Analysis of these data
confirms some previous findings regarding
relationships between stress and illness in
general, but also demonstrate how this rela-
tionship is affected by the intervening vari-
able of “tendency to adopt the sick role.”
Frequency of medical visits is a function of
both these variables, but, in general, the
tendency to adopt the sick role is a more
influential variable than stress.

These findings, which again underline the
difference between true prevalence and
“known illness,” would seem to have im-
portant implications for basic research in the
future. Etiological studies are fundamental
to medical science, and to our understanding
of human health and illness behavior. But
such theories are usually proposed on the
basis of known, or reported, illnesses and ob-
served symptomatology. The data presented
here, however, indicate systematic, non-
medical biases in populations reporting for
medical diagnosis and treatment.?? In the
future, much more rigorous methodology
must be developed to separate the processes
leading to symptom formation from processes
bringing persons to medical attention. The
concept of “illness behavior,” and its meas-
urement here in terms of the tendency to
adopt the sick role, are but a few steps in
that direction.

In any event, we have attempted to indi-
cate how sociological concepts may be linked
to traditional medical concepts in the effort
to gain a deeper understanding of illness and
the phenomena associated with it. Human
beings, even when concerned with symptoms,
act under the influence of a variety of norms,
values, fears, and expected rewards and pun-
ishments—that is, in terms of the costs and
rewards offered by the “social role of the
sick person.” One of the tasks of medical
sociology is to trace the connections between
such influences and the occurrence of actual
and known illnesses in various populations,
and thus to reach a more accurate and sys-
tematic interpretation of the phenomena
involved.
