@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089343?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
a study of how perceptions of the

attitudes of members of occupational
groups, and communication with members
of such groups, are related to individuals’
own attitudes. Before describing the study,
some of the theoretical considerations will
be outlined, and the hypotheses tested will
be presented.

One of the writers has set forth some ele-
ments of a theory of communicative acts.
The theory assumes that by means of com-
munication individuals are able to maintain
simultaneous orientation toward one another
and toward the object of their communica-
tion, That is, communication enables people
to know something about how each feels
toward the other and also about the object
of communication. Such knowledge is held
to be essential in establishing both the “ready
calculability” of others’ behavior and the
basis for consensus which are so essential to
the maintenance of social systems.

When the orientations of persons are simi-
lar, both toward each other and toward ob-
jects common to them, their collective adap-
tation toward their common environment
is presumably facilitated. When people are
mutually attracted to each other and have
similar attitudes, it is easier to know how
the others will act, and to check or validate
one’s own attitudes, than in the absence of
these conditions. If this is assumed, then

T:: paper presents a partial report of
communication leading to similarity of at-
titudes will be rewarded. When attraction
toward the other persons is positive, simi-
larity of attitude will be more rewarding
than in the absence of such attraction.
Similarly, if the attitude is strongly held,
the discovery, via communication, of simi-
lar attitudes on the part of others will be
more rewarding than if the attitude is one
of relative indifference.

Since similarity of orientation can be
achieved through communication, communi-
cation is important in influencing attitudes,
particularly when the communicators are
members of a group and when an attitude is
intensely held. Communication conveys not
only feelings about another person or some
issue but also information or facts which may
affect another’s attitude.

If one is interested in the psychological
processes by which communicators maintain
common orientations toward common aspects
of their environment, it is necessary to make
certain assumptions not only about “objec-
tive” similarity but also about individual per-
ceptions of others’ orientations. Accuracy of
such perceptions is likely to increase with
increased opportunity to obtain information,
via communication, and to decrease as a
result of the “distorting” influences associ-
ated with the affective components of inter-
personal attraction and intensity of own
orientations. Whatever the degree of accu-
racy involved, such perceptions presumably
influence communicative behavior (both in
transmitting and in receiving information),
and thus in turn influence the nature of the
who might or might not be acquainted with
one another. The “presumably relevant” is-
sue was preference for Eisenhower or Stev-
enson as presidential candidates at the time
of the election, three months prior to the
time at which interviews were held. Because
of the demands of another part of the study,
data for which were obtained during the
same interviews, all of the subjects were
women, mothers of children under nineteen
years of age. All of these factors—the non-
primary nature of the “group,” the temporal
remoteness of the issue, and the generally as-
sumed low relevance of the particular issue
to this category of respondents—were
thought to have an attenuating effect upon
the hypothesized relationships. Such a “se-
vere test” was planned as part of a more
inclusive attempt to discover the limits
within which the general hypotheses apply.
Subjects, selected by probability sam-
pling ® from Detroit, Michigan, were asked
which of the two candidates they had pre-
ferred in the preceding presidential election.
It was assumed that, even under conditions
of mobility and of social and cultural change,
no very marked changes in perceptions of
occupational groups would be likely to have
occurred during the three-month interval
since the election.

Respondents were also asked to report the
preferences of their three “best friends,” and
to estimate the proportion of three occupa-
tional groups which they thought had pre-
ferred Eisenhower: practically all, more
than half, less than half, or practically none.
The occupational groups were: (1) “people
like factory workers and laborers” (repre-
sentative of the lower working class); (2)
“people like architects, lawyers, doctors and
other professional people” (representative
of the upper middle class) ; and (3) “people
like salesmen, secretaries and clerks” (rep-
resentative of the lower middle class). Em-
phasis was placed, during the interviews, on
respondents’ imagery of “people like . . .”
rather than of male workers in the occupa-
tions cited for illustrative purposes.

They were also asked how much they
concern were established: (1) those who
cared a good deal; and (2) those who cared
somewhat or were indifferent.

Objective social class was based largely
on the occupation of the respondent’s hus-
band. Four classes were set up—lower work-
ing (mainly operatives and laborers), upper
working (skilled workers), lower middle
(clerks, small business owners, and sales-
men), and upper middle (most professional
workers, executives and managers of large
businesses). The occupations of the respond-
ents’ best friends, or of best friends’ hus-
bands, were also ascertained.

The information from the interviews was
coded on IBM cards, and analyses were
made to test the hypotheses stated above.
In the analyses the upper and lower halves
of each class were combined to provide
enough numbers in each category for statisti-
cal tests of significance.
tically all of the factory workers had pre-
ferred Eisenhower. Only 36 per cent of the
Eisenhower supporters in the middle class
reported that more than half or all of the
factory workers had been for Eisenhower,
and a similar percentage of Stevenson sup-
porters in each class reported more than half
of the factory workers for Eisenhower; the
difference between 60 per cent and 36 per
cent is significant. (Sampling errors were cal-
culated specifically for the sample used in
this study.)

Perception of the attitudes of sales and
clerical workers by members of the objective
middle class reveals a similar trend (see
Table 2). Twenty-one per cent of the Eisen-
hower supporters perceived practically all of
the sales and clerical group as being for
Eisenhower; ten per cent of the Stevenson
supporters perceived the sales group in this
way. On the other hand, 36 per cent of the
Stevenson supporters in the middle class per-
ceived sales workers as being for Stevenson,
compared with 12 per cent of the Eisenhower
supporters. These differences are significant.
There was some evidence that a majority of
clerks may have been for Stevenson, while
the sales workers were predominantly for
Eisenhower.

It has been found in other studies that in
an ambiguous situation there is more op-
portunity to perceive in accordance with
one’s own needs or frames of reference. We
have also hypothesized that perception is
most likely to be subjectively influenced
when the object or class perceived is im-
portant or attractive to the perceiver. Our
findings lend support to both propositions.
Both Eisenhower and Stevenson supporters
in the middle class tended to attribute their
own attitudes to the sales-clerk group. Also,
in this ambigous situation those in the work-
ing class attributed their own attitudes to
sales workers e¢ al. However, since presum-
ably this group was less attractive to mem-
bers of the working class, the attribution
was not so great.

Where the situation is less ambiguous (at-
titudes of factory workers), perception was
not so likely to be determined by subjective
question from the voting studies that more
than half of the professional workers actu-
ally voted for Eisenhower.

These results appear to be somewhat con-
tradictory to the hypothesis concerning at-
tribution of own attitude to attractive groups
—in this case, to one’s own class. However,
finer analysis reveals that those who were in
the middle class and preferred Stevenson
were predominantly from the lower middle
class. Professional people are in the upper
middle class, and represent a group quite
different from groups in the lower middle
class. It may be that differences between
lower-middle and upper-middle respondents
were such that the latter were insufficiently
attractive to affect the judgments of the
former. These findings suggest that a group
viewed as quite different from one’s own
may be too remote to offer enough attrac-
tion to affect perception. Also, the attitudes
of professional workers were quite definitely
pro-Eisenhower; there was little ambiguity
about this.

Despite this clear-cut situation, 17 per cent
percentage of working-class respondents pre-
ferring Eisenhower than of any other cate-
gory of respondents report that they do not
know the attitudes of professionals (Table
3). This is consistent with the assumption of
general lack of concern and of little com-
munication.

Perhaps professional workers—architects,
lawyers, and doctors—were identified to some
extent with Stevenson, a lawyer. If those in
the working class preferring Eisenhower
had little opportunity to communicate with
this group of people, they may have as-
sumed that they would be most likely to be
for Stevenson. (Some information about the
amount of communication of the different
groups of respondents was gathered in the
study and will be reported later.) The re-
sults of the first analysis show rather clearly,
however, that members of a particular class
are likely to attribute their own attitudes
to the rest of that class.

The next hypothesis states that those who
communicate frequently with others will
more accurately perceive their attitudes than
will those who communicate infrequently.
The data, not shown here, do not support
this hypothesis. Whether or not the respond-
Table 4). This group also reported no greater
concern about the election than other groups
(see Table 5). This might indicate that lack
of communication, and perhaps also lack of
concern, is related to inaccurate perception
of others’ attitudes, since the working-class
group preferring Eisenhower was less ac-
curate than other groups in its perception of
factory workers’ and of professional workers’
attitudes. There is no direct relationship,
however, between communication and ac-
curacy, and it may be that the amount of
communication is not so important in ac-
curate perception as the content of the
communication. This possibility will be dis-
cussed later.

The data relevant to the hypothesis about
the relationship between concern over the
issue and perception of the different groups
show that much concern intensifies the find-
ings already reported about perception. For
example, Eisenhower supporters in the work-
ing class who reported much concern were
more likely than those who reported little
concern to perceive factory workers as be-
ing for Eisenhower. Those much concerned
in the middle class were more likely to at-
tribute their own attitudes to sales and
clerical workers than were those little con-
cerned. The analysis, however, resulted in
such small numbers in each category that
no evaluation of the significance of these
differences could be made.

The preferences and occupations of the
respondents’ friends showed a close rela-
tionship to their perceptions of the different
occupational groups. As would be expected,
the friends for the most part were reported
to prefer the same candidate as the respond-
ent. Seventy per cent of the respondents re-
ported that their friends’ preferences were
the same as their own; 20 per cent reported
their friends as preferring a different candi-
date; 7 per cent of the respondents did not
know their friends’ preferences; and for
about 3 per cent information about friends
was not obtained. No attempt was made to
determine from the friends what their prefer-
ences had actually been. The fact that
friends’ preferences are reported to be much
like the respondents’ could be the result of
varying degrees of accuracy in perceiving
similarity. Table 6 shows that probably this
similarity was not wholly the result of at-
tributing own attitude to friends. Those for
Eisenhower in the working class reported
fewer friends supporting their preferred
candidate than did those for Stevenson in the
working class. It would be expected that
there would be fewer people in the working
class for Eisenhower. There is probably,
however, some perceptual distortion.

In order to examine more closely some of
the characteristics of the most and least
accurate judges of majority preference of
occupational groups, four categories of re-
spondents were distinguished, on the basis of
the accuracy of their estimates. In the first
group (43 respondents whose perceptions
were least accurate) were those who per-
ceived most factory workers as preferring
Eisenhower and who perceived most sales
and clerical workers as preferring Stevenson.
Fourteen persons (or 33 per cent of this
group) perceived most professional workers
as being for Stevenson. In the second group
(178 respondents) were those who per-
ceived most factory workers as preferring
Eisenhower and most sales workers for Eisen-
hower. Twenty-one persons (or 12 per cent
of this group) perceived most professional
workers as being for Stevenson. In the third
group (77 respondents) were those who per-
ceived most factory workers as being for
Stevenson and most sales workers for Stev-
enson. Seven persons (or 9 per cent of this
group) perceived professional people as be-
ing for Stevenson. In the fourth group (the
249 most accurate respondents) were those
who perceived most factory workers for
Stevenson and most sales workers for Eisen-
hower. Five persons (or 2 per cent of this
group) perceived most professional people as
being for Stevenson.

The attitudes and classes of these groups
are shown in Table 7. The attitudes of the
respondents in Groups 2 and 3 correspond to
what would be expected if they attributed
their own attitudes to the different occupa-
tional groups. Thus, Group 2 perceived both
factory workers and sales workers as being
for Eisenhower, and a significantly greater
percentage of Group 2 also preferred Eisen-
hower. Group 3 perceived both occupational
groups as being for Stevenson, and a sig-
nificantly greater percentage of Group 3
also preferred Stevenson. It can also be seen
that in both Groups 1 and 2 there is a
much greater percentage of Eisenhower sup-
porters in the working class than in the
middle class. In these two groups were 35
of the 47 people who perceived professional
workers as being for Stevenson. It has al-
ready been pointed out that those working
class respondents supporting Eisenhower
were more inaccurate in the perception of
It is not possible to evaluate these differ-
ences statistically, since they are based on
the numbers of best friends. However, the
number of friends in the different groups
and their preferences correspond rather
closely with the respondents’ perceptions of
the occupational groups involved.

In Group I (by whom factory workers
were perceived as being for Eisenhower and
sales workers for Stevenson), there were
relatively few friends in the clerical and sales
groups and the majority of these were said
to be for Stevenson. The reported preference
of the majority of their friends in the
operative group (factory workers) was also
reported as being for Stevenson, however.
The percentage for Stevenson (52%) is less,
though, than the percentage (73%) among
the friends of the respondents in Group 4
(accurate perceivers). In Group I there was
also a large percentage who perceived pro-
fessional workers inaccurately. Although the
percentage whose attitudes were not known.
In this group were also a number of respond-
ents who perceived professional workers’
attitudes inaccurately. A number of their
friends were reported to be in the profes-
sional group, and 74% preferred Eisen-
hower.

In Group III (by whom sales workers
et al. were perceived as being for Stevenson)
there were 20 friends reported as in the sales
and clerical groups, and the great majority
were said to prefer Stevenson. The friends
who were professional workers were also re-
ported as tending to prefer Stevenson, but
in Group III there was not much inaccurate
perception of professional workers’ attitudes.

This analysis shows that perception of the
attitudes of different groups corresponds
quite closely to the attitudes of friends in
those groups. There was also evidence that
where there were few friends in a particular
group, the attitudes of the group were not
likely to be perceived accurately.

The results of this analysis are subject to
two interpretations: (1) perception of atti-
tudes of occupational groups is affected by
knowledge of the attitudes of best friends in
these occupational groups; and (2) attitudes
which correspond with the respondents’ own
attitudes are attributed to best friends and
to their own occupational groups.

From the data in this study there is no
way of proving conclusively either of these
interpretations. Other data show that there
was no difference in the amount of comunica-
tion reported with best friends of either
preference. Thus there was the same oppor-
tunity for knowing the attitudes of friends
reported as having attitudes different from
the respondents’ as for knowing those of
friends reported as having the same attitude.
Of course, communication with friends re-
ported as having attitudes different from the
respondents’ may have been of a different
content from communication with friends
reported as having similar attiudes. That is,
the only times a friend was reported as
having a different attitude may have been
when the communication with that friend
definitely established the friend’s preference.
Otherwise, the friend was reported as having
a similar attitude. This would mean that
unless more were known about the kind of
communication, the amount of it is irrele-
vant except insofar as it provides the op-
portunity for the respondent to know her
best friend’s attitude. It would also suggest
that reports of friends’ attitudes are subject
to some distortion.
sus.

It can probably be assumed that within
non-primary “groups” like occupational
classes, attributions of consensus are more
subject to perceptual “distortion” than in
face-to-face groups in which information
about attitudinal distributions is easier to
come by. It is also likely that membership
attraction is less strong toward occupation
classes than toward most voluntary face-to-
face groups. If this is so, perceptual dis-
tortion resulting from attraction may not
have played a prominent part in this study.
Insofar as there is influence from class mem-
bership upon attitudes like those here in-
vestigated, however, it is likely that such
influence is in some degree mediated by the
degree and nature of consensus attributed to
class members.

In terms of the theoretical basis for this
study, it can be concluded that the bases for
perceived similarity between own attitude
and modal attitude of groups are both
“Tealistic” (i.e., based upon information re-
ceived via communication) and “autistic”
(ie., based upon desired similarity). The
present study makes no attempt to separate
“projective” attribution of own attitudes to
members of attractive groups and “intro-
jective” acceptance of what are believed by
group members, on independent grounds, to
be characteristic attitudes of such groups.
Its findings are consistent with the assump-
tion, however, that attitudinal homogeneity
within occupational classes can be more fully
accounted for with an adequate theory of
the determinants of perceived consensus than
without it.
