American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
We develop and test a theory of relational cohesion, which predicts how and
when people in exchange become committed to their relationship. The theory
focuses on dyads within networks and predicts that more equal power and
greater “total,” or mutual, power promote exchanges that arouse positive
emotions and create perceptions of the relation as a cohesive unit. The be-
havioral consequences are a tendency for actors to (1) stay in the exchange
relation despite attractive alternatives, (2) provide each other token gifts,
and (3) contribute to a new joint venture. Three laboratory experiments test
and support the theory. Our results suggest that complementary emotional/
affective and uncertainty-reduction processes explain the effect of repetitive
exchanges on commitment formation. The broad implication is that frequent
exchanges by the same actors in a network result in their relation becoming
a valued object in itself and a source of informal constraint on malfeasance.
1981). Sometimes exchange relations are
strong, friendly, and close; sometimes they
are weak, impersonal, and distant; but in ex-
change networks they are likely to fall some-
where between these extremes. We use the
concept of relational cohesion to capture the
effects of repeated or frequent exchanges on
actors’ definition of their relationship as a
unifying force or an object of attachment in
its own right (Lawler 1992a; Lawler and
Yoon 1993). In an exchange network, dyads
with greater relational cohesion should exert
greater informal constraints on opportunism
or malfeasance (Williamson 1981; Grano-
vetter 1985).

We argue specifically that frequent ex-
changes between two actors in a network
tend to make their relation an expressive ob-
ject, valuable in its own right, because mild,
positive emotions are produced by success-
ful exchanges, and parties in these exchanges
attribute this emotion in part to their relation-
ship (Lawler 1992a; Lawler and Yoon 1993).
The emergence of an exchange relation can
be viewed as incipient “group formation,”
produced by growing perceptions of interde-
pendence (see Rabbie and Horowitz 1988;
Kramer 1991), and the concept of commit-
ment can capture the behavioral conse-
quences of this process.
Commitment is defined here as the attach-
ment an individual feels to a collective en-
tity, such as a relation, group, or organiza-
tion (Kanter 1968, 1972). Such person-to-
group attachment can involve instrumental
(utilitarian), affective (emotional), or norma-
tive ties (e.g., Parsons 1951). Instrumental
commitment is based on the perceived costs
of leaving the collective, whereas affective
commitment is an emotional or cathectic at-
tachment to the group. Normative commit-
ment is the moral obligation to uphold col-
lective rules (Kanter 1968; Meyer, Allen, and
Gellatly 1990). For example, in an employ-
ment relationship, employees with strong af-
fective attachment stay “because they want
to,” employees with instrumental attachment
stay “because they need to,” and employees
with normative attachment stay “because
they feel they ought to” (Meyer et al. 1990:
710). We focus here on emotional/affective
attachment and, in our case, the exchange re-
lation is the group or collective entity.

Social structures—whether based on
power, status, or wealth—produce different
frequencies of interaction among a set of ac-
tors. This particular impact of social struc-
ture is basic to Emerson’s (1972, 1981)
microtheorizing about “exchange relations,”
because the repetitive transactions that con-
stitute exchange relations stem from social-
structural conditions (Emerson 1972; Cook
and Emerson 1978). It also is basic to Blau’s
(1977) macrotheorizing about how and why
structural dimensions shape social contacts
or “social associations,” and to Granovetter’s
(1985) argument that economic behavior is
embedded in social relations. One explana-
tion for the effect of structure on exchange
frequency is homophily—people interact
more with similar others than with dissimi-
lar others (Blau 1977; McPherson, Popielarz,
and Drobnic 1992). Another explanation in-
volves incentives—structures make ex-
changes with some actors more “profitable”
than exchanges with others (Emerson 1972,
1981; Cook et al. 1983; Molm 1987). Ex-
change theory focuses on incentives. We at-
tempt to show how such instrumentally based
exchange relations actually foster emotion-
ally based, expressive ties between actors
(Lawler and Yoon 1993). In a broad sense, a
theory of relational cohesion suggests that
exchanges build the foundation for percep-
tions of similarity (homophily) between ac-
tors and for the interpersonal relations within
which their economic behavior is embedded.

The development of relational cohesion
and commitment is an endogenous process
that emerges from the interaction between
actors. Our theory poses two key questions
about this microprocess: First, when do the
structures that produce frequent exchanges
between actors lead them to perceive their
relationship as a positive social object unto
itself? If actors perceive their relation as a
distinct social object in Parsons’s (1951)
terms, or as a “third force,” in Berger and
Luckmann’s (1966) terms, they should be
willing to act with reference to that social
object. Second, do emotional/affective pro-
cesses help account for the emergence of ex-
change relations as a distinct social object?
If so, it may be possible to incorporate emo-
tional processes explicitly into social-ex-
change explanations for “‘stickiness” in mar-
kets, for the development of trust in net-
works, and for the formation of strong “one-
on-one” relations at key junctures of an
interorganizational field.

Suggesting that structural power (or power-
dependence) produces commitment among
those who exchange repeatedly over time is
not a new idea (see Cook and Emerson 1978,
1984; Tallman, Gray, and Leik 1991). The
standard exchange-theory explanation for the
causal chain—structural power > exchange
frequency + commitment—is that frequent
exchanges reduce uncertainty. Thus, actors
who exchange frequently with each other
come to know each other more, find each
other’s behavior more predictable, and be-
lieve they have similar orientations to the ex-
change situation (Emerson 1981; Cook and
Emerson 1978, 1984). The development of
trust (Coleman 1990), relation-specific assets
(Williamson 1981), and social embeddedness
(Granovetter 1985) can all be seen as parts of
a general uncertainty-reduction process (see
also Kollock 1994).

Our recent work (Lawler and Yoon 1993),
however, indicates that the commitment pro-
cess emerging from repetitive exchanges has
important emotional/affective components
(also see Homans 1961). We have shown that
consummated exchanges give actors an
“emotional buzz” in much the same way as
jointly accomplishing a task with another
fosters feelings of satisfaction, enthusiasm,
or excitement. These feelings mediate the
impact of structural power and exchange fre-
quency on commitment behavior. Thus, we
have introduced an intervening emotional/af-
fective link between frequent exchanges and
commitment behavior.

In the theory of relational cohesion we
propose and test here, we seek to explain
how and when emotional processes generate
commitment. We report the results of three
separate laboratory experiments, each testing
the theory with a different form of commit-
ment behavior: staying in the relation when
good alternatives exist, unilaterally providing
token gifts to each other, and contributing to
a joint venture that constitutes a social di-
lemma.! Stay behavior is the traditional indi-
cator of commitment in work on organiza-
tions (Halaby and Weakliem 1989; Mueller
and Price 1990). Gift-giving can be con-
strued as symbolic of a relation as long as
the gifts are token (i.e., have little or no ex-
trinsic value), unilateral (i.e., given without
knowing whether the other is giving), and
noncontingent (i.e., given without an explicit
expectation of reciprocity) (Heath 1975;
Lawler and Yoon 1993). Contributing to a
joint venture (i.e., shared pool) puts indi-
vidual resources at risk (Coleman 1990). The
theory of relational cohesion posits an en-
dogenous process by which the structural po-
tential for cohesion is actualized in “rela-
tional cohesion,” that is, in.the actors’ defini-
tions of the relation as a unifying force in the
situation. Commitment behavior, whether in-
strumental, affective, or normative, is a
proximal result of relational cohesion.
work. They both have at least one alternative
other with whom they may exchange if they
do not negotiate an agreement with each
other, and the network is “negatively-con-
nected” because each can exchange with
only one other at a given point in time (Em-
erson 1972, 1981; Cook et al. 1983). Second,
the expected benefits within the focal rela-
tion are greater than the expected benefits
from the alternative relation, and thus, there
are structurally based incentives for actors to
negotiate and successfully exchange with
each other (Homans 1961). Many ongoing
exchange relations fit this characterization.
Third, the exchanges are negotiated in an ex-
plicit manner rather than being nonnego-
tiated (see Molm 1994 for more discussion).
The emphasis on a particular focal dyad dis-
tinguishes this work from much recent re-
search on exchange networks (see Skvoretz
and Willer 1993). Some examples of dyads
that fit these three scope conditions are two
college roommates negotiating household
duties and responsibilities during an aca-
demic year, labor and management represen-
tatives negotiating contracts repeatedly over
time, and two corporations negotiating re-
peatedly to buy and supply raw materials.

The theory reduces to a causal model, por-
trayed in Figure 1. In this model, the dimen-
sions of structural power indirectly produce
commitment behavior through a sequence of
theoretically-specified steps—the endog-
enous process. The endogenous process in-
tertwines behavior (exchange frequency),
mild positive emotions (pleasure/satisfaction,
interest/excitement), and perceptions of the
relation as a unit (relational cohesion). Given
this theoretical model, indirect effects of
power, not direct effects, constitute support
for the theory. In the following pages, we for-
malize the theory, define key terms, and ex-
plicate the rationale for the predicted paths
in the causal model shown in Figure 1.
The value of power or dependence is greater
than 1, because the theory stipulates that
each actor benefits more from exchanges in
the focal relation than in alternative ones.

A power-dependence approach is useful for
understanding both cohesive and divisive ten-
dencies in a social structure because it adopts
a nonzero-sum conception of structural power
(Bacharach and Lawler 1981; Lawler 1992b;
Lawler and Ford 1993). A zero-sum concep-
tion indicates an inverse relation between ac-
tors’ power capabilities—an increase in A’s
power by definition entails a decrease in B’s.
The focus in a zero-sum conception is on the
differentiating, coercive, and divisive effects
of a power capability (Kanter 1972). A non-
zero-sum conception is an important theoreti-
cal shift because it allows the total or average
power in a relation to vary, and therefore, ac-
tors in a relation can both gain or lose power
simultaneously. For example, the dependence
on each other (mutual or “total” dependence)
can increase or decrease; Emerson (1972:63)
refers to increased mutual dependence as a
“cohesion” effect of the power-dependence
relation. A similar idea is implied by Thibaut
and Kelley’s (1959; Kelley and Thibaut 1978)
concept of “mutual fate control,” which they
define as the degree of control each has over
Thus, a nonzero-sum conception of power
suggests that the relative power in a dyad and
the total or average power across actors are
two distinct dimensions of structural power.
Changes in total power can occur while the
relative power of two actors remains con-
stant, and changes of relative power can oc-
cur without changing the total power in the
relation. Both the total (mutual) dependence
and relative dependence in an exchange rela-
tion are potential sources of cohesion in the
dyad. The concept of “structural cohesion”
is a way to integrate the effects of relative
and total power dependence.

We define structural cohesion as the struc-
tural potential for instrumental cooperation
in an exchange relation. Instrumental coop-
eration exists in an exchange relation when
each actor is likely to benefit more from a
negotiated exchange in the focal relation than
from an alternative exchange relation (Pruitt
where SCrand SC7yyrefer to the first and sec-
ond partial derivatives of structural cohesion
(SC) with respect to total power, SCpr and
SCprp to the first and second partial deriva-
tives with respect to relative power, and SCrp
refers to the multiplicative effect of relative
and total power. (The proof for these deriva-
tions is available from the authors.)

The set of partial derivatives describes how
relative and total power induce varying de-
grees of structural cohesion. Structural cohe-
sion is a positive function of total power
(SCr> 0), and it increases at a decreasing
rate (SC;77 < 0); structural cohesion is a nega-
tive function of unequal power (SCr < 0); a
unit change of relative power has a smaller
negative effect on structural cohesion as
power inequality increases (SCrpr > 0). Given
that higher values of relative power mean
greater power inequality, the joint effect
(SCrr < 0) indicates that increases in total
power produce larger increments of struc-
tural cohesion under lower power inequali-
ties, and that greater power equality in-
creases structural cohesion more when total
power is greater.
Focusing on the linear relations of power
to structural cohesion (i.e., first partial de-
rivatives), the positive impact of total power
on structural cohesion (SC; > 0) captures the
point that greater total power or mutual de-
pendence in a dyad increases the opportunity
costs of leaving the focal relation. Higher to-
tal power gives actors more flexibility to
adapt and more room for misperception or
miscalculation because a larger number and
range of agreements meet a “sufficiency” cri-
terion; that is, the agreements give both ac-
tors more benefit than would be gained from
their respective alternatives. The negative re-
lation of unequal power to structural cohe-
sion (SCr < 0) is consistent with the point
that power inequalities often complicate the
bargaining agenda by raising fairness issues.
Those with power advantages tend to argue
for agreements that favor themselves; where-
as, disadvantaged actors tend to argue for
agreements that equalize benefits (Bacharach
and Lawler 1981; Hegtvedt and Cook 1987).
The joint impact of relative and total power
(SCrr < 0) indicates further that high total
power and equal power create an extra push
toward structural cohesion. In combination,
the greater flexibility provided by high total
power and the prominent fairness principle
(i.e., equal payoffs) provided by equal power
should have a positive multiplicative effect
on structural cohesion.

Axiom 1 and its derivations (equations 5
and Sa to Se) can be applied to studies on ne-
gotiation behavior, such as concessions and
punitive tactics, as well as to studies on ex-
change frequency and the nature of exchange.
Greater structural cohesion implies that mem-
bers of a given dyad will more successfully
negotiate exchanges when they each have
something the other wants. Such effects for
total power (mutual dependence) and for
equal versus unequal power have been ob-
served in some previous research (Lawler and
Yoon 1993; Lawler et al. 1995), but the pos-
sibility of an interaction effect has not been
tested.
where E refers to positive emotion and F re-
fers to exchange frequency.

The first partial derivatives indicate that
relational cohesion is a positive linear func-
tion of positive emotion (RCg > 0), positive
emotion is a positive linear function of ex-
change frequency (E, > 0), and exchange fre-
quency is a positive linear function of struc-
tural cohesion (Fsc > 0). The main point here
is that these positive relations are connected
through a “chain,” such that structural cohe-
sion (SC) directly affects exchange frequency
(F) which in turn produces positive emotion
(E), which then generates relational cohesion
(RC). This chain excludes direct effects be-
tween any two theoretical constructs beyond
the paths specified in the axiom (also see
Figure 1).
Each equation is a prediction for one path in
the theoretical model, from exchange fre-
quency through relational cohesion. The ra-
tionale for the link from exchange frequency
to relational cohesion is detailed below.

Effects of exchange frequency on emo-
tions. Negotiations take place in the context
of uncertainty and ambiguity about each
other’s constraints, orientations, and inten-
tions. Reaching an agreement, therefore, is a
joint accomplishment that should make par-
ticipants feel good (Lawler and Yoon 1993).
In fact, the uncertainty inherent in most ne-
gotiation settings should render the “emo-
tional buzz” from frequent agreements more
clearly felt and easily reported. Emotion is
defined as a relatively short-term positive or
negative evaluative state that involves neuro-
physiological, neuromuscular, and some-
times cognitive features (Kemper 1978; Izard
1991). The theory of relational cohesion fo-
cuses on mild emotions—everyday experi-
ences like feeling happy, unhappy, elated,
sad, excited, bored, or enthusiastic.

The circumplex model along with some re-
cent sociological theorizing about emotions
provides a useful approach to mild emotions
that is relevant to negotiated exchange
(Kemper 1978; Watson and Tellegen 1985;
Larsen and Diener 1992). In the circumplex
model, pleasure and arousal are the primary
dimensions of emotion, and most other emo-
tions can be categorized as combinations of
these. The arousal dimension is problematic,
however, because it is vague and can be ei-
ther negative or positive (Larsen and Diener
1992). Thus, based on Izard (1991), we treat
“interest/excitement” as a positive form of
arousal that is distinguishable from pleasure;
interest/excitement is a motivational state of
curiosity and fascination (Izard 1991; Mand-
ler 1975), whereas pleasure is a feeling of
gratification or satisfaction. Interest/excite-
ment is “feeling energized”; pleasure is
“feeling satisfied.” Interest/excitement is
based on an expectation of future rewards,
while pleasure/satisfaction is based on re-
wards received (Izard 1991).

Extrapolating from Izard (1991), one
would predict stronger effects for interest/ex-
citement than for pleasure/satisfaction if fre-
quent exchanges induce an orientation to the
future or to anticipated outcomes (“looking
forward’); stronger effects for pleasure/sat-
isfaction would be predicted if frequent ex-
changes foster an orientation to the past or
outcomes in hand (“looking backward’). Ac-
tors in a negotiated exchange may look ei-
ther forward or backward, as Macy (1993)
has recently suggested, and our previous re-
sults (Lawler and Yoon 1993) suggest that
interest/excitement mediates the impact of
exchange frequency on commitment more
than does pleasure/satisfaction. In our earlier
study, interest/excitement was a function of
exchange frequency, whereas pleasure/satis-
faction was a function of the nature of ex-
change or the payoffs from it. In this study,
we explore whether each of these emotions
are important contributors to relational cohe-
sion.

From emotion to relational cohesion to
commitment. According to the theory of re-
lational cohesion, the impact of emotion on
commitment behavior is mediated by rela-
tional cohesion, implying that actors per-
ceive the relation itself as an external, causal
force. The basis for this prediction is that
people want to reproduce the positive feel-
ings associated with exchange, and therefore
they try to understand or interpret the source
of those feelings. The emerging exchange re-
lation is likely to be a part of that interpreta-
tion; that is, the actors will attribute the posi-
tive emotions in part to their relationship
with each other. In this sense, the emotions
experienced individually are interpreted by
actors as coming from something they share.
The stronger the positive emotions produced
by frequent exchanges, the more salient the
exchange relation will become as a target of
attachment and commitment (Lawler 1992a;
Lawler and Yoon 1993). People who think
their relation has unifying or integrating
qualities are likely to trust each other more,
anticipate relatively cooperative exchanges,
invest more in their relation, and be willing
to take risks or suffer costs to maintain the
relation.

Relational cohesion is similar to the “ob-
jectification” of the exchange relation—the
perception of it as an objective reality (Ber-
ger and Luckmann 1966). Essentially, it in-
volves incipient “psychological group forma-
tion” or “social categorization”—actors de-
fine their relation as distinctive or “set off”
from other relations in the situation (Tajfel
and Turner 1986). Our theory holds that as
an exchange relation becomes an objective
reality for actors, it exerts a subtle, positive
force of its own, and a dose of expressive-
ness is added to the instrumental foundation
of the exchange relation. This emotional/ex-
pressive emphasis represents a key difference
between our theory and related analyses by
Berger and Luckmann (1966) and Tajfel and
Turner (1986).

The “expressiveness” of the relation is dis-
tinct from the liking or interpersonal attrac-
tion of the actors for each other (Parsons
1951; Hogg and Turner 1985; Lawler 1992a;
Markovsky and Lawler 1994). Both the other
actor and the exchange relation itself can be
distinct social objects, just as the “general-
ized other” and “specific others” are distinct
objects in Mead’s theory (Mead 1934), and
the “organization” is a distinct object of at-
tachment in research on organizational com-
mitment (Meyer et al. 1990). In fact, Hogg
and Turner (1985) provide evidence that in-
terpersonal attraction is neither necessary nor
sufficient for group formation. We infer that
instrumentally based exchange relations, cre-
ated and maintained by structural-power con-
ditions, could become targets of affective at-
tachment, regardless of whether the particu-
lar actors like each other.

To conclude, the theory of relational cohe-
sion predicts that different forms of commit-
ment behavior are produced through the
same emotional/affective process. Relational
cohesion can add intrinsic and/or expressive
benefits to exchanges in a focal dyadic rela-
tion, thus increasing stay behavior; it also
can make gift-giving symbolic of joint ac-
complishments; and it can lead both actors
to perceive the relation as an emerging nor-
mative constraint, which should mitigate the
“mutual assurance” problem in a social-di-
lemma choice.
power conditions. Subjects engaged in 12
episodes of two-party negotiations (Pruitt
and Kimmel 1977; Lawler and Bacharach
1987; Lawler and Yoon 1993). Each negotia-
tion episode could involve several rounds of
offers and counteroffers. The maximum
number of rounds per episode differed in
each experiment—there were three rounds
per episode in the gift-giving experiment,
four rounds in the stay-behavior experiment,
and five rounds in the contribution experi-
ment. This allowed us to explore whether
structural-power effects are sensitive to the
number of rounds available for agreement.
Subjects were provided with opportunities to
engage in one of the commitment behaviors
during the last one-third of each experimen-
tal session, after the incipient exchange rela-
tion had a chance to form.

Each experiment employed the same 2 x 2
factorial design, manipulating relative pow-
er (equal versus unequal) and total power
(high versus low) in the dyad. Subjects were
undergraduate students at a large mid-
western university, recruited as paid volun-
teers. A total of 480 subjects participated in
the experiments. In each of these experi-
ments, 80 dyads (40 male dyads and 40 fe-
male dyads) were randomly assigned to one
of the four experimental conditions (20 dy-
ads per cell).?
company called Beta and was attempting to
sell iron ore. As the instructions explained,
the two companies had engaged in prelimi-
nary discussions, and their initial offers were
quite far apart. Alpha’s representative had
offered a price of 1 cent per unit, while
Beta’s representative had asked for 25 cents
per unit. In light of this gap, both subjects
were to negotiate on behalf of their
company’s interests (i.e., Alpha was to nego-
tiate for as low a price as possible, and Beta
for as high a price as possible).

Subjects’ “pay” depended on the agree-
ments they reached with each other or with
an alternative company. Subjects had infor-
mation only on their own profit, stated in
terms of points; they did not have exact in-
formation on their negotiation partner’s
profit at each price level, which is consistent
with related works (Lawler and Bacharach
1987; Lawler, Ford, and Blegen 1988; Law-
ler and Yoon 1993). In fact, there was an in-
verse relationship between Alpha’s profits
and Beta’s profits over the 25 possible
agreement prices.

The instructions explained that the study
would include up to 15 episodes of negotia-
tion, with one negotiation representing one
episode. In fact, the experimental session
ended after 12 episodes. The instructions
also informed subjects that each negotiation
was separate and independent, because the
price set in one episode had no formal bear-
ing on price in subsequent episodes. In each
episode the two groups negotiated anew. If
an agreement was not reached in a given epi-
sode, the price paid by Alpha or received by
Beta was determined by an agreement with
an alternative supplier or buyer. The alterna-
tive was a simulated other with whom sub-
jects did not actually negotiate. Profits from
the alternative supplier/buyer were based on
a random drawing with known probabilities
for various profit levels.

Subjects bargained with each other via
computers. One round consisted of one offer
by each party. When making an offer, sub-
jects had three options: (1) repeat their last
offer, (2) accept the last offer made by the
other, or (3) make a counteroffer (i.e., con-
cession). They had to confine offers to one
of the 25 price levels (from 1 cent to 25
cents), and once made, an offer could not be
retracted.
We manipulated power dependence by vary-
ing the probabilities of profits from agree-
ments with the alternative (for similar proce-
dures, see Bacharach and Lawler 1981; Law-
ler and Bacharach 1987; Lawler and Yoon
1993). Subjects were given an “alternative
negotiation sheet” that showed the actual
probabilities of different profits they could
earn from the alternative. Each actor had
knowledge of their own alternative and the
other’s alternative. For all power conditions,
the expected profit from an agreement with
the alternative was lower than the expected
profit from the optimal or midpoint agree-
ment in the focal dyad, which was set at 120
points.

The manipulations took the form of a sim-
ple probability distribution. In the equal
power condition, each subject in a dyad had
the same probability distribution for points
from the alternative. Under high total power,
they both had a 1 percent chance of getting
120 points, a 4 percent chance of 100 points,
a 15 percent chance of 80 points, a 60 per-
cent chance of 60 points, a 15 percent chance
of 40 points, a 4 percent chance of 20 points,
and a 1 percent chance of 0 points. Thus, the
expected value (profit) from the alternative
was 60 points. Under low total power, the
expected value (profit) from the alternative
was higher (80 points), as each subject was
offered an alternative with a 1 percent chance
of 140 points, a 4 percent chance of 120
points, a 15 percent chance of 100 points, a
60 percent chance of 80 points, a 15 percent
chance of 60 points, a 4 percent chance of 40
points, and a 1 percent chance of 20 points.

Comparable probability distributions ma-
nipulated unequal power. For the unequal-
power conditions, the expected value (profit)
of the alternative was 75 points for the high-
power actor and 50 points for the low-power
actor under high total power; the expected
value (profit) was 100 points for the high-
power actor and 65 points for the low-power
actor under low total power. Given that rela-
tive power was defined as a ratio, these ma-
nipulations provided virtually the same un-
equal power ratio for both high and low total
power conditions (RP = 75/50 = 100/65 =
1.5). The equal and unequal power condi-
tions within each total power condition had
All dependent variables were measured at the
dyad level. The first experiment dealt with
staying behavior, the second with gift-giving,
and the third with making contributions in a
social dilemma. A sentence at the end of the
instructions indicated that later in negotia-
tions, the profits from the alternative will
change (stay behavior experiment), or the
subjects have the option of giving gifts (gift-
giving experiment), or they have the option
of contributing some of their individual re-
sources to a joint venture. Further instruc-
tions, given to subjects between the eighth
and ninth negotiation episodes, explained
these options.?

Stay behavior (Experiment 1). To measure
stay behavior, the instructions between
eighth and ninth negotiation informed sub-
jects of changes in the payoffs from their al-
ternative negotiations, indicating an increase
in the expected profit. In one-half the dyads,
the expected profit from the alternative be-
came 120 points, and in the other half it be-
came 110 points. We included both levels
because our earlier study showed very low
absolute rates of staying behavior in negoti-
ated exchange (Lawler and Yoon 1993), and
we wanted to design a measure to be sensi-
tive to the subtle variations in attachment
likely to occur in such an instrumentally-ori-
ented context. Given that the expected profit
from the focal relation was 120 points, the
focal relation still offers equal or slightly bet-
ter profits than the alternative, which is con-
sistent with the scope conditions of the
theory. The total number of agreements
across these last four negotiation episodes
(episodes 9 through 12) constituted our mea-
sure for stay behavior (range 0 to 4).4

Gift behavior (Experiment 2). To measure
gift behavior, the instructions portrayed gifts
as exemplified by providing a person candy,
flowers, or a card to acknowledge a relation-
ship and stated: “Gifts allow you a way to
express how you feel about your relationship
to the other.” Gifts were made by completing
a form at the end of each bargaining episode
during episodes 9 through 12. The form
served as a voucher that subjects could ex-
change for pieces of candy after the experi-
ment. If subjects did not send a gift, they
could keep the voucher for themselves. Im-
portantly, the instructions indicated that they
would not know if the other gave them gifts
until the experiment was over. This removed
the possibility of subjects treating gifts as an
explicit exchange. The total number of times
both subjects gave gifts in negotiation epi-
sodes 9 through 12 is our measure for gift-
giving; it could range from 0 to 4.

Contribution behavior (Experiment 3). To
measure contribution behavior, the instruc-
tions indicated that after each negotiation
both actors had the chance to contribute a
fixed amount of their individual resources (40
points) to a joint account co-owned by both
subjects. All the profits- would be divided
equally. When both parties contributed, each
received a net profit of 20 points; when both
did not contribute, they received no gain or
loss; when one party contributed and other
didn’t, the noncontributor received 30 points
and the contributor lost 10 points. This was a
“decomposed” prisoner’s dilemma game
(Rapoport and Chammah 1965), but unlike
most repeated games, subjects did not know
the results (i.e., whether the other contrib-
uted) until the experiment was completed.
The total number of mutual contributions in
the last four episodes constituted our measure
of contribution behavior; like the other com-
mitment measures, it ranged from 0 to 4.5
The three experiments shared the same mea-
sures for the endogenous variables—agree-
ment (exchange) frequency, positive emo-
tion, and relational cohesion.

Agreement frequency. Agreement frequen-
cy was measured as the proportion of nego-
tiation episodes in which the focal negotia-
tions yielded agreement. We analyzed agree-
ment frequency across the first four episodes
of bargaining (mean = .593; S.D. = .239) and
across the second four episodes (mean =
.646; S.D. = .254).

Positive emotion. After episodes 4 and 8,
subjects reported their feelings about the ne-
gotiations using a series of 9-point bipolar
adjectives. Factor analyses yielded two di-
mensions, which correspond to pleasure/sat-
isfaction and interest/excitement (Izard
1991), suggesting that in our context, this
distinction is reasonable (Lawler and Yoon
1993). The pleasure/satisfaction index
summed reports for five items: pleased/dis-
pleased, happy/unhappy, satisfied/not satis-
fied, contented/discontented, and joyful/not
joyful. Interest/excitement was measured by
the sum of reports for enthusiastic/unenthu-
siastic, excited/bored, energetic/tired, moti-
vated/unmotivated, and interested/not inter-
ested. Scores for the dyad were the sums of
individual subjects’ scores (after episode 4,
means = 5.3 and 6.3, Cronbach o = .88 and
.85 for pleasure/satisfaction and interest/ex-
citement respectively; after episode 8, means
= 5.5 and 6.3, Cronbach o = .95 and .92).

Relational cohesion. To measure rela-
tional cohesion, the questionnaire adminis-
tered after episode 8 asked: “Think about the
relationship you and the other have in the
negotiations so far. How would you describe
the RELATIONSHIP on each of the follow-
Our theoretical model predicts a series of in-
direct paths through which structural power
affects commitment behavior (see Figure 1).
We test each prediction (path) in the theoreti-
cal model using ordinary-least-squares re-
gression. Antecedent variables in the model
are controlled while testing each specific
path. Note that indirect effects, rather than
direct effects, constitute support for the theo-
retical model. For analyses of all but the last
link in the theoretical model, the experiments
are combined, and the maximum number of
rounds per episode (3, 4, or 5) is an addi-
tional exogenous variable. The number of
rounds per episode is represented as two
dummy variables omitting the 3-round cat-
egory (gift behavior)—one for the four-round
We predicted that both higher total power
and more equal power promote more fre-
quent agreement (exchange), and the combi-
nation of the two should produce a multipli-
cative effect. Three models tested these pre-
dictions, one model each for the first four,
second four, and first eight negotiation epi-
sodes. The results are identical across these
analyses (see Table 1). In accord with the
theory, these three models show that higher
total power produced more frequent agree-
ments (8 = .201, .236, and .278; p< .01, .01,
and .001); and equal, compared to unequal
power, also produced more frequent agree-
ments (8 = .139, .146, and .182; p < .05 for
all). The interaction effect of relative power
and total power is not significant. Thus, the
effects for total power (mutual dependence)
and relative power (equal versus unequal de-
pendence) are additive, not multiplicative. In
subsequent analyses, we drop the interaction
term for the power conditions as none of the
results change when it is included.

The number of rounds available for nego-
tiation also revealed a positive effect on the
frequency of exchange across all rounds
(Model 3). Specifically, the coefficients for
the first eight episodes reveal significant ef-
fects for the three versus four rounds (8 =
.166, p < .001) and three versus five rounds
(B = .291, p < .001; means = .56, .63, and
.68, respectively); a direct comparison of
four versus five rounds indicates a margin-
ally significant difference (¢ = 1.72 (two-
tailed test), p < .09). However, the results are
stronger in the first four than in the second
four negotiation episodes (8 = .272 versus
.000 and .333 versus .132); the impact of
number of rounds is substantially reduced
with additional negotiation episodes. Impor-
tantly, the effects of total and relative power
are not contingent on or affected by the
maximum number of negotiation rounds
available to actors.®
According to the theory of relational cohe-
sion, the positive effects of total power and
equal power on emotion should operate indi-
rectly through the frequency of exchange
(agreements). When positive emotion is re-
gressed on power and exchange frequency,
there should be a positive effect for exchange
frequency and no positive direct effects for
power. Table 2 presents the results of sepa-
rate regressions for each of the two emotions
(pleasure/satisfaction and interest/excite-
ment) after the fourth and eighth episodes of
negotiation. We regress the time 1 measures
(after four episodes) on agreement frequency
for the first four episodes and time 2 mea-
sures (after eight episodes) on the first eight
episodes.

The results of these analyses provide strong
and consistent support for the theory. First, in
each equation, as predicted, more frequent
agreements produce more positive emotion,
and in fact, these are the strongest coeffi-
cients. Second, there are no positive direct
effects of equal power or total power on emo-
tion, and none were predicted. Negative di-
rect effects for total power suggest that if
higher mutual dependence does not produce
more frequent agreements, the result is less
pleasure/satisfaction. Similar negative direct
effects for equal power were revealed in a
previous study (Lawler and Yoon 1993), but
these are not replicated here. Third, as pre-
dicted, in this study both positive emotions—
pleasure/satisfaction and interest/excite-
ment—are enhanced by more frequent agree-
ments. The effects for pleasure/satisfaction
are stronger than the effects for interest/ex-
citement (8 = .540 versus .240 after the fourth
episode of negotiation; B = .460 versus .285
after the eighth episode).’

The findings for number of rounds are
complex and difficult to interpret. For the di-
rect effects in Table 2, all the signs are nega-
tive, and six of eight are statistically signifi-
cant. Combining these results with those in
Table 1, it is clear that there is a positive in-
direct effect for number of rounds on emo-
tion that operates through agreement fre-
quency and smaller (negative) direct effects.
The direct effects may reflect a “down-
hearted” or negative emotional response to
failures to agree when more rounds are avail-
able. Overall, these results must be inter-
preted cautiously (see note 2).
Lawler et al. (1995) find the reverse for the ef-
fects of total power. In the present study, which
simultaneously addresses both dimensions of
power, both emotions are important.

8 The theory justifies the causal order of posi-
tive emotion — relational cohesion, but both
emotion and relational cohesion were measured
on the same questionnaire (after the eighth nego-
tiation episode). Thus, we reestimated these equa-
tions, using the measures of positive emotion af-
ter the fourth episode. The results are virtually
identical. Only pleasure/satisfaction had a signifi-
cant effect (B = .197, p < .01).
relation as an objectified unit. Each emotion
singly has the same effect, although the ef-
fect for pleasure/satisfaction is stronger than
the effect for interest/excitement (8 = .436
versus .285); and with both emotions in the
model, only pleasure/satisfaction has a sig-
nificant effect (B = .395, p < .001). Thus,
while there is evidence that both emotions
have the same sort of impact on relational
cohesion, pleasure/satisfaction emerges as
more important.?

The results also reveal an unpredicted find-
ing, a direct effect of agreement frequency
on relational cohesion (B = .344, .436, and
.345 for Models 1, 2, and 3, respectively; all
p < .001). Given that the theory emphasizes
the indirect effects of power and agreement
frequency operating through emotional/af-
fective processes, this unexpected finding is
important. It suggests that the emotional/af-
fective process, posited by our theory, is not
the only process affecting the development of
relational cohesion. Perhaps an uncertainty-
reduction process is also operating (e.g., see
Williamson 1981; Cook and Emerson 1984).

To examine this possibility, we construc-
ted a measure of the “predictability of the fo-
cal relation” from four sets of polar adjec-
tives that were included on the questionnaire.
These items asked subjects to characterize
their relationship to each other, and included
unpredictable-predictable, vague-clear, un-
certain-certain, and unstable-stable (Cron-
bach’s a = .74). As hypothesized by ex-
change theory (Cook and Emerson 1984), the
regression of perceived predictability on
agreement frequency with exogenous vari-
ables controlled yielded a significant positive
effect (B = .39, p < .001). More frequent
agreement generated perceptions of a more
predictable exchange relation. Furthermore,
the regression of relational cohesion on the
two positive emotions, perceived predictabil-
ity and agreement frequency, revealed that
the predictability of the relation had a strong
positive effect on relational cohesion (B =
.42, p < .001), as did pleasure/satisfaction (B
= .33, p < .001).'° Thus, there is evidence
that both uncertainty-reduction and emo-
tional/affective processes mediate the impact
of frequent agreement on relational cohesion.
The positive side of these results for our
theory is that, even when a measure for the
predictability of the relation is included as a

'0 Given the prospect of correlated error be-
tween perceived predictability and pleasure/sat-
isfaction, we reestimated this equation with two-
stage least squares, using the predicted values of
predictability and pleasure/satisfaction. The im-
pact of both remained statistically significant (B
=.17, p <.05 for predictability; B = .37, p < .001
for pleasure/satisfaction).
The last step in testing the theory of relational
cohesion is to examine the impact of rela-
tional cohesion on the three forms of com-
mitment behavior—staying, gift-giving, and
contributing. The theory suggests that the
perception of the relation as an objectified
unit is the basis for various forms of commit-
ment behavior. We treat each experiment
separately for this analysis (see Table 4).
The results lend striking support to the
theory of relational cohesion. In fact, the re-
sults are the same for all three forms of com-
mitment behavior—staying in the relation
despite improved alternatives, giving token
gifts unilaterally, and contributing to a joint
venture that represents a two-actor social
(prisoner’s) dilemma. Specifically, the per-
ception of a cohesive relation increases stay-
ing in the focal relation (B = .560, p < .001),!!
gift-giving (B = .348, p < .01), and the fre-
quency of contributing to a joint venture with
the focal other (B = .239, p < .05). The only
direct effect that remains across all three
forms of commitment behavior is an impact
of agreement frequency on stay behavior (B=
.260, p < .05). Thus, there is substantial sup-
port for the notion that relational cohesion is
a proximal cause of commitment behavior, a
point through which other structural, cogni-
tive, and emotional processes tend to operate.
The theory of relational cohesion empha-
sizes the emotional/affective factors in com-
mitment formation. The purpose is not to
displace or contradict the uncertainty-reduc-
tion hypothesis, the current emphasis in ex-
change theory (see Cook and Emerson 1984;
Kollock 1994), but to consider whether emo-
tional/affective processes deserve a distinct
role. We argue that if a network repeatedly
brings the same two people together and the
two accomplish a joint task they are likely
to experience an “emotional buzz” involving
mild feelings of satisfaction and/or excite-
ment. These emotions are not solely a result
of individual rewards produced by success-
ful exchange, but result partly from success-
fully accomplishing a task jointly with an-
other person. The emotions make the dyadic
relation and, in particular, its unifying im-
pact more salient and more real to the actors;
this salience and reality is conceptualized as
“relational cohesion,” and the prediction is
that it leads to commitment behavior of vari-
ous forms.

This study makes three theoretical contri-
butions. First, it pulls together the implica-
tions of a nonzero-sum concept of power.
Previous analyses of the cohesive or integra-
tive effects of power-dependence relations
have focused solely on the total-power di-
mension—mutual dependence or interdepen-
dence (Emerson 1972; Bacharach and Lawler
1981; Lawler 1992b; Molm 1987, 1994). We
conceptualized structural cohesion as the
combined effects of total and relative power
dependence. We predicted that greater struc-
tural cohesion, along either or both higher
total power-dependence and more equal
power-dependence, would generate more fre-
quent agreement in a focal dyad. The results
of our three experiments support the sepa-
rate, additive effects of these two power di-
mensions, but not the multiplicative effect.
This is sufficient to maintain the current for-
mulation for structural cohesion, but the ab-
sence of evidence for a multiplicative effect
suggests the need for further empirical work.
One possibility is that the orthogonal ma-
nipulations in our experiments create rather
small multiplicative increments in structural
cohesion that are difficult to detect. Another
possibility is that the additive effects are
dominant, and the interactive effects show up
only within particular ranges of total and
relative power. In either case, “structural co-
hesion” serves as a useful conceptualization
of the combined effects of relative and total
power on conciliatory behavior in negotiated
exchanges.

The second theoretical contribution this
study makes is that relational cohesion, or
“objectification of the exchange relation”
(Berger and Luckmann 1966), helps explain
how and why emotional processes foster
commitment behavior. When people have a
common focus and interact repeatedly, they
come to sense that they are part of something
larger—a relation, group, or organization.
Durkheim (1915) explains this “sense” as
primarily emotional, stressing the uplift or
“effervescence” generated by joint activity
(also see Collins 1981). Berger and
Luckmann’s (1966) explanation relies on ac-
tors’ definitions or cognitive “typifications”
of the meaning of their repetitive activity.
Broadly, we show one way that these emo-
tional and cognitive processes are inter-
twined in social exchange. The emotional
uplift from joint activity fosters a sense of
participating in something larger and an ef-
fort to interpret what the “something larger”
is; if the exchange relation is part of this in-
terpretation, the actors take account of and
nurture that relation in their future interac-
tions. In this way, the exchange relation be-
comes an expressive object of intrinsic value
to the actors and a “third force” impinging
on them.

The third contribution our study makes
concerns the central role of emotion and af-
fect in the commitment process. This point
is actually strengthened by support for an un-
certainty-reduction process. Frequent ex-
changes enhance relational cohesion through
both positive feelings and perceptions of a
predictable relation, and we infer that uncer-
tainty-reduction helps to “set off’ focal rela-
tions from alternative ones (Cook and Emer-
son 1978; Kollock 1994). Importantly, the
uncertainty-reduction process is complemen-
tary to the emotional/affective process and
does not “wash it out.” There is a distinct
place for both in explanations of commit-
ment to exchange relations.

We propose that the theory of relational
cohesion be broadened to incorporate these
complementary processes. The impact of ex-
change (agreement) frequency on commit-
ment via uncertainty-reduction can be con-
ceptualized as a “boundary defining” pro-
cess, and the route through emotion can be
seen as a “social bonding” process. The
boundary-defining process sets the dyadic
relation off from alternative relations and
makes it appear more distinct to actors, while
the social-bonding process transforms the re-
lation into an “object” that is valuable in it-
self and a source of emergent informal con-
straints on malfeasance (Granovetter 1985:
490). The “boundary defining” process indi-
cates that instrumental features of exchange,
such as interdependencies (Rabbie and
Horowitz 1988; Kramer 1991), promote
“psychological group formation” in the dyad.
The “social bonding” process indicates that
the distinctiveness of the exchange relation
makes it a target for attachment and commit-
ment. The theory of relational cohesion
should incorporate and test both of these pro-
cesses in larger groups and networks.

Evidence in our studies for backward-
looking (pleasure/satisfaction) and forward-
looking (interest/excitement) emotions is
mixed. Clearly, pleasure/satisfaction is more
In recent social-exchange frameworks, emo-
tions are seen either as epiphenomal by-
products of reinforcements and punishments
or are reduced to a cognitive phenomenon.
However, the outpouring of recent research
on the sociology of emotions offers a variety
of ways to incorporate emotions and give
them a more significant role in exchange
theory. For example, expressions of emotion
can convey trust (Frank 1988), claim or as-
sert status (Clark 1990), or can increase
power (Kemper 1978). Emotions that are felt,
but not openly expressed, can signal a lack
of correspondence between the events in an
exchange and the identities of the actors
(Smith-Lovin and Heise 1988), reveal norms
for expressing emotion in a given context
(Hochschild 1983), or help explain the emer-
gence or decline of cohesion, commitment,
and solidarity (Collins 1981). We focus
mainly on cohesion and commitment, but
one general message from this research is
that emotional/affective processes contribute
independently to an understanding of social
exchange and warrant more explicit attention
by exchange theorists (see Molm 1991 for
some recent work).
A second general message of our research
is that exchange networks are likely to con-
tain endogenous processes that produce pock-
ets of relational cohesion. Our research sug-
gests that the emotional/affective and uncer-
tainty-reduction effects of repetitive ex-
change are important aspects of this endog-
enous process. Thus, power capabilities de-
rived from a larger network should produce
relational cohesion in different locations and
on different levels within complex networks
as long as negotiated exchanges produce
positive feelings and a sense of predictability
in any given relation. Greater relational co-
hesion should make exchange relations more
resilient and more difficult to break apart than
is indicated by exchange-network theories
(Cook et al. 1983; Markvosky et al. 1988;
Skvoretz and Willer 1993), because of the
immanent or emergent value of the exchange
relation (Foa 1971; Tallman et al. 1991).

This emphasis on endogenous processes is
also a key difference between our theory and
rational-choice theory. A rational-choice ap-
proach would assume that pecuniary and non-
pecuniary utilities are exogenously imposed
on a dyad and remain stable throughout re-
peated interactions. In contrast, our theory
assumes that the pecuniary utilities associ-
ated with structural power conditions are ex-
ogenously imposed, while nonpecuniary
utilities, such as relational cohesion, develop
through endogenous processes involving re-
peated social interaction and emotions. Ap-
plied to stay behavior, for example, rational-
choice theory would predict staying when-
ever the sum of nonpecuniary payoffs (i.e.,
value of the relation) and pecuniary payoffs
(i.e., agreement payoffs) in the focal relation
exceeds the payoffs from the alternative. Our
theory and our evidence indicate that stay
behavior is endogenously produced via rela-
tional cohesion; this is contrary to the predic-
tion of rational-choice theory. Relational co-
hesion reflects the fact that the exchange re-
lation has become an object of value.

Broadly, the theory of relational cohesion
suggests an avenue by which interpersonal
relations become a source of “social embed-
dedness” (Granovetter 1985), shaping ex-
changes, generating informal constraints on
malfeasance or opportunism, and reducing
“transaction costs” (Williamson 1981). In
transaction-cost terms (Williamson 1981),
relational cohesion can be construed as a “re-
lation specific asset” that cannot be trans-
ferred from one exchange partner to another,
and therefore, it increases the opportunity
costs of switching to exchange with alterna-
tives. Williamson (1981) argues that transac-
tion costs—the costs of forming and main-
taining contractual relations—can be mini-
mized by constructing hierarchies of control.
However, because relational cohesion has an
emotional/affective component, long-term
horizontal contracting in such relations be-
comes a more viable alternative to hierar-
chies of control than is implied by transac-
tion-cost theory. Our research demonstrates
that, in the context of emotionally based per-
ceptions of the relation as a unit, people are
more likely to stay in their exchange relation,
give each other token gifts, and contribute to
a new joint venture subject to malfeasance.
We argue that these behavioral consequences
of relational cohesion reflect a dampening of
the original instrumental basis of the rela-
tion, the superimposition of an expressive
component, and an incipient normative order.
Bacharach, Samuel B. and Edward J. Lawler.
1981. Bargaining: Power, Tactics, and Out-
comes. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Berger, Peter L. and Thomas Luckmann. 1966.
The Social Construction of Reality. New York:
Doubleday.

Blau, Peter M. 1977. “A Macrosociological The-
ory of Social Structure.” American Journal of
Sociology 83:26-54.

Clark, Candace. 1990. “Emotions and Micro-
politics in Everyday Life: Patterns and Para-
doxes of Place.” Pp. 305-33 in Research Agen-
das in the Sociology of Emotions, edited by T.
D. Kemper. Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press.

Coleman, James S. 1990. Foundations of Social
Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Collins, Randall. 1981. “On the Microfoundations
of Macrosociology.” American Journal of So-
ciology 86:984-1014.

Cook, Karen S. and Richard M. Emerson. 1978.
“Power, Equity, and Commitment in Exchange
Networks.” American Sociological Review
27:721-39.

. 1984. “Exchange Networks and the Ana-
lysis of Complex Organizations.” Pp. 1-30 in
Research on the Sociology of Organizations,
vol. 3, edited by S. B. Bacharach and E. J.
Lawler. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Cook, Karen S., Richard M. Emerson, Mary R.
Gillmore, and Toshio Yamagishi. 1983. “The
Distribution of Power in Exchange Networks:
Theory and Experimental Evidence.” American
Journal of Sociology 89:275-305.

Durkheim, Emile. 1915. The Elementary Forms
of Religious Life. New York: Free Press.

Emerson, Richard M. 1972. “Exchange Theory
Part I: A Psychological Basis for Social Ex-
change.” Pp. 38-57 in Sociological Theories
in Progress, vol. 2, edited by J. Berger, M.
Zelditch, Jr., and B. Anderson. Boston, MA:
Houghton-Mifflin.

. 1981. “Social Exchange Theory.” Pp. 30-
65 in Social Psychology: Sociological Pers-
pectives, edited by M. Rosenberg and R. H.
Turner. New York: Basic Books.

Foa, Uriel G. 1971. “Interpersonal and Economic
Resources.” Science 171:345-50.

Frank, Robert H. 1988. Passions within Reason:
The Strategic Role of Emotions. New York:
Norton.

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. “Economic Action and
Social Structure: The Problem of Embedded-
ness.” American Journal of Sociology 91:481—
510.

Halaby, Charles N. and D. Weakliem. 1989.
“Worker Control and Attachment to the
Firm.” American Journal of Sociology 95:549-
91.

Heath, Anthony. 1975. Rational Choice and So-
cial Exchange. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Hegtvedt, Karen A. and Karen S. Cook. 1987.
“The Role of Justice in Conflict Situations.”
Pp. 109-36 in Advances in Group Processes,
vol. 4, edited by Edward J. Lawler and Barry
Markovsky. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Hochschild, Arlie. R. 1983. The Managed Heart:
Commercialization of Human Feeling. Los An-
geles, CA: University of California Press.

Hogg, A. Micheal and John C. Turner. 1985. “In-
terpersonal Attraction, Social Identification,
and Psychological Group Formation.” Euro-
pean Journal of Social Psychology 15:51-66.

Homans, George L. 1961. Social Behavior: Its
Elementary Form. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.

Izard, Carroll E. 1991. The Psychology of Emo-
tions. New York: Plenum Press. ,

Kanter, Rosabeth M. 1968. “Commitment and
Social Organization: A Study of Commitment
Mechanisms in Utopian Communities.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 33:499-517.

. 1972. Commitment and Community:
Communes and Utopias in Sociological Per-
spective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Kelley, Harold H. and John W. Thibaut. 1978.
Interpersonal Relations: A Theory of Interde-
pendence. New York: Wiley.

Kemper, Theodore D. 1978. A Social Interac-
tional Theory of Emotions. New York: Wiley.

Kollock, Peter 1994. “The Emergence of Ex-
change Structures: An Experimental Study of
Uncertainty, Commitment; and Trust.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 100:315-45.

Kramer, Roderick M. 1991. “Intergroup Relations
and Organizational Dilemmas: The Role of
Categorization Processes.” Research in Orga-
nizational Behavior 13:191—228.

Larsen, Randy J. and Edward Diener. 1992.
“Promises and Problems with the Circumplex
Model of Emotion.” Pp. 25-59 in Emotion, ed-
ited by Margaret S. Clark. Newburg Park, CA:
Sage.

Lawler, Edward J. 1992a. “Choice Processes and
Affective Attachments to Nested Groups: A
Theoretical Analysis.” American Sociological
Review 57:327-39.

. 1992b. “Power Processes in Bargaining.”
The Sociological Quarterly 33:17-34.

Lawler, Edward J. and Samuel B. Bacharach.
1987. “Comparison.of Dependence and Puni-
tive Forms of Power.” Social Forces 66:446—
62.

Lawler, Edward J. and Rebecca Ford, 1993.
“Metatheory and Friendly Competition in The-
ory Growth: The Case of Power Processes in
Bargaining.” Pp. 172-210 in Theoretical Re-
search Programs: Studies in Theory Growth,
edited by J. Berger and M. Zelditch, Jr. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Lawler, Edward J., Rebecca Ford and Mary A.
Blegen. 1988. “Coercive Capability in Con-
flict: A Test of Bilateral Deterrence Versus
Conflict Spiral Theory.” Social Psychology
Quarterly 51:93-107.

Lawler, Edward J. and Jeongkoo Yoon. 1993.
“Power and the Emergence of Commitment
Behavior in Negotiated Exchange.” American
Sociological Review 58:465-81.

Lawler, Edward J., Jeongkoo Yoon, Mouraine R.
Baker, and Michael D. Large. 1995. “Mutual
Dependence and Gift Giving in Exchange Re-
lations.” Pp. 271-98 in Advances in Group
Processes, vol. 15, edited by B. Markovsky, J.
O’Brien, and K. Heimer. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.

Macy, Michael W. 1993. “Backward-Looking
Social Control.” American Sociological Review
58:819-36.

Mandler, George. 1975. Mind and Emotion. New
York: Wiley.

Markovsky, Barry and Edward J. Lawler. 1994.
“A Formal Theory of Group Solidarity, Part I:
Conceptual Framework and Application to
Emotions.” Pp. 113-38 in Advances in Group
Processes, vol. 11, edited by B. Markovsky, J.
O’Brien, and K. Heimer. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.

Markovsky, Barry, David Willer, and Travis
Patton. 1988. “Power Relations in Exchange
Networks.” American Sociological Review
53:220-36.

McPherson, Miller J., Pamela A. Popielarz, and
Sonja Drobnic. 1992. “Social Networks and
Organizational Dynamics.” American Socio-
logical Review 57:153-70.

Mead, George H. 1934. Mind, Self, and Society.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Meyer, John P., Natalie J. Allen, and Jan R.
Gellatly. 1990. “Affective and Continuance
Commitment to the Organization: Evaluation
of Measures and Analysis of Concurrent and
Time-Lagged Relations.” Journal of Applied
Psychology 75:710-20.

Molm, Linda. 1987. “Extending Power Depen-
dence Theory: Power Processes and Negative
Outcomes.” Pp. 178-98 in Advances in Group
Processes, vol. 4, edited by E. J. Lawler and B.
Markovsky. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

. 1990. “Structure, Action, and Outcomes:

The Dynamics of Power in Social Exchange.”

American Sociological Review 55:427-47.

. 1991. “Affect and Social Exchange: Sat-

isfaction in Power-Dependence Relations.”

American Sociological Review 56:475-93.
. 1994. “Dependence and Risk: Transform-
ing the Structure of Social Exchange.” Social
Psychology Quarterly 57:163-89.

Mueller, Charles W. and James L. Price. 1990.
“Economic, Psychological and Sociological
Determinants of Voluntary Turnover.” Journal
of Behavioral Economics 9:321-35.

Parsons, Talcott. 1951. The Social System. New
York: Free Press.

Pruitt, Dean J. and M. J. Kimmel. 1977. “Twenty
Years of Experimental Gaming: Critique, Syn-
thesis and Suggestions for the Future. Annual
Review of Psychology 28:363-92.

Rabbie, Jacob M. and Murray Horowitz. 1988.
“Category versus Groups as Explanatory Con-
cepts in Intergroup Relations.” European Jour-
nal of Social Psychology 19:172-202.

Rapoport, Anatol and Albert M. Chammah. 1965.
Prisoner’s Dilemma: A Study in Conflict and
Cooperation. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.

Smith-Lovin, Lynn and David R. Heiss. 1988.
Analyzing Social Interaction: Advances in Af-
fect Control Theory. New York: Gordon and
Breach.
Skvoretz, John and David Willer. 1993. “Exclu-
sion and Power in Exchange Networks.” Amer-
ican Sociological Review 58:801-18.

Tajfel, Henri and John C. Turner. 1986. “The So-
cial Identity Theory of Intergroup Behavior.”
Pp. 7-24 in Psychology of Intergroup Rela-
tions, edited by S. Worchel and W. G. Austin.
Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall.

Tallman, Irving, Louis Gray, and Robert Leik.
1991. “Decisions, Dependency, and Commit-
ment: An Exchange Based Theory of Group
Development.” Pp. 227-57 in Advances in
Group Processes, vol. 8, edited by E. J.
Lawler, B. Markovsky, C. Ridgeway, and H.
Walker. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Thibaut, John W. and Harold H. Kelley. 1959.
The Social Psychology of Groups. New York:
John Wiley and Sons.

Watson, David and Auke Tellegan. 1985. “To-
ward a Consensual Structure of Mood.” Psy-
chological Bulletin 98:219-35.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1981. “The Economics
of Organization: The Transaction Cost Ap-
proach.” American Journal of Sociology 87:
549-77.
