@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
knowledge, technique, and skill, con-

temporary education is slowly but
consciously beginning to give attention to the
development of personal and social qualities
considered basic to a successful career. Grad-
uate faculties, however, are so little con-
cerned with this aspect of education that
many of them doubt whether personality
development is a graduate school function.

It is the purpose of this article to present
the opinion of a cross-section of distinguished
American educators on the issues implied in
the title of this article. The 204 leaders were
from 45 states and included 85 graduate
deans, 66 presidents, 34 deans and faculty
members, and 19 representatives of pre-
collegiate education. Readers interested in a
more detailed analysis of the implications of
the opinion of these leaders on this and
other aspects of doctoral study are referred
to the writer’s recent book, Toward Improv-
ing Ph. D. Programs, published by the
American Council on Education.

Perhaps no issue raised by the compre-
hensive study of Ph. D. programs was of
greater interest than that of broadening the
doctoral candidate’s training to include more
than purely intellectual discipline. There was
substantial agreement to the effect that the
prospective college teacher and research
worker should be educated to work and live
cooperatively, should be willing to assume
social responsibility, and should live as active
and rich a life as possible. There was like-
wise, explicit as well as implicit in the state-
ments made, rather widespread recognition
of the fact that the personal and social
qualities of the average graduate student
leave much to be desired in such respects.
Despite this meeting of minds there was
nevertheless little agreement on remedial
measures; and there were rather marked

I ADDITION to the communication of
differences of opinion over whether or not
any remedy fell within the proper scope of
advanced graduate education.

Many of those who thought it promising
and thoroughly realistic to use the dynamic
environment of a graduate school to modify
the personal and social characteristics of
doctoral candidates were disturbed at the
factors of negative selection that attract
atypical personalities to scholarly careers.
Several graduate deans were convinced that
better financial rewards and social prestiges
enabled medicine, law, business, and other
professional schools to attract the best minds
and personalities, In their opinion the way
out lies not so much in rehabilitating in-
dividuals as in reshaping university careers
so that with selective admissions the graduate
school can attract abler recruits.

Almost every objective investigation has
indicated nevertheless that we can dismiss
the notion that doctoral recruits are of
inferior intellectual caliber. A recent check
in the social science fields showed that one-
third of all first-year graduate students had
been graduated from college with high
honors or equivalent distinction. The pro-
portion of honors students at the doctoral
level of study is more than double that for
first-year graduate students. The advanced
graduate school probably gets too many of
the “greasy grind” type of mind and of
mentally able individuals who have not yet
chosen a career,

The impression that doctoral candidates
are more of an intellectual than a social
elite appears to be better justified. A poll
of 4,667 members of the American Associa-
tion of University Professors, for example,
indicated the following social origins, accord-
ing to the occupational status of their
fathers: businessmen, 26.6 percent; farmers,
24.7 percent; manual workers, 12.1 percent;
clergymen, 10.6 percent, and seven miscellane-
ous categories accounted for the remaining
26 percent. It is a matter of common observa-
tion that in many other prestige occupations,
the medical profession, for example, where
doctors are often the sons of doctors, there
is more social inheritance of occupation. The
social and economic composition of the gradu-
ate school group makes for strongly demo-
cratic minded individuals whose cultural in-
terests and attainments tend to be lower
middle class.

The fact that college and research careers
provide a comparatively open channel of
vertical social mobility should be cherished
in our democracy. But it should be re-
cognized that in making the ascent under
prevailing academic conditions the recruit
is more likely to acquire intellectual than
social growth. The regimen for becoming a
doctor of philosophy may indeed retard
what would otherwise be the unstimulated
cultural and artistic growth of the individual.
It tends to accentuate the situation which
may have caused him to eschew or be denied
full participation in the socializing activities
of undergraduate extra-curriculum life on
the campus. In short, the graduate school
gets the individual with negative personality
qualities, boorish manners, bad dress, and
general uncouthness primarily as the result
of a system of selection that stresses
what a man knows rather than what he is
as a total functioning personality. And the
way out seems to call for a more comprehen-
sive basis of selection plus a greater willing-
ness to consciously promote the growth of
the whole individual.

The statement of a university dean of
liberal arts is worth quoting at this point
for its graphic posing of the problem:

I have just gone through a siege of selecting
new faculty members. We had a vacancy in
modern languages. Out of five candidates con-
sidered very seriously, one had the personal
qualities which would make a good faculty per-
son. He had only the Master’s degree. All the
Ph.D.’s had some objectionable personality
quirks. From the standpoint of training all
were excellent. It seems too bad that graduate
Some people, especially graduate deans,
were quite explicit and emphatic about say-
ing that educational development along the
line of social adjustment was not a rightful
charge upon the graduate school:

The graduate school has little opportunity to
make much contribution to the social adjust-
ment of a graduate student. Perhaps we shall
have to accept the fact that the period of gradu-
ate study, because of its concentration, represents
a partial social hiatus between his undergraduate
experience and his adult professional life. (A
graduate dean)

The graduate school, in my opinion, should
attend primarily to the curricular preparation
of the graduate student and social, emotional
and what-have-you other elements should slip
in unobstrusively wherever a good man and
professor has a chance to help out a fellow
human being. (A college president)
really good enough intellectually he is likely
to come through no matter how many
personal peculiarities he may have.”

Despite this rather substantial and vocal
minority, most of the individuals who res-
ponded to the questionaire agreed with the
liberal arts dean quoted earlier who wished
the graduate school would “take its work
seriously” and consciously make provision
for the fullest possible development of its
doctoral students. For instance, the presi-
dent of a teachers’ college regretted the
prevailing emphasis on “the minutiate of
scholarship which have a tendency to dwarf
imagination, initiative, and human qualities
which make for individual effectiveness,”
especially since “most Ph. D.’s are employed
where human relationships count.” The presi-
dent of a college of liberal arts similarly
argued that “a broad view toward, and
competence in relating specialized fields to
the larger objectives of organized society,”
ability to work “with students as well as
subject matter,” and the “habit of working
in larger areas of community life,” were just
as important as intensive preparation in a
special field. The nature of the issue involved
is cognently stated in the following re-
marks of a particularly distinguished educa-
tor, the dean of a university college of liberal
arts:
The alternate viewpoint on this matter,
emphasizing the educational value of human
relations as such, may be summarized in
the words of a college president who said:
“Tt should be done personally and not by
courses.” A chemistry professor said,
“graduate students usually associate only
with those who are working in their field,”
and that “it would be very beneficial if they
could be brought into contact with graduate
students who are working in totally different
subjects.” Others called for “participation in
community living while the candidate is
studying for his degree” and “significant
contacts with important leaders, particularly
those carrying large administrative respon-
sibilities.” Still others, as already noted, put
their main reliance for developing the
personal qualities of students on organized
personnel services, especially on individual
counseling.

Several educators mentioned extracurri-
cular activities as the best means of social
and personal development. One university
was reported as providing “suitable living
arrangements” to this end for its graduate
students, and as “encouraging discussion,
requiring training in public speaking, and
organizing departmental groups or clubs.” A
professor of psychology reported beginnings
in the same direction at his institution. One
graduate dean thought that “to get the best
results, the graduate school should be made
into a kind of residential college,” while
another suggested “social groups built
around the departments in which they work.”
The dean of a summer session thought that
once a candidate was admitted, improvement
can be effected only through utilizing the
university as a social laboratory “in which he
can practice being the type of person we
would like to see him become.”

Closely related to this line of thought,
indeed shading into it, were recommenda-
tions for induction into the profession and
for more warm human contacts between
students and their professors,
In the opinion of the distinguished educa-
tors consulted, the tendency of the graduate
school to divorce subject matter from the
self has not always encouraged the healthy
objectivity it was designed to produce. They
believe thinking has so much physiology and
sociology in it that the whole person and
his environment ought to be considered in
planning and conducting a program of
graduate study or in appraising progress in
it. This concept of effective program requires
a great deal more than readiness to work with
the individual graduate student as if he were
a disembodied intellect. It includes a concern
for the candidate’s housing, his social life,
his mental and physical health, his growth
in the personal qualities which employers say
are essential to success on the job; all of this,
of course, as part of the main task of promot-
ing a quality of intellectual growth for
which the doctorate in philosophy may be
conferred with pride.
