American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
ence techniques to social casework

is comparatively new, it is still perti-
nent to ask, what does social casework really
want of research? It is a question much de-
bated by social scientists called in either
for a general or a specific assignment. But
this question soon becomes entwined with
another: What does social casework offer
to the neighboring social sciences? Even a
brief contact brings home the reminder that
it takes two to make an impact—and a tell-
ing impact leaves neither one entirely un-
dented.

In part, social casework makes its offering
to social research through the challenge and
the opportunity furnished by demands that
cannot be fully satisfied by established
techniques. One way of learning these de-
mands is to consult the caseworker, and
this was done on a small scale through
a survey made last Spring. Letters were sent
to 125 family and children’s agencies listed
under the National Conference of Jewish
Social Welfare, requesting the formulation
of the questions that most need study.

The request was not for suggested research
projects but merely for a statement of the
problems which, on the basis of daily prac-
tice, seem most urgent. The inquiry was
limited to problems connected with case-
work, excluding both administrative prob-

B=. the application of social sci-
lems and those relating to other facets and
functions of social work.

The list of respondents—including agen-
cies of varied size, viewpoint, region and
type of community—did not constitute a
sample, nor was it so regarded. Despite the
numerical limitation, however, and despite
the fact that only Jewish agencies were
included, the response provides a picture
that is illuminating with regard to areas of
inquiry and to underlying assumptions. As
judged from current literature, from con-
ference discussions, and from interviews
with members of many other social agencies,
the main features are representative although
a true sampling might reveal differences in
emphasis. The results have proved suffi-
ciently interesting that it is hoped a larger
inquiry may be undertaken under broader
auspices in the fall, covering a nationwide
sample.

The survey asked, not for answers, but
for questions. And its purpose was not only
to ascertain attitudes and opinions, but also
to affect them. The desired effect was merely
to modify a conception of scientific research
that seems to have wide currency in this
field as elsewhere—one that curiously com-
bines the qualities of Medicine Man and
Frankenstein monster. It is a stereotype
which favors the twin myths that science
is strictly quantitative and that it is ab-
solutely objective—myths that have been
attacked repeatedly in recent social science
literature.?

Reactions to this very limited survey sug-
gest that to stimulate serious consideration
by caseworkers of what casework wants to

2E.g. Hadley Cantril, Adelbert Ames, Jr., Al-
bert H. Hastorf, and William H. Ittelson, “Psy-
chology and Scientific Research,” Science, 110 (Nov.
4, 11, and 18, 1949), 461-464, 491-497, 517-522.
know is a useful device for jolting the stereo-
type, as well as for obtaining desired infor-
mation, and that it may prove constructive
when it is applied to a nationwide sample.

The size and quality of the response
served to challenge a stereotype many social
workers hold about themselves—that “social
workers are not research-minded.” Despite
the well-known kernel of fact lodged in
this stereotype, a newcomer is likely to be
more impressed with the extent and vitality
of current social work research than with
the expected hurdles that beset its path.

The 33% response on this survey, which
would be high average for a normal mail
questionnaire, takes on impressive magni-
tude in an inquiry where respondents are
asked to discuss, to formulate, and to re-
spond within two weeks. Without attempt-
ing a detailed report of the questions sent
in, it is possible to sketch out the major
areas of inquiry indicated, the priorities
assigned to different kinds of problems,
something of the assumptions revealed, and
a few salient implications for research.

Roughly, the questions fall into five
groups, of which the first two are by far
the most prominent, the fifth is very small,
and all break into subdivisions:

1. General problems relating to casework
process.

2. Specific practices in specific situations.

3. Evaluation of casework results.

4. Effects of background factors—eco-
nomic or cultural.

5. Size of agency and nature of com-
munity in relation to casework practice.

By far the leading group of questions is
the one involving general problems related
to the casework process. The majority of
these emphasize agency procedure; a smaller
proportion speak in terms of total process
—with equal weight on client and on agency;
and very few formulate their questions pri-
marily in terms of client or case charac-
teristics.

The formulation of these questions docu-
ments a tendency, noted by a number of
leaders in the field, toward a view that is
process-centered rather than client-centered.
This tendency relates to a “handicap of
casework research” which has been described
as “the caseworker’s disposition to attribute
most failures of casework treatment to in-
adequate handling by the caseworker.”
Such a slanting, unless recognized and
guarded against, may bias the initial study
design, especially in the direction of neglect-
ing what Isidor Chein® has called the “drab
variables” that should not be slighted.

A considerable proportion of the general
process questions in the first large group
relate to definition, comparison or delimita-
tion of function. One of the most frequent
questions in the whole response concerns
the definition of casework itself—as one
puts it, “what is uniquely casework?” Above
all, what are the boundary lines between
casework and psychiatry, and what should
be their inter-relations?

The speculation about role and function
implies a consciousness and acceptance of
changing role, and a desire to clarify. It
implies in addition that one important area
of research is concerned with description
rather than with causality and measurement.

A striking feature of the response is that
the second group of questions, dealing with
specific practices in specific situations, comes
chiefly from people working with children.
Agencies which combine family service with
children’s work tend to ask specific questions
relating to children and general ones relating
to adults. Although most of the specific
questions could be converted into generali-
ties, they are phrased in terms that limit
their application to a specific situation or
even occasionally to some individual case
or institution.

The few equally specific questions relating
to adults concern adults who are in a de-
pendency situation—either the aged or those
who require economic assistance.

The contrast recalls the classic division
between casework that involves action of
mind upon mind and casework that involves
action in the social environment.* The di-
chotomy, like many dichotomies, grows less
sharp through the years. Nevertheless, it is
still true that much work with dependents is
likely to involve direct action on their en-
vironment as well as work with the inner
self. Casework with nondependent adults is
more likely to induce modification of the
environment by the client himself, as a re-
sult of his agency experience. The difference
so conspicuous in the formulating of ques-
tions has meaning also for the formulation of
research,

There is further meaning for research in
the fact that the more specific the question,
the more likely it is to be client-centered
rather than process-centered. The difference
relates to the very definition of casework,
with its insistence on individuation. The
tendency to avoid generalization is demon-
strated regularly at social work conferences,
where most papers—however general the
title—are likely to resolve into the detailed
presentation of a single case.

For purposes of research, however, general-
ization is indispensable—and this has been
one source of objection by caseworkers. It
is an objection that should be a valuable
check rather than an obstacle. Statistical
treatment often requires that similar entities
be treated as identical, and constant vigilance
must be exercised to offset and to restrain
such treatment, especially in dealing with
material so complex.

The third group of questions involves
evaluation of service rendered to clients.
Many questions in the other groups require
incidental evaluation—for example, in com-
paring or evaluating procedures. In some
form or other, however, a substantial mi-
nority of the respondents directly demand
a check on the amount of help given, its
effectiveness, its stability, its significance.

Although it did not receive majority at-
tention from caseworker respondents, a major
share of research interest, effort and financial
support is aimed at evolving some means
of evaluating casework results. The em-
phasis, natural enough in any case, is per-
haps reinforced by the history of social work
in recent decades, with the shift of emphasis
from relief to personal adjustment and from
serving only the economically deprived to
serving members of all income groups.

The most discussed effort at evaluation is
that of J. McVicker Hunt® and his colleagues
at the Community Service Society of New
York, which so far has produced a move-
ment scale now in its initial testing period
—a scale designed to show whether the
client has progressed, retrogressed, or stood
still during his agency contact. Carefully
designed and delimited, the study appears
to justify the claim that it has “standardized
the judgment of different caseworkers con-
cerning the direction and degree of change”
in the limited though important category
of cases to which it is applicable. So far,
however, it is only standardization of
workers’ judgments that has been demon-
strated, and only within a single agency.
The real test seems to lie in checking the
results of this standardized opinion against
the living results of the casework. A begin-
ning toward such a check has been made
and the results are eagerly awaited, despite
the regrettably small number of cases that
could be examined.

In line with current attitudes, the field
inclines to forget that although the reliability
of the study has been established, the va-
lidity is still to be revealed. Published and
unpublished comments often ignore the limi-
tations stated by its author or the possibility
of using other methods to attain the goal
so ardently desired.

It would be possible, for example, to
start with the follow-up study, analyzing
intensively what has happened for the clients
over a period of years, and to work back
from there to the elements in the casework.
The primary focus would be on what hap-
pened, rather than on the caseworker’s
evaluations. The initial effort would be to
analyze single elements rather than aggre-
gates, and to arrive at these elements through
client experience. Such a study is envisaged
by our agency, as an additional method of
getting at material so elusive that we may

5“Measuring the Results of Social Casework:
A Field-Test of the Movement Scale.” Paper de-
livered at the National Conference of Social Work,
April, 1950.
expect to explore many methods in our
efforts to cope with it.

The fourth group of questions deals with
the effects of background factors. All involve
the conditioning of the casework process by
elements of the environment, either cultural
or economic, but the vagueness of ques-
tions about the cultural factor contrasts
sharply with the concreteness of those about
the economic. Moreover, economic consider-
ations are raised only with regard to clients
in a dependency situation, and inquiry is
almost exclusively concerned with the effect
of the economic factor on the client’s con-
tact with the agency, and with the use of
economic assistance in that contact, rather
than with its direct or indirect role in the
situation that brought him to the agency for
help.

This fourth group of questions differs
from the others in the extent to which it
reveals a prerequisite need to translate the
concepts of the social sciences into terms
more visibly and cogently applicable to social
casework. A number of pioneers have made
a notable beginning, but the phrasing and
content of the questions about background
factors suggest a dawning readiness to grant
their existence rather than a definite con-
ception of what they are, how they function,
and their significance—not only in the case-
work process but also in the client’s initial
situation. Nor do the questions suggest a
prevailing recognition that the social work
agency is itself a product and a part of
our culture, subject to its strains and biases.

There is, of course, no guarantee that, in
the process of communication, the accepted
concepts of the social sciences will not also
receive some shaking up.

The fifth and smallest group of questions
involves size of agency and nature of com-
munity in relation to casework practice.
These questions, chiefly from small agencies
in small communities, tend to highlight the
relationship between agency problems and
type of community. Small agencies are
peculiarly aware that it is impossible to
divorce casework problems from problems
of agency interpretation and support—a sep-
aration denied in theory but often assumed
in fact. Even a brief acquaintance with
agency practice brings home the profound
relationship between the picture the com-
munity has of the agency and the attitudes
toward applying for help, the types of re-
quest brought, the expectations and re-
sponses of the client. Less clearly, it is
evident that community attitudes influence
the caseworker’s evaluation of his own role,
which in turn is a factor in the casework
relationship.

All five groups of questions share certain
characteristics. One of these is that their
frame of reference is the status quo. Which
of our accepted methods is better for certain
situations, what is the best application of
our established procedures, how can we
gauge the results of what we are doing?
Very few ask for comparisons of basic dif-
ferences in orientation and approach, al-
though a considerable number invite a defi-
nition and delimitation of casework. None
inquires about the relative advantages of
sectarian or non-sectarian agencies, although
some ask about the significance of the cul-
tural factor for Jews in a Jewish agency.
Almost none raises questions about evolving
new measures to fill unmet needs, or about
testing accepted assumptions.

Such absences are noted, not as defects
in the response, but rather as clues to certain
research values and responsibilities. Untested
—and often unconscious—assumptions are
exactly what one does not ask about on the
basis of day by day practice. A function and
a constant by-product of research is to root
them out and make them defend them-
selves. This can be done most effectively,
however, if the research design is not invaded
by the assumptions. Since the technician
from outside the field must depend on the
expert within for basic briefing, each needs
to be on guard against his own biases as
well as against those of the other.

Another part of the research job is to
open the way for new solutions, and this
task too may be accomplished as a by-
product. Systematic study of current practice
points up the elements that need to be
maximized or minimized, and in so doing
points the way to new solutions.
In asking the caseworkers for their ques-
tions, it was not assumed that the areas of
inquiry sketched out would provide a blue-
print for specific research projects. To bring
within the range of research the problems
needing study requires a multiple job of
translation, and one important part is to
translate the problems themselves into terms
appropriate for research.

An ingenious job of translation is re-
quired also by the team approach generally
recognized as essential and now being em-
ployed by a number of agencies, where
caseworkers and social scientists together
attack a wide variety of problems.é

There has been less active acceptance so
far of the need to combine teams of materials
and methods. The kind of combination em-
ployed, for example, in Rensis Likert’s
bombing surveys and Federal Reserve Board
studies has yet to be fully developed in so-
cial work research, which has tended to em-
ploy a single-barreled approach.

Equally to be desired, and still less ex-
ploited so far, is the teaming of different
methods, especially the combining of quanti-
tative and qualitative analysis, with each
granted full status as data. There is a tend-
ency to assume that a study must be either
quantitative or qualitative, and that on
the whole, numbers are more true and more
real than words—even when they are so
hedged about by statistical limitations as
to make their precision deceptive.

One consequence is a concentration on the
process of measurement rather than on what
is measured, with more weight on the ma-
nipulation of categories than on the initial
exploration necessary to make them sound
and meaningful. This means preoccupation
with reliability at the expense of validity,
even though lip service is given to the need
for establishing validity.

Translation and combination of concepts,
materials and techniques are only the be-
ginning, for a large part of the apparatus
required to fill the needs of social casework
has yet to be invented. At every turn one is
reminded that, like the social worker and
most other human beings, the social scientist
tends to accept the status quo as a frame
of reference. We recognize the need to inno-
vate, but much of our research has been a
grafting of accepted methods on to new
material rather than the development of
new ones at the dictation of the material.

One need is for either a modification of
the rating scale or a supplementary instru-
ment. Another innovation for which many are
groping is an adequate control group. At-
tempts to match groups on even an inade-
quate number of variables result in what
Ernest Greenwood’ has accurately termed
“a frightful decimation” of the sample. A
possible conclusion is that our very notion
of what constitutes a control group must be
modified.

Aside from its challenge and stimulus to
research efforts, social work has much to
offer the social scientist, through its content.
Olive Stone® has reviewed some of the con-
tent values, though perhaps greater emphasis
could be laid on the fact that so much of
casework centers about the process of
change, a process of key interest to the so-
cial sciences. Its goal is to produce change
for the client, within himself, in his environ-
ment, or both.

Sociology and anthropology might profit
also by closer scrutiny of the role and func-
tion of social work in our society. Helen
Witmer® has brilliantly expounded the the-
ory that social work is an institution, with a
function that sets it apart from other insti-
tutions. Whether one accepts the classifica-
tion or not, it is at any rate a social mani-
festation, the function of which is to render
more effective the functioning of our major
social institutions and the use individuals
are able to make of them. Provision to com-
pensate for breakdown in major mechanisms
HE purpose of the discussion was, so

I to speak, self-analysis of sociological

scientists. To the extent that this
analysis was accomplished, it was done in
the following fashion.

A basic paper was read by a member of
the Society, also a member of the panel, who
has been working for a great many months
with others in Washington on the Point-IV
program. He is a person born and reared in
another culture but who has for years been
in the United States. The purpose of his
paper was to set forth the objectives of the
Point-IV program and to delineate the job
to be done. The other four members of the
panel, all of whom had had experience in
other cultures, added their opinions and
judgments to the prescription.

The prescription, stated in terms of social
tasks, is as follows:
to understand both the local and national cul-
tures of the people to be assisted.

2. The training of technicians from more
highly developed cultures who will be used in
the program, in how to step down their techni-
cal knowledge to the level of usability in less
highly developed cultures.

3. The technical training of nationals who
come to the United States from the countries
to be assisted, in how to make practical adapta-
tions of what they see and learn here to their
home country’s situations.

4. On-the-job appraisal of progress being
made among the local people and of any dis-
turbances or frustrations which may be develop-
ing. An analysis of the same thing in relation
to the economic, social and political “power
structure” of the country in which programs
are undertaken. A constant analysis of con-
flicts which may develop in these cooperative
undertakings.

5. The development of democratic ways of
accomplishing improvements. (a) The develop-
ment of social structures and leaders in local
areas in order that the maximum residue of
accomplishment may be retained and built
upon by those who are recipients of technical
assistance. (b) The development of means and
