American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
HERE appears to be a considerable

I volume of opinion that sociology is

not an exact science. Within the same
attitude one also readily senses the view that
none of the social sciences is exact, and as
if to terminate the consideration of such a
unique possibility, some would add that
they never can reach such a stage of pre-
cision. Since logical thinking is generally
quite essential to scientific progress the be-
lief which has just been presented may well
be subjected to additional examination.

We might approach the problem by asking
what the term “exact” means. Certainly no
natural science has completely explored and
explained its set of natural phenomena so
“exactness” cannot be applied to any scien-
tific discipline in such a manner. The term,
if applied in that sense, is only relative, and
further, the state of relativity is constantly
changing for no field is static at present.
Perhaps some sciences are advancing faster
than others but if that be true we have no
measures at hand to show the differential
rates of progress,

It might prove helpful if we were to ex-
plore the nature of the term “exact” a little
farther. What is the particular meaning it is
supposed to have when used in reference to
any given science? How exact should or can
a science be? It is clear that if any science
allows for the discovery of exceptions to
its generally accepted tenets or laws of na-
ture, the term “exact” must be one which
allows considerable internal variation,

If half of the hypotheses which have been
advanced by any given field of science have
been found to hold true, does that make the
science “exact”? Would three-fourths be
better? Have we any answer to the question
at all which scientists would accept? It may
be that many of them have never thought
of the matter at all, and would see no point
in discussing it. Such treatment of the
matter might seem to be too precise. Indeed
it may be that some would ethnocentrically
hold that their own field is the most typical
of what an “exact” science should be.

One way of exploring the stability, and
hence the exactness of a science is by examin-
ing the number of concepts which it has set
down. Fairchild writes “No science can have
any more precision and exactitude than the
words or other symbols such as mathematical
or chemical formulae in which it is embod-
ied.” To the extent to which this clue prom-
ises reward we might give it a little atten-
tion. Under Fairchild’s editorship more than
2500 words and phrases have been pub-
lished. This is a fact which indicates that
sociology is not lacking in a specific vo-
cabulary laden with precise meanings. One
uses the word “precise” here with caution
yet no scientist would state that every con-
cept in his field is incapable of variations
in meanings under certain conditions,

Another approach in considering the mean-
ing of the term “exact” is through the nature
of its vocabulary. Sociology has broken some
new trails by taking words from the com-
mon language and has given them concrete
meanings, Such terms as culture, caste, char-
acter, family, folkways, identification, pri-
mary group, sympathy and suggestion all
sound so familiar that we may have difficulty
in thinking of them as having precise defi-
nitions. To the average reader they seem
more like old friends whom we have come
to appreciate because of what they have
meant to us in the past rather than formal
terms which bear the dignity of officialdom
in a scientific field. They appear to be about
as flexible as old shoes, and to lack almost
all of that which one might attribute to an
“exact” science, yet sociology uses them
with quite explicit meanings.

If sociologists had chosen to use the Greek
term Ta Sympheronta, or Chremata in place
of the more familiar, yet precise word Jn-
terests, they might have been given more
credit for being “exact.” If they had em-
ployed the Latin Rationes for Interaction in
preference to the Greek He Pros Allelous
Chreia many of their learned colleagues
would not have known the difference yet the
effect of redundant aloofness might have
been greater.

Instead of Human Nature the words
Physis Anthropina, or Natura Humana could
have been selected. Social Trends might have
become Phorai Koinai, or Communes La-
tiones; Society might have been called He
Ton Anthropon Koinonia or Societas Hu-
mana; Population would have been Plethos
or Summa Hominum, and greater their status
might have been in scientific terminology.
But the sociologists chose to use the common
language as their channel of communication
under the belief that an invention is just as
significant socially whether it goes by that
name, by Aliquid Inventum or by Heurema,
and the same applies to the hundreds of
other familiar words which have been shaped
and sharpened to serve as tools and instru-
ments for the analysis of human society.

Some of the physical sciences have la-
boriously sought words in the classical lan-
guages and made them bearers of precise
ideas. If these words sound austere, isola-
tionist, or scientific, that may simply be due
to the fact that the average reader does not
know their etymological origins, their origi-
nal or semantic meanings, how they may
have been wrenched apart, syllable from
creaking syllable, nor the various shades of
meaning which they originally had, for he
seeks only their definitions in some special-
ized dictionary of his own field of science.
Sociological terms frequently appear to lack
this official rigidity because we all know
several shades of meaning for each term
such as contact, competition, conflict, accom-
modation and assimilation, and when we
first observe that someone insists on giving
them concise meanings in sociology we feel
deprived of some of our liberties, and that
would be quite true, Nevertheless the social
sciences have taken such steps, even though
some may raise imperturbable eyebrows at
such unscientific antics, but the student
makes peace with the terms, comes to like
them, and finds that his memory is not un-
duly burdened with verbal antiquities.

We might, with some profit, search for
another approach to the problem by starting
from the datum that each natural science
seeks to formulate the laws of nature which
function within its particular area of in-
vestigation. A natural law is usually accepted
as substantial if it holds true for a satisfying
number of experiments. No law is known to
be true for every possible experiment since
“every possible experiment” can never be
performed. The fact that water boils at 212
degrees F. at sea level is exact enough for
most of us, yet no one has ever proved that
it is true in all possible cases. We accept it
after we tire of looking for exceptions. There
may actually be none, but we do not hear
the leading chemists or physicists making
such statements,
A similar declaration might be taken from
sociology—“Slums generate delinquency.” Is
that a natural law? We see immediately how
it could have exceptions, for not all slum
dwellers show signs of delinquency, but the
statement did not make that assertion at all.
How does that differ from the boiling of
water? Very little, indeed, for we will agree
that all of the samples of H,O which have
been tested, boiled under the conditions
given, and not otherwise, On Pike’s Peak the
boiling does not take place under exactly the
same conditions as at sea level, nor will the
same conditions prevail when one attempts
to boil water in a vacuum.

We should logically allow the same flexi-
bility to the proposition about slums, for
under the conditions governing the original
declaration, in time delinquency will appear.
Both cases necessitate definitions, and these
are the products of culture, not nature. In
both cases we are also dealing with samples,
and from these we reason about the universe
from which they were taken. If the assertion
about slums were to be proved to be true in
one hundred experiments would it then be
“exact”? If not, how many times would be
necessary?

When does one pass the point beyond
which “exactness” prevails? Should one en-
visage a scale on which there are marked
off degrees of exactness? Or is it one of those
pet inexactitudes which is harbored within a
discipline of thinking which bears the label
of science?

If we wish to take another approach we
might recall that some people have held
that sociology is not an exact science, nor
can it ever become one, for it deals with
human beings who are free to move about,
who have wills of their own, and therefore
one cannot predict their behavior. Could we
make the same statement about birds, fishes
or animals? If so, then we recall that we have
never heard such a charge being held against
Ornithology, Ichthyology or Zodlogy. And
what is the reason for this difference? It
seems clearly to be that sociology studies
human behavior, which includes all of us,
and Homo Sapiens is pretty sensitive about
being held under a light, He is not nearly as
delicate when it comes to exploring the life
secrets of crows, catfish, or kangaroos, but he
does not like to view himself under a micro-
scope, in fact it might be a difficult feat to
perform with composure.

It may be that people do not care to con-
sider any science as “exact” which is related
to human behavior for the wish to be free
is the very essence of freedom itself, and to
be found subject to the laws of nature would
minimize the scope of this desire. Man is the
only object in natural creation who has
coined the concept of freedom, and in its
expression he wishes to apply it according
to circumstances most advantageous to him-
self, Consequently it is much more satisfying
for men to think of themselves as special
creatures who have a sort of extralegal priv-
ilege on earth, subject to no laws which
govern such things as flowers, frogs and
weeping willows. It is soothing to feel one’s
self wrapped in a robe of invisibility through
which the prying eyes of the scientist shall
never pierce. But such thinking belongs in
the same category as fear of the doctor,
aversion to dentists’ offices, and the reticence
to being enumerated by the census taker.

Others may boldly declare that sociology
is not an exact science because it cannot
control its environment, or the human beings
who make up its complicated area of in-
vestigation, human society. This view is
quite acceptable but the same is true of the
astronomer. He may count and photograph
stars and planets, calculate their orbits, ana-
lyze their chemical structures, or even take
their temperatures, but he cannot remove
them from their environment, or change it. If
he could make one stand still, it would no
longer be a star. Similarly, we might point
out that microbes on cover glasses are not
the same harmful little beasts which attack
the human organism, nor is a cat on the op-
erating table the same feline that disturbs
our neighbors, The difference is each case
is that of behavior.

The control of any aspect of natural en-
vironment is only possible by the restriction
of freedom and limitation of function. Under
such conditions the objects being examined
are neither normal nor natural, Notwith-
standing these sacrifices, however, we pro-
ceed to examine the objects of nature, what-
ever they may be. This examination usually
turns out to be a listing of their character-
istics under whatever restraints are imposed
but within this confinement we do not see
natural microbes, cats, birds or human be-
ings. One might be justified in holding the
view that sociology is probably leading the
way in the application of most logical scien-
tific methods for it studies its sphere of
nature when the objects of its investigation
are free, in the process of natural social in-
teraction, and uninhibited by artificial re-
pression.

Since those who maintain that sociology
is not an exact science are very amiable and
quite serious people, we shall give them
every advantage even to the extent of stat-
ing more of their contentions. For instance,
some are concerned over their belief that
sociology does not apply the same orderly
techniques that the exact sciences have.
There are two answers to this exasperating
situation. The first might be illustrated by
referring to physics which is one of the most
punctilious of disciplines, and possessed of
an imposing array of ingenious instruments.
Yet few of those people would declare that
their machines are flawless in their measure-
ments or performance, The micrometer, as
an example, may give measures which are
accurate in centimeters to the fourth or
fifth decimal place, but they may never be
regarded as absolutely correct. These frac-
tions may not be very important in ordinary
applied physics but they do represent rela-
tive exactness.

The field of chemistry is known to be one
of great precision, and yet the leaders in that
science would hesitate to place a framework
around the known formulae for sulphur
compounds by claiming that new ones will
never be discovered, The same might be true
regarding the chemical composition of chloro-
phyll. Within its operational arena chem-
istry has settled down to a very presentable
exactness, but by no means a final one.
It is true that the sociologist does not use
a laboratory in the traditional way in which
that essential institution has been developed
in the past. He does, however, have a metho-
dology which is no less accurate than those
which involve scales, test tubes, burners,
microscopes or micrometers, for all efforts
made by every science to reach exactness
ultimately use mathematics, even statistics,
which happens to be the primary laboratory
technique of the social sciences. In as far as
mathematics has been developed, we can
rely on it as being very exact, even equal
to mechanical devices or formulae. Within
certain limits both machines and statistics
will give accurate measures, but outside of
these borders accuracy can only be attained
by making finer instruments or using better
methods of calculation.

We agree that the mean birth rate for a
country is a useful figure, and that two
points beyond the decimal are sufficient for
ordinary purposes; yet if we multiply the
total population by the two-place birth rate
for a given year, and mark off five decimal
places, we shall probably find that we are
either short or over several hundred babies.
The error is explained by the lack of pre-
cision in the mathematical calculations used.
If the decimal places were increased we
should come nearer to the exact number of
babies born; in fact we could carry it to
another extreme and wind up our figuring
with a fraction of a baby on our hands.

We might also recall that the familiar x
is only approximately finite. We accept it
as 3.14159 if we are satisfied with five deci-
mal places. If we are not, we may designate
it as 3.1415926535. Now if we wish to find
the area of a circle and multiply the square
of the radius by the first figure given we will
have a smaller area than if we had used the
second one. Which is correct? It is a matter
of relative exactness, The significance of this
point is that we cannot call mathematics a
completely exact field of abstract science for
there are several ways of solving some prob-
lems. Yet we do not regard mathematics as
inexact simply because the tail of ~ extends
so far into the mists.
There are advocates of exactness who are
tempted to point out that sociology cannot
predict human behavior, In the case of the
individual all will admit that prediction is
difficult. It is not easy to say which child
will cause his parents worry on a particular
day, whether a young man will marry a
girl within his home town or from another
place, or whether a graduate student will
have the stamina to remain at his studies
until awarded a Ph.D. These things are hard
to foretell accurately, but let us not be led
to assume that such difficulties beset only
the social sciences; we are merely more con-
scious of them in the familiar realm of
social interaction than we are of similar
problems related to inanimate objects or to
the lower organisms.

We should keep in mind that the meteor-
ologist is seldom able to predict the weather
on a given day two weeks in the future
despite the desires of his friends to have a
picnic on that date, and he has many accu-
rate instruments at his disposal. The doctor
of medicine may have to “wait until to-
morrow” to decide whether Junior’s rash
is measles or something else, for he is un-
able to predict with assurance, even twenty-
four hours in advance.

If accuracy in prediction is a measure of
exactness in science then we should recall
that the zodlogist cannot tell us which rabbit
will eat the tops off of our newly arisen beans;
the botanist cannot predict which seeds out
of a package will not germinate; the bac-
teriologist would hesitate to say which of
a dozen children who have been exposed to
the mumps will contract the illness; the
geologist would not like to have us press
him for a statement where the next earth-
quake will occur; nor would a physicist risk
his professional status by predicting which
railroad rail will crack during the next heavy
frost. All sciences have predictive values
but they rely on the statistical device of
probability. In the same manner does the
sociologist, by the same mathematical tech-
niques, and often with results which are
just as accurate.

If one cannot safely base his case regard-
ing the assumed inexactness of sociology on
its recognized fallibility in prediction, a weak-
ness shared by all other sciences, then on
what foundation can it be placed? Perhaps
it uses a different method? If one observes
the methods of sciences he will find that
they are all essentially the same; the differ-
ences are in particular techniques and special
laboratory equipment. The common method
of every science consists of observation, hy-
pothesis, assembling known facts, experimen-
tation, gathering new data, testing the hy-
pothesis, and a statement regarding the re-
sults, The machinery may be a telescope, a
scalpel or a calculating machine, but the
method is the same.

If the preceding comments are convincing
to those who care to weigh them, then the
statement is conclusive that sociology is one
of the natural sciences, all of which are
headed in the same direction; that is, toward
an explanation of natural phenomena. The
contention that sociology is not an exact
science should be judged again in the light
of facts which show that no single science is
exceedingly precise, and exactness is only a
relative term.

There may appear yet to be a little room
for the belief that sociology is “so young”
that it has not attained the coordination of
maturity, but that is not a weighty argu-
ment, for during the century of its operation
such scientific disciplines as bacteriology,
meteorology, spectroscopy, oceanography,
astrophysics, stereochemistry, neurophysiol-
ogy, biochemistry, biophysics, endocrinology
and several others have made their appear-
HE COMMUNITY utilized as the point

I of departure for this survey of inter-

marriages is Derby, Connecticut, the
smallest in area of the 169 townships in the
state. Its population, according to the United
States Census of 1940, totals 10,287. Located
in the lower Naugatuck Valley eight miles
‘west of New Haven, Derby is an industrial
community noted for its production of tex-
tiles and light metal commodities. Approxi-
mately 32 immigrant groups of the Caucasoid
race are represented there, along with a few
Negroes and Chinese. The pattern of their
arrival was essentially the same as that found
in hundreds of other towns and cities along
the Eastern Seaboard. Six Protestant
churches, two Roman Catholic churches, and
an orthodox Jewish synagogue, as well as
several other churches and synagogues in
neighboring communities serve the religious
needs of the people.

The original Jews in the community ar-
rived from Germany during the late nine-
teenth century. Here they peddled their mer-
chandise from door to door and subsequently
opened clothing, jewelry, and millinery stores
in the central business section of the city as
soon as they had accumulated some capital.
It was not until the turn of the century
that Jews immigrated in numbers sufficient
to constitute an independent religious group.
Most of these later immigrants were ortho-
dox Jews from Russia and Poland; a few
came from Hungary and Rumania, Almost
all of them were merchants, catering to the
needs of the immigrant gentiles whose lan-
guages they spoke. In 1905 the Jews or-
ganized a congregation, hiring the hall of a
fraternal organization for Sabbath and Holy
Day services. Previously they had attended
synagogues in nearby communities or had
formed prayer groups in their own homes.
In 1916, when there were approximately fifty
Jewish families in Derby, plans for the erec-
tion of a synagogue were begun. The build-
ing was completed in 1918. A resident rabbi
was secured, a “Jack-of-all trades” who not
only conducted religious services but also
taught the children, served as cantor, slaugh-
tered poultry and cattle, circumcized the
male children, and married and buried the
adults,

To what extent have these “small town”
Jews intermarried? How does their intermar-
riage incidence compare with the rates of
other communities and areas in Europe and
America?

The Jews of Derby, 110 families in all,
have had a high rate of inmarriage, none
intermarrying in 1929-1930 and only one,
