@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Women in American society are generally ex-
pected to be less capable than men, particu-
larly in situations involving some sort of task
performance. Ward and Balswick (1978), for
example, report that men are assumed to be
more rational and logical than women; Bem
(1974) notes that men are commonly seen as
more responsible than women. Broverman, et
al. (1972) find evidence that men are believed
to be more aggressive, more objective, more
self-confident, more intelligent, more
trustworthy, and so on, than are women. These
stereotypical expectations have been rea-
sonably stable over time (see, e.g., Sheriffs and
Jarrett, 1953; Spence and Helmreich, 1978).

Furthermore, both men and women develop
such expectations. Rosenkrantz et al. (1968)
show that the stereotypes women have of mas-
culinity and femininity are similar to the
stereotypes men have. Both men and women
also judge ‘‘masculine’ characteristics to be
more desirable than ‘*feminine’’ characteristics
(McKee and Sheriffs, 1957). Goldberg (1968)
demonstrates that both men and women rate
articles less favorably when they are believed
to be written by women than when they are
believed to be written by men.'
Such sex-stereotyped expectations have
strong and widespread behavioral conse-
quences. Male leaders are asked for informa-
tion more often than are female leaders (Eskil-
son and Wiley, 1976); men interrupt women
much more often than women interrupt men in
mixed-sex groups (Zimmerman and West,
1975); men participate more frequently in
group interaction than do women (Strodtbeck
and Mann, 1956; Curtis et al., 1975); in am-
biguous task situations women are more influ-
enced than are men (Whittaker, 1965). In short,
differences in the task behavior of men and
women generally reflect the differences in ex-
pectations for men and women. (For more
thorough summaries of these differences see
Lockheed and Hall, 1976; Meeker and
Weitzel-O’Neill, 1977; Berger et al., 1980.)

We are interested in whether these gender-
based status inequalities can be reduced to any
significant degree. Is there any theoretical
basis for assuming that such a reduction can be
accomplished? Further, if gender inequalities
can be reduced, what are the conditions under
which we may expect this reduction to occur?
How extensive a reduction is possible? It may
be, for example, that gender inequalities can be
reduced, but that the amount of change is small
or the circumstances under which the change
occurs are impractical. Finally, do the answers
to the previous questions apply equally to men
and women? Reducing gender inequalities for
women involves raising their status; for men it
involves lowering their status. The means by
which and the degree to which reduction oc-
curs might therefore be quite different for men
and women.

There are two basic approaches to answering
these questions. The first of these approaches
is transitional and dispositional. It assumes
that a primary focus of socialization is the
learning of sex roles. In particular, various
skills, capacities, and affect states associated
with each sex become internalized as disposi-
tions of the individual through childhood so-
cialization. To be male, then, is to deal with
“problems” or ‘‘objects,”’ to be ‘“‘task-
oriented” and ‘‘coldly rational’. In contrast, to
be female is to deal with ‘people’? and
“feelings,” to be ‘“‘process-oriented” and
“warmly expressive”. Because these charac-
teristics come to be seen as dispositional (or
even personality) traits, the same limited re-
pertoires of attitudes and behaviors are avail-
able to each sex in all situations. In task
groups, then, men are “‘active’’ (they partici-
pate more), while women are ‘‘passive’’ (they
participate less).

According to the dispositional approach,
then, gender inequalities result from dif-
ferences in the repertoires of attitudes and be-
haviors to which men and women are so-
cialized. Since these repertories are learned
and internalized from early childhood, they are
very resistant to change. Significant reductions
in gender inequalities are not likely to occur in
the absence of a large-scale restructuring of
socialization experience.”

Although a great deal of research assumes
some version of the dispositional approach (see
discussions of much of the relevant literature in
Lipman-Blumen and Tickamyer, 1975, and
Miller and Garrison, 1982), very little research
actually tests the implications of this approach.
In one of the few studies that does do so,
Lockheed and Hall (1976) found that women
do not use the same limited repertoire of atti-
tudes and behaviors in all situations. Specifi-
cally, in task groups whose members are all
female, some of the women adopt the reper-
toire of attitudes and behaviors that are associ-
ated with being male—they participate more
frequently and they are less deferential than
are other members. Further, these women
continue to exhibit the stereotypically male rep-
ertorie when they later join mixed-sex groups
engaged in the same task. The effect disap-
pears, however, if the mixed-sex group they
join is engaged in a different task. These find-
ings are clearly inconsistent with the disposi-
tional approach.

A second approach, based on status charac-
teristics theory (see Berger et al., 1977; Berger
et al., 1980), can accommodate these findings.
This situational approach assumes that status
roles are more basic in the determination of
task behaviors than are specific sex roles. Both
males and females learn the repertoires of at-
titudes and behaviors associated with status
superiority and status inferiority. For example,
status superiors participate more frequently,
have their contributions more positively evalu-
ated and are more influential in task groups
than status inferiors. In most situations where
men and women interact, women are accorded
the lower status (at least in contemporary
American society). Consequently, in most
situations women use the repertoire of atti-
tudes and behaviors that is associated with
their status inferiority—just as the disposi-
tional approach would predict.

However, in some situations status dif-
ferences based on gender are clearly irrelevant
to the task at hand (as when the group is com-
posed exclusively of members of only one sex).
In these cases status differences based on other
characteristics, such as physical attractiveness
or race, will come to determine whose status is
high and whose status is low. Since all know
how to be both status superior and status in-
ferior, those with a status advantage will adopt
the repertoire of attitudes and behaviors that is
associated with their status superiority, re-
gardless of their sex; those with a status disad-
vantage will adopt the status inferior reper-
toire, again regardless of their sex.

In other situations gender may be only one of
several statuses that differentiate people. In
these cases all the status differences will be
involved in determining whose status is high
and whose is low. Although gender will have an
impact, other statuses may override its impli-
cations. An attractive white woman with a
PhD may behave like a status superior, while
an unattractive black man with a grade school
education may behave like a status inferior.

According to the situational approach, then,
gender inequalities reflect status inequalities. If
gender is the only basis of status inequality
present in the situation, men and women will
think and act like status superiors and status
inferiors respectively, given current American
cultural norms. However, if gender is not a
basis of status inequality, or if other bases of
status inequality are present, some men may ex-
hibit status inferior attitudes and behaviors and
some women may exhibit status superior atti-
tudes and behaviors. The nature and extent of
gender inequality is situationally specific.

Given this situational specificity, it should be
possible to reduce the effects of gender in-
equalities by altering the situation in which
these inequalities exist (e.g. by introducing in-
formation about other status differences whose
implications contradict those of gender).
Eliminating the invidious distinction between
“male” and “female” would probably require
massive resocialization, just as the disposi-
tional approach suggests. However, the effects
of that invidious distinction might be reduced
or eliminated in at least some situations with-
out having to achieve such an obviously im-
practical goal.

Among the tests of the status characteristics
argument that have been performed,* there is
one study that is particularly relevant to the
issues we have raised here. Pugh and Wahrman
(1983) demonstrate that women who are shown
to be more competent than their male partners
at a task related to (but distinct from) the
group’s task will be as influential in the group
decision-making as are the men. Moreover,
this effect can be transferred to new male
partners, given the same group task. Under at
least some conditions, then, it is possible to
reduce the effects of gender inequality, as sug-
gested by the situational approach of status
characteristics theory.

The Pugh and Wahrman results deal with a
class of situations in which group members
have no prior conception of the relevance of
sex to the tasks they perform. In this sort of
situation, members nevertheless come to see
sex as task relevant because men are expected
to be more capable at tasks in general than are
women. Members assume that if men are gen-
erally more capable, then they are probably
more capable at the task the group is perform-
ing, even though nothing is known about the
relevance of sex to that task. The “burden of
proof” is on demonstrating that sex is irrele-
vant to task performance, rather than on dem-
onstrating that it is relevant.

In another, probably much larger, class of
situations, members do have conceptions of
Epstein (1970:194—97) argues that there are at
least a few circumstances under which it is
possible to ‘‘minimize” the effects of women’s
low status, even in situations involving explicit
relevance. One of the most important of these
circumstances is when high ability can be un-
ambiguously demonstrated. If a woman can
clearly show expertise at the task, thus discon-
firming the expectations people have for her
simply because she is a woman, the gender
inequality may be reduced. Her opinions and
advice may be sought out because of her spe-
cial talents. This effect seems most likely to
occur if, as Epstein suggests, the task is formal
and well-defined and standards for perfor-
mance are clear and measurable.

In the studies we report here, we use the
theoretical apparatus of status characteristics
theory (with one minor conceptual extension)
to test Epstein’s argument. In particular, we
evaluate whether and to what extent the dis-
confirmation of gender-based status expectan-
cies can reduce the inequality in task situations
where gender is explicitly relevant to the task.

Status Characteristics Theory. Consider the
situation shown in the graph in Figure la. This
figure represents a typical task situation in-
volving gender inequality. Points in the graph
represent individual actors (p, 0), status ele-
ments (differentially evaluated states of D, the
diffuse status characteristics sex, and of C*,
the ability to perform the group’s task), and task
outcome states (differentially evaluated levels
of performance of task T). P is the focal actor
in this situation; that. is, it is from that actor’s
point of view that the situation is seen. Lines in
the graph represent relations between actors,
status elements, and task outcome states. For
example, the possession line between p and
D(—) indicates that p is female; she ‘‘pos-
sesses” the negatively evaluated state of the
diffuse status characteristic sex. The relevance
line between D(—) and C*(—) indicates that sex
is relevant to one’s ability to perform the
group’s task. Finally, the negatively signed line
between D(—) and D(+) is a dimensionality
relation; it indicates that p and o possess oppo-
sitely evaluated states of the same characteris-
tic.

As represented in Figure la, actor p is a
woman interacting with a man. Furthermore,
she sees sex as directly relevant to one’s ability
to perform the task. That is, she believes that
males are more capable at the task than are
females.

If success at task T is valued and requires
collective effort (as, for example, in jury deci-
sions or business conferences), status charac-
teristics theory predicts that the focal actor will
develop paths of task expectancy linking her-
self and o to outcome states of the task [T(+)
p—D(-)—C*(—)—_T(_) and

p——D(-)——D(+)——C*(+)—_I(+),
and two paths linking o with task outcome
states:

o——D(+)——C*(+)——T(+) and

o——D(+)—D(-)——C*(-)—_T(-).

The role of these paths in determining the
aggregated expectations that p has for herself
and o differs depending on the task
significance, the length and the number of the
paths.

The task significance of a path concerns the
implications the path has for ability to perform
the task. A positive path implies high ability, a
negative path, low ability. Task significance is
determined by computing the algebraic product
of the signs of the relations along the path and
the sign of the task outcome state. Both of p’s
paths in Figure la have negative task
significance, the first because all the signs
along the path are positive and the task out-
come state is negative, the second because
exactly one sign along the path is negative and
the task outcome state is positive. Using the
same reasoning, both of 0’s paths have positive
task significance. That is, both the p’s paths
suggest that she should perform poorly at the
task, while both of o’s paths suggest that he
should perform well.

The length of a path concerns the strength of
the expectancy it establishes. The shorter the
path, the stronger the expectancy associated
with it. Path length is determined simply by
counting the number of relations on the path.
In Figure 1a p has paths of length three and
four (as does 0). In determining aggregated ex-
pectations, the three-step path should have a
greater impact than the four-step path.

The number of paths linking the actors to
each task outcome state affects the extremity
of the expectations aggregated from the paths.
The greater the number of consistent paths (i.e.
paths having the same task significance), the
more extreme the effect on expectations. In
Figure 1, then, p’s expectations relative to o
should be lower than they would be if only one
path linked them to their respective task out-
come states.
In aggregating paths of task expectancy, the
number and length of paths of positive task
significance are compared with the number and
length of paths of negative task significance.
To the extent that the paths of positive task
significance “‘outweigh” the paths of negative
task significance, the aggregated expectations
for that actor are increased; to the extent that
the negative paths outweigh the positive, the
aggregated expectations are decreased.*

Finally, p’s expectation advantage relative
to o is determined by comparing her aggregated
expectations for herself (e,) with her aggre-
gated expectations for 0 (e,). To the extent that
e, is greater than e,, she will come to see her-
self as more capable at the task than her part-
ner. To the extent that e, is less than e,, she
will see herself as less capable. Furthermore,
her behavior will reflect her expectations. She
will, for example, participate more and defer
less to her partner if she expects herself to be
more capable than if she expects herself to be
less capable.

In the situation represented in Figure la, p
should come to see herself as less capable than
her male partner. She therefore is likely to
defer to his opinions relatively frequently.

Extending the Theory. How will disconfir-
mation of expectations affect this situation? As
currently formulated, status characteristics
theory does not provide a direct answer to that
question, since no relation of ‘‘disconfirma-
tion” is included in the theory. It is, however, a
simple matter to extend the theory to encom-
pass such a relation. Consider first the possi-
bility of confirmation of expectations. Ba-
sically, confirmation suggests that the focal
actor comes to see that group members in fact
do possess the levels of ability that their
statuses would imply. In other words, confir-
mation can be represented as a possession re-
lation between the actor and his or her pre-
sumed ability to perform the task (i.e. C*), as
in Figure 1b.

Disconfirmation can be represented, then,
by the same type of relation. The only dif-
ference in this case is that the relation links p’s
low status [D(—)] with high ability [((C*(+)] and
o’s high status [D(+)] with low ability [C*(—)].
In Figure 1c the focal actor comes to see that
group members in fact possess levels of task
ability that differ from what their statuses
would imply.

What are the consequences for p’s expecta-
tions and behavior of representing confirma-
tion and disconfirmation in this way? First, in
both cases additional paths of task expectancy
have been introduced. Since the number of
paths to any particular task outcome affect p’s
aggregated expectations, both confirmation
and disconfirmation should have some effect
on the gender inequality in the situation.

Second, all the additional paths for each
actor in the confirmation situation have the
same task significance—negative for p, posi-
tive for o. Given that adding paths of the same
task significance makes the aggregated expec-
tations more extreme, p’s expectation advan-
tage should become more extreme. Since e, is
already less than e,, she should expect to per-
form even less capably compared to her part-
ner than when her expectations have not been
confirmed. Consequently, she is likely to be
less influential in reaching a group decision
than would otherwise be the case.

In the disconfirmation situation two of the
three new paths for each actor have task
significance that is opposite from that of the
original paths—positive for p and negative for
o. Since such paths make aggregated expecta-
tions less extreme, p’s expectation advantage
should become less extreme. She should ex-
pect to perform more capably compared to her
partner than when her expectations have not
been disconfirmed. Therefore, she should be
more influential in the group decision-making
than otherwise.

Finally, status characteristics theory posits
an attenuation principle regarding consistent
paths. Specifically, each such additional path
increases the effect on subsequent aggregated
expectations, but at a decreasing rate. No such
attenuation occurs with respect to inconsistent
paths. The inclusion of a path with different
task significance adds to the information in the
situation; inclusion of a path with the same task
significance merely supports information that
is already available.*

5 Of course, the effect of adding a second “incon-
sistent’ path will be attenuated, since the task
significance of that path is the same as the task
significance of the first inconsistent path.
As a result of the attenuation principle,
therefore, status characteristics theory pre-
dicts that disconfirmation (which introduces
inconsistent paths) should have a more pow-
erful effect than should confirmation (which
introduces only consistent paths). P’s expecta-
tions and relative power and prestige behaviors
should increase more in the situation repre-
sented in Figure Ic than they should decrease
in the situation represented in Figure 1b. Dis-
confirmation should reduce gender inequality
more than confirmation increases it.®

Let us compare the predictions made using
the situational approach of status charac-
teristics theory with predictions for the same
situations suggested by the dispositional ap-
proach. First, as we have indicated, the status
characteristics argument suggests that both
confirming and disconfirming expectations
should alter the gender inequality in task per-
formance; confirmation should increase the in-
equality, disconfirmation should decrease it. In
contrast, the dispositional argument suggests
that neither confirmation nor disconfirmation
should have a significant impact on the in-
equalities in the situation.

Status characteristics theory also makes
predictions about the relative amount of impact
that confirmation and disconfirmation of ex-
pectations should have, based on the attenua-
tion principle. Specifically, disconfirmation,
because it involves the introduction of incon-
sistent information, should have a greater im-
pact than confirmation. Since the dispositional
argument predicts no effects for either confir-
mation or disconfirmation, there should also be
no differences in their impact. Even if there are
small effects of confirmation and disconfirma-
tion, the dispositional argument provides no
reason for assuming that one or the other of the
effects should be larger.

Two other sets of predictions may be con-
sidered. First, one might assume that actors
take into account information that is consistent
with what they already presume to be true and
ignore or discount information that is incon-
sistent with that knowledge. Such a view is
supported by a series of studies that have con-
sidered the explanations individuals have for
the success or failure of men and women per-
forming the same task. In general, male suc-
cess is attributed to ability, while female suc-
cess is attributed to luck or hard work or an
easy task (see Feather, 1969; Deaux and
Emswiller, 1974; Feldman-Summers and
Kiesler, 1974). By contrast, male failure is at-
tributed to external circumstances (i.e. factors
beyond his control), while female failure is at-
tributed to lack of ability (see Feather and
Simon, 1973). Information that is inconsistent
with the established stereotypes is discounted.
From the consistency view, therefore, only
confirmation should affect gender inequalities;
disconfirmation should have no impact at all.
Even if disconfirmation has some minimal im-
pact, the impact of confirmation should be ob-
viously and significantly greater.

Finally, we may consider predictions based
on behavioral principles of reward maximiza-
tion (see, e.g., Homans, 1974, and Burgess and
Bushell, 1969). In this case information that is
self-enhancing is likely to be taken into ac-
count, while information that is self-
denigrating is likely to be ignored. In the con-
text of the current study, confirming a
womans low self-expectations should not have
significant effects since it can only reduce her
own self-image. However, disconfirming her
low self-expectation should have a significant
impact since it enhances her self-image. Even
if confirmation has some minimal impact, the
impact of disconfirmation should be obviously
and significantly greater.”

We have conducted two experiments de-
signed to test predictions based on status char-
acteristics theory against these alternatives.
The first study deals with the effects of confir-
mation and disconfirmation of women’s low
status expectations. The second compares the
effects of confirmation and disconfirmation on
men’s high status expectations. Although
status characteristics theory assumes that the
effects would be the same for men as for
women, there are reasons (discussed below)
for considering the possibility that the effects
are different for men.
subjects were provided information establish-
ing gender differentiaion in the group and were
administered a test of a fictitious ability. In the
second phase, additional information was pro-
vided that was designed to establish the cul-
tural relevance of gender to this ability. Ex-
pectations established by this procedure were
then confirmed or disconfirmed through the
reporting of scores on the ability test from the
first phase of the study. Finally, subjects com-
pleted a joint decision-making task ostensibly
involving this same ability. This task was de-
signed to measure the subject’s influence be-
havior (i.e. one of the observable power and
prestige behaviors about which status charac-
teristics theory makes predictions).

Subjects were randomly assigned to one of
three conditions, depending on the nature and
extent of information reported regarding test
scores and ability levels in the first phase of the
study.® Those in the Low Status Baseline con-
dition (LSB), representing the situation shown in
Figure 1a, received no information about their
performance on the test in Phase One. Those in
the Low Status Confirmation condition (LSC),
representing the situation shown in Figure 1b,
were informed that their performance on the
test indicated very low ability, while their part-
ner’s performance indicated very high ability.
Finally, those in the Low Status Disconfirma-
tion condition (LSD), representing the situa-
tion shown in Figure 1c, were told that their
performance indicated very high ability while
their partner's performance indicated very low
ability.

Procedures. As each subject arrived, a lab
assistant greeted her and escorted her individ-
ually to an experimental room to begin the first
phase of the study. The assistant asked her to
fill out an information sheet giving her name,
year in school, and hobbies, and informed her
that similar information would be provided
about her partner later in the study.

The assistant then administered a test of a
fictitious ability called Contrast Sensitivity to
each subject. Subjects were instructed to eval-
uate a series of slides shown to them on a TV
monitor. Each slide presented a rectangular
pattern composed of smaller black and white
rectangles. For each slide subjects had ten sec-
onds to decide if there was more black or more
white area in the larger rectangle, and to record
this choice on a test form provided by the as-
sistant.°
One of the most interesting findings to
emerge from previous studies of Contrast
Sensitivity ability is that males are generally
far more accurate at solving Contrast Sen-
sitivity problems than are females. Contrast
Sensitivity may in fact be a gender-based
ability. That is, whether you have high or
low levels of Contrast Sensitivity may be
dependent upon your sex or gender... . At
the present time, social scientists are not
sure why there is such a strong male-female
difference on Contrast Sensitivity ability.
. .. The difference is probably due to dif-
ferent socialization experiences—for exam-
ple, the different kinds of socialization expe-
riences that are emphasized in the educa-
tional paths that are open to men as com-
pared to the traditional paths open to
women.
scores from the first phase. The scores were
publicly announced (i.e. over the TV moni-
tors), and each subject was asked to record
both her own score and that of her partner on
the information sheet. In the LSC condition,
each subject was informed that she had cor-
rectly answered 9 problems out of a possible
25, while her partner had answered 16 of the 25
problems correctly. In the LSD condition, this
pattern of scores was reversed, so that the
subject received the score of 16, while her
partner received the score of 9. A set of ‘“na-
tional standards” showed that a score of 9 re-
flected a low level of ability and 16 a high level
of ability. Subjects in the LSB condition re-
ceived no information about their scores from
the test administered in the first phase.

Task. Subjects in all conditions then partici-
pated in the team decision-making task. Each
subject gave an initial opinion as to whether the
top or the bottom pattern contained more white
area; after she registered her own initial
choice, her partner's initial choice was com-
municated to her. Final decisions were made
privately. Initial opinions were communicated
ostensibly for the purpose of improving the
team score. To reinforce this idea, a set of
standards was presented that indicated that in-
dividuals who worked as a team performed
more effectively than individuals who worked
alone.

All exchange of information during the inter-
active task phase was controlled by the ex-
perimenter; thus, each subject found that her
partner disagreed with her on 20 of the 25
trials. Five agreement trials were randomly
distributed in each block of 5 trials to enhance
the plausibility of the disagreements. The sub-
ject’s P(S) (i.e. the proportion of times she
stayed with her own initial choice, given a dis-
agreement) provided a measure of her rejection
of influence in the situation, one of the observ-
able power and prestige behaviors. Finally,
after completing a questionnaire, subjects were
interviewed and debriefed.

Seventy subjects participated in the study.
All were 18- or 19-year-old females who had
volunteered to participate in the study and who
were paid for their participation. In accordance
with standardized criteria (see Cook et al.,
1974), data for 10 of the subjects were excluded
from analysis on the basis of suspicion or vio-
lation of experimental conditions (e.g. misun-
derstanding of instructions).''!

Predictions and Results. Status charac-
teristics theory predicts that both confirmation
and disconfirmation of a woman's gender-
based ability expectations should affect her
subsequent expectations and behavior. Con-
firmation should decrease her expectations,
which in turn should lower her position in the
power and prestige order of the group. In the
context of this study, confirmation should re-
duce the rate at which she rejects influence.
That is, the mean P(S) in the LSC condition
should be lower than in the LSB condition:
LSC < LSB. Disconfirmation should increase
her expectations, which in turn should raise
her position in the power and prestige order of
the group. Disconfirmation should therefore
increase the rate at which she rejects influence.
The mean (PS) in the LSD condition should be
higher than in the LSB condition: LSD > LSB.
Finally, because of the operation of the attenu-
ation principle, disconfirmation should have a
more powerful effect on expectations and be-
havior than should confirmation. The increase
in P(S) from the LSB condition to the LSD
condition should be greater than the decrease
from the LSB condition to the LSC condition:
(LSD - LSB) > (LSB — LSC).

These predictions are summarized in the first
column of Table 1a. The second, third and
fourth columns summarize predictions based
on dispositional consistency and maximization
principles, respectively. As we have indicated,
the dispositional approach predicts no effects
of either confirmation or disconfirmation. If
the dispositional arguments are correct, then,
we should expect LSC = LSB, LSD = LSB,
and (LSD — LSB) = (LSB — LSC). Consis-
tency arguments propose that only confirma-
tion should have significant effects. Therefore,
we should expect LSC < LSB, LSD = LSB,
and (LSD — LSB) < (LSB — LSC). Finally,
maximization arguments propose that only dis-
confirmation should have significant effects.
Consequently, we should expect LSC = LSB,
LSD > LSB, and (LSD — LSB) > (LSB —
LSC).

The results are reported in Table 1b. The
mean P(S) in the LSB condition is 0.510. This
value is consistent with the values found in
structurally similar conditions of previous
studies in the status characteristics tradition
(see the studies reported in Berger et al., 1977).
Such a result suggests we were successful in
establishing the relevance of gender to ability
at the Contrast Sensitivity task, a precondition
for testing the predictions of the theory.'? The

12 Questionnaire and interview responses also
generally support this interpretation. However, the
mean P(S) value is the key evidence in support of
that interpretation. There are at least two reasons for
this. First, although the expectancy processes dis-
cussed in status characteristics theory are assumed
to have cognitive consequences, they are not as-
sumed to be cognitive processes themselves. Thus, a
mean P(S) in the LSC condition is 0.372 (0.138
lower than in LSB) and the value in the LSD
condition is 0.735 (0.225 higher than in LSB).
The one-tailed Mann-Whitney U statistics for
the differences between these conditions and
LSB are very strongly significant, as shown in
Table 1c. This pair of results is consistent only
with the expectancy predictions of status char-
acteristics theory.

To test the status characteristics prediction
based on the attenuation principle, we com-
puted difference scores for each subject in the
confirmation and disconfirmation conditions
between her own P(S) and the mean P(S) value
in the baseline condition. These difference
scores could then be ranked for statistical
analysis in the same way the P(S) scores for the
first two predictions were ranked. Results rel-
evant to the predicted difference between dif-
ferences are presented in the last row of Table
lc. The one-tailed Mann-Whitney U obtained
for this test indicates that the probability of
obtaining these results by chance alone is
0.042. While this finding is not as statistically
strong as the others, it does provide strong
support for the prediction.
Taken as a whole, then, the results of Study
One strongly support the situational approach
to reducing gender inequalities suggested by
status characteristics theory. Only the predic-
tions derived from that theory are fully con-
sistent with the results of our experiment.

However, it is not possible to eliminate the
other three approaches on the basis of Study
One alone. First, one of the results (concerning
the difference between differences) also sup-
ports a prediction of the maximization ap-
proach. Although the results are not fully con-
sistent with the predictions of that approach, it
would be wise to perform an additional test in
which the predictions of the expectancy and
maximization approaches regarding the dif-
ference between differences can be discrimi-
nated.

Second, it is quite possible that the effects of
confirmation and disconfirmation on the sub-
sequent expectations and behavior of men
differ from their effects for women. If, for
example, the maximization approach were cor-
rect, disconfirmation of men’s high status ex-
pectations should have much less impact than
disconfirmation of women’s low status expec-
tations. Lowering one’s status is costly, while
raising it is rewarding. A similar prediction
might also be made by the socialization ap-
proach. For example, an internalized disposi-
tion for ‘‘passivity’’ among women could make
them less resistant than men to alterations in
their expectations; women may be more re-
ceptive to new information about their status
than are men.

Even if all the alternative explanations for
our results could be unambiguously elimi-
nated without further research, an additional
The design of the second study mirrored that of
the first. In this case, however, the subjects
were males, with the manipulations altered ac-
cordingly. Thus, in the gender manipulation
during the first phase of the study, the subjects
were introduced to a female partner, Diane
Winston, also a freshman, whose hobbies were
sewing, reading, and music. The confirmation
and disconfirmation manipulations were sim-
ply inverted. A male whose high status was
being confirmed was informed that his 16 cor-
rect answers out of 25 problems reflected a
superior level of Contrast Sensitivity ability; a
male whose high status was being disconfirmed
was informed that his 9 correct answers out of
25 reflected a very low or poor level of ability.
In all other respects the procedures of the two
studies were identical.

The three conditions thus created are pre-
sented in Figure 2. The graph of the High
Status Baseline (HSB) condition is shown in
Figure 2a. The graph of the High Status Con-
firmation (HSC) condition is given in Figure
2b. The graph of the High Status Disconfirma-
tion (HSD) condition appears in Figure 2c.

Eighty-four subjects participated in Study
Two. All were 18- or 19-year-old males. The
data from 21 of these subjects were excluded
study would be useful in testing the attenuation
principle of status characteristics theory. We
are aware of only two other studies which have
tested predictions based on the attenuation
principle. One (Norman et al., 1984) provides
strong support for the principle. The other
(Pugh and Wahrman, 1983) finds no evidence
of the operation of the principle (although the
nature of the test performed is somewhat less
direct than in the Norman et al. study). Our
results thus far support the principle. Clearly,
additional information is needed to properly
assess the value of the attenuation principle.

We have therefore conducted a second study
concerned with the implications of confirma-
tion and disconfirmation of men’s expectations
and behavior. This focus permits us to deal
with all three of our concerns. First, it permits
us to construct a test of differences between
differences that discriminates between the ex-
pectancy and maximization predictions. Sec-
ond, it allows us to evaluate whether there are
gender differences in the utility of disconfir-
mation as a tool for reducing gender inequality.
Third, it provides an additional test of the op-
eration of the attenuation principle of status
characteristics theory.
HSC > HSB, HSB > HSD, and (HSB — HSD)
> (HSC — HSB).

Again, the dispositional approach proposes
no differences in any of these cases: HSC =
HSB, HSB = HSD, and, if any differences do
exist, (HSB — HSD) = (HSC — HSB). The
consistency approach would suggest that con-
firmation should increase expectations, but
that disconfirmation will be ignored. Thus,
HSC > HSB, HSB = HSD, and (HSB — HSD) <
(HSC — HSB). Finally, the maximization ap-
proach makes the same predictions as the con-
sistency approach, since, in this case, consis-
tency is maximizing (i.e. it yields the highest
self-evaluations). These predictions are sum-
marized in Table 2a. Note that the attenuation
prediction of the status expectancy approach
for this high status situation differs from the
predictions of all three alternatives. The status
expectancy approach predicts that the effects
of disconfirmation should be greater than those
of confirmation. The dispositional approach
predicts no differences in the effects of confir-
mation and disconfirmation. Both maximiza-
tion and consistency predict that the effects of
disconfirmation should be Jess than those of
confirmation.

The results relevant to these predictions are
presented in Tables 2b and 2c. The mean P(S) in
the baseline condition HSB is 0.719. This fig-
ure is dramatically higher than the 0.510 for
women in the LSB condition, and is highly
significant statistically (see Table 3). This
further confirms that we were successful in
establishing differential expectations for men
and women on the basis of the explicit rele-
vance of their gender to the Contrast Sensitiv-
ity task. It also enables us to make some ad-
ditional comparisons later on in our analysis.

The mean P(S) in the HSC condition is 0.779,
a value which is significantly higher than the
value in the HSB condition. Also, the mean
P(S) in the HSD condition is 0.479 which is
significantly lower than the value in the HSB
condition. These results constitute strong sup-
port for the status expectancy argument.

Using the same procedure for computing
difference scores as before, we can test the
predictions based on the attenuation principle.
Again, the difference between the disconfir-
mation values and the mean baseline value is
greater than the difference between the confir-
mation values and the mean baseline value,
and it is statistically highly significant.

The results of our second study also strongly
support the status expectancy approach. In no
sense are our results consistent with the pre-
dictions of any of the other approaches.
tion, creates differentiated expectations that
are reflected in differences in the willingness to
be influenced: the P(S) for men increases to
0.719; the P(S) for women decreases to 0.510.!4
When these gender inequalities are confirmed,
the influence rates become more extreme: the
P(S) for women is decreased to 0.372; the P(S)
for men is increased to 0.779. However, when
the gender-based expectations are discon-
firmed these differences in influence rates are
not simply reduced, they are reversed. The
P(S) from men is decreased to 0.479; for women
is it increased to 0.735. These probabilities re-
flect low expectations for men and high ex-
pectations for women. Disconfirmation actu-
ally inverts one’s expectations. A woman
whose initial expectations are lower for herself
than for a man comes to develop expectations,
therefore, that are higher for herself than for a
man when the initial expectations are discon-
firmed. That is, she does not come to see her-
self simply as more capable than she originally
was, or even as equally capable as a man, but
as more capable than the man.

Nevertheless, it is still “better” to be a man
than a woman. Telling a man he is not capable
does not reduce his expectations and behavior
to the level that results from telling a woman
that she is not capable. The statistical
significance of the difference (0.479 versus
0.372) is quite high as reported in Table 3. It is
a little less clear that telling a woman she is
capable does not increase her expectations and
behavior to the level that results from telling a
man that he is capable. The significance level for
this difference (0.735 versus 0.779) is only
0.143. However, this is still a fairly healthy
probability level. Together, the two results
suggest to us that even in the circumstances
we created, sex biases continue to hinder
women and help men.

Our results also provide strong support for
several of the basic principles of status char-
acteristics theory. First, the results support the
notion that all salient status information in a
task situation is likely to have an impact on
expectations and behavior in that situation.
This notion is part of the “‘combining” argu-
ment incorporated in the logic of the theory. As
we have noted, some work in the program as-
sumes (and provides support for) an
“eliminating” argument somewhat like the
maximization and consistency arguments con-
sidered here. However, the data here strongly
support the combining argument.

The results strongly support the attenuation
principle as well. Information that is discrepant
from established expectations does have a
greater impact than does consistent informa-
tion. We are not sure why Pugh and Wahrman
failed to find evidence for attenuation. How-
ever, we believe that the strong, direct and con-
sistent evidence from our study, together with
similar evidence from Norman et al., demon-
strates the legitimacy and importance of that
principle in the structure of status charac-
teristics theory.

None of our results suggest that the effects
of either confirmation or disconfirmation differ
between men and women. In particular, we
have found no evidence that the presumed
“passivity” of women makes them more likely
to be affected by our interventions. Perhaps
more importantly, we have found no evidence
for the operation of a maximization principle.
It is apparently neither more nor less difficult
to lower men’s high status expectations than it
is to raise women’s low status expectations;
the effects are just as strong for men as they are
for women.

To what extent can these results be
translated into a practical intervention strategy
for reducing gender inequalities in everyday
situations? The issue is in fact somewhat more
complex than is often assumed. Traditionally,
one answers this question by evaluating the ex-
tent to which laboratory conditions represent
the situations found in everyday life. The more
representative those conditions are, the more
one can generalize from the laboratory to
everyday situations. However, in our view one
does not generalize from laboratory exper-
iments to everyday life. Rather, one gener-
alizes from such experiments to the theories
that they test. It is the theories then that are
applied to everyday settings. Practical impli-
cations derive, therefore, from approximation
of theoretical conditions, not of experimental
conditions. (For a more detailed statement of
this argument, see Zelditch, 1980.)

In the current circumstance our exper-
imental results strongly support both the basic
theory and derivations from it regarding the dis-
confirmation of gender-based task expectan-
cies. Consequently, we can conclude with rea-
sonable confidence that gender inequality can
be reduced at least when men and women work
collectively on well-defined tasks with clear
performance standards and the possibility of
unambiguous demonstration of ability—just as
Epstein argued. The more closely the situation
approximates these theoretical conditions, the
more successful the intervention is likely to be.

The presence of other social processes and
conditions may obscure the impact of discon-
firmation. Status characteristics theory applies
only to situations in which actors have no prior
experience with the task. However, in many
situations actors do have extensive prior expe-
rience with the task. For example, someone
who has observed women consistently perform
poorly at math in school may also come to see
gender as explicitly relevant when working
with a woman on a mathematical task. When
relevance is explicitly generated from outside
the task situation in this way (or, for that matter,
when cultural definitions of relevance are par-
ticularly strong), additional paths that are con-
sistent with gender evaluations will probably
be created. Experience with the task, therefore,
is one of a number of circumstances which are
likely to reduce the impact of disconfirmation.
How much the impact would be reduced we
cannot say without further investigation.

The presence of other social processes may
also enhance the effects of disconfirmation.
Epstein indicates, for example, that women’s
status disadvantage may also be minimized by
attaching rewards to levels of performance.
This argument is consistent with the implica-
tions of an extension of status characteristics
theory developed by Berger et al. (1983) to deal
with expectations for reward as well as expec-
tations for task performance. According to that
extension, the allocation of rewards for dif-
ferent levels of performance (or the establish-
ment of expectations for such rewards) intro-
duces new paths of task significance. If these
“reward paths” also disconfirm the gender-
based expectancies, the effects of disconfir-
mation should be still more powerful. Telling a
woman she is capable and paying her at a level
commensurate with her capabilities should in-
crease her expectations even further than we
have demonstrated here. Clearly, such a pre-
diction is worth investigating.

It would also be useful to explore the limits
of the applicability of the disconfirmation in-
tervention strategy in a different direction.
Since it is not always possible to include both
men and women in the intervention, a study of
the effects of confirming or disconfirming the
expectations of only one of the actors (i.e.
either the high-status actor or the low-status
actor, but not both) would be informative.
Status characteristics theory predicts that the
effects of both confirmation and disconfirma-
tion would be weakened under these circum-
stances. How much weaker the effect would be
is open to question.

Finally, independent of practical implica-
tions, our results do not indicate that principles
regarding sex-role socialization or the acquisi-
tion of gender identities are seriously in error.
They indicate only that such principles are in-
completely (and somewhat inaccurately)
specified.'5 Socialization and other interaction
processes identify what the content of gender
statuses are, which sexes ordinarily have what
statuses, what repertoires are available for
each status, and when each can be employed.
The stereotypes are therefore quite sturdy.
What our results do show is that it is possible
to alter the effects of these stereotypes despite
their sturdiness. First, the implications of the
stereotypes are situationally specific; how gen-
der status comes to affect any situation de-
pends on the nature of the link between gender
and the properties of the situation (if any link
exists at all). Second, the operation of gender
stereotypes is a concrete manifestation of a
more general status-organizing process; how
gender status comes to affect any situation also
depends on what other manifestations of status
are present in the situation.
Sociological Perspectives, edited by David Mes-
sick and Karen Cook. New York: Praeger.

Berger, Joseph, M. Hamit Fisek, Robert Z. Norman,
and Morris Zelditch, Jr. 1977. Status Charac-
teristics and Social Interaction. New York:
Elsevier.

Berger, Joseph, Cecilia Ridgeway, Susan
Rosenholtz, and Murray Webster, Jr. In press.
“Cues, Expectations and Behaviors.” In Ad-
vances in Group Processes, volume 3. Edited by
Edward J. Lawler. Greenwich, CT: JAI.

Berger, Joseph, Susan Rosenholtz, and Morris Zel-
ditch, Jr. 1980. “Status Organizing Processes.”
Pp. 479-508 in Annual Review of Sociology, vol-
ume 6. Edited by Alex Inkeles, Neil J.Smelser and
Ralph H. Turner. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.

Berger, Joseph, David G. Wagner, and Morris Zel-
ditch, Jr. 1985. “Expectation States Theory: Re-
view and Assessment.” Pp. 1-72 in Status, Re-
wards and Influence: How Expectations Govern
Behavior, edited by Joseph Berger and Morris
Zelditch, Jr. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Broverman, Inge, Susan Vogel, Donald Broverman,
Frank Clarkson, and Paul Rosenkrantz. 1972.
“Sex Role Stereotypes: A Current Appraisal.”
Journal of Social Issues 28:59-78.

Burgess, Robert L., and Don Bushell, Jr., eds. 1969.
Behavioral Sociology. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press.

Cahill, Spencer E. 1980. “Directions for an Interac-
tionist Study of Gender Development.” Symbolic
Interaction 13:123-38.

1983. ‘“‘Reexamining the Acquisition of
Sex Roles: A Social Interactionist Approach.” Sex
Roles 12:1-15.

Cook, Karen S., Ruth C. Cronkite, and David G.
Wagner. 1974. ‘Manual for Experimenters in Ex-
pectation States Theory.” Technical Report. Lab-
oratory for Social Research, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA.

Curtis, R. C., M. P. Zanna, and W. W. Campbell, Jr.
1975. ‘Sex, Fear of Success and Perceptions and
Performance of Law School Students.” American
Educational Research Journal 12:287-97.

Deaux, Kay, and T. Emswiller. 1974. ‘Explanations
of Successful Performance and Sex-linked Tasks:
What is Skill for the Male is Luck for the Female.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
29:80-5.

Epstein, Cynthia F. 1970. Woman’s Place: Options
and Limits in Professional Careers. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.

Eskilson, A., and Mary Glenn Wiley. 1976. “Sex
Composition and Leadership in Small Groups.”
Sociometry 39:183-94.

Feather, N. T. 1969. “Attribution of Responsibility
and Valence of Success and Failure in Relation to
Initial Confidence and Task Performance.” Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology
13:129-44.

Feather, N. T., and J. G. Simon. 1973. “Fear of
Success and Causal Attribution of Outcome.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
41:525—42.

Feldman-Summers, S., and Sara B. Kiesler. 1974.
“Those Who Are Number Two Try Harder: The
Effect of Sex on Attributions of Causality.” Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology
30:846-55.

Freese, Lee, and Bernard P. Cohen. 1973.
“Eliminating Status Generalization.” Sociometry
36:177-93.

Goffman, Erving. 1977. “The Arrangement Between
the Sexes.” Theory and Society 4:301-31.

Goldberg, P. 1968. “Are Women Prejudiced Against
Women?” Transaction 5:28-30.

Heider, Fritz. 1958. The Psychology of Interpersonal
Attraction. New York: Wiley.

Homans, George C. 1974. Social Behavior: Its
Elementary Forms. Rev. ed. New York: Harcourt.

Hough, K. S., and B. P. Allen. 1975. “Is the
‘Women’s Movement’ Erasing the Mark of Op-
pression from the Female Psyche?” Journal of
Psychology 89:249-58.

Levenson, H., B. Burford, B. Nonno, and L. Davis.
1975. “Are Women Still Prejudiced Against
Women? A Replication and Extension of
Goldberg’s Study.” Journal of Psychology
89:67-71.

Lipman-Blumen, Jean, and Ann R.Tickamyer. 1975.
“Sex Roles in Transition: A Ten-Year Perspec-
tive.” Pp. 297-337 in Annual Review of Sociology,
volume |. Edited by Alex Inkeles, James Coleman
and Neil J. Smelser. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Re-
views.

Lockheed, Marlaine E., and Katherine P. Hall. 1976.
“Conceptualizing Sex as a Status Characteristic:
Applications to Leadership Training Strategies.”
Journal of Social Issues 32:111-24.

Meeker, Barbara J., and P. A. Weitzel-O’Neill. 1977.
“Sex Roles and Interpersonal Behavior in Task-
Oriented Groups.” American Sociological Review
42:91-105.

Miller, Joanne, and Howard H. Garrison. 1982. ‘Sex
Roles: The Division of Labor at Home and in the
Workplace.” Pp. 237-62 in Annual Review of
Sociology, volume 8. Edited by Ralph H. Turner
and James F. Short, Jr. Palo Alto, CA: Annual
Reviews.

Norman, Robert Z., Leroy F. Smith, and Joseph
Berger. 1984. “The Processing of Inconsistent
Status Information.” Paper presented at the First
International Conference on Status, Expectations
and Related Social Processes. Columbia, SC.

Pugh, Meredith D., and Ralph Wahrman. 1983.
“Neutralizing Sexism in Mixed-Sex Groups: Do
Women Have to Be Better Than Men?” American
Journal of Sociology 88:746-62.

Ridgeway, Cecilia, Joseph Berger, and Leroy F.
Smith. 1985. ‘Nonverbal Cues and Status: An Ex-
pectation States Approach.” American Journal of
Sociology 90:955-78.

Rosenkrantz, Paul, Susan Vogel, H. Bee, Inge
Broverman, and Donald Broverman. 1968. “Sex-
Role Stereotypes and Self-Concepts in College
Students.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 32:287-95.

Sheriffs, A. C., and R. F. Jarrett. 1953. “Sex Dif-
ferences in Attitudes About Sex Differences.”
Journal of Psychology 35:161-68.

Spence, J. T., and R. Helmreich. 1978. Masculinity
and Femininity: Their Psychological Dimensions,
Correlates, and Antecedents. Austin, TX: Univer-
sity of Texas Press.
We analyze the sex composition of 815 face-to-face voluntary organizations in 10
communities to determine the extent of sex integration produced by voluntary
affiliation. The sex segregation in these groups is substantial; nearly one-half of the
organizations are exclusively female, while one-fifth are all male. Instrumental
organizations (business-related and political groups) are more likely to be sex
heterogeneous, while expressive groups are likely to be exclusively male or female.
From the point of view of the individual, the typical female membership generates
face-to-face contact with about 29 other members, less than four of whom are men.
Male memberships, on the other hand, produce contact with over 37 other members
on the average, nearly eight of whom are female. Men’s contacts are both more
numerous and more heterogeneous. We conclude that there is little support for the
sex integration hypothesis in these data, although the sex heterogeneity of
instrumental groups (especially those which are job-related) indicates that this
pattern may change as women move into the labor force in increasing numbers. The
paper explores some consequences of segregation for the organizations and the
social networks they generate.
(1965) view of voluntary groups as multilevel
integrators, researchers have argued that vol-
untary groups serve as a sort of interstitial
glue. Yet the details of exactly what is inte-
grated with what has remained remarkably un-
clear over the years. What emerges from the
literature is a picture of voluntary groups
which may represent the emergent interests of
unspecified publics in the political domain,
provide resources for useful contacts in the
economic domain, allow the expression of al-
truistic impulses in charitable activity, and
provide a variety of peripheral and ephemeral
services (Smith and Freedman 1972).

In contrast to this integrative view of volun-
tary groups, many of the early community
studies emphasized that voluntary associations
were sorting mechanisms (Hughes 1943; An-
derson 1937). As Gans (1967:61) noted, the
groups ‘‘divided and segregated people by their
interests and ultimately, of course, by socio-
economic, educational, and religious dif-
ferences.’ Of course, the integrating and sort-
ing perspectives on voluntary associations are
