@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
It is common for scholars interested in race and poverty to invoke a lack of access to job
networks as one of the reasons that African Americans and Hispanics face difficulties in
the labor market. Much research has found, however, that minorities do worse when they
use personal networks in job finding. Research in this area has been hampered by the
complicated and multi-step nature of the job-finding process and by the lack of
appropriate comparison data for demonstrating the various ways in which minorities
can be isolated from good job opportunities. We seek to specify what it means to say that
minorities are cut off from job networks. Building on the literature on social networks in
the labor market, we delineate the various mechanisms by which minorities can be
isolated from good job opportunities. We examine how these mechanisms operate, using
unique data on the chain of network contacts that funnel to an employer offering
desirable jobs. We find that network factors operate at several stages of the recruitment
process. We find scant evidence, however, that these network factors serve to cut off
minorities from employment in this setting. We conclude with a discussion of the
theoretical and methodological implications of the case for the study of networks, race,
and hiring.
networks (e.g., Braddock and McPartland 1987;
Johnson, Farrell, and Stoloff 2000; Royster
2003; Wilson 1996)

Previous studies, however, have produced
mixed results on whether social networks pro-
duce superior job rewards for minorities.
Although the original impulse might have been
to emphasize minorities’ disconnection from
the world of work, much work suggests the
opposite, that minorities are more likely to have
obtained their job through networks than non-
minorities (e.g., Elliott 1999, 2000; Green,
Tigges, and Browne 1995; Reingold 1999).
Moreover, these studies have also found that
jobs obtained through networks pay Jess than
jobs obtained by other means. A similar find-
ing that informal job networks are detrimental
for the earnings of Hispanics has appeared in
Falcon (1995), Green, Tigges, and Diaz (1999),
Korenman and Turner (1996), and Mier and
Giloth (1985; but see Elliott and Sims 2001).
Rather than exclusion from white networks
(e.g., Royster 2003), the emphasis in the liter-
ature has shifted to minorities’ over-reliance on
ethnic networks. Thus, the imagery that emerges
from these studies is that minorities are stuck in
the “wrong networks,” that is, those that lead to
low-wage jobs.

There is something slippery about the way
these network arguments are currently being
used, however. Because “wrong network” is
defined in terms of the eventual outcome (a
network is “good” if it leads to a good out-
come, otherwise, it is a “wrong network”), such
explanations run the danger of circular reason-
ing. To give network accounts of minority under-
performance analytical bite, we need to specify
the mechanisms by which minorities are
“excluded” from productive networks or “stuck”
in unproductive ethnic networks.

In this paper, we elaborate the various net-
work mechanisms by which minorities can be
isolated from good job opportunities. Using
unique data from one employer, we examine
multiple steps in the chain of network referral
processes originating from employees to the
applicants for entry-level jobs at this employ-
er. To avoid the circularity inherent in extant
“wrong network” accounts, we study access to
a set of desirable jobs that are within reach of
candidates with modest levels of education and
skills. Further, we form proper baselines of
comparison using data on both networked and
non-networked minorities and non-minorities at
each stage of the process. We identify numer-
ous points in the process where network factors
could lead minorities to have less access to
these desirable jobs than non-minorities.
ly addressing the effects of minority/non-minor-
ity differences in networks have also produced
mixed results. Some studies argue that racial
homophily in job-finding networks results in
racial insularity, and thus contributes to the eco-
nomic marginalization of minorities (e.g.,
Braddock and McPartland 1987). Reingold
(1999) finds that the percentage of employed
friends is a critical factor in explaining differ-
ences in word-of-mouth job finding among sev-
eral minority groups. He suggests, however,
that “there seems to be an inverse relationship
between the socioeconomic status of personal
contacts and finding work through word-of-
mouth.”

In all this research, the question arises
whether ties to employed people provide access
to jobs, or is it that working people get to know
other employed people in the course of their
work? Studies comparing the networks of
employed and unemployed individuals will
always suffer from this causal ambiguity. While
this is a general problem in the area of net-
works (do ties to higher-status people cause
superior labor market outcomes, or is it that
people with superior labor market outcomes
gain access to high-status people?), much of
the research on race and networks suffers from
this ambiguity (e.g., Fernandez and Harris 1992;
Johnson, Bienenstock, and Farrell 1999;
Johnson et al. 2000; Lichter and Oliver 2000).

One way to avoid this causal ambiguity is to
begin with samples of job seekers or job chang-
ers—as opposed to job incumbents—and exam-
ine the chances of obtaining employment for
various search methods. For example, several
projects using data from the Multi-City Study
of Urban Inequality (MCSUI) compare the ways
in which people from different race groups
found their current jobs (e.g., Elliott 1999, 2000,
2001; Green et al. 1995; Green et al. 1999;
Johnson et al. 2000). Since the job-finding
methods reported by workers are temporally
prior to having obtained the job, the use of net-
works in these studies does not suffer from the
causal ambiguity noted above because the net-
works being reported were not obtained once the
person was on the job. This research, however,
has produced little evidence that social net-
works generate superior job rewards for minori-
ties. For example, Falcon (1995), Green et al.
(1999), Korenman and Turner (1996), and Mier
and Giloth (1985) find that informal job net-
works are detrimental for the earnings of
Hispanics. According to these studies, it would
appear that, rather than simply being cut off
from job finding networks, minorities seem to
underutilize formal methods of job search,
which lead to better jobs.

Job-seeker studies have a number of weak-
nesses, however. First, because they contain
samples of people looking for a diverse array of
jobs at many different firms, they cannot uncov-
er the specific influence of social ties on the
organizational screening process. Depending
on the firm’s particular human resources prac-
tices, personal contacts can affect the hiring
process at a number of distinct points: the for-
mation of a pool of applicants, the manner in
which applicants learn about the screening
process, the extent of information about open-
ings, and so forth. Employers certainly vary in
the degree to which they rely on the use of per-
sonal contacts as a means of recruitment (e.g.,
Holzer 1996; Marsden 2001; Marsden and
Gorman 2001), and such heterogeneity in
employers’ behavior limits our ability to inter-
pret the results for these studies.

Second, studies of job changers tend to have
limited and possibly inappropriate controls for
worker characteristics. Because the use of social
ties for job search may be related to other vari-
ables that measure the overall appropriateness
of the job seeker for the job opening (e.g., edu-
cation, relevant work experience), the general-
ly sparse controls in these studies could result
in biased assessments of the role of social ties
in hiring.

Employer surveys (e.g., Holzer 1996; Moss
and Tilly 2001) constitute an alternative
approach for studying social networks and hir-
ing. These types of studies offer valuable
insights on typical hiring practices and provide
good information about the last person hired.
Compared to job-seeker studies, research using
this approach is less vulnerable to the causal
ambiguity noted above since it is designed to
report on the employer’s recruitment behavior.
Thus, studies in this tradition have been help-
ful in fleshing-out the employer side of the hir-
ing process.

Although these studies contribute pieces to
the puzzle, it is important to realize that none
of the research discussed thus far examines
actual hiring processes, in that they cannot
address how the firm selects employees from a
pool of candidates. Without baseline informa-
tion on the presence or absence of social ties for
the pool of competing applicants, among whom
some are hired and others are not, it is impos-
sible to isolate the effect of social contacts on
hiring per se. If large proportions of job seek-
ers use their friends and relatives as sources of
information during job searches, then, even if
hiring decisions were being made randomly, a
similarly large proportion of hires would report
having used personal networks. The literature on
networks and race has similarly suffered from
a paucity of data on actual hiring processes.
To address the ways in which race and net-
works interact in hiring, we need research that
taps screening dynamics at various phases of the
hiring process and measures the ways in which
social ties might affect outcomes at each stage.
Single-firm screening studies (e.g., Fernandez,
Castilla, and Moore 2000; Fernandez and
Weinberg 1997; Petersen, Saporta, and Seidel
2000, 2004) are better suited to this task. These
papers find that referral networks have an
important role in the hiring process. While these
studies overcome the general problems of job
incumbent, job seekers, or employer-side stud-
ies, with the exception of the Petersen et al.
(2000, 2004) and Kirnan, Farley, and Geisinger
(1989) papers, screening studies cannot address
the role of race in hiring since the authors could
not identify the race or ethnicity of applicants.
Some studies using an audit framework have
addressed race differences in employer screen-
ing (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004; Cross et
al. 1990; Heckman 1998; Pager 2003; Turner,
Fix, and Struyk 1991). These studies are limit-
ed to assessing employer behavior when candi-
dates apply via impersonal means (typically,
responses to newspaper ads) because they use
resumes from fictitious applicants.
Consequently, they cannot study network
recruitment practices, the key concern in this
paper. Nor can these studies address, as we do
here, subsequent steps in the hiring process.
Using obviously different methods, ethnog-
raphers have also weighed in on the question of
whether minorities are cut off from job-finding
networks. For example, Kasinitz and Rosenberg
(1996) argue that poor, black residents of the
Red Hook section of Brooklyn are cut off from
good jobs on the waterfront, even though these
jobs are spatially very close by. Since people
tend to be hired into these jobs only through con-
The imagery that emerges from these accounts
is not so much one of minorities being cut off
from employment opportunities—on the con-
trary, minorities appear disproportionately to
use networks to find jobs—but one where they
are embedded in the “wrong” network, that is,
they tend to overuse networks that lead to low-
wage jobs. Since, as we noted above, a “wrong
network” is defined in terms of the outcome,
such an argument runs the risk of circular rea-
soning.

In light of the research showing that there
does not appear to be a deficit in minorities’ abil-
ity to form job-finding networks per se, a key
component of the “wrong network” puzzle
comes down to understanding why minorities
are underrepresented in networks that lead to
good jobs. Addressing this issue is crucial if the
idea of “wrong network” is to be rendered fal-
sifiable. To attribute logically the exclusion of
minorities to the absence of network ties to
good opportunities, we would need to feel con-
fident that these minorities might plausibly have
been hired except for the lack of the contact (for
a discussion of causal structure of network the-
ories, see Mouw 2003). For example, when
considering modestly educated people (e.g.,
high school graduates), it would not make sense
to attribute their underrepresentation among
medical doctors to the lack of networks that
lead to the job as a proximate factor. Indeed,
what gives Kasinitz and Rosenberg’s (1996)
account of network exclusion its power is the
fact that African Americans in Red Hook could
plausibly have worked the waterfront jobs with
their existing skills.

From this perspective, it is critical to define
the various processes whereby network factors
could limit minorities’ access to desirable jobs.
In the conceptualization we advance here, the
“wrong network” account is consistent with
underrepresentation of minorities in any of a
number of stages in the recruitment and hiring
process. While past research on race and net-
works has studied various portions of the
process, it has been poorly equipped to distin-
guish among these various stages. In addition,
since policies target discrete steps in the process
(e.g., training policies are meant to affect the
formation of the applicant pool, some forms of
affirmative action are meant to affect the screen-
ing stage; see Reskin 1998), understanding each
stage is crucial for crafting effective policy
interventions.

Figure 1 presents a conceptual map of the
ways in which networks might affect the vari-
ous stages of the recruitment and hiring process.
We analytically separate the chain of network
processes into two phases: the referring process
and the screening process. We start by adopting
the perspective of the employees that might
originate network connections to desirable jobs,
and analyze minority versus non-minority rep-
resentation in this pool of workers (step 1a in
Figure 1). By doing so, we probe the theoreti-
cal argument that there might not be enough
minority workers in good jobs who can serve as
originators of word-of-mouth networks, as is the
case in Kasinitz and Rosenberg’s (1996) story
of Red Hook. Even if minorities are in a posi-
tion to originate job networks, it could be that
minorities are reluctant to pass on information
about job openings to good jobs. We flag this
issue as step 1b in Figure 1. Wilson (1987), for
example, suggests this might be a possibility in
his discussion of the exodus of the middle class
from poor areas. More recently, Smith (2005)
has found strong evidence of such reluctance to
pass on information about job openings in her
sample of low-income African Americans (see
also Newman 2005).

Even if employed minorities originate refer-
rals to desirable jobs at comparable rates to
non-minorities, the question of the race of the
target of those efforts remains (Figure 1, step
1c). As emphasized by Elliot (1999, 2000,
2001), job referral networks tend to be
“Wrong” Network

     
 

    
 

      
 
   
     
   
 
  
  

Step la. Are minority
employees available to
refer? [minority vs. non-
minority representation in
pool of workers]

Step 1b. Do minority
employees refer?

Step 1c. Do employees
refer minority applicants?

 

 

1. Referring Process

2. Screening Process

 
    
  
 

Employer Prefers
Nonreferrals

  
  

        
  

Step 2. Employer’s
Attitude Towards
Referrals

Pool of Minority
“Networked” Applicants

   

    
   

(0) (+)

Employer Is Neutral Towards Referrals Employer Prefers Referrals
ies (e.g., Aponte 1996; Bailey and Waldinger
1991; Jenkins 1986; Kasinitz and Rosenberg
1996; Miller and Rosenbaum 1997; Neckerman
and Kirschenman 1991; Waldinger 1996, 1999)
claim that minorities lack the necessary social
connections that employers look for in hiring.
As a consequence of this disconnection, minori-
ties are alleged to suffer at the hiring interface.
This was the pattern in Petersen et al.’s (2000)
study in which recruitment source explains the
company’s apparent avoidance of African
Americans. In this important study, African
Americans were less likely to be hired than
whites, but “once referral method is taken into
account, all race effects disappear.”

In this scenario, if minorities were well rep-
resented in the pool of networked applicants,
then employers’ preference for referrals would
act to hire minority applicants in proportion to
their representation in the networked pool of
applicants that are delivered by steps 1a to Ic.
If, however, minorities are underrepresented in
the steps that occur prior to the screening step
2, then the preference for referrals would work
to transmit minority underrepresentation of the
networked pool of applicants to the pool of peo-
ple who have been hired.

Other research has found, however, that while
many employers hire through contacts generat-
ed from their existing employees, some employ-
ers avoid hiring through networks (Fernandez
et al. 2000:1296-98). For example, Ullman
(1966) reports that many employers prefer to
hire through employee referrals, but that
employers who do not like their current work
force or are having “problems with cliques”
avoid referrals. In this case, the final screening
stage of the process (step 2) would serve as a dis-
tinct point of disconnection from desirable jobs.
For an employer who is avoiding referrals, being
well represented in the pool of referred appli-
cants is bad news for minorities. On the other
hand, if the employer is neutral toward hiring
referrals, access to desirable jobs for minorities
will be provided at the last step of the process
(step 2) in proportion to the overall applicant
pool, as opposed to the networked applicant
pool. In this latter case, the employer’s screen-
ing actions at step 2 would not reinforce minori-
ties’ referral networking activities (steps la—1c),
but neither would the employer actions serve to
cut off minorities from desirable jobs.
centages of these employees are immigrants (to
be discussed later).

The data that we have collected at this site are
extremely sensitive, and issues of confidential-
ity are very salient in this case. Consequently,
we need to be spare in our description of the
company. The company we are studying is a pri-
vate, medium-sized (approximately 1,200-per-
son) firm located in the western United States.
While the company employs people at numer-
ous locations, we focus here on its headquarters
and main production facility. The entry-level
jobs that are the main focus of this study are fac-
tory-production occupations that fall into the
broad category of “Other Production
Occupations” (Bureau of Labor Statistics SOC
code 51-9000), a code that covers a range of
machine operators and tenders (see
www.bls.gov/soc/home.htm).

As a case study, we make no claims with
respect to the representativeness of the plant
under study. The in-depth information we have
available here makes this an ideal setting, how-
ever, for dissecting a number of the network
mechanisms by which minorities might be dis-
advantaged. Although some links in the chain
have been studied in a piecemeal fashion, a
number of these processes have never before
been addressed. Thus, the theoretical signifi-
cance of this case is that it provides a window
through which one can view the operations of
a set of processes that are normally hidden from
view.

Working through the firm’s human resources
department, we assembled data on the pool of
applicants, interviewees, job offers, and hires.
We collected the paper application materials
(i.e., the standardized application form and,
occasionally, resumes) for all 2,605 applica-
tions to the plant’s entry-level production jobs
over the 39-month period of the study, from
September 1, 1997 to November 30, 2000. The
number of hires over this period is 192. Over
three-quarters (77 percent) of the applications
were from people who applied only once, and
23 percent of the applications were from peo-
ple who applied multiple times during the peri-
od of the study. These repeat applicants allow
us the opportunity to examine the reliability of
the racial classification we use here (see
Appendix). The number of repeat applications
varied from two to six. Most of the repeat appli-
cations (72.2 percent) were second applications,
and account for an additional 16.6 percent of the
application pool. An additional 4.0 percent of
the applicant pool was made up of applications
from people who had applied three times; only
2.3 percent of the applications were from peo-
ple who had applied four or more times.

From these paper files, we coded data on
applicants’ education, work history, and other
human capital characteristics. We also geocod-
ed candidates to the addresses they listed on the
application form. We successfully geocoded
99.8 percent of the applicants. We use the
geocoded data to calculate measures of com-
muting distance to the plant. To our knowledge,
this is the first time such spatial data has ever
been used in the analysis of an applicant pool.

The most important feature of this study site,
however, is that the plant is unusual in that it
keeps information on the racial and gender com-
position of the applicant pool. This feature of the
data allows us rare insight into the ways in
which race and networks interact in the hiring
process. In order to be hired, all applicants to the
plant must come into the receptionist’s area to
turn in a completed and signed application form.
After accepting the application form, the recep-
tionist logs the receipt of the application and
records the applicant’s apparent race and gen-
der. Therefore, race of applicant is not, as in
many surveys, self-identified, but it is based
on the receptionist’s perception. While such a
definition is well suited to our purposes of
understanding the role of race in the hiring
process, the specific procedures used by the
company to collect these data do introduce
methodological complications (see Appendix).
Because we had access to the names and sig-
natures on the application forms, we did not
need to rely solely on the logs to identify gen-
der. We were successful in coding gender for
97.2 percent of the applications.

The applicant pool for the entry-level jobs at
this company is quite diverse along racial lines.
As we discuss later, Asian Americans are clear-
ly overrepresented among employees and in the
application pool for this company. Although
the employer does not directly ask whether the
candidate is an immigrant, there is some infor-
mation on the application form (e.g., address of
previous employers, address of schools attend-
ed) that gives us some indication about the
immigrant composition of the applicant pool.
Using these criteria, 11 percent of white, 1 per-
cent of black, 17 percent of Hispanic, and 55
percent of Asian applicants are immigrants.
Immigrants from the Philippines and Mexico
account for 47 and 9 percent of the immigrant
population respectively.

A key component of our argument is that, in
dissecting the network processes as a proxi-
mate cause of success in the labor market, it is
important to consider settings where it is plau-
sible that minorities might be hired, except for
the network processes. This is crucial for ensur-
ing that we are not misattributing the effect of
networks to the effects of human capital factors.
The entry-level production jobs that we study
here are within reach for people with modest
education and labor force experience: the medi-
an years of education and labor force experience
for the people hired into these jobs over the
course of the study are 12 and 7.9 respectively.
There is also plenty of reason to think that these
jobs are desirable for modestly educated work-
ers within the context of the local labor market.
Although the nation as a whole was experienc-
ing an economic boom over most of the period
of the study, the local labor market was plagued
by high rates of unemployment ranging between
6.7 and 14.1 percent.! In this macro-environ-
ment, full-time jobs with good medical and
pension benefits are likely to be especially
attractive. This is confirmed by the applicants’
behavior in this setting: 95.5 percent of the job
offers made were accepted.

Moreover, the wages that the firm offered
were also attractive, particularly for females
and minorities. Similar to the firm in the
Fernandez et al. (2000) study, the company had
a policy of offering everyone the same starting
wages. For the first eight months of the study
(9/97--4/98), starting wages were $7.75 per hour;
the starting wages were then raised to $8.05
for the rest of the study. We used data from the
5 percent Public Use Micro Sample of the 2000
Census to calculate baseline wage rates for var-
ious race and gender groups in the local area.
Following Holzer (1996), we limit the data here
to the non-college population (i.e., years of edu-
cation less than 16). Table 1 shows that the
company’s starting wages of $7.75 and $8.05 fell
in the 25th and 27th percentiles of the overall
wage distribution for males in the area. These
wages were even more attractive to females,
however: for them, $7.75 and $8.05 fell in the
35th and 36th percentiles of the overall female
wage distribution.

There was also considerable racial variation
in the levels of attractiveness of these wages.
Considering whites alone, these starting wages
fell in the 18th and 19th percentiles of the male
wage distribution, and in the 30th and 31st per-
centiles of the female distribution. These wages
placed considerably higher in the wage distri-
bution for minorities, especially minority
females. The company’s wages fell in the 27th
and 28th percentiles of the wage distribution for
male African Americans and in the 37th and
38th percentiles for African American females.
For both genders, these wages were even more
attractive to Hispanics, for whom the company’s
starting wages fell in the 35th and 36th per-
centiles of their male distribution, and in the
43rd and 44th percentiles of the wage distribu-
tion for Hispanic females. Asians, too, showed
a similar pattern. For Asian males, the compa-
ny’s offered wages fell in the 32nd and 35th
percentiles, a difference of 14 and 16 points
compared to white males. For Asian females, the
difference was nine and 10 points compared to
the wage percentiles of white females, that is,
the 39th and 41st percentiles.

Starting wages do not tell the whole story,
however. This firm shares various elements of
a classic internal labor market (Doeringer and
Piore 1971), with most hiring occurring at the
entry-level “ports of entry,” and with internal
promotion ladders. New hires go through a 90-
day probation period, after which pay raises are
commonly granted. Of the 192 hires, 56 people
(29.2 percent) turned over prior to the end of the
90-day probation. An additional 16 people were
re-hires, and had already passed the probation
period at the time of the second hire. We did not
observe the end of the probation period for 11
people, who were censored because we fin-
ished the study prior to the end of their 90-day
probation. Looking at the raises for the remain-
ing 109 new hires, 68 people (62.4 percent)
received pay increases to $8.50. Seventeen peo-
ple (15.6 percent) did not receive a raise, but 23
people (21.1 percent) had their hourly wage
increased to $10.05 per hour, and one person
received a pay increase to $10.35. Data under
the second heading in Table 1 shows that these
increases place the company’s wages in, respec-
tively, the 29th, 37th, and 38th percentiles of the
local wage distribution for males. Here, too,
these wages were more attractive for females
than for males by 11 to 14 points; that is, these
wages fell at the 40th, 51st, and 52nd percentiles
for females.

Similar to the pattern in the top section of
Table 1, the post-probation wages are consid-
erably more attractive to minorities than to non-
minorities of both sexes. Whereas these wages
cut at the 21st, 27th, and 28th percentiles for
white males, they fell at the 32nd, 40th, and
41st percentiles for African American males, the
37th, 43rd, and 45th percentiles for Asian males,
and the 39th, 49th, and 50th percentiles for
Hispanic males. Similarly stark race contrasts
appear for females (c.f. columns for whites and
each minority group). Indeed, the top wage of
$10.35 approaches the median of the wage dis-
tribution for white and African American
women in the area (46th and 48th percentiles),
while the $10.35 figure well exceeds the medi-
an for Hispanic and Asian females (62nd and
57th percentiles).

Although the underrepresentation of minori-
ties in job-referral networks is often cited as an
element of network accounts of race and pover-
ty, there is a paucity of information on the role
of networks and race in the hiring process per
se (for a thorough review, see Petersen et al.
2000). In these data, we distinguish networked
candidates using data collected from the origi-
nal application forms submitted for entry-level
jobs at the plant. The application form has an
item that explicitly asks about recruitment
source: “How did you find out about the job?”
and lists several boxes to check. One of the
boxes is “Current [NAME OF COMPANY]
employee,” and includes space for the name of
the referrer. Because we can identify the recruit-
ment source at application, and follow candi-
dates through pre-hire screening, we can address
demand-side arguments about the employers’
favoring referrals in the screening process.
Employee referrals made up 30.2 percent of
the applications for which we could identify
recruitment source (773 of the 2,556; the recruit-
ment source was left blank for 49 of the 2,605
applications), and non-referrals made up 70.3
percent. Among these non-referrals, however,
there were 164 applications that did not contain
a check in the box indicating that an employee
had referred them, but they did list a word-of-
mouth source: 146 of these applications simply
listed “friend,” and another 18 applications list-
ed a name. A search of the company records
showed that none of these 18 individuals was
ever employed at the company. We will distin-
guish these as “non-employee referrals” in our
analyses.

Whereas most past research has collected
data on the characteristics of the job contact
once people have been hired (e.g., Corcoran,
Datcher, and Duncan 1980), we have been able
to link referrers with their referrals for a large
percentage of candidates at the application
phase. Of the applications indicating that the
applicant was referred by employees of the
company, 83.7 percent (647 of 773) supplied the
name of the referrer, and 126 declined to give
the name of the referrer (122 applicants left the
space on the application form blank, and four
others filled in “friend”). In contrast to the set-
tings of some past research (e.g., Fernandez et
al. 2000; Fernandez and Weinberg 1997), this
company does not pay employees for their refer-
rals. Thus, workers do not have any financial
incentive to ensure that applicants will fill in
their name as referrers on the application form
(see Neckerman and Fernandez 2003;
Fernandez and Castilla 2001 for analyses of
referring incentives). This is likely to account for
the relative laxity that these applicants show in
providing the name of their referrer.
From company data sources, we located
employment records for 95.9 percent (602) of
the 628 referrers who were named on the appli-
cation form. The missing 26 applications list-
ed only a first name on the application form;
since many of these names were common, we
could not generate unique matches for them
from the employee database. By tracing back
their names in the company’s employee data-
base, we were able to match 216 referrers to
these 602 referrals. The number of referrals
produced per referrer varied between one and
20.? Of these 216 referrers, 39.3 percent pro-
duced only one referral applicant, and 26.4 per-
cent originated two referral applications.

For studying who among company employ-
ees produces referrals, we built a dataset gleaned
from the company’s personnel records. We iden-
tified 557 workers who were employed at the
focal plant at any point over the 39-month peri-
od of the study, and thus, were at risk of origi-
nating referrals to the site of the study. We coded
worker’s self-identified race and gender as it was
provided to the company for purposes of com-
plying with Equal Employment Opportunity
policies. As we noted earlier, minorities con-
stituted over 50 percent of the work force
employed at this site. This feature is crucial for
addressing the question of whether minority
workers are less likely than other workers to
originate networks. This is in contrast to Kasinitz
and Rosenberg’s (1996) case where there were
no minorities at all employed in desirable water-
front jobs. There, the network disconnection
occurs at the very origin of the referral net-
works, since there were no minorities to activate
referral processes. The situation in the setting
of our article is clearly not as stark. An impor-
tant advantage of the current study, however, is
that we are able to examine multiple points
beyond origination where minorities’ network
exclusion could occur in this setting. We com-
bined the employee race data with the recep-
tionist’s information on the race of the applicant
to explore the role of racial and ethnic homophi-
ly (.e., the tendency of people to refer people
The first way that “wrong network” processes
could manifest themselves in this context is by
the absence of minorities and poor workers
among the originators of job contact networks
(see step 1a in Figure 1). We begin by studying
the race and gender distribution of the potential
originators of job contact networks, that is, the
group of employees at the company who might
serve as network conduits to the firm.

The first two columns of Table 2 show the
race distribution by gender for all plant employ-
ees who could have produced referral applica-
tions to the company over the period of the
study for employees at the focal plant. For both
males and females, over half the workers
employed at this company are minorities. The
next two columns show the race distribution
for male and female entry-level employees who
might be especially likely to refer people to the
entry-level jobs at this company. For both gen-
ders, the percentage of minorities increases,
and the percentage of whites decreases com-
pared to the full population of employees at the
plant. Among minorities, relatively large per-
centages of Asian Americans and Hispanics,
but more modest percentages of African
Americans, are represented in entry-level jobs
and in the company overall.

We also examined the pattern of gender rep-
resentation at the company. Women make up
63.2 percent of the work force at the plant and
69.4 percent of the incumbents of entry-level
jobs. This pattern of female overrepresentation
occurs irrespective of race. The only exception
to this is the African Americans, for whom the
gender distribution is much more evenly divid-
ed: 47.8 percent of blacks in the company over-
all are female, and 56.3 percent of blacks in
entry-level jobs are women.
It is well known, however, that race is uneven-
ly distributed across space within labor markets
(Fernandez and Su 2004). We gain further
insight by comparing these race and gender dis-
tributions of workers with the composition of
persons employed in the local area. For this
task, we use data from the 5 percent sample of
the 2000 Public Use Micro Sample (PUMS)
for the local metro area, which contains approx-
imately 1 million residents. As with the analy-
ses presented in Table 1, we adjust the data to
focus on the non-college labor force.

Against this spatially defined external base-
line, white workers of both genders are under-
represented in the factory under study. The
percentages of African Americans employed at
the factory are quite similar, however, to their
respective proportions in the metro area.
Hispanic males are underrepresented in entry-
level jobs (28.6 vs. 35.3 percent) and the com-
pany overall (24.9 vs. 35.3 percent). The most
noteworthy pattern, however, is the extremely
large overrepresentation of Asians. For both
male and females, and whether the comparison
is to all employees or only to entry-level employ-
ees, the Asian percentage of the company’s work
force is much higher than that of the local labor
catchment area as measured by the PUMS.
Asians make up only 6.5 and 6.1 percent of
employed females and males in the metropoli-
tan labor market, but account for nearly a quar-
ter of females (23.3 percent) and over a quarter
of males (26.8 percent) employed at the com-
pany. The Asian overrepresentation is even larg-
er when considering the entry-level employees,
especially for males (c.f. 35.7 vs. 6.1 percent).

In sum, the analyses of step 1a of the process
show that relatively large percentages of Asian
Americans and Hispanics, but small percentages
of African Americans, are available to refer oth-
ers in this setting. At least with respect to
Hispanics and Asians, substantial numbers of
minorities are available to serve as potential
originators of job networks that lead to this
company. While African Americans are in short
supply in this setting, this shortage appears to
be attributable to their relative scarcity in the
employed work force in the metro area in which
the firm is located.
cations for 200 referrers. Of the 557 employees
working at the focal plant, these 200 employees
(35.9 percent) originated a total of 580 appli-
cations over the 39-month period of the study.

The first column of Table 3 shows race dif-
ferences in the percentage of employees origi-
nating at least one referral applicant. Over half
(50.9 percent) of Asian American male employ-
ees and 45.1 percent of Asian females originated
at least one referral applicant. Within gender,
Hispanics produced the next highest percentage
of referral applicants (females: 44.6 percent,
males: 41.2 percent). About a third of African
Americans of both genders (33.3 and 36.4 per-
cent) originated at least one referral to the plant.
Interestingly, whites show the lowest rates of
producing referrals: 27.7 percent for females
and 18.8 percent for males. The next two
columns of Table 3 show the average number of
referrals produced by employees of each race
group. Here, too, Asians are the most active
networkers (producing an average of 2.27 refer-
rals for males and 1.58 for females), and whites
are the least active in originating referrals (0.47
for males, and 0.51 for females).

One limitation of the analysis presented in
Table 3 is that it does not control for any back-
ground factors. To determine whether back-
ground factors might account for the observed
race differences in referral behavior, we devel-
oped a set of predictive models (i.e., negative
binomial regressions) of referring, including a
number of background variables among the
regressors. One potentially important variable
is the amount of time that individuals are
employed during the hiring window and are
We also include in the model demographic
background factors of gender and age. Also,
since job networks often involve kin (see, e.g.,
Grieco 1987; Waldinger and Lichter 2003), we
include measures of marital status (1 = married)
and family size among the regressors. The lat-
ter measure is coded from company records on
the number of dependents that workers claim for
medical benefits. Similar to Fernandez and
Castilla (2001), we control for hourly wages
since low-wage workers might be better posi-
tioned than high-wage workers to know about
openings for these entry-level jobs. Wages might
also measure structural accessibility to appro-
priate candidates, since high-wage workers are
probably less likely to know people who would
be interested in applying for these relatively
low-wage entry-level jobs. We also control for
Table 4. Descriptive Statistics of Variables Used in Predictive Models of Referring

 

 

 

Mean Std. Dev. Minimum Maximum
African American 042 .201 0 1
Hispanic 274 446 0 1
Asian American .245 430 0 1
Native American .009 .095 0 1
Gender (Male = 1) 367 482 0 1
Age (in years) 34.186 10.075 18.218 61.128
Marital Status (1 = Married) 558 497 0 1
Number of Dependents 1.731 1.573 0 7
Hourly Wage (in $s) 12.699 5.036 6.000 49.520
Tenure (in years) 2.790 4.539 0 31.641
Air Distance to Plant, km (e!) 2.059 2.213 .020 17.131
Air Distance squared (e) 9.126 26.129 000 293.461
Days of Exposure (e?) 9.393 4.119 9 1248
Number of Referrals Produced 1.047 2.263 0 20

 

Note: N = 547.
Table 4 presents descriptive statistics for these
background factors. Noteworthy in Table 4 is
that the “days of exposure” variable shows wide
variation across individuals in the number of
days that people were employed during the win-
dow of study (minimum = 9, maximum =
1,248). Table 5 reports the result of negative
binomial count models of the number of refer-
rals produced by employees, adjusting for the
time that each individual is employed at the
company during the hiring window (see
Cameron and Trivedi 1998:3). Model 1 exam-
ines race and gender differences in producing
referrals controlling only for length of time
exposed to the risk of referring. To facilitate the
comparison between Models | and 2, we have
dropped from the analysis 10 cases that are
missing on the background factors used in
Model 2. (Adding the 10 cases for estimation
of Model 1 does not change the substantive
results). Model 1 shows that there are no sig-
nificant gender differences in the counts of
referrals originated by employees at the com-
pany. There are race differences, however. The
counts of referrals produced by members of all
three major minority groups are greater than
those produced by whites. As was the pattern in
Table 3, Asian Americans originated the most
referrals. African Americans, too, produced
more referral applicants than did whites. The
black-white difference in originating referrals is
so pronounced that, despite their modest num-
bers in the plant, the contrast between African
Americans and whites is statistically reliable.
Table 5. Negative Binomial Regression Models Predicting the Count of Referrals Produced

 

 

 

 

Model 1 Model 2
Marginal Marginal
Coefficient Effect Coefficient Effect
African American 1.425 *** 1.213 1.435 *** 1.285
(3.51) (3.21)
Hispanic 869 *** 532 1859 *** 546
(4.20) (4.03)
Asian American 1.469 *** 1.286 1.511 *** 1.418
(7.06) (6.88)
Native American 538 274 818 508
(0.51) (0.82)
Gender (Male = 1) 0.013 ~.005 ~.047 —.018
(-0.07) (-0.26)
Age (in years) —.026 ** -.010
(-2.98)
Marital Status (1 = Married) —.333 -.159
(-1.54)
Number of Dependents .250 *** .100
(3.67)
Hourly Wage (in $s) .013 .005
(0.48)
Tenure (in years) —.074 * -.030
(-2.46)
Air Distance from Plant (km) —.023 * -.009
(-2.28)
Air Distance squared 00017 .00007
(1.80)
Constant 7,597 *** —6.74]1 ***
(49.46) (-14.22)
Hispanics were also the source of more refer-
rals than were whites.

We next examined whether these race dif-
ferences in referral behavior could be explained
by the other background factors (Model 2).
Considering the effects of the controls, older
workers were significantly less likely to produce
referrals than were younger workers. Although
marital status did not significantly predict orig-
inating referrals, the number of dependents that
workers listed with the company is positively
associated with producing referral applications.
We next examine step Ic in Figure 1, the race
of the referred applicants that have been pro-
duced by this process. We use several baselines
of comparison in assessing whether step Ic of
the process is a point of disconnection in the
chain of network contacts leading to these jobs.
The first and simplest criterion of disconnection
is whether there are any minorities at all pro-
duced by the referral process, irrespective of the
race of the referrer. This was clearly not the
case in Kasinitz and Rosenberg’s (1996) study:
not only were minorities absent and thus could
not originate referrals (step 1a), none of the
non-minorities employed in the waterfront jobs
referred minorities.

Table 6 shows the race and ethnic distribution
of applicants produced by referrers of different
racial and ethnic backgrounds. Along the rows
is the self-identified race or ethnic group of the
referrer as it was provided to the company when
the worker was hired. Listed along the columns
is the race or ethnicity of the 306 referral appli-
cants who applied during the period and whom
we could match to the receptionist’s coding of
the applicant’s race based on their appearance
(see Appendix). There is a strong overall rela-
tionship between the race of the referrer and the
race of the referral applicant in Table 6 (p <
.0001; log-likelihood x? = 151.829, with 9 d.f.).
The results are very similar when the analyses
are divided by gender (males: p < .0001; log-
likelihood x” = 64.999, with 9 d.f.; females: p
< .0001; log-likelihood x* = 97.657, with 9
d.f.). Indeed, all the results regarding race
homophily are very similar across gender. Most
important for our purposes, over half of the
referred applicants of either gender are minori-
ties (males: 61.8 percent; females: 57.2 per-
cent). Clearly, by this first criterion, minorities
are not absolutely cut off at step Ic.

A more stringent criterion, however, would be
to assess whether the referral process is repro-
ducing the racial distribution of the referring
population. The baseline here is the race distri-
bution of referrers surviving prior steps in the
process, that is, the race distribution of referrers
at step 1b. Of the 200 employees producing
referrals during the study window, 29.5 percent
were white, 4.0 percent were African American,
33.0 percent were Hispanic, 32.5 percent were
Asian American, and 1.0 percent were Native
American. As we noted earlier, there were
marked race differences in the extent to which
these employees produced at least one referral,
and in the number of referrals per referrer (Table
3). Looking at the race distribution of the refer-
rals produced by these referrers (row 5, Table 6),
we find that whites account for a higher per-
centage of the referral pool than of the origi-
nating population of referrals (40.8 vs. 29.5
percent). The diagonal element for whites shows
that they are the most racially insular of the
groups in referring: 76.9 percent of the referrals
produced by white employees are white. This is
consistent with network accounts that empha-
size racially insular job-contact networks as a
means of advantaging whites (e.g., Royster
2003). In contrast, the percentage of blacks in
the referral pool is quite similar to that of the
referrers (5.6 vs. 4.0 percent), and the percent-
age of Asians in the referral pool also matches
the percentage of the referring population quite
closely (34.6 vs. 32.5).

The lone exception to this pattern is the
Hispanics: they constitute nearly a third of refer-
rers, but only 19 percent of referrals. Some part
of this result could be due to measurement error
introduced by the receptionist’s relatively high
inconsistency in classifying Hispanics. Analyses
of the racial classification of repeat applicants
(see Appendix) show that the receptionist would
sometimes switch the racial classifications of
whites and Hispanics. If the first application
from a person was coded as Hispanic, the sec-
ond application from the same person was coded
as white 13.5 percent of the time. The confusion
appears in the other direction as well: for first-
time applications who were coded as white, the
second application from the same person was
switched to Hispanic 10.7 percent of the time.
In contrast, the large off-diagonal percentages
for African Americans and Asian Americans
are not likely to be due to the receptionist’s
inconsistency in coding race. For these groups,
the receptionist was very consistent across mul-
tiple applications from the same person, with
inconsistency rates of only 2.0 percent for Asian
Americans and 0.0 percent for the small num-
ber of African Americans (see Table Al). As an
upper-bound estimate of the effect of the mis-
classification, we reclassified all the referrals
from Hispanics that were listed as white by the
receptionist as Hispanic referrals, and all the
Hispanic referrals produced by white referrers
as white. This raises the marginal percentage of
Hispanic referrals from 19 percent to 23.9 per-
cent, a number that is still considerably less
than the 33 percent of the referring population
that is Hispanic. Although the extent of dis-
connection is not absolute, by failing to replen-
ish the supply of referral applicants in proportion
to their representation among referrers,
Hispanics are being cut off, in relative terms,
from the networks leading to these jobs.

While the reclassification exercise still leaves
a large unexplained gap for Hispanics, it is
worth noting the impact of the reclassification
on inferences about the extent of connection
for whites. The net impact of the reclassifica-
tion exercise is to lower the estimated percent-
age of whites among referrals to 29.4 percent,
a figure virtually identical to the 29.5 percent-
age of whites among referrers. Therefore, using
the race distribution of the referring popula-
tion as a baseline, the measurement error intro-
duced by the receptionist’s misclassification
could account for the disproportionate access
whites appear to be granted at step Ic.

A final criterion for assessing whether
minorities suffer disadvantages at step lc
depends on whether minority employees refer
minority applicants less than they refer white
applicants. Network accounts of racial factors
in the labor market emphasize the importance
of racial insularity of job contact networks in
channeling people of distinct races to different
jobs (Elliott 1999, 2001; Royster 2003;
Waldinger and Lichter 2003; Wilson 1996).
Given that minorities are well represented in
steps la and 1b, a lack of racial homophily in
the target of referring could weaken minori-
ties’ links to the jobs at this company.

Table 6 shows considerable evidence of the
cross-race referring of whites by minorities:
percentages of white referrals originated by
Hispanic, African American, and Asian
American referrers are respectively, 39.3, 35.3,
and 25.2 percent. As discussed above, the large
percentage for Hispanics is likely an overesti-
mate due to measurement error introduced by
the receptionist’s inconsistency in classifying
Hispanic referrals. Irrespective of which minor-
ity group one considers, however, the percent-
age referring whites is /ower than the percentage
referring minorities. While there is considerable
variation across rows, for each row the largest
percentage appears in the same-race (diagonal)
cell. Over three-quarters (76.9 percent) of refer-
rals produced by whites are white, according to
the company’s receptionist. The next largest
percentage on the diagonal is for Asian
American referrers: 65.2 percent of the referral
applications produced by Asians are coded as
Asian by the receptionist. Although relatively
low percentages appear on the diagonal for
Hispanic and African American referrers (41.6
and 41.2 percent respectively), in both cases
these numbers exceed the percentage of whites
being referred. By this final criterion, we find
no evidence that a lack of racial homophily in
minorities’ referring patterns is weakening
minorities’ access to this company. This con-
clusion is robust to the inclusion of a number
of control variables in multivariate analyses.°

In sum, we have found little evidence that
minorities in this setting are cut off from the job
networks that lead to employment at this com-
pany due to the behavior of the originators of
referral networks. We have shown that minori-
ties (i.e., African Americans, Hispanics, and
Asian Americans) are well represented among
the employees of this firm, and thus are avail-
able to serve as originators of referral networks
to the company (step 1a). Although only a small
number of African Americans are employed at
the company, at least some part of their short
supply is likely to be attributable to the relative
scarcity of African Americans in the area in
which the firm is located. Moreover, in the data
presented in Tables 3 and 5, whites show the
lowest level of participation in networking activ-
ities among the racial and ethnic groups of
employees. We found no evidence that minori-
ties are absent from job networks that lead to
employment at this company due to minority
employees’ relative ineffectiveness compared
with whites in recruiting employee referrals
(step 1b). Indeed, these findings are consistent
with other research (e.g., Elliott 1999, 2001;
Reingold 1999) suggesting that minorities use
networks more often than whites in job search-
es. Although the firm employs a highly female
work force, we found no evidence of gender
affecting racial patterns in the propensity to
participate in networking.

At the last stage of the referring process (step
1c), we find that minority referrals are well rep-
resented in the pool of referral applicants and
The net result of the network referral process-
es emanating from the company employees is
to produce a pool of applications that is racial-
ly diverse. As the last row of Table 6 shows, non-
network applicants to this company are also
racially diverse. The analyses thus far have yet
to address the screening process, however (step
2 in Figure 1). Even if minorities are well rep-
resented in the application pool, this does not
necessarily mean that they will be similarly rep-
resented at subsequent stages of the screening
process, such as interview, job offer, or hire.
As we discussed earlier, the role of referral
networks depends on the employer’s attitude
toward referrals. If the employer prefers refer-
rals—perhaps by giving them the benefit of the
doubt (see Fernandez and Sosa, forthcoming)—
then having minorities well represented in the
pool of referrals will serve to strengthen their
representation at later stages of the screening
process. If the employer is avoiding hiring refer-
rals, however, then minorities’ representation
in the referral pool will work against them.
While employers pay employees for referrals in
many settings (e.g., Fernandez et al. 2000), that
is not the case in this company. As pointed out
by an anonymous reviewer, this is prima facie
evidence that the employer does not prefer refer-
rals. We interviewed the entire four-person staff
of the factory’s human resources department
concerning the company’s recruitment prac-
tices. Interviews totaled approximately three
hours with the head of the human resources
department, and one hour each with the other
three HR personnel. In addition, we spent a
total of eight days in the HR offices working
with these people to obtain copies of the appli-
cation and employee records that we coded for
this study. None of these people responded affir-
matively when asked directly whether they
showed any preference for referrals as a matter
of policy. The most common phrasing of these
responses was that “referrals are treated like
everyone else.” Consequently, we do not expect
the screening and hiring process to strengthen
minority representation among the pool of hires
via a preference for referrals (step 2, right-hand
arrow in Figure 1). On the other hand, we have
no evidence that this employer is avoiding refer-
rals (step 2, left-hand arrow leading to “Wrong
Network” in Figure 1).

To check whether screeners play this role at
step 2, we assembled data on all applicants for
entry-level jobs at the company over the peri-
od of the study and tracked their progress
through the hiring pipeline. We coded whether
initial applicants were granted at least one inter-
view by company personnel and whether they
were offered a job. At least one in-person inter-
view was conducted by the human resources
department; the standard operating procedure is
for the human resources department then to
send successful interviewees on for a subse-
quent interview with the hiring manager who
requested the position be filled. The decision to
make a job offer is then made by the hiring
manager.

Figure 2a shows the race and network com-
position of female candidates as they move
from application, to interview, to offer, and
finally to the hiring stages of the screening
process. Overall, there is little evidence of a
preference for networked candidates among
females: networked candidates were 33.9 per-
cent of female applicants, and 35.3 percent of
female hires. Although the number of networked
black females became nil, the race distribution
did not otherwise change very much across the
stages.

Turning to males (Figure 2b), several pat-
terns are noteworthy. First, for each race group,
the non-networked share of the population of
applicants is greater than the proportion of net-
worked applicants. For whites, the networked vs.
non-networked percentage nearly doubles (30.1
vs. 15.3 percent), and nearly triples for
Hispanics (14.6 vs. 4.5 percent). Looking across
the stages for non-network candidates (i.e., top
of Figure 2b), we find that the share of Asians
grows substantially from 16.8 percent of appli-
cants to 28.6 percent of hires. The share of non-
networked Hispanics and blacks also increases
across stages, albeit less dramatically. This
growth among the non-networked minorities is
balanced by a large decline across the stages in
the number of non-networked white males, from
30.1 percent of the initial applicant pool to 17.1
percent of hires.

The most important pattern for our purpos-
es is revealed in the bottom portion of Figure 2b,
however. The percentage of networked appli-
cants does not increase across the various stages
of the screening process. If anything, the gen-
eral pattern is one where networked candidates
decline relative to non-networked candidates
across the stages: networked candidates con-
stitute 35.3 percent of the overall male applicant
pool, and 28.6 percent of the overall set of hires.
For whites, the decline is substantial, from 15.3
of applicants to 5.7 percent of hires. Thus, nei-
ther Figure 2a nor Figure 2b show evidence
that this employer prefers candidates who were
referred to the company; if anything, the gen-
eral pattern among males is one where net-
worked candidates decline relative to
non-networked candidates across the stages.

The analyses presented thus far do not con-
trol for other variables that might influence
screeners’ choices, however. As a way of intro-
ducing controls into the analysis, we developed
predictive models of who survives the screen-
ing process and is hired vs. who is not hired.
This analysis compresses the three stages of
the screening process: interview, offer, and offer
acceptance (hire). In preliminary analyses, we
examined the predictors of who gets interviews
and who gets job offers conditional on being
interviewed. The findings of these more detailed
analyses are consistent with the results pre-
sented here. We coded a number of human cap-
ital factors from information provided by
applicants on the application form. We measured
the number of years of education, years of labor
force experience, and labor force experience
squared (to capture the decay in the importance
of experience; see Mincer 1974). In addition, we
coded a dummy variable for whether the appli-
cant had work experience in the firm’s specif-
ic industry. As a measure of the applicant’s labor
100%

Network

Network

 

0%

(B)

 

 

16.8

 

   

 

3.2

 

 

{

 

 

£9 Asian Non-Networked|

8 Hispanic Non-
Networked

@ Black Non-Networked

£3 White Non-
Networked

DAsian Networked

@ Hispanic Networked

@ Black Networked

O White Networked

 

 

Applications
(N=555)
100%

Non-
Network

 

Network

(A)

 

 

 

11.8

34.1

Applications
(N=789)

ed

9.9

38.8

  

Interviews
(N=152)

 

: 38.4

 

 

Basa

8.8

44

36.8

 

 

 

 

£9 Asian Non-Networked|

@ Hispanic Non-
Networked

@ Black Non-Networked|
£3 White Non-
Networked

GAsian Networked

@ Hispanic Networked

 

 

Re co Black Networked
17.8 17.6 O White Networked
Offers Hires
(N=73) (N=68)
applications in excess of the number of job
openings on the day the person applies (for a
similar strategy, see Fernandez and Weinberg
1997). We have also controlled for the number
of times that the person applied.

Our main variables of interest, however, are
those distinguishing among application sources.
To evaluate the extent to which this employer
shows a preference for networked candidates,
we have coded a dummy variable distinguish-
ing whether applicants have been referred by
either an employee or by a non-employee. As
with the descriptive analyses presented earlier,
the substantive results do not change if we focus
only on employee referrals.

In light of the findings in Figures 2a and 2b,
which show that the results for race differ by
gender, we present the models separately for
males and females. Table 7 presents descriptive
statistics for the variables used in the predictive
models by gender. To provide a consistent set of
cases across the various analyses, we have delet-
ed cases that are missing across any of the vari-
ables used in the final models (i-e., Model 3 on
Tables 8 and 9). Here, too, the substantive con-
clusions do not change if we use the non-miss-
ing cases in the other models. The key
background variables we examine are race—as
coded by the receptionist—and network vs.
non-network recruitment source. Table 8 reports
the results of probit regression models of who
gets hired among females. Model 1 includes
only network vs. non-network recruitment
source, and dummy variables for race.
Controlling for race, the relationship between
network recruitment source and getting hired is
aeaS TS «44L6 80 9770 GP) X UT
cw L00"— 18 600"— _ pordde sown jo N
£7 60000" St 1000" a sSutuodo Jo N — suoneordde jo N
£9" 100° cL 100° _ (z-8-) pozenbs jue]d 0} sourysip peoy
Le €£00°- we €00- _ (;-9-) wry ‘sueyd 0} courysip peoy
byl 00" 6r'l 400° a gof yse] uo a3em ApLNOY
£67 ae CV LOT axa CP" a (sax = |) Ansnput ut souoredxy
S'07- «#£00— £°0c— *#£007— _ (;-2-) parenbs sousriedxo yo sie,
9LT «eal 10° C8 «ex 110" _ soustiedxe JO sIBo,
89° £00° 69° £00° — SUI[OOYPS JO sIBa,
:sjonuod
so SEO" —_ —_ aa — PoOYIOMJON,
cr I— L70"— _ —_ — — poyIOMjoUu-UON,
ueisy
89° 670" —_ —_ _— — PoaxOMjoN
cL 070° —_ —_ aa — PoxJOMjou-uON
oruedsty
qa q— — — a a PoxOMION
ov" 810° _ _ _ — poxtomjou-UON,
ueoLoUury ueoLyy
so” 610° —_ —_ _ — PoyIOMION
ou
suOTOBIOU]
_ _ Is 600°- Le- O10 ueououry ueIsy
_ _ tL 910° +0"- 100'- oruedsiyy
_ _ se 600— Il- 900°- ueoLoUly UeoLIyy
:punoisyoeg o1ydersowsq
_ _ orl rZ0" 6c 010" ONION
r90INOg JUSWINIIDY
onyea-Z poo [eursreypy anyea-Z poo” [eurseypy anjea-Z soy [euseyy so[qele, Juopuadopuy
£ [POW 7 PPOW

 

 

so[qeieA JUopuodopuy poyosjag YIM so[eUlo, 10J OIF] SUNoIParg S[OpO| UOISsasBOY WqQolg JO swaIoJoo °g a1qul.
“(480} papte1-OM}) 10° > T axa ‘SO > Tae Ol > 7
‘g]qeuuea Juopuadap 0} payejar Ap}0aJ19q “PyBUIIS2 ION q

“(gouatIedxa ATsnpul jnoyyIM pue Poyxlomiou-uoU oyYM ‘sayy “9"1) SafqeuiseA JUopusdapul [Bd11089}e9 Jo sallosayeo
[epout 10} pue ‘parjdde sow yo saquinu ‘ssurusdo gof Jo saquinu Jo ssaoxa ul suoneor|dde yo soquinu ‘pasenbs aour)sip peor Yueyd 0} souesIp peo ‘gol yse] Uo o3em ‘porenbs
aouatiadxa ‘souatiodxa ‘sievaX Sulpooyps Jo suvsW ev payenjeas ‘ajquieA JUopuadapul Ul aSuLYO UN eB YIM poyEIOsse pamolAsoyU! Bulag Jo Aq[Iqeqoid jeuorpuod ul aBueyD y

‘919 = N [MOL :210N

 

cw
£c
9°
Lc
br
£67
s'0c-
9LT
89°

(sD)
aaaS UTS
L00"—
60000°
100°
£00—
00°
axel
ax £00
ax LTO"
£00"

18
Sc
cL
ce-
orl
L6T
£07—
C87
69°

(€1)
444 L6 80
600"—
1000"
100°
£00-
400°
axa CV"
#*£00—
xe LO"
£00°

(p)

9770 GP) X UT
— pordde sown jo N
— sSutuodo Jo N — suoneordde jo N
a (z-9-) porenbs jueyd 0} s0ux sip peoy
_ (,-9-) wy suey 0} sourjsip peoy
— gof yse] uo a3em ApLNOY
_— (sax = |) Ansnput ut souoredxy
a (;-9-) pouenbs aouatiedxe yo sey,
— aouatiadxe Jo sIvax
_ Sulpooyps jo sea,
small (marginal effect = .01) and statistically
insignificant. This is also true when race is not
controlled: in analyses not presented here, the
zero-order marginal effect of network recruit-
ment source is .008, with a Z-value of .34.
Model 1 also shows that the race contrasts are
small and statistically insignificant. The same
is true when recruitment source is not con-
trolled: none of the race contrasts are significant,
and they are virtually identical to those pre-
sented in Model | (i.e., —.006, -.001, and —.009
for blacks, Hispanics, and Asian Americans).

Model 2 introduces human capital and other
controls to the predictive model. The results
show that the firm’s screeners are more likely
to hire applicants with more years of work expe-
rience, although consistent with human capital
predictions, this effect is curvilinear. Controlling
for the other factors, candidates with industry-
specific experience are 14.2 percent more like-
ly to be hired. In our discussions with the
company personnel, they said that they do not
consider years of education to be a particular-
ly important factor for these jobs. Consistent
with this, the marginal effect of years of edu-
cation is small and insignificant. None of the
effects of the other control variables is statisti-
cally reliable. Most important for our purpos-
es, there are no effects of the network vs.
non-network recruitment source or of race on
the chances of getting hired after controlling for
human capital and other factors. These results
do not change when recruitment source is inter-
acted with race (Model 3): none of the race by
network interaction contrasts (compared to the
excluded category of non-networked whites) is
significantly related to getting hired. Taken as
a whole, the results in Table 8 are consistent with
the findings presented in Figure 2a. Even after
adding controls to the analysis, there is no evi-
dence of a preference for networked candidates
among females, and the race distribution of
hires is not different from the distribution of
applicants.

Table 9 presents the same analyses for males.
Similar to the results for females, networked
applicants are not more likely to be hired than
non-networked applicants. The negative sign
on the coefficient shows that, if anything, the
opposite is true: non-networked applicants are
more likely to be hired than networked candi-
dates. Turning to the race effects, while none of
the race contrasts was significant among
females, the pattern is different for males. For
males, all three minority racial groups—blacks,
Hispanics, and Asians—are more likely to be
hired than whites. The strongest effect is for
black males, who are 15.1 percent more likely
to be hired than white males (i.e., the excluded
category), although the small number of cases
involved makes this effect statistically margin-
al (p < .10, Z-value of 1.64). The contrasts of
Hispanic and Asian males, however, are also
substantial, showing that they are respectively
5.8 and 7.7 percent more likely to be hired than
white males. Here, too, these results are not
affected by whether the person applied via a net-
worked or non-networked recruitment source.
In preliminary analyses examining the zero-
order effect of race (i.e., without controlling
for recruitment source), the marginal effects
for race are respectively 13.2, 5.4, and 6.2 for
blacks, Hispanics and Asians and achieve sim-
ilar levels of statistical reliability (Z-values of
1.72, 1.67, and 2.12).

Model 2 introduces the controls for individ-
ual background factors that the firm’s human
resources screeners said they look for. Similar
to the finding for females, the marginal effect
of years of education is small and statistically
insignificant for males. Although the effect is
not as strong for males as it is for females, can-
didates with more years of work experience are
more likely to survive the screening process
and be hired (c.f. marginal effects .006 for males
vs. .011 for females). Consistent with human
capital predictions, the squared term for males
shows that this effect is curvilinear. None of the
other control variables were significantly relat-
ed to hiring. Considering the race differences in
Model 2, the race differences are somewhat
attenuated compared to Model 1, and the sig-
nificance levels of the effects bounce around
(i.e., the effect for African Americans falls below
the .10 level of significance [p-value of .107],
and the effect for Hispanics climbs over the 10
percent level [p-value of .098]). Neither the
control variables nor the race dummies change
the conclusion, however, with respect to the
role of network recruitment source: candidates
applying via networks are not more likely to be
hired than non-networked candidates. Indeed,
although it is not significant, the sign of the mar-
ginal effect is negative, indicating that non-net-
worked candidates are more likely to be hired
than networked candidates.
LR x? (df) 10.82** 34.19*** 35.42***

(4) (3) (16)
Note: N = 445.
2 Change in conditional probability of being interviewed associated with a unit change in independent variable,
evaluated at means of schooling years, experience, experience squared, wage on last job, road distance to plant,
road distance squared, number of applications in excess of number of job openings, number of times applied, and
for modal categories of the categorical independent variables (i.e., whites, white non-networked, and without
industry experience).
* p< .10; ** p <.05; *** p< .01 (two-tailed test).
Recruitment Source:
Network
Demographic Background:
African American
Hispanic
Asian American
Interactions:
White
Networked
African American
Non-networked
Networked
Hispanic
Non-networked
Networked
Asian
Non-networked
Networked
Controls:
Years of schooling
Years of experience
Years of experience
squared
Experience in industry
(1 = Yes)
Hourly wage on last job
Road distance to plant
(kms.)
Road dist. to plant squared
Num of apps—
Num openings
Number of times applied
ginal effect shows that Asian non-networked
males are 8.5 percent more prevalent among
hires than among applicants, even after the
introduction of control variables in Model 3.
In separate analyses, we explored whether
characteristics of the referrer are associated
with getting hired. We found some evidence
that referrals from high-wage employees are
more likely to be hired when referrer’s wage
(measured in dollars) is added to Model 3 in
Tables 8 and 9, but only when the data for males
and females are pooled (marginal effect .005,
with a Z-value of 2.02). The results are also
statistically unreliable when the “race x net-
work interaction” terms (as in Model 3) are
added to the model in analyses pooling both
genders. We examined whether this referrer’s
wage effect reflects deference that the human
resources department shows to highly paid
supervisors who have the authority to make
final hiring decisions. Although intriguing, this
question stretches the limits of our data. We
cannot separate the effects of referrer’s wage and
referrer’s supervisory status in these data: the
correlation between supervisory status and wage
is .665, and neither variable is significant when
both are added to Model 3. Nor is the referrer
supervisor effect significant when added to
Model 3 alone (Z-value of 1.34). To the extent
that screeners are showing a preference for
referrals from some subset of referrers, this evi-
dence can be described only as weak at best.
In sum, the regression analyses of step 2
show little evidence of whites—either male or
female—being preferred to minorities in screen-
ing. Indeed, the pattern is the opposite for males.
Even after controlling for the factors that the
human resources screeners say that they look
for, the marginal effects show that minority
males are being hired at higher rates than white
males. Most important from the perspective of
our goal of parsing out the steps at work in gen-
erating “wrong network” processes, there is
also little evidence of an employer’s preference
either for, or against, candidates who were
referred to the company at the hiring interface.
The one exception to this observation is the
case of Asian American males, where non-net-
worked candidates are more likely to be hired
compared with networked applicants. We can
only speculate whether this reflects a conscious
effort to limit the number of Asians. It is clear
that Asians—especially males—are overrepre-
In this paper, we have sought to specify what it
means to say that minorities are cut off from job
networks using unique primary data on the hir-
ing process for entry-level jobs collected at a
factory. In this respect, this paper has made a
number of important theoretical contributions
to the study of racial inequality and networks.
First, this paper has made important strides for-
ward in specifying the mechanisms (Reskin
2003) operating in network accounts of racial
inequality in the labor market. Extant “wrong
network” accounts of minority underachieve-
ment run the danger of circular reasoning
because “wrong network” is defined in terms of
the eventual outcome. We argue that much more
analytical precision is needed to specify what it
means to be “stuck” in the “wrong network.”
The complicated and multi-step nature of the
job-finding process has thwarted past attempts
to identify and distinguish among the various
steps of network processes at work in the labor
market. The research in this area has also been
hampered by the lack of appropriate compari-
son data for demonstrating the various ways
that minorities can be isolated from good job
opportunities.

We suggest that when properly specified, the
“wrong network” idea is a black box with many
moving parts inside. Moreover, “wrong net-
work” stories are consistent with minority
underrepresentation in any of a number of dis-
crete steps in the recruitment and hiring process-
es. In this paper, we have been able to specify
es.

We found that network factors operate at sev-
eral stages of the recruitment process, but we
only found scant evidence that these network
factors serve to cut off minorities from employ-
ment at this company. We began by examining
the minority vs. non-minority representation in
the pool of people who could potentially orig-
inate word-of-mouth networks to this employ-
er (step la in Figure 1). We found relatively
large percentages of Asian Americans and
Hispanics, but small percentages of African
Americans, available to refer others in this set-
ting. African Americans were in short supply in
this setting, but the shortage appears to reflect
their relative scarcity in the metro area work
force.

We next analyzed the extent to which minor-
ity workers actually produce minority candi-
dates for hire at the plant via referral networks
(step 1b in Figure 1). In contrast with the expec-
tations of certain theories, which suggest that
minorities might be reluctant to engage in net-
working activities, we found that African
Americans, Asians, and Hispanics are signifi-
cantly more likely to produce referral applica-
tions than are whites. We also examined whether
job referrals from minority employees serve as
a conduit to the firm by checking the data for
evidence of racial and gender homophily in
employee referrals, and by comparing the racial
background of the originator and the target of
referring (step 1c). Notwithstanding the limi-
tations of the procedures by which race was
measured in the applicant pool (see Appendix),
we found a strong overall relationship between
the race and gender of the referrer and the race
and gender of the referral applicant. Irrespective
of the baseline of comparison, we found little
evidence of minorities’ disconnection from jobs
at this firm at step Ic.
We then studied the company’s hiring process
by examining candidates’ chances of proceed-
ing through the screening process from appli-
cation to interview to job offer. In contrast to
some other hiring studies (e.g., Petersen et al.
2000), we did not find that the racial distribu-
tion of candidates is skewed against minorities
over subsequent steps of the hiring process.
Gender and race interact in a complex manner,
and we found that minorities (especially males)
appear to be preferred over whites. We could
find only weak evidence, however, that the com-
pany’s screeners prefer networked candidates,
irrespective of race or gender of the applicant.

It is important to point out that this paper has
significant implications for policy. Since poli-
cies are often designed to target distinct steps
in the recruitment process (National Research
Council 2004), understanding each of these
steps is crucial for crafting effective policy
interventions. Affirmative action, for example,
is focused on affecting the behavior of labor
market screeners (Reskin 1998). Assessing
whether there is discrimination in screening is
very difficult using only data on the people
who were hired, without observing the people
who are turned away and not hired during
screening (National Research Council 2004).
Similarly, assessing the extent to which affir-
mative action policies change the behavior of
screeners will be very difficult without data on
both hires and non-hires. Other policy pre-
scriptions have urged companies to open up
their recruitment practices by broad advertising
and use of formal job posting systems that for-
malize their recruitment processes, on the the-
ory that informal, referral-based recruitment is
inherently exclusionary (LoPresto 1986). The
results presented here, however, suggest that
this heuristic is too simple. Relying on referrals
as a recruitment strategy can help reproduce
the distribution of the referring population
(Rubineau and Fernandez 2005). In a setting like
the one studied here, where the current work
force is racially diverse, a recruitment strategy
involving employee referral processes can help
to perpetuate the existing racial diversity of the
company.

In conclusion, although we found clear evi-
dence of network processes at work at several
of the various stages of the recruitment process
we examined, we are hard pressed to describe
these results as supporting the view that network
factors serve to cut off minorities from employ-
ment at this company. Although the “wrong
network” account does not fit the facts in this
setting, this is not to say that in another, less
diverse setting, where referrals might be pre-
ferred by screeners, the empirical results would
not be markedly different.

While we can make no claims of empirical
generalizability on the basis of the results from
this setting, nevertheless, this study has impor-
tant methodological implications. While the cir-
cumstances might be special, the value of this
study is apparent in the light it sheds on mech-
anisms that are normally hidden from view. We
suggest that the fine-grained processes that we
have uncovered here need to be addressed to ren-
der the “wrong network” hypothesis testable in
other settings. Given the interdependencies laid
out in Figure 1, racial and network differences
in the upstream, early stages of the referring
process (steps la—1c) will potentially bias the
pool from which employers will select candi-
dates (step 2). Moreover, in light of the mech-
anisms we have examined here, it is important
to realize that the race and network effects that
are often reported in analyses of highly aggre-
gated survey data (e.g., those based on the
Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality), are like-
ly conflating the effects of the multiple mech-
anisms that we have delineated. At best, results
based on such highly aggregated data will reflect
the net result across the various stages of the
process in different organizational settings.
Distinguishing among these steps should be a
high priority for future research. The insights
gleaned from this case study should serve as an
important guide for designing broader-gauge
research that might parse out more precisely
the mechanisms alleged to be at work at the
intersection of networks and race in the labor
market.
The company has taken precautions to organ-
ize their hiring process in a lawful way, not
allowing factors of race and gender to affect the
hiring process directly. Specifically, they have
kept the information on race and gender on sep-
arate logs that are filed separately by clerical
staff that are not part of the human resource
screening process. Note that the company staff
has never combined the application information
and the data on race and gender.

Although it is extremely rare to have data on
race at the time of application, the particular way
in which the company collected these data com-
plicates the measurement of race. First, the pro-
cedures used to record the flow of applicants
changed over the course of the study. During the
first 10 months of the study, the receptionist
checked off the apparent race and gender of
each applicant, but did not record the name of
the applicant in the log. Therefore, we cannot
identify the race of the job seeker for applica-
tions that arrived during that 10-month period.
For months 11 to 39, however, the receptionist
recorded the name of each individual applicant
in the log. For those applying during this peri-
od, we can match the race of the applicant (as
it was perceived by the receptionist) to the other
application material.

Second, although the same receptionist was
employed throughout the 39-month period of the
study, the issue of the reliability of this per-
son’s racial judgments remains to be addressed.
We analyzed the consistency of the reception-
ist’s racial identifications using data gleaned
from repeat applications from the same person.
Over the 29 months of the study for which we
can match racial identifications to individual
applications, 119 people applied multiple times,
producing a total of 265 applications with infor-
mation on race. Most (97) of these people
applied twice, 18 three times, and 4 applied 4
or more times. Arranging the applications in the
time order in which they applied, we constructed
146 time-adjacent comparisons of the race clas-
sification for the same person across these 265
applications. Table Al shows the pattern of race
classification for pairings of multiple applica-
tions for the same person. For people who
applied twice, the race assigned the first time
that the person applied is listed along the rows,
and the columns show the racial classification
for the second application made by the same
person. For those who applied three or more
times, the race of the first application (listed
along the rows) is then compared with the race
of the second application (listed along the
columns). Then, to reflect the time sequence of
these judgments, the race of the second appli-
cation is compared against the race of the third
application for the same person. This process is
repeated until all pairings are exhausted, yield-
ing a total of 146 such time-adjacent paired
judgments for the same applicant.

Table A1 shows that the overall level of agree-
ment across judgments is very high: 89 per-
cent of people in Table 1 fall on the diagonal.
Only 16 people were treated inconsistently by
the receptionist, and 15 of these had applied
twice, and one had applied three times. All the
other instances of multiple applications (from
three to six applications) showed absolute agree-
ment with respect to race. Looking at the dif-
ferent races, the level of consistency was very
high for the small number of African Americans
(100.0 percent of the four cases were classi-
fied consistently) and Asian Americans (98.0
percent). The rate of agreement was somewhat
lower for non-Hispanic whites (85.7 percent)
and Hispanics (81.1 percent). The ambiguity
with respect to Hispanic vs. white origin appears
in both directions: six non-Hispanic whites were
subsequently coded as Hispanic; five Hispanics
are later classified as non-Hispanic white. This
latter result is consistent with the results of
recent research on racial classification (Harris
2002).

We were able to compare the receptionist’s
racial classification to the applicants’ self-iden-
tified race for some cases. Some applications
were from people who were either subsequent-
ly hired or had worked at the company in the
past, and thus had provided the company a self-
identified race for equal employment opportu-
nity (EEO) reasons. There were 123 applications
from 110 people for whom we could match the
self-identified racial classification with the
receptionist’s classification. Here, too, the great-
est inconsistency resulted from coding
Hispanics. Of the 40 applicants that self-iden-
tified as Hispanics, the receptionist coded 23
(57.5 percent) as Hispanic. Asians, too, were
often misclassified: only 27 of 46 (58.7 percent)
of the self-identified Asians were classified as
Asian by the receptionist. This is in contrast to
virtually total agreement with respect to whites
(29 of 30, or 96.8 percent) and blacks (7 of 7,
or 100 percent).
Aponte, Robert. 1996. “Urban Employment and the
Mismatch Dilemma: Accounting for the
Immigration Exception.” Social Problems
43:268-83.

Bailey, Thomas and Roger Waldinger. 1991.
“Primary, Secondary and Enclave Labor Markets:
A Training Systems Approach.” American
Sociological Review 56:432-45.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004.
“Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than
Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor
Market Discrimination.”American Economic
Review 94:991-1013.

Braddock, Jomills and James McPartland. 1987.
“How Minorities Continue to be Excluded from
Equal Employment Opportunities: Research on
Labor Market and Institutional Barriers.” Journal
of Social Issues 43:5-39.

Bridges, William P. and Wayne J. Villemez. 1986.
“Informal Hiring and Income in the Labor Market.”
American Sociological Review 51: 574-82.

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi. 1998.
Regression Analysis of Count Data. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Corcoran, M., Linda Datcher, and Greg J. Duncan.
1980. “Influence Networks in Labor Markets.”
Pp. 1-37 in In Five Thousand American Families:
Patterns of Economic Progress, vol. 8, edited by
Greg J. Duncan and James N. Morgan. Ann Arbor,
MI: Institute for Social Research.

Cross, Harry, Genevieve Kenney, Jane Mell, and
Wendy Zimmerman. 1990. Employer Hiring
Practices: Differential Treatment of Hispanic and
Anglo Job Seekers. Urban Institute Report 90-4.
Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

Doeringer, Peter and Michael Piore. 1971. Internal
Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis.
Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.

Elliott, James R. 1999. “Social Isolation and Labor
Market Insulation: Network and Neighborhood
Effects on Less-Educated Urban Workers.” The
Sociological Quarterly 40:199-216.

. 2000. “Class, Race, and Job Matching in
Contemporary Urban Labor Markets.” Social
Science Quarterly 81:1036-51.

——. 2001. “Referral Hiring and Ethnically
Homogeneous Jobs: How Prevalent Is the
Connection and for Whom?” Social Science
Research 30:401-25.

Elliott, James R. and Mario Sims. 2001. “Ghettos and
Barrios: The Impact of Neighborhood Poverty and
Race on Job Matching among Blacks and Latinos.”
Social Problems 48:341-61.

Falcon, Luis M. 1995. “Social Networks and
Employment for Latinos, Blacks, and Whites.”
New England Journal of Public Policy 11:17-28.

Fernandez, Roberto M. and Emilio J. Castilla. 2001.
“How Much Is That Network Worth? Social
Capital in Employee Referral Networks.” Pp.
85-104 in Social Capital: Theory and Research,
edited by N. Lin, K. Cook, and R. S. Burt. New
York: Aldine de Gruyter.

Fernandez, Roberto M., Emilio J. Castilla, and Paul
Moore. 2000. “Social Capital at Work: Networks
and Employment at a Phone Center.” American
Journal of Sociology 105:1288-1356.

Fernandez, Roberto M. and David Harris. 1992.
“Social Isolation and the Underclass.” Pp. 257-93
in Drugs, Crime, and Social Distress: Barriers to
Urban Opportunity, edited by Adele Harrell and
George Peterson. Washington, DC: Urban Institute
Press.

Fernandez, Roberto M. and M. Lourdes Sosa.
Forthcoming. “Gendering the Job: Networks and
Recruitment at a Call Center.” American Journal
of Sociology.

Fernandez, Roberto M. and Celina Su. 2004. “Space
in the Study of Labor Markets.” Annual Review of
Sociology 30:545-69.

Fernandez, Roberto M. and Nancy Weinberg. 1997.
“Sifting and Sorting: Personal Contacts and Hiring
in a Retail Bank.” American Sociological Review
62:883-902.

Green, Gary P., Leann M. Tigges, and Irene Browne.
1995. “Social Resources, Job Search, and Poverty
in Atlanta.” Research in Community Sociology
5:161-82.

Green, Gary P., Leann M. Tigges, and Daniel Diaz.
1999. “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Job-Search
Strategies in Atlanta, Boston, and Los Angeles.”
Social Science Quarterly 80:263-78.

Grieco, Margaret. 1987. Keeping It in the Family:
Social Networks and Employment Chance.
London, England: Tavistock.

Harris, David. 2002. “In the Eye of the Beholder:
Observed Race and Observer Characteristics.”
Department of Sociology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY. Unpublished manuscript.

Heckman, James J. 1998. “Detecting Discrimination.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 12:101-16.
Holzer, Harry J. 1996. What Employers Want: Job
Prospects for Less-Educated Workers. New York:

Russell Sage Foundation.

Jenkins, Richard. 1986. Racism and Recruitment:
Managers, Organizations and Equal Opportunity
in the Labor Market. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Johnson, James H., Jr., Elisa J. Bienenstock, and
Walter C. Farrell, Jr. 1999. “Bridging Social
Networks and Female Labor Force Participation in
a Multiethnic Metropolis.” Urban Geography
20:3-30.

Johnson, James H., Jr., Walter C. Farrell, and Jennifer
A. Stoloff. 2000. “African American Males in
Decline: A Los Angeles Case Study.” Pp. 315-37
in Prismatic Metropolis: Inequality in Los Angeles,
edited by Lawrence D. Bobo, Melvin L. Oliver,
James H. Johnson, Jr., and Abel Valenzuela, Jr.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Kasinitz, Philip and Jan Rosenberg. 1996. “Missing
the Connection: Social Isolation and Employment
on the Brooklyn Waterfront.” Social Problems
43:180-93.

Kirnan, Jean Powell, John A. Farley, and Kurt F.
Geisinger. 1989. “The Relationship Between
Recruiting Source, Applicant Quality, and Hire
Performance: An Analysis by Sex, Ethnicity, and
Age.” Personnel Psychology 42:293-308.

Korenman, Sanders and Susan C. Turner. 1996.
“Employment Contacts and Minority-White Wage
Differences.” Industrial Relations 35:106-22.

Lee, Jennifer. 1998. “Cultural Brokers: Race-Based
Hiring in Inner-City Neighborhoods.” American
Behavioral Scientist 41:927-37.

. 2001. “The Racial and Ethnic Meaning
Behind Black: Retailers’ Hiring Practices in Inner-
City Neighborhoods.” Pp. 168-87 in Color Lines:
Affirmative Action, Immigration, and Civil Rights
Options for America, edited by John David
Skrentny. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Lichter, Michael I. and Melvin L. Oliver. 2000.
“Racial Differences in Labor Force Participation
and Long-Term Joblessness among Less Educated
Men.” Pp. 220-248 in Prismatic Metropolis: Race,
Segregation, and the Dynamics of Inequality in Los
Angeles, edited by Lawrence D. Bobo, Melvin L.
Oliver, James H. Johnson, Jr., and Abel Valenzuela,
Jr. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Lin, Nan, W. M. Ensel, and J. C. Vaughn. 1981.
“Social Resources and Strength of Ties: Structural
Factors in Occupational Status Attainment.”
American Sociological Review 46:393-405.

LoPresto, Robert. 1986. “Recruitment Sources and
Techniques.” Pp. 13-1 to 13-26 in Handbook of
Human Resource Administration, 2nd ed., edited
by J. J. Famularo. New York: McGraw Hill.

Marsden, Peter V. 2001. “Interpersonal Ties, Social
Capital and Employer Staffing Practices.” Pp.
105-26 in Social Capital: Theory and Research,
edited by Nan Lin, Karen Cook, and Ron Burt.
Chicago, IL: Aldine de Gruyter.

Marsden, Peter V. and Elizabeth H. Gorman. 2001.
“Social Networks, Job Changes, and Recruitment.”
Pp. 467-502 in Sourcebook of Labor Markets:
Evolving Structures and Processes, edited by Ivar
Berg and Arne Kalleberg. New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum.

Menjivar, Cecilia. 2000. Fragmented Ties: Salvadoran
Immigrant Networks in America. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.

Mier, Robert and Robert Giloth. 1985. “Hispanic
Employment Opportunities: A Case of Internal
Labor Markets and Weakly Tied Social Networks.”
Social Science Quarterly 66:296-309.
——. 2005. Chutes and Ladders: Navigating the
Low-Wage Labor Market. Department of
Sociology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.
Unpublished manuscript.

National Research Council. 2004. Measuring Racial
Discrimination. Panel on Methods for Assessing
Discrimination, edited by Rebecca M. Blank,
Marilyn Dabady, and Constance F. Citro.
Committee on National Statistics, Division of
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Pager, Devah. 2003. “The Mark of a Criminal.”
American Journal of Sociology 108:937-75.

Petersen, Trond, Ishak Saporta, and Marc-David
Seidel. 2000. “Offering a Job: Meritocracy and
Social Networks.” American Journal of Sociology
106:763-816.

—. 2004. “Getting Hired: Race and Sex
Differences.” Institute of Industrial Relations
Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley.

Reingold, David A. 1999. “Social Networks and the
Employment Problem of the Urban Poor.” Urban
Studies 36:1907-32.

Reskin, Barbara F. 1998. The Realities of Affirmative
Action. Washington, DC: American Sociological
Association.

. 2003. “Including Mechanisms in Our
Models of Ascriptive Inequality.” American
Sociological Review 68:1-21.

Royster, Deirdre A. 2003. Race and the Invisible
Hand: How White Networks Exclude Black Men
Jrom Blue-Collar Jobs. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.

Rubineau, Brian and Roberto M. Fernandez. 2005.
“Missing Links: Referral Processes and Job
Segregation.” MIT Sloan School of Management,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA. Unpublished manuscript.

Sanders, Jimy, Victor Nee, and Scott Sernau. 2002.
“Asian Immigrants’ Reliance on Social Ties in a
Multiethnic Labor Market.” Social Forces
81:281-314.

Smith, Sandra. 2005. “ ‘Don’t Put My Name on It’:
Social Capital Activation and Job-Finding
Assistance among the Black Urban Poor.”
American Journal of Sociology 111:1-57.

Turner, Margery Austin, Michael Fix, and Raymond
J. Struyk. 1991. Opportunities Denied,
Opportunities Diminished: Racial Discrimination
in Hiring. Urban Institute Report 91-9.
Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

Ullman, Joseph C. 1966. “Employee Referrals: A
Prime Tool for Recruiting Workers.” Personnel
43:30-35.
Waldinger, Roger. 1996. Still the Promised City?
African Americans and New Immigrants in
Postindustrial New York. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

1999. “Network, Bureaucracy, and
Exclusion: Recruitment and Selection in an
Immigrant Metropolis.” Pp. 228-60 in Immigration
and Opportunity: Race Ethnicity and Employment
in the United States, edited by Frank D. Bean and
Stephanie Bell-Rose. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.

Waldinger, Roger and Michael I. Lichter. 2003. How
the Other Half Works: Immigration and the Social
Organization of Labor. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.

Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly
Disadvantaged. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.

1996. When Work Disappears: The World

of the New Urban Poor. New York: Knopfb
