http://www.jstor.org/stable/209051 1 ?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
The principle of hierarchy involved in Weber’s conception of bureaucracy is incompatible
with preservation of the individual authority required by professionals in their work. Avail-
able analyses indicate, however, that even among non-professionals the relationships between
superordinates and subordinates in a work hierarchy are likely to deviate from those out-
lined by Weber in that they are affected by the norms and values workers bring to the
situation. The present study of the norms, values, and behavior exhibited by an hierarchically
organized group of physicians in a medical center suggests that supervisory relationships
among physicians represent an extreme case of such deviation. It also provides clues regarding
specific social mechanisms that serve to reconcile maintenance of individual authority with
hierarchical organization.
precisely all the processes involved in the
definition and enforcement of moral rules
that form the core problem of sociology.” #*
What we can legitimately hide and what we
can legitimately reveal to those with whom
we work and with whom we share tasks and
team-belongingness teaches us much about
the more general social dialectic of privacy
and access.

In every society, “the right to question
must be allowed to be limited by the right
to secrecy.” #4 Occupations and professions
form an ideal ground on which the inter-
sections of these two rights can be studied
in their crystallization in work rules and
role prescriptions. The determination of who
can hide from whom may be as essential to
the workings of a social system as deter-
mination of who has power over whom.
2See, for example, Talcott Parsons, “Introduc-
tion” in Henderson and Parsons, op. cit., pp. 58-60;
Logan Wilson, The Academic Man, New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 1942, pp. 71-93; Walter I.
Wardwell, “Social Integration, Bureaucratization,
and the Professions,” Social Forces, 33 (May, 1955),
pp. 356-359; David N. Solomon, “Professional Per-
sons in Bureaucratic Organizations,” in Symposium
on Preventive and Social Psychiatry, sponsored by
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, et al.,
Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing
Office, 1958, pp. 253-266; Robert K. Merton, Social
Theory and Social Structure, rev. ed.; Glencoe, Ill.:
Free Press, 1957, pp. 207-224; Mary Jean Hunting-
ton, “Sociology of Professions, 1945-55,” in Hans
L. Zetterberg, editor, Sociology in the United
States of America, Paris; UNESCO, 1956, pp. 87-93.

As these writers suggest, apparent incompatibili-
ties between bureaucratic and professional stand-
ards abound. Thus the realm of authority, with
which the present paper deals, represents only one
of several areas of potential strain, conflict, or ad-
justment that might be investigated empirically.

8 Wilson, of. cit., p. 73. This type of authority
has also been described as “expert,” “professional,”
or “functional”; see Henry G. Metcalf and L. Ur-
wick, editors, Dynamic Administration: The Col-
lected Papers of Mary Parker Follett, New York:
Harper, 1940, pp. 277-281; Herbert A. Simon,
Administrative Behavior, New York: Macmillan
Co., 1947, pp. 142-146; Talcott Parsons, Essays in
Sociological Theory: Pure and Applied, Glencoe,
TIL: Free Press, 1949, pp. 189-191.

These terms emphasize the basis for authority,
while “individual authority” emphasizes the locus.
and thus allows for the possibility that experts may
be qualified to make independent decisions but may
nevertheless not be allowed to do so under certain
circumstances.

#See the references cited in footnote 2 above.
suggest that not all formal hierarchies are
equally bureaucratic in terms of their actual
operation. Should a similar situation exist
for professional personnel, it would seem
that hierarchical organization may, but need
not, mean curtailment of individual author-
ity and consequent organizational or individ-
ual strain.

As Gouldner,> Blau,® and others? have
observed in various work contexts, those who
hold superordinate positions in an official
hierarchy may have the formal right to im-
pose their decisions upon subordinates (that
is, to exercise authority), but in fact they do
not always choose to do so. Instead, they
may attempt to exert influence in the desired
direction through education, persuasion, or
advice. Further, selection of one or another
of these potential modes of control is rarely
a simply function of the personal preference
of the persons in charge. It is becoming
increasingly clear that if such individuals
are to discharge their responsibilities effec-
tively, they are constrained in some measure
to take notice of the relevant norms and
values of subordinates and to act accord-
ingly. Through being incorporated in role
expectations which specify appropriate
behavior patterns for supervisory relation-
ships under various circumstances, these
norms and values may set the real limits—
sometimes in contrast with “official” limits—
on the kinds of supervisory control that will
be feasible in particular work situations.

The supervisory relationships observed
among a group of physicians in an outpatient
clinic of a large teaching hospital offer an
extreme—and therefore instructive—example
of this general principle. These relationships
also offer suggestive evidence concerning
how hierarchical organization of profes-
8 A relatively large body of sociological literature
concerned with these relationships has accumulated,
including the following representative works: Os-
wald Hall, “Sociological Research in the Field of
Medicine: Progress and Prospects,” American So-
ciological Review, 16 (October, 1951), pp. 639-643 ;
Harvey L. Smith, “The Sociological Study of Hos-
pitals,” unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of
Chicago, 1949; Alfred H. Stanton and Morris H.
Schwartz, The Mental Hospital, New York: Basic
Books, 1954; Albert F. Wessen, “The Social Struc-
ture of.a Modern Hospital,” unpublished Ph.D.
thesis, Yale University, 1951; Temple Burling,
Edith M. Lentz, and Robert N. Wilson, The Give
and Take in Hospitals, New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1956; Mark G. Field, Doctor and Patient in
Soviet Russia, Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1957; Renée C. Fox, Experiment Perilous,
Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1959; E. Gartly Jaco,
editor, Patients, Physicians and Illness, Glencoe,
Tll.: Free Press, 1958; Eliot Freidson, “Client Con-
trol in Medical Practice,” American Journal of So-
ciology, 65 (January, 1960), pp. 374-382; George
G. Reader and Mary E. W. Goss, “Medical Sociol-
ogy with Particular Reference to the Study of Hos-
pitals,” Transactions of the Fourth World Congress
of Sociology, London: International Sociological
Association, 1959, Vol. II, pp. 139-152.

°Cf. Oswald Hall, “The Informal Organization
of the Medical Profession,” Canadian Journal of
Economics and Political Science, 12 (February,
1946), pp. 30-44, and “Stages of a Medical Career,”
American Journal of Sociology, 53 (March, 1948),
pp. 327-337; Rose Laub Coser, “Authority and
Decision-Making in a Hospital,” American Socio-
logical Review, 23 (February, 1958), pp. 56-63;
Field, op. cit.; and Joseph Ben-David, “The Pro-
The research site was a program of com-
prehensive care and teaching sponsored by
the general hospital, medical school, and
nursing school that together make up a
major Northeastern medical center. Located
mainly in the general medical clinic and the
general pediatric clinic of the hospital, the
program yearly provides medical care for
about 12,000 ambulant patients and clinical
instruction for all fourth-year students in the
medical school. Along with a small number
of nurses, social workers, and other hospital
personnel, some 80 physicians participate in
the program. Most of these physicians serve
on a part-time unpaid basis but some are
salaried full-time employees; all are special-
ists who hold appointments on the staffs of
both the hospital and the medical school.

In 1952 the Bureau of Applied Social
Research, Columbia University, began a
series of interlocking studies of different
aspects of the program.!° Data for the
present report were gathered as part of that
series, primarily through intermittent partic-
ipant observation over a period of five years
(1952-1957), and secondarily through study
of organizational documents and question-
naires filled out by physicians. The partic-
ipant observation took place mainly in the
general medical clinic, where about 50 of
the physicians worked; it was conducted by
the author and included a total of nearly
two years of attendance at staff meetings
and clinical conferences as well as informal
interviews with various members of the pro-
fessional staff. The questionnaire survey was
carried out in 1956 by another member of
The overall organization of the program
for comprehensive care and teaching has
been described in detail elsewhere.’* A brief
account of those aspects that pertain to
physicians will suffice, therefore, to indicate
the general nature of the formal hierarchy
within which this professional group ap-
peared to work without noticeable strain.

In order to “emphasize the integration
necessary to the practice of comprehensive
care,” 13 the program is officially conceived
as a nondepartmental unit of the medical
center as a whole. The program is thus the
ultimate responsibility of the group who
makes policy for the medical center: the
joint administrative board. Direct respon-
sibility for determining general program
policy, however, is the province of a formal
advisory committee, appointed by the joint
administrative board and consisting of the
heads of the clinical departments as well as
a number of other professionals who hold
positions of prominence in the center.!*

Next in line is the director of the program,
a salaried internist appointed by the advisory
committee. According to an official state-
ment, he is responsible to the advisory com-
mittee for “overall supervision and coordina-
tion of the program” and “ultimately respon-
sible to the clinical department heads for the
care the patients receive.” He brings to the
committee ‘questions of policy” and keeps
them “informed of general progress.”

Responsible to the director are four
salaried assistant directors: two internists
and two pediatricians. Placed in charge of
the general medical clinic, the assistant direc-
tor for medicine was initially “responsible
to the director for the care of all adult pa-
tients under the program and for students’
activities in the medical clinic and on visits
to the home.” 1° Subsequently the last-named
responsibility was assigned to an assistant
director for home care. The assistant direc-
tors for pediatrics and for pediatric home
care have responsibilities that are similar but
not identical to those of their counterparts
in medicine.

In turn, all of the physicians who teach
students and care for patients in the two
clinics or in the home care services are held
formally responsible for these activities to
the appropriate assistant director. This
group of physicians includes a small number
of salaried specialty consultants and assistant
residents as well as a larger number of un-
salaried attending internists and pediatri-
cians.

While medical students are in the clinics,
they are viewed as junior physicians, im-
mediately responsible to the individual
physicians who serve as their instructors
and ultimately responsible to those in charge
of the program.

14The doctors who serve as heads of the clinical
departments in the medical school also hold the
position of chief of the corresponding clinical serv-
ice in the hospital. For example, the head of the
department of medicine in the school is physician-
in-chief of the hospital; the head of the depart-
ment of surgery is surgeon-in-chief, and so on.

15 Reader, “Organization and Development of a
Comprehensive Care Program,” op. cit., p. 763.

16 Ibid.
Before considering the meaning of this
formal hierarchy in terms of day-to-day
actions and expectations of physicians, three
further facts about it should be noted. First,
departures from formal organization of
physicians as a “company of equals” had
ample precedent in the medical center.
Physicians who receive advanced training
while on the house staff of the hospital are
traditionally organized in hierarchical fash-
ion; within each clinical service, interns are
responsible to assistant residents, assistant
residents to head resident, and head resident
to the chief of the service. Correlatively,
each higher level is responsible for and
supervises the work of the level below.!7
Moreover, even before the program was
instituted there were official—though less
elaborate—lines of responsibility in the two
clinics under discussion, as well as in other
patient-care and teaching units of the med-
ical center. Second, during the five-year
period of observation the program as a whole
underwent many changes, but the hierar-
chical arrangement described remained rela-
tively stable. No trend toward a more
egalitarian pattern could be discerned. Third,
both positive and negative sanctioning
powers remained in the hands of the advisory
committee. It retained the right to appoint,
dismiss, and promote physicians in the pro-
gram. In this respect it also followed
precedent in the medical center, where these
rights are traditional prerogatives of the
chief of each clinical service, subject to the
final approval of the medical board of the
hospital in the case of hospital appointments,
and of the executive faculty of the medical
school in the case of academic appointments.
also the assistant director for medicine in
the program—made out and posted a master
schedule in which physician-instructors were
paired with students and assigned patients
and examining rooms. When physicians ar-
rived at the clinic each morning or afternoon,
they customarily consulted the master sched-
ule to find out which patients they would be
seeing that day and where, and to learn
which students’ work they would be called
upon to check. “Checking” students was the
main teaching activity of physicians in the
clinic, and it ordinarily took place in the
following manner: after a student had
finished interviewing and examining his as-
signed patient, he reported the findings to
his assigned physician-instructor, who first
discussed with the student alternative prob-
able diagnoses, possible plans for therapy,
and the nature of the particular disease that
seemed to be involved; then the physician-
instructor proceeded to examine the patient
briefly himself. Finally he conferred again
with the student concerning what should be
done next for the patient, and he counter-
signed the notes which the student had
written in the patient’s chart.

Occasionally a physician expressed a
preference for continuing to check a partic-
ular student. When this occurred the physi-
cian-in-charge tried to take the preference
into account in making future assignments
though, as was generally understood, to do
so was not always possible within the frame-
work of the sometimes disparate schedules
of students and physicians. There were also
times when the physician assigned to a stu-
dent was unavailable when that student was
ready to be checked. In such instances the
physician was known or assumed to be oc-
cupied elsewhere with unexpected teaching
or patient care duties, and the physician-in-
charge either found a substitute or checked
the student himself.

But for the most part, physicians complied
as a matter of course with the directives
contained in the schedule, and seemed to
take for granted the right of the physician-
in-charge of the clinic to make decisions
about these routine aspects of their work.
Specific formal penalties for noncompliance
did not exist, nor did they appear necessary
to physicians. “Of course the clinic needs a
schedule,” an attending physician remarked,
“and naturally we try to follow it. Otherwise
the clinic would fall apart.”

In this case, physicians were not partic-
ularly apt to review critically each decision
made by the physician-in-charge. There were
other situations, however, when they care-
fully examined the content of a request
before they decided to comply with it. In
fact, in the case of chart review they were
prepared to comply only if they approved.

Chart Review. When the physician-in-
charge reviewed charts at the beginning of
each clinic session, he examined the recent
notes made by students and physicians 18 in
the charts of patients scheduled for revisits
during the session. If he had comments on the
care a patient was receiving, he wrote them
out in the form of suggestions and clipped
them to the chart where they could be seen
by the student or physician with whom the
patient had an appointment. Typical of the
suggestions offered were the following: “Sug-
gest basal metabolism and serum cholesterol
on this patient.”; “No complete urinalysis
recorded in past six months on this diabetic.
How about looking for albumin and doubly-
refractile bodies?”; “Occult blood in stool
suggests need for barium enema and
proctoscopy.”; “Elderly patient with insom-
nia may be depressed. Psychiatric consulta-
tion?”

The director of the program, who had
instituted the procedure,!® looked on review-
ing charts in this manner as a form of super-
vision which in the long run would aid in
maintaining high standards of patient care
in the medical clinic. He explained, “Going
over the charts regularly lets the doctors
know we’re following what they’re doing,
and that’s what counts in keeping standards
up.”

Apart from what could be learned through
examination of successive entries in the
charts themselves, no records were kept of
whether or not physicians actually carried
out the suggestions that were offered. How-
ever, the physician-in-charge believed that
compliance with his suggestions occurred
more often than not. He recognized, never-
theless, that compliance was always prob-
lematic; in accordance with the professional
norms and values described more fully in a
later section of this paper, physicians
reserved to themselves the right to accept or
reject the suggestions about patient care
which the physician-in-charge might make.
“TI believe a doctor should always be open
to advice about his patients, since no one is
ever so good he can’t learn something from
others occasionally,” said an attending
physician in the clinic. However, he con-
tinued, “But it’s up to the doctor who’s
actually taking care of the patient to make
the final decisions—he’s the one who’s
responsible for the patient, remember.”

This view was shared by physicians in
the clinic generally, including those who held
supervisory positions. The director of the
program himself remarked, “If you’re review-
ing charts you don’t expect the doctors to
carry out every suggestion you make. You
may have a good reason for suggesting some-
thing should be done, but they may have a
better reason for not doing it, since they
know the patients.”

In the case of chart review, then, physi-
cians interpreted the official right to super-
vise as the right to advise rather than to
make decisions governing their behavior.
They considered it their duty to take super-
visory suggestions about patient care into
account, and in this sense they accepted
supervision. But they also felt obliged, as
responsible physicians, to examine such sug-
gestions critically, and to follow them only
if they appeared to be in the patients’ best
interests according to their own professional
judgment. Correlatively, they would have
considered it a breach of their duty as physi-
cians to carry out a supervisory suggestion
regarding the care they gave to a patient
without independently evaluating its merits.

As could hardly be otherwise under such
conditions, formal sanctions for non-compli-
ance with supervisory suggestions of this
sort were not in evidence. In the very
infrequent instances when a_ supervising
physician believed the well-being of a patient
was seriously threatened by what he judged
to be inadequate medical care, he made a
point of discussing the case personally with
the responsible physician. These discussions
focused not on the fact that the responsible
physician had failed to follow the suggestions
offered, but on the technical problems pre-
sented by the patient, viewed in the light of
current medical knowledge and practice.
Alternatively or concomitantly, the supervis-
ing physician might arrange to have the pa-
tient presented by a student at a teaching
conference, where the patient’s problems and
medical care were discussed by students and
faculty members, presumably for the benefit
of the students present. In either case, there
was a strong likelihood that the responsible
physician would revise his approach to the
patient’s care as a result of the discussion,
although sometimes it was the supervising
physician himself who became convinced that
his suggestions had been less wise than he
had originally thought.

Types of Control. The type of control
manifested in chart review clearly differs in
certain respects from that exemplified in
scheduling. In the latter case, a physician
who was formally in charge made a decision
which indicated that one particular course
of action was to be followed by other physi-
cians. The decision was intended to leave
little margin for alternative behavior on the
part of those involved; compliance was
expected. Physicians understood this; with
respect to scheduling they believed that in
making requests the physician-in-charge was
within the rights attached to the supervisory
status he held, and that they had an obliga-
tion to behave in accordance with the
requests. Correspondingly, they complied
overtly. Thus the process of control was in-
direct, and its outcome—overt compliance
—was relatively predictable.

In chart review, on the other hand, the
rights attached to the status of physician-
in-charge were more limited. Consistent with
professional norms, he acted as a consultant,
making decisions which he intended and
physicians interpreted as leaving a wide
margin for alternative behavior. Accordingly,
the decisions were expressed as suggestions,
and overt compliance was expected and oc-
curred only if the suggestion met with ap-
proval after independent critical evaluation.
Here the process of control was indirect,
and the outcome of the process was in
principle unpredictable.

Obviously, the latter “indirect” process
represents an institutionalized form of ex-
ercising influence; advice was given which,
according to the norms of physicians, might
legitimately be rejected by recipients.?° In
contrast, the “direct” process which was
described represents the exercise of author-
ity; supervisory decisions were made which,
however phrased, ordinarily could not be
rejected legitimately by those whose actions
they concerned.

It should be noted, nevertheless, that both
types of control had at least one feature in
common: there were neither specific formal
penalties for non-compliance nor specific
formal rewards for compliance. General for-
mal sanctions existed, of course, in the form
of possible promotion or dismissal from the
staff. These sanctions, however, essentially
rested with the chiefs of the services, and
the relationship between their application
and performance in the clinic was far from
obvious either to the physicians who worked
in the clinic or to the observer. More ap-
parent was the importance of anticipated
informal sanctions, such as those illustrated
in the case of chart review.
and ultimately, upon the norms and values
they held regarding each sphere.

Patient Care. As the account of chart
review suggests, physicians believed patient
care to be a professional activity which
required independence in decision making,
ie., individual authority for each doctor.
Accordingly, supervising physicians generally
attempted to exert influence rather than
authority when they wished to affect the
behavior of other physicians in this realm of
activity.

Informal questioning of physicians with
supervisory responsibility for patient care in
various units of the hospital indicated that,
except in the rare case when they found
themselves dealing with an unusually stub-
born and uninformed intern, they were not
prepared to give anything resembling an
order to another doctor concerning the care
of that doctor’s patient. For example, two
supervising physicians acknowledged that
they had the formal right to make such
requests because they were officially respon-
sible for the professional care given to pa-
tients in their units; yet both independently
went on to make almost identical comments:
“You just never do it, though”; “But you
don’t do it, of course.”

Observation of interaction among doctors
in the medical clinic bore out these state-
ments, for it revealed no instance in which
a supervising physician officially requested a
physician on the staff to follow a particular
course of action in the care he gave his
patient. (Interns did not work in the clinic,
and so there was no opportunity to observe
whether they were in fact ever treated differ-
ently from residents and attending physicians
in this respect.) However, observation did
show a great many instances—apart from
chart review—in which supervising physi-
cians made some form of suggestion to those
in the clinic whose work they were supervis-
ing. Space precludes description of such
instances, which on the whole were most
likely to occur in clinical conferences and
history meetings conducted by the director
of the program.

Professional Norms and Values. Under-
lying and legitimating the exercise of influ-
ence rather than authority in the realm of
patient care were, of course, certain firmly
institutionalized values of the medical profes-
sion: acceptance of personal responsibility
for patients, together with acknowledgement
of one’s own potential limitations in fulfilling
that responsibility.?1

Physicians in the clinic did not often
verbalize their beliefs regarding personal
responsibility for patient care. Instead, such
personal responsibility appeared to be a basic
premise for behavior, a value which was so
taken for granted that verbalization was
ordinarily superfluous. By and large, only
when physicians found themselves with ap-
parently irreconcilable differences of opinion
in discussions about the diagnosis or treat-
ment of a particular patient were they likely
to express themselves on the topic.

Assumption of personal responsibility for
patients would seem to account in large
measure for physicians’ unwillingness to take
or give authoritative orders concerning pa-
tient care. For once this value was accepted
—as it apparently was by physicians in both
supervisory and non-supervisory positions
—to give an order meant usurping another
doctor’s professional responsibility, as well
as taking over the everpresent risk of being
proved wrong by later events. And to follow
an order, if given, without independently
evaluating it, was equivalent to being ir-
responsible professionally. No doctor wanted
to be open to either charge—i.e., to violate
these professional norms—and thus it is not
surprising that no orders were given in the
first place.

Nevertheless, as has been indicated, physi-
cians were willing to give and accept advice
in the area of patient care. The values under-
lying such behavior found expression in
their beliefs regarding the limitations of any
single doctor’s medical knowledge and skill,
and in the significance which they attached
to possession of these attributes.

As the survey of opinions of more than
five hundred physicians in the medical center
indicates, almost all of the doctors queried
(97 per cent) believed extensive knowledge
of medical facts to be of considerable impor-
tance in judging the competence of physi-
cians in their specialty.?2 Moreover, they
is based reads as follows: “How much importance
do you personally attach to extensive knowledge
of medical facts when judging the competence of
clinical students and physicians in your specialty?”
Physicians were requested to check one of four
answers—“great importance,” “moderate impor-
tance,” “minor importance,” or “no importance”’—
for each of three categories of people: “3rd year
student,” “4th year student,” and “Physician in
your specialty.”

The exact distribution of answers for the last-
named category was as follows: 70 per cent of the
507 physicians assigned extensive knowledge of
medical facts “great importance”; 27 per cent as-
signed it “moderate importance”; two per cent
assigned it “minor importance”; and one per cent
did not answer the question.

23Qne per cent of the 507 physicians did not
answer the question. Except for the substitution
of the phrase, “skill in the realm of diagnosis,” the
question was exactly the same as that cited in the
previous footnote.

24The question read as follows: “How would
you feel if a third year student, fourth year stu-
dent, and physician in your specialty were to admit
his uncertainties with respect to a diagnostic prob-
lem?”. For each of the three categories of people
physicians were requested to check one of five
answers: “Disapprove strongly,” “disapprove
mildly,” “would not care,” “approve mildly,” or
“approve strongly.”

The exact distribution of their answers for the
category, “physicians in your specialty” was as
follows: one per cent said they would “disapprove
strongly” if a colleague were to admit his un-
certainties; three per cent would “disapprove
mildly”; seven per cent “would not care”; 16 per
cent would “approve mildly”; 71 per cent would
“approve strongly”; and two per cent did not
answer the question.
accordance with the norms of medical prac-
tice, they believed in admitting it.?>

These evaluations seem to explain at least
in part why physicians would not only
tolerate but, on occasion, actually welcome
supervisory advise in matters of patient care,
even though they would not consider the
possibility of orders. That is, because they
had learned as professionals to place a high
value upon both admitting uncertainty and
being knowledgeable, it may be presumed
that they were motivated to seek and accept
help when they needed it as well as con-
tinually to acquire greater knowledge and
skill. Advice from others clearly offered op-
portunities for such learning and assistance;
yet, significantly, it did not jeopardize the
personal responsibility for patients which
physicians felt was essential to maintain.

Physicians did not invariably define advice
from other physicians as a valuable learning
experience, however, nor were they equally
ready to accept suggestions from any physi-
cian who might conceivably be put in charge.
Even though a supervising physician offers
only advice rather than orders, in the nature
of the supervisory situation—and in contrast
with the consultation typical of private prac-
tice, where advice is given only upon request
—the supervisor’s advice is sometimes un-
solicited. Not unlike workers in other organ-
izations, physicians tend to interpret un-
solicited advice as an adverse reflection on
their professional competence.?® Conse-
quently if they are to accept a formal rela-
tionship involving this sort of advice and
still retain their professional self-respect,
they must respect the source of the advice,
the supervising physician. Study of the re-
actions of physicians in the clinic to two
successive physicians-in-charge who had
differing qualifications suggested that the
extent of respect accorded a supervising
physician depended to a considerable extent
on assessments of his professional compe-
tence, as well as on the formal rank he held
in the medical school and in the immediate
work context. In evaluating these char-
acteristics the point of reference of physi-
cians was personal: if they believed the
professional competence of a_ supervising
physician approximately equalled or ex-
ceeded their own, they were likely to respect
him; and unless a supervising physician of
lower rank had remarkable professional ac-
complishments to his credit, physicians were
likely to respect him less than one whose
formal rank was the same or higher than
their own.?” Thus, although giving and tak-
ing advice was a general behavior pattern
among physicians which the norms and
values of the medical profession not only
legitimated but under certain circumstances
required, translation of the pattern into effec-
tive supervisory relationships in the realm
of patient care required careful “matching”
of the qualifications of both parties to the
relationship.

Administration. In contrast with patient
care, the norms and values associated with
the sphere of activity which physicians
called “administration” permitted super-
visory control through the use of authority
.tather than influence alone. The case of
scheduling illustrates this relationship, for
physicians tended to look on this activity as,
in the words of one doctor, “just administra-
tive paperwork.”

Observation of physicians in the medical
clinic indicated that overt compliance with
administrative decisions was, in general,
relatively predictable. But as might be
expected, it was never completely so; devia-
tions were also predictable, though they ap-
peared to constitute a rather small proportion
of the total behavior observed.

Physicians in the clinic, for example, did
not invariably see all of the patients
scheduled for them during a clinic session,
or arrive exactly on time for their appoint-
ments in accordance with the administrative
request that they be prompt. The reasons
they gave for not complying were sometimes
Following administrative regulations was
evidently not very important to physicians
when the regulations conflicted with the pro-
fessional task of taking care of patients
whose need they evaluated as more pressing.
Consequently they felt free to disregard
administrative requests on occasions when
such conflicts arose.

Administration versus Professional Activ-
ities and Norms. That professional obliga-
tions took precedence over adhering to
administrative decisions does not negate the
fact that, in areas which physicians defined
as “administrative,” they were generally
willing to grant those in charge the right
to make decisions affecting their actions, a
right they did not concede in the realm of
patient care. Examination of the prevailing
conception of administration among physi-
cians in the medical clinic provides some
explanation of this differential willingness.

By and large, physicians defined admin-
istrative activity more by exclusion than
otherwise. That is, they tended to label as
“administration” virtually any work in the
clinic—and the medical center—that did
not involve caring directly for patients,
teaching students, doing research, or the
personal planning, studying, and writing
entailed in these activities.
When pressed for a positive definition,
some physicians who were informally inter-
viewed specifically cited policy-making about
organizational procedures. But they were
generally inclined to view administrative
activity as, in the words of one of the full-
time staff members, “paperwork and other
housekeeping chores.”

Whether identified specifically as paper-
work, housekeeping, or policy-making, how-
ever, physicians seemed to agree that admin-
istrative work was relatively non-profes-
sional in character, requiring little or no
medical training for its execution and bear-
ing only indirectly on strictly medical
affairs.2> This was implicit in the way they
tended to contrast administration with taking
care of patients and teaching, both of which
manifestly did require medical training and
were obviously medical activities. As might
be expected of professionally trained per-
sons, physicians generally preferred to be
doing professional work, which they valued
highly, rather than administrative work
which they held in less esteem.

The prevalence of this outlook is indirectly
corroborated by the answers physicians gave
to a question contained in the survey, which
asked them to rank certain activities “in
terms of the amount of interest you have in
them.” 2° More than half (63 per cent) of the
physicians gave first place to seeing patients,
and roughly two-fifths assigned this place
to teaching or research (19 per cent and 17
per cent, respectively). However, practically
no one (one per cent) rated administration
as of primary interest, and approximately
four-fifths (79 per cent) of the physicians
ranked administration last in terms of the
amount of interest this activity had for
them.

Thus it would seem that when physicians
complied with administrative decisions, they
gained freedom from a responsibility—that
of making the decisions—which they con-
sidered more or less onerous. Perhaps more
The findings that have been presented
resolve certain analytic problems even while
they raise others.

First, although hierarchical organization
of professionals would appear to conflict with
maintenance of the individual authority
which is functionally required for profes-
sional work, practice in the organization
that has been described indicated that it did
not do so. In large measure, the potential
strain implied was apparently avoided
through adherence to professional norms of
behavior. These norms did not require, as
is sometimes thought, that each physician be
autonomous in every sphere of his activity,
but only that he be free to make his own
decisions in professional matters as opposed
to administrative concerns. Nor, even in
the professional sphere, did the norms rule
out the possibility of supervision; so long
as supervision came from a physician and
took the form of advice, it was within
normatively acceptable bounds for physi-
cians. Thus one of the organizational mech-
anisms for reconciling hierarchical super-
vision of professional activity with mainte-
nance of individual authority in that sphere
would appear to be the conception of super-
vision as a formal advisory or consultation
relationship. A related structural mechanism
for avoiding strain would seem to be the
practice of assigning supervisory duties only
to persons whose formal rank and profes-
sional qualifications are sufficient to com-
mand the respect of the professionals under
their supervision.

Second, the findings suggest that supervi-
sory relationships among physicians consti-
tute a limiting case of the general observa-
tion that the norms and values of subordi-
nates will affect, in greater or less degree, the
extent and kinds of control which those in
superordinate positions may exert with re-
spect to subordinates. When physicians work
in a formal organization they do not come
as disparate individuals with vague, diverse
or radically conflicting expectations regard-
ing the nature of supervisory control they
will properly exercise or submit to. Rather,
as has been shown, they come as profes-
sionals, with norms and values regarding
supervisory control which are relatively well
defined, shared, and specific as to circum-
stance. Presumably this is a consequence of
the similarity and intensity of their prior
professional education; during the course of
their successive experiences as medical stu-
dent, intern, and perhaps resident, they have
both the opportunity and the obligation to
observe, learn, and internalize professional
standards for conduct in various sorts of re-
lationships with medical colleagues as well
as with patients and ancillary personnel.°°
At any rate, the fact that physicians tend to
share these standards before affiliating with
a formal organization as fully-qualified doc-
tors, and regardless of whether they hold
supervisory or non-supervisory positions, is
especially significant in the present connec-
tion. For it suggests that in the case of physi-
cians, neither the norms of “superordinates”
nor those of “subordinates” as such are of
greatest relevance in determining the extent
and kind of supervisory control that can be
exercised feasibly, but rather the norms and
values of the medical profession at large.
When both supervisor and supervised are
physicians the control-oriented behavior of
each is largely predetermined by established
professional norms and values which both
know and accept in advance. Relatively little
mutual adjustment of role expectations is
therefore required on the part of either per-
son, and it is in this sense that supervisory
relationships among physicians appear to
constitute a limiting case of the principle
cited.

Although this paper presented no data
concerning lay supervision, the findings im-
ply that a great deal of adjustment may be
required in supervisory relationships which
involve non-physicians as well as physicians.
If the non-physician is unfamiliar with pro-
fessional norms and values, or unwilling to
accept them as guides for his conduct with
physicians, he may experience considerable
frustration in attempting to exercise control,
even in administrative matters. That such
frustration actually is the lot of some hos-
pital administrators who are not physicians
has already been suggested by others.*! How
common the predicament is and how it is re-
solved in practice remain important subjects
for investigation. Likewise, the extent to
which the foregoing analysis of supervisory
relationships among physicians in a particu-
lar organization applies to other professional
work groups—non-medical as well as medi-
cal—clearly requires systematic study.
