@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Collective action rests, in part, on group identity and political opportunity. Just how
group identity is manifested and perceptions of political opportunity are altered,
however, remain unclear, particularly in the case of a geographically dispersed
population. An often overlooked mechanism is media technology. This article ana-
lyzes an important yet underexamined instance of worker mobilization in the United
States: the southern textile strike campaigns of 1929 to 1934 during which more
than 400,000 workers walked off their jobs. Using historical data on textile manu-
facturing concentration and strike activity, FCC data on radio station foundings,
and analyses of political content and song lyrics, the authors show that the geo-
graphic proximity of radio stations to the “textile belt” and the messages aired
shaped workers’ sense of collective experience and political opportunity: Walk-outs
and strike spillover across mill towns resulted. The implications of the analyses for
social movement theory generally, and for the understanding of how media can
enable or constrain collective struggle, are discussed.
sponsored violence (Griffith 1988; Hall et al.
1987; McLaurin 1971).

A pivotal moment in U.S. labor history,
the movement’s eventual defeat has had con-
sequences for labor practices, organizing ef-
forts, economic development, and persistent
poverty and inequality in the U.S. South up
to the current day (Roscigno and Kimble
1995). Yet, little sociological attention has
been devoted to this instance of southern
worker unrest. Indeed, much of the research
on worker insurgency overlooks the South or
treats it as a union-resistant region (Corn-
field and Leners 1989). How is it that nearly
In 1921, southern cotton-producing states
produced 54 percent of the nation’s total
yardage of woven cotton goods. This yield
increased to 67 percent by 1927, partly the
result of the relocation of textile manufactur-
ing operations from the North to the South.
This regional shift occurred because cheap
labor was abundant in the South and union
activity was virtually nonexistent: Southern
Chambers of Commerce focused on these
facts when enticing northern mill owners to
move south. Indeed, wages in southern mills
were approximately one-third of those in the
North, even after controlling for the cost of
living. In addition, southern mill workers
worked longer hours (Yellen 1936).
Workers typically lived in villages under
the control of mill owners. Whole families
labored together for the sake of subsistence,
yet housing, food, and medical care re-
mained substandard in many instances (Gell-
horn 1933; Hall et al. 1987). Some mill own-
ers, employing paternalistic policies to sta-
bilize their workforces, offered company-
sponsored social programs, housing, medi-
cal services, credit at the company store, and
religious services to workers. These com-
pany programs failed, however, to offset low
wages and instead came to be seen as an im-
portant mechanism of labor control and co-
ercion (Leiter, Schulman, and Zingraff
1991). Exorbitant interest rates were charged
at mill stores, ministers and doctors were on
the company payroll, and workers who were
not performing to the company standard or
who got out of line risked losing their homes
(Cornfield and Leners 1989; Griffith 1988;
McLaurin 1971; Pope 1942). Given such
conditions, worker resistance eventually
emerged.

Strikes broke out in large numbers in
1929; the main grievances were working
conditions, wages, and hours. On March 12,
1929, 500 women walked out of the inspec-
tion department at the American Ganzstoff
Corporation in Elizabethton, Tennessee. The
following day, 3,000 more workers walked
out demanding higher pay. Later that week,
2,000 workers walked out of the neighbor-
ing Bemberg plant in Gastonia, North Caro-
lina making the same demands. Strikes not
immediately related to those in Gastonia and
Elizabethton occurred soon afterward in
South Carolina: In late March, 800 workers
walked out at Ware Shoals Manufacturing
Company, and 1,250 workers walked out of
the New England Southern plant in Pelzer.
Within three weeks, 8,000 workers had
walked out of 15 plants in the Piedmont area
of South Carolina. Strikes followed shortly
thereafter in the North Carolina towns of
Pineville, Forest City, Lexington, Bessemer
City, Draper, and Charlotte (Hall et al. 1987;
Yellen 1936).

Local newspapers tended to be connected
to traditional economic interests, such as
textiles, and thus took a vehement and ag-
gressive stance against this early wave of
worker protest. Indeed, mill owners and lo-
cal newspapers often worked hand in hand
to sway public opinion away from strikers
by appealing to anti-Communist sentiments,
despite the fact that few workers had such
affiliations. Most, in fact, were simply pro-
testing unfair conditions rather than defend-
ing or fighting for a broader ideological
stance (Salmond 1995). Perhaps most well-
known in this regard were the editorials pub-
lished in the Gastonia Daily Gazette entitled
“A Deep Laid Scheme” and “Red
! Other print communications, such as pam-
phlets, labor-oriented newspapers, and under-
ground newspapers did little to foster these
strikes. In a few cases, National Textile Workers
Union (NTWU) pamphlets were distributed, but
only after the strike had already begun; and they
reduced strike support among workers because of
their emphasis on promoting racial and gender
equality in wages. Similarly, certain strikes, such
as those in Gastonia in 1929, received coverage
in the Communist Daily Worker, despite little if
any striker affiliation with the Communist Party.
This coverage, rather than fostering greater
movement cohesion or participation, was used by
local papers to criticize strikers and had the ef-
fect of reducing support (Salmond 1995). One
exception to this generally negative impact of
print media was the Augusta Labor Review, a
small pro-labor paper in the somewhat isolated
Horse Creek Valley of South Carolina. This
newspaper seems to have had a positive impact
on strikes in that area, perhaps because its
founder and editor, Paul W. Fuller, a Methodist
Episcopal minister, integrated Christian and pa-
triotic discourse and symbolism into the presen-
tation of worker grievances. Thus, the news-
paper’s message and related worker actions were
less easily interpreted or attacked as being Com-
munist-oriented by the local power structure
(Simon 1998).
Roosevelt and the head of the NRA, Hugh
S. Johnson, were opposed to strikes as a
means of solving disputes between workers
and mill owners. Instead, they favored con-
trolling work hours and child labor in an ef-
fort to limit production, drive up profits for
mill owners, and improve economic condi-
tions for workers through the “trickle-down”
of profits (Hall et al. 1987; Hodges 1986).
Prices, sales, and employment increased to
the highest level in five years by late sum-
mer, 1933, but by fall this prosperity soured.
The Depression reached its worst period in
the winter of 1933-1934, and mill owners,
while seemingly supportive of the coopera-
tive message in Section 7a, began to practice
old strategies of oppression or in some cases
instituted new ones. The “stretch-out,” for
instance, was used to circumvent laws limit-
ing working hours. This was the workers’
term for the cumulative changes that “set
them tending machines ‘by the acre,’ filled
every pore in the working day, and robbed
them of control over the pace and method of
production” (Hall et al. 1987: 211). Spinners,
mostly women, were often stretched from 24
to 48 looms, and then from 48 to 96, “with-
out a commensurate increase in pay, often
with no increase whatsoever, or even an ac-
tual decrease” (Yellen 1936:299).? Thus,
workers found themselves working as much
in the new eight-hour shift as they had in
shifts lasting two to four hours longer. Fur-
ther, by enabling industry to curtail produc-
tion when mills were producing sufficient
product through “short time,” the NIRA Tex-
tile Code inadvertently led to a surplus of
goods and higher rates of unemployment
(Tullos 1989). In short, mill owners saw the
laws enacted under the NIRA as bothersome
but easy to manipulate (Wood 1986).
Unions in the coal mining industry jumped
at the chance to take advantage of the NIRA.
Yet, in the textile industry, the United Tex-
tile Workers (UTW) did not institute a
unionization drive (Tippett 1931). Indeed, it
Strike activity intensified throughout the
South in 1934. On February 12, 1934, a
strike broke out at K. S. Tanners Stonecutter
Mills in Spindale, North Carolina. Five
months later, on July 14, a strike occurred in
Guntersville, Alabama, and wildcat strikes
soon rolled across that state involving
20,000 workers. On Labor Day, many work-
ers in North Carolina and South Carolina,
states that did not observe the holiday, re-
fused to come to work. Newspapers reported
400,000 workers on strike by September
14—the largest strike in American history.
What prompted workers across dispersed
mill villages to strike despite the lack of
clear-cut union support or organization?
even in the face of harsh countermobil-
ization. These researchers also argue that al-
ternative belief structures provide movement
participants with a structure of nonmaterial
rewards, not necessarily tied to movement
success (Epstein 1990; J. Gamson 1995; W.
Gamson 1992a; Melucci 1985; Taylor and
Whittier 1992). An alternative belief struc-
ture and collective identity have been impor-
tant in a variety of struggles, including those
promoting racial justice (Morris 1984; Nagel
1994; Stotik, Shriver, and Cable 1994),
women’s rights (Mathews 1982; Meyer and
Whittier 1994; Taylor and Whittier 1992),
and class-based politics (Fantasia 1988;
Hodson, Ziegler, and Bump 1987). Fantasia
(1988) makes this focus explicit in relation
to working- class politics and highlights the
importance of “cultures of solidarity,” defin-
ing them as “cultural formations that arise in
conflict, creating and sustaining solidarity in
opposition to the dominant structure” (p. 19).

Discussions of collective identity resonate
with classical and contemporary theoretical
ideas pertaining to “class consciousness”
and when it may emerge. Indeed, “the most
important blank spots in the theory of class
concern the processes whereby ‘economic
classes’ become ‘social classes’” (Giddens
1982:157). Mann (1973) conceives of class
consciousness as a complex process, occur-
ring in stages, that is often curbed by domi-
nant ideologies, class ambiguities, conces-
sions by elites, or outright defeat. Mann’s
stages include (1) class identity, whereby
one defines oneself as working class; (2)
class opposition, whereby one perceives
capitalists and their agents as opponents; (3)
class totality, whereby class identity and op-
position define the total of one’s social situ-
ation and society as a whole; and (4) con-
ceiving of an alternative. During this final
stage, Mann continues, an “explosive poten-
tial” may emerge and create either a “con-
flict consciousness,” which aims to alleviate
the immediate problem, or a more “revolu-
tionary consciousness,” wherein the needed
change involves overall systemic reorgani-
zation (also see Giddens 1982). Given the
correct progression, the delegitimization of
existing ideology, and the existence of an al-
ternative interpretational frame, class con-
sciousness will emerge (Della Fave 1980,
1986; Oliver and Johnston 1999).

In contrast to identity theorists and those
dealing explicitly with class consciousness,
political opportunity theorists focus on the
political context in which groups are embed-
ded and the shifting levels of opportunity
that emerge across time and place. The like-
lihood of mobilization and the degree of le-
verage exerted by insurgents, it is argued,
will be heightened in situations in which
elites are divided in their defense of the ex-
isting order (Gamson and Meyer 1992; Jen-
kins 1985; Jenkins and Perrow 1977;
McAdam 1982; Pichardo 1995; Tilly 1976).
When elites are coordinated, in contrast, the
reproduction of dominant relations is more
likely, as is countermobilization against
those engaging in insurgent action (Lach-
mann 1990; Tomaskovic-Devey and Ros-
cigno 1996). McAdam (1983) emphasizes
such countermobilization in his analysis of
elite response to tactics implemented by
civil rights activists during the 1960s. Bar-
kan (1984) and James (1988) highlight the
role of other actors in the civil rights strug-
gle—namely the southern racial state, which
constrained movement participants, and the
federal government, which eventually inter-
vened on behalf of participants.

Griffin, Wallace, and Rubin (1986) and
Montgomery (1987) stress themes of elite
response to labor organization in their analy-
ses of capitalist countermobilization during
the 1930s and 1940s. Coercion and control
through paternalism proved effective as a
preventive strategy (Leiter et al. 1991; Mc-
Laurin 1971). More obvious were efforts of
capital to divide workers racially, to curtail
working-class mobilization with subversive
activities and violence, and to control labor
organization and labor practices through ma-
nipulation of the state and state policy (see
C. Brown and Boswell 1995; Brueggeman
and Boswell 1998; Kimeldorf 1999;
Roscigno and Kimble 1995; Wood 1986).
How were mill worker identity and sense of
political opportunity manifested in the 1920s
and 1930s despite the geographically dis-
persed nature of mill towns? This question
is integral to those interested in the diffusion
of collective action (Oliver 1989; Olzak
1992; Rogers 1995; Soule 1997; Soule and
Zylan 1997). Such spatial “spillover” re-
quires some form of network structure
through which information is communicated
and shared (Fantasia 1988; Morris 1984;
Oberschall 1989). Assuming nonparticipants
have the same structural relation to the net-
work as social movement participants, non-
participants become potential adopters
(Myers 1998; Strang and Meyer 1993).
While information networks may include
family, friendship, or transportation ties, the
media may be particularly important for in-
formation flow across geographically dis-
persed populations (W. Gamson 1995;
Kahan 1999; Oberschall 1989; Spilerman
1970). Myers (1998, 2000), in his analyses
of racial rioting, 1964-1971, characterizes
this potential influence as a concentric area
around the network origin defined by the
range of the medium’s distribution, rather
than as lines connecting individuals. This is
an important theoretical extension of previ-
ous perspectives because it offers a potential
mechanism through which group conscious-
ness and perceptions of opportunity may be
altered across geographic space.

To assert the media’s influence requires
specifying the structural and instrumental
ways in which it can shape collective action
across a dispersed population. On the struc-
tural end, the introduction of new media may
provide opportunities not directly associated
with collective action, but which alter the le-
verage and/or autonomy of subgroups. This
appears to be true in the case of radio station
foundings in the South, which had the unin-
tended consequence of creating a relatively
autonomous community of musicians, many
of whom were ex-mill workers, who traveled
from mill town to mill town and radio sta-
tion to radio station. This group alone, we
suggest, represented an important conduit
for information flow among mill towns.‘ In-
deed, indirect network ties may be as impor-
tant to social movement diffusion as direct
links (Soule 1997).

Media, including the radio, can be more
directly influential when it shapes prospec-
tive movement participants’ perceptions of
political opportunity. It is here—in drawing
a distinction between political opportunity at
a structural level and perceived political op-
portunity among potential insurgents, and
specifying the mechanism(s) through which
perceived opportunity may be altered—that
political opportunity theory has been limited
(Kurzman 1996; McAdam 1982; Tarrow
1988). By disseminating information geo-
graphically, media can mold the political
perceptions of a dispersed population
(Kahan 1999). This was the case with radio
and its establishment in the U.S. South. For
the first time in U.S. history, a president
spoke over this medium to southern workers
in the format of “fireside chats,” during
which a national political commitment to the
plight of workers and workers’ right to col-
lectively organize was communicated de-
spite local elite repression (R. Brown 1998;
Hall et al. 1987).
Media can also be instrumental by alter-
ing workers’ sense of collective experience
and solidarity. Historically, one of the most
obvious means through which group identity
has been manifested and shared is through
language generally, and music specifically
(Eyerman and Jamison 1998). Language and
vocabularies of motive, of which music lyr-
ics are no exception, are important facts in
social action not reducible to individual so-
cial psychology. Rather, verbalization,
through speech or song, is always conversa-
tional and dynamic, often political, and po-
tentially consciousness-altering (Flacks
1999; W. Gamson 1992b; Goffman 1981;
Lichterman 1999; Mills 1939, 1940). As
such, “the language of situations as given
must be considered a valuable portion of the
data to be interpreted and related to their
conditions” (Mills 1940:913).

Although consistent with classical the-
ory’s interest in culture and more recent ef-
forts to develop social movement theory’s
emphasis on cultural processes (Melucci
1985; Taylor and Whittier 1992), it is no-
table that so few analyses systematically
consider music as a component of the col-
lective action repertoire or as a form of dis-
course through which collective identity is
fostered and movement solidarity is
achieved. In a study of American left-wing
music, Denisoff (1972) distinguishes be-
tween songs that are rhetorical, highlighting
discontent, and songs that aimed at recruit-
ment and solidarity maintenance during ac-
tive, collective protest (also see Flacks 1999;
McLaurin and Peterson 1992). Eyerman and
Jamison (1998) concur and suggest that the
articulation of identity through music is cen-
tral to movement formation. Indeed, music
not only adds an authentic air to the plea for
social action because of its emotional appeal
(Pratt 1990), but it also builds and reinforces
identity and group commitment through
ritual and the act of singing collectively
(Flacks 1999).° In the southern case, the folk
8 These sources include, but are not limited to,
American Folksongs of Protest (Greenway
1953), The People’s Song Book (Hille 1948),
Folk Songs of North America (Lomax 1960),
Hard Hitting Songs for Hard-Hit People (Lomax
et al. 1967), American Industrial Ballads (Seeger
1992), Babies in the Mill (Dixon 1998), and in-
terviews undertaken by the authors.

° We limited our sample of songs to those ema-
nating from the South that were recorded, sung,
played, or transcribed prior to 1935. Ideally, we
would also have radio “play lists” for the time
period in question. Unfortunately, given the new-
ness of radio at the time, such records were not
kept. What we do know, given the historical lit-
erature and interviews we undertook with surviv-
ing mill musicians and mill workers, is that many
of the musicians who wrote and sang mill-related
songs traveled from radio station to radio station
to play, sang some of these songs during live ra-
dio shows, and spent significant time with those
residing in the mill towns (Malone 1968; Wig-
gins 1987). This suggests that the impact of ra-
dio on collective identity may have been direct
through the playing of mill songs, or indirect
through the creation of this autonomous group of
Along with establishing the spatial link
between mill concentration, radio station
foundings, and strike activity is the need to
specify and analyze how radio was influen-
tial. Here, we rely on historical data pertain-
ing to the impact of politically oriented
broadcasts, archival and interview data on
ex-mill worker musicians during the period
in question, and on content analyses of mu-
sic lyrics. Political data are drawn from his-
torical accounts and the archives of the New
Deal Network Library and Franklin D.
Roosevelt Library. We gathered information
on musicians and songs dealing with south-
ern textile mills, textile mill town life, and
textile worker insurgency from 1929 to 1934
from the Archie Green Papers of the South-
ern Folk Life Collection at the University of
North Carolina Archives and a variety of
other sources.® The resulting collection of 35
songs represents the most comprehensive
compilation of Southern textile songs of
which we are aware.?
to textile mills and mill towns where the
most pronounced strikes of 1929-1934 oc-
curred. Spatial patterns are analyzed by geo-
graphical mapping. These visual representa-
tions show whether radio was a viable mech-
anism through which perceptions of politi-
cal opportunity could have been altered and
collective identity manifested. Supplemen-
tary quantitative analyses of the population
of Southern mill towns (N = 542), whether a
strike occurred, and whether there was a ra-
dio station within the city limits or near to
the city, help us further establish the link be-
tween radio stations and actual strike events.
The analysis then focuses on transmission
content, directly or indirectly via radio, and
its implications for perceptions of political
opportunity and collective identity. For anal-
yses of political content, we outline a major
shift in political structure and opportunity
during the time period in question—that is,
Roosevelt’s New Deal. We then draw from
archival sources to describe the role radio
played in communicating this new context to
southern mill workers, magnifying their per-
ceptions of opportunity and offering legiti-
macy to their experiences and claims of in-
justice at the hands of mill owners.
Consistent with Hodson’s (1999) recom-
mendation for systematically analyzing qual-
itative content data and converting it into
quantitative and descriptive summary statis-
tics, we created a coding scheme for analyz-
ing music lyrics. Both authors coded each of
the 35 songs along various dimensions, re-
ported in Tables 2, 3, and 4. Inter-coder reli-
ability was approximately 91 percent. In
cases of disagreement, we went back to the
original source to rectify the difference. Our
analysis of music lyrics employs a dichotomy
similar to Denisoff’s (1972), distinguishing
between songs focusing on discontent and
collective experience (N = 21) and songs
dealing with protest (N = 14).!° For songs of
Radio quickly found its way into the U.S.
South in 1922, when on February 3, the first
license was granted to WGH in Montgom-
ery, Alabama. Within one month, stations
were founded in Charlotte, Memphis, At-
lanta, Charleston, Richmond, and Mor-
ganton. Interest in this new medium was in-
tense, to say the least, as 43 operating li-
censes were granted to various stations
across the South by the end of that year.
Early ownership patterns in the South mir-
rored those in the country as a whole, with
heavy reliance on department stores, insur-
ance companies, universities, amateurs, and
major electronics manufacturers (e.g., Gen-
eral Electric, Westinghouse, etc.) who had
links to the newly emerging recording indus-
try (e.g., RCA/Victor) (Garafalo 1997). Our
examination of FCC archival records indi-
cates that traditional industries in the South
(e.g., agriculture and textiles) played little or
no role, while colleges, music companies,
battery companies, and relatively new indus-
tries, such as automobile and insurance deal-
ers, did. Take, for example, station WBT in
Charlotte and station WRBU in Gastonia,
North Carolina. Although located near tex-
tile mills, mill owners apparently had no in-
volvement or control in either station. Rather,
WBT was owned by C. C. Coddington, an
entrepreneur and Buick dealer, while WRBU
was owned by A. J. Kirby Music Company.
Two important political issues emerged
during the early years of radio. The first had
to do with the nature of broadcasts, and de-
bates over public versus commercial inter-
ests. Despite considerable discussion, little
federal intervention occurred until the mid
to late 1930s, when the Communications Act
of 1934 created the FCC. Even then, how-
ever, regulation and oversight lagged behind
the new, developing technology (Bittner
1982; Garafalo 1997). Thus, stations were
relatively free to broadcast what they
wanted. Most stations depended on the pro-
gramming of NBC and CBS, while allocat-
ing between one and three hours a day to
programming and live shows that catered to
the specific interests of local populations
(Summers 1958). In the South, for instance,
“depending on the location, one could usu-
ally begin the day or spend the noon hour
listening to a program of hillbilly, Cajun,
blues, or gospel music” (Malone 1979:71).
The other issue had to do with transmis-
sion range. This concern was addressed by
the Radio Act of 1927, which limited the
power of most stations in order to reduce in-
terference among stations sharing the same
frequency (Hogan [1930] 1971). Although
initially a problem in the South, given its
few stations and the inability of broadcasts
to reach rural populations, this was partially
remedied by the increase in foundings in the
late 1920s and into the 1930s. Figure 1 dis-
plays the increase in number of stations dur-
ing this time period. The increase between
1922 and 1930 was significant, and large
Southern cities like Atlanta, Memphis, and
Nashville boasted as many as five stations.
Small stations were also established, and
they found a niche in rural towns with re-
spectable population concentrations (Hall et
al. 1987). By 1931, foundings tapered off
Number of Radio Stations

 

140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
1922

1923

1924

1925

1926

1927

1928
Year

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

 

1934
“SOATYOIV DOA pur “(CEG 1) yoo anjg ajuxay s,uosplang ‘(6Z61) S11 afuxay usayinos fo K10]9aL1G S$ ,YADID :8a24Nog
SEGT 0} JOLIg YINOS *S*_Q 9} UI SdUIPUNOY UOTVeIG OIPeY puUe saTTUNWUIWO| SuLIN;IVJNUeY, 9[Vx9Z, “[ deyy
oeog
eIUBIA

mK

 

000'00z ue a0
000‘002 pur 000'0s ueemjeg [7
000‘0s uy} sso7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ayunog ut sajpuids jo saquinn

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ew

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OW

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aT I
3
€& ee
juOW
£ nqunko Fb
Ee ee
i 09} &
=o ee r
: see Ging. St
Campeeg e
jue = =
A = ? see ey
A = suey 2G c=
nity See ae e i ee
e fpacatite Z
Fi
ee D
e
a S
2 2s
2 y — : of suusygn
pee Ease LS Lot. oe
feels >
mee ant ; ° J
CBs wpa | eS, egy
we uo aH :
° ’ es = aay ‘Aud youn
d
uy °
8 ce .
Ne a PR ahgs
, ony” \
°
°
e
owen
‘uno
“SUIPUNOJ UOTIEIS OIPeI DUO ISBT I YIM AITO SaIOUD #

eect amt niitmnnae cen 3am mt c'

 

 

nana T wamnpic amprr nip canmnn

“SOATYODIV DOA pur “(CEG 1) yoo anjg ajuxay s,uosplang ‘(6Z61) SIJIW afUuxay usayinog fo K10]Ja41q S$, yAVID :sad4nos

m> SHTIMIAYPINpTAT AIIwAT oT Avra
*palino90 oyINs araym IID sojousg #
“(QE6T) UOTIEA Pur “(S661) YOUNIS *(CG66) PUOWTTTES “(9L61) SUL pur UPTON “(L861) ‘TP 19 [TRH :sa24n0g
PEGT 94 6Z6T “UINOS *S°1) BY) SsordE APANIV OYLIS IIA PXAL “7 dey,
Auahey

ony

BxqBiN|o9

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aaow

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

font

 

os

 

 

roup

 

 

 

 

 

Isnquimbog

 

 

 

 

 

ON,
KOE a

yrs

 

 

feyBurus

ep

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

WAST

200810}54

 

eure,

 

 

 

quyaes 2
feyBhyyooy
i ud)
+ ou ‘sire euuen
SM, |x| Re
>| " uo}
pyOH sedhig
> piaueg |
°
Pa ,
e
°

 

 

 

*palino90 oyINs araym IID sojousg #
“(QE6T) UOTIEA Pur “(S661) YOUNIS *(CG66) PUOWTTTES “(9L61) SUL pur UPTON “(L861) ‘TP 19 [TRH :sa24n0g

 

 

em
but in the county or in an adjoining county.
This association, albeit weaker, is also sig-
nificant.!! It is clear, given these patterns,
that many southern mill workers lived and
worked within the concentric rings of radio
transmission and that this may have shaped
the insurgency that unfolded.

But did workers have access to radios?
Radio ownership among mill workers was
surprisingly high given their low economic
status. Hampton’s (1935) analysis of leisure-
time activities among 122 mill workers
across three mill villages during this period
suggests that up to 70 percent had radios in
their homes. Furthermore, when asked to
rank 46 leisure-time activities, listening to
music on the radio was ranked highest. “The
radio is kept going all the time there ain’t no
static” (woman, quoted in Hampton 1935:
61). While music programs were most popu-
Media may influence collective action by al-
tering actors’ perceptions of political oppor-
tunity. Pratt (1990) notes that the rapid dif-
fusion of information to more people
through media was intensified with the ad-
vent of radio. The South was no exception,
particularly when it came to political infor-
mation. For the first time, southern workers
felt as if they had a direct line to the presi-
dent, as Franklin Roosevelt took to the air-
waves and entered their homes. Roosevelt
used the new medium of radio to move be-
yond traditional means of political discourse
and to “reach over and around the networks
of state and local party structures and politi-
cal personalities” (Kahan 1999:185). Roose-
velt, in fact, created “a new political con-
text” through radio, utilizing its directness
and its potential to circumvent local power
bases.

With respect to the rights and grievances
of workers, Roosevelt used weekly “fireside
radio chats” to signify his support. The third
of these broadcasts, which was titled “On the
Purposes and Foundations of the Recovery
Program” and aired on July 24, 1933, dealt
explicitly with the need for industrial reform
and better working conditions. This left
workers, including those in the South who
traditionally felt isolated from national bases
of power, with the impression that they
could count on “the intervention of the fed-
eral government as a lever against local
elites and guarantor of workers’ rights” (Hall
et al. 1987:292). Roosevelt also urged work-
ers to write him—and they did, in unprec-
edented numbers (Sussman 1963).

Many southerners took part in the write-in
campaign to the president (McElvaine 1983;
Sussman 1963). Those who felt excluded
from the political process, most notably
women, now felt empowered to share their
grievances, discussed the need and desire to
organize collectively and, through their de-
tailed letters, encouraged the powerful to
consider the mill workers’ plight. Many of
these letters also made clear that southern
workers believed there would be federal in-
The impact of Roosevelt’s radio transmis-
sions on the consciousness of southern tex-
tile workers was witnessed firsthand in 1933
by Martha Gellhorn, a reporter hired by Fed-
eral Emergency Relief Administration direc-
tor Harry Hopkins to investigate social and
economic conditions in the South. In her re-
port to Hopkins on the conditions in Gaston
County, North Carolina, Gellhorn describes
poor health conditions along with unfair mill
owner practices, while also noting:
Consequently, the airways became an arena
in which political battles over the right of
workers to collectively organize were fought
when George Sloan, head of the Cotton Tex-
tile Institute, went on the airwaves to express
the position of mill owners (Hall et al. 1987).

Use of the airwaves by local organizers and
a progressive president intent on addressing
work-related issues was important for mill
worker perceptions of political opportunity.

North Carolina Ramblers, for instance, were
able to play music full-time after landing a
recording contract in 1925. Poole’s band was
extremely popular throughout the mill towns
of the Southeast, playing popular tunes and
songs that spoke to the lives of mill work-
ers. In fact, the bulk of the music that mill
workers listened to reflected not only mill
work but the whole existence of mill life
(Hall et al. 1987).

The Dixon Brothers, former mill workers,
recorded “Weave Room Blues,” “Weaver’s
Life,” “Factory Girl,’ and “Hard Times in
Here,” while also performing traditional
southern folk tunes and mill-related songs
live on the airwaves (Photograph 1). Lesser
known singers also recorded cotton-mill
songs. Frank Welling and John McGee, also
known as the Martin Brothers, recorded
“The Marion Massacre” for Paramount,
while David McCarn recorded “Cotton Mill
Colic” and “Serves Them Fine” for Victor,
the latter song chiding textile workers for
leaving their mountain homes for the cotton
mills (Malone 1968; Peterson 1992).

Record sales dropped during the Depres-
sion, and live broadcasts of music became
even more important for these musicians.
Sometimes, during live “barn dance” broad-
RADIO AND SOUTHERN TEXTILE WORKER INSURGENCY 35
Table 2. Frequency Distribution of Textile Workers’ Concerns as Expressed in Songs about the
Textile Worker Experience
Family Well-Being Worker Well-Being
Family Children Future and Low Physical Mental

Song Title Subsistence Working Children Wages Well-Being Well-Being
The Big Fat Boss and the x

Worker
Brown Lung Blues x x
Cotton Mill Blues x
Cotton Mill Colic x x
Cotton Mill Girl x
Cotton Mill Man x x
Factory Girl x
Hard Times Cotton Mill Girls x
Hard Times in Here x
Hard Times in the Mill x
Let Them Wear Their x x

Watches Fine
Ma and Pa x
Mill Mother’s Lament x x
No More Shall I Work in x

the Factory
OV Man Craft
Rich Man/Poor Man x
Serves Then Fine x
Shirt Factory Blues
Weave Room Blues x x
Weaver's Life x
Winnsboro Cotton Mill Blues x
Total 5) 5) iz V 6 2

 

casts, like J. W. Fincher’s Crazy Waters
Crystals Saturday Night Jamboree broadcast
on WBT in Charlotte, these musicians and
groups would play together and share mill-
related songs (Green 1963a; Malone 1968).
Their sharing of popular tunes and their abil-
ity to travel “paved the way for some of the
first hillbilly bands to earn their livings per-
forming at a Spartanburg high school audi-
torium one night, at a Gastonia mill recre-
ation center the next evening, and on a Char-
lotte radio station the following morning”
(Tullos 1989:2).

Woody Dewey, a radio archivist associ-
ated with the John Rivers Communications

Museum at the College of Charleston, in
Charleston, South Carolina, remembers
hearing musicians such as Bill and Charlie
Monroe, Bill Carlisle, and others sing songs
of interest to mill workers. He also recalls
listening to specific broadcasts in the early
1930s as a 10-year-old while visiting his
uncle:

They listened to a program each day from
WIS, I think that’s right, in Columbia. Any-
way, they listened to a program called the
Aristocratic Pigs... . Fisher Hendley was
the head pig, I suppose [laughs]. His signa-
ture song was “Weave Room Blues,” and he
played the banjo, and he would play it
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Sat, 09 Jul 2016 18:39:09 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
Thus, radio transmission was directly in-
fluential for the cultural life of mill towns.
More indirectly, radio created a network of
ex-mill workers (i.e., musicians) who trav-
eled between towns, drawing from and con-
tributing to the cultural life and experiences
of those still working in the mills. The mu-
sic and the emergence of radio “put mill-
hands across the region in touch with each
other, allowing those who missed the travel-
ing musicians’ performances to hear and en-
joy the same music,” thus fostering a strong
sense of group identity (Hall et al. 1987:
261). Mill owners, on the other hand, peri-
odically saw the emerging music and its con-
sciousness-altering potential as a threat. For
example, in Danville, Virginia in 1930, local
authorities and mill owners attempted to for-
bid workers from singing Dave McCarn’s
recently released “Cotton Mill Colic”
(Rorrer 1982).

Songs pertaining to mill life often em-
ployed a collective sense of experience, us-
ing the words “we,” “us,” and “our,” and
communicated anxieties specific to the ex-
periences of most mill workers. Table 2 (on
p. 35) shows these songs (N = 21), catego-
rized by the concerns they address, specifi-
cally family well-being and/or the worker
her or himself. This table illustrates the rich-
ness of these songs, the multiplicity of con-
cerns they touch on, and the fact that the is-
sues addressed could vary by verse. Recog-
nizing the overlap in themes highlights the
complexity of these songs and their lyrics.

Ten of the 21 songs dealing with mill
work generally relate concerns for family,
while fifteen, or seventy-one percent, de-
note problems faced by workers. Among
concerns for family well-being, children are
often mentioned, something that undoubt-
edly evoked a broader concern and univer-
sal appeal among listeners.!* Five of these
deal with family subsistence—the ability to
provide for one’s family’s basic needs. This
concern is most obvious in some of the lyr-
ics to a song aptly titled Mill Mother’s
Lament:
Notably, much of the worker complaint is
directed specifically at employers and man-
agers rather than being seen as a conse-
quence of mill work. Vallas’s (1987) analy-
sis of the labor process and the social and
organizational aspects of work suggests that
a focus on managers and owners, rather than
the labor process generally, has stronger
ramifications for class consciousness (Bill-
ings 1990; Della Fave 1980). W. Gamson
(1995) concurs and suggests that an injus-
tice frame will be more effective at recruit-
ing and mobilizing if the target is a concrete
specified—the work process and/or the neg-
ative impact of human agents (i.e., bosses,
managers, and/or scabs). Given our focus on
the manifestation of collective identity, class
consciousness, and insurgency through mu-
sic, the distinction between cause and effect
is important. If lyrics do not address a cause,
then consciousness relating to where griev-
ances should be aimed will remain unclear.
This interpretational link between cause and
effect is indeed crucial if social movement
discourse and framing processes are to be
effective (W. Gamson 1995; Snow and Ben-
ford 1992; Taylor and Whittier 1995). It is
noteworthy that a cause is specified in more
than three-quarters of these songs. Sixteen of
the 21 associate discontent with the work
process, while the same number specify a
human culprit.

Lyrics pointing to the work process fall
into three principal categories: general work
conditions, the length of the work day, and
the introduction of scientific management.
Twelve of the 21 songs place the blame for
mill worker problems on general work con-
ditions, including the speed, cleanliness, and
noise associated with mill work. One verse
of Weave Room Blues provides a vivid im-
age of these conditions:
38 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

Table 3. Frequency Distribution of Causes of Textile Workers’ Concerns as Expressed in Songs

about the Textile Worker Experience

 

 

Work Process

Bosses, Managers, Scabs

 

General Work Length of Scientific
Conditions Work Day Management

Song Title

Presence
of Scabs

Exploitation Managerial
by Owner Control

 

The Big Fat Boss and the
Worker

Brown Lung Blues

Cotton Mill Blues

Cotton Mill Colic

Cotton Mill Girl

Cotton Mill Man

Factory Girl

Hard Times Cotton Mill Girls
Hard Times in Here

Hard Times in the Mill

Let Them Wear Their
Watches Fine

Ma and Pa
Mill Mother’s Lament

No More Shall I Work in
the Factory

OV Man Craft
Rich Man/Poor Man
Serves Then Fine

a1 xX me xX oe xX ae xX

Shirt Factory Blues x
Weave Room Blues x
Weaver’s Life x
Winnsboro Cotton Mill Blues x

Total 12, 3

x

 

actor, preferably a person or corporation pre-
sented as malicious, selfish, or greedy. The
Big Fat Boss and the Worker—a song
penned by Ella May Wiggins, a mill worker
and local organizer who was killed in an
ambush during the Gastonia uprisings—con-
veys such specificity and resulting polariza-
tion by straightforwardly attributing worker
problems to mill owner exploitation. Two
verses in particular stand out:

The boss man hates the workers,
the workers hates the boss.
The boss man rides in a big fine car
and the workers has to walk.

 

The boss man sleeps on a big fine bed
and dreams of his silver and gold.
The workers sleeps in an old straw bed
and shivers from the cold.

Some of this exploitation, as workers rec-
ognized, took the form of paternalistic prac-
tices, as related in the following two verses
of Cotton Mill Man:

The company taught us all the rules
on how to work the spinning spools,
So the boss’s son could drive a
big black sedan.
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Sat, 09 Jul 2016 18:39:09 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
Clearly, songs of mill worker experience
and discontent have a general appeal—an
appeal that transcends the specifics of a par-
ticular mill town and that reverberates with
the day-to-day realities of mill life in the
South. Not only do these songs appeal to
collective understanding and concerns relat-
ing to family subsistence, the well-being and
future of children, and specific problems af-
fecting workers, but they also provide a
framework through which such concerns are
interpreted in a causal fashion. This is cru-
cial if the framing aspect of social movement
culture is to invoke focused collective action
(W. Gamson 1995; Snow and Benford 1992;
Snow et al. 1986; Taylor and Whittier 1995).
Put simply, songs afforded workers a frame-
work through which the similarity of their
plight became increasingly obvious; they
also shifted accountability away from the
workers and toward the labor process and its
beneficiaries.
also because it serves as a unifying force
during mobilization. As Morris (1984) notes
in his analysis of the southern civil rights
movement, this is particularly important
when countermobilization is fierce (Denisoff
1972; Flacks 1999). Symbolism, ritual, and
discourse through music are crucial for
maintaining solidarity among participants
and for shaping the consciousness of nonpar-
ticipants so that they become sympathetic to,
or are actually recruited into, the movement.

In the case of southern textiles, songs that
emerged out of earlier strikes became songs
of unification across mill towns during later
strikes (Denisoff 1971; Huber 1998; Malone
1979). The Gastonia Strike of 1929 stands
out as one of the first labor conflicts in the
South to create a repertoire of protest songs
outlining the plight of workers as well as
touching on strike issues and elite counter-
mobilization strategies. The importance of
song during an active protest is evident in
Photograph 2. It shows the Four Tobacco
Tags (foreground), a popular recording and
radio group during the era, playing and sing-
ing at a 1934 strike near Austell, Georgia,
while striking workers danced in order to
block the doorways to the Clark Threadmill.

Table 4 classifies these 14 textile protest
songs by their primary intent. Unlike the
songs of general mill worker experience de-
scribed previously, these songs are more di-
rect in their goal and thus were easier to
code. Most (9) have as their main aim soli-
darity maintenance and recruitment during a
strike period. Like the general songs of mill
life summarized previously, language is
largely inclusive, referring to “we,” “our,”
and “fellow workers.” Some lyrics, such as
these from Here We Rest, attempt to main-
tain solidarity in the face of strike-breaking
by scabs:
Table 4 also reports the type of counter-
mobilization described, if any. Interestingly,
13 of the 14 songs describe some form of
countermobilization, and in more than half
of these, the countermobilization entails co-
ercion of employees and employer manipu-
lation of the legal-political system. Elite
countermobilization is obvious in the lyrics
to The Marion Strike. In this well-known
song used in subsequent strikes, the per-
former provides the listener with a detailed
account of both corporate influence over the
local police and the interactive nature of the
struggle that occurred:

RADIO AND SOUTHERN TEXTILE WORKER INSURGENCY 41
Table 4. Frequency Distribution of Characteristics of Textile Workers Protest Songs
Primary Intent
Description Hostility Countermobilization
Maintenance of Strike toward Employee Incarceration Hiring

Song Title of Solidarity Activity Scabs Coercion of Leaders of Scabs
All Around the Jailhouse x x
Ballad of the Blue Bell Jail x x
Chief Aderholt x x
Come On You Scabs If You x x

Want to Hear
Here We Rest x x
Let Me Sleep In Your Tent

Tonight, Beal
The Marion Strike x x
The Marion Massacre x x
On A Summer Eve x x
Roane County Strike at Harriman X x
The Speakers Didn’t Mind x x
Song Ballet by Ella May x x
Up in Old Loray Waiting for x x

a Trial
Union Special x
Total 9 4 1 7 ) 1

 

Note that despite the coercion and legal-po-
litical manipulation described, these songs
of protest have an optimistic underpinning
throughout—that positive change will hap-
pen, albeit through struggle. The last verse
of Union Special couples worker optimism
with the recognition that powerful forces
stand in their way:

The city officials are against us,
And the big men of the town.
But they will see in the future
That their playhouse will come down.

These illustrative lyrics demonstrate the
complex nature and substance of these pro-
test songs. They were an important tool in
the protest repertoire, appealing to workers’
sense of commitment and similarity of ex-
perience, to their own economic well-being
and future, and to social justice, broadly de-
fined. Thus, these songs offered a valuable
tool with which to recruit and maintain soli-
darity. Further, they offered the listener,

 

whether protest participant or not, a justifi-
cation of the mobilization that was unfold-
ing by specifying corporate abuses of eco-
nomic, legal, and political power. The shar-
ing of these themes, directly and indirectly
via radio, for the first time offered southern
mill workers sense of unity and solidarity
that extended beyond the particulars of their
specific mill town.

CONCLUSIONS

The establishment of radio stations in the
South and the high concentration textile
manufacturing areas of North Carolina and
South Carolina was influential for the wor-
ker insurgency that unfolded in the 1920s
and 1930s. Local organizers used the air-
waves to express grievances and to coordi-
nate action. Presidential “fireside chats” al-
tered southern mill workers’ perceptions of
political opportunity, leading to the belief
that national political power was now on
their side and that the federal government
would intervene to counter local elite repres-
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Sat, 09 Jul 2016 18:39:09 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
sion. A new collective identity and move-
ment solidarity was formed through music
played on the radio and spread by local mu-
sicians traveling from mill town to mill
town. Unfortunately for mill workers, little
federal intervention occurred, and the strike
campaigns were largely defeated through
state-sponsored violence and legal-political
control. Southern businessmen also helped
lobby for, and eventually pushed through,
the Taft-Hartley Act, which banned the
closed shop, allowed states to instigate
“right to work” laws, and resulted in a dras-
tic reduction in worker petitions for union
elections (Minchin 1997; Roscigno and
Kimble 1995; Wood 1996).

Our explication of radio’s role in this in-
stance of mobilization extends on collective
identity and political opportunity frame-
works. Collective identity theory, as we
have noted, is useful for establishing the
importance of interpretational, identity, and
solidarity processes for subordinate-group
challenge, in a manner consistent with tra-
ditional emphases on class consciousness.
What is often lacking, though, is elabora-
tion on how media can play a fundamental
part in these processes and, indeed, shape
the collective experience and feelings of
“groupness” across a geographically dis-
persed population. Furthermore, little sys-
tematic attention among collective identity
theorists has been devoted to examining the
role of music as an important element of the
social movement repertoire—a role that not
only provides a basis through which collec-
tive identity may be realized but also one in
which an interpretational frame of cause
and effect is offered to the listener. In the
case of mill-related music, this conscious-
ness-altering potential was evident during
the 1920s and 1930s and persisted even into
the mid-1960s when, for example, a record-
ing of “Cotton Mill Man” was considered
“too provocative” to be played on many ra-
dio stations in southern mill towns
(Peterson 1992). Following previous work
on culture and framing processes (W.
Gamson 1995; Snow and Benford 1992;
Snow et al. 1986; Taylor and Whittier
1995), we believe that music and the inter-
pretational frame it can provide is funda-
mental if collective identity is to be trans-
formed into coordinated collective action.
We do not believe that the importance of
music is limited to textile workers or to one
particular era of worker unrest. In fact, we
found during our data collection a signifi-
cant amount of material highlighting the im-
portance of music for a number of historical
struggles pertaining to class, race, and gen-
der, and across a number of industries and
geographic locations. Many movements
have had a well-developed repertoire of
songs, used before and during collective pro-
test. Women’s workplace issues, for in-
stance, have received attention in songs per-
taining to the coal mining industry, among
others, throughout this century. Music is
clearly an important part of the African
American experience, from slave gospels, to
blues lyrics, to jazz, to contemporary soci-
etal critiques embedded in rap music. Song
also has been central to other working class
movements—including striking longshore-
man, lumberers, steel workers, and automo-
bile workers—and for as long as we can tell
(e.g., see Greenway 1953; Lomax, Guthrie
and Seeger 1967; Pratt 1990). What is lack-
ing, despite archival collections and some
historical accounts, are systematic analyses
and substantive sociological interpretations
of these lyrics—if and when they are impor-
tant and how they are tied to stratification
processes and efforts to remedy inequality.'?

Political opportunity theory has specified
the importance of leverage and its histori-
cally contingent nature. However, an expli-
cation of the mechanism(s) through which
potential movement participants’ percep-
tions of opportunity may be altered is often
lacking. Media, whether in an earlier histori-
cal era or the contemporary day, are impor-
tant in this process (Brown 1998; Calhoun
1998; Kahan 1999). It is also the case that
structural political opportunity must be dis-
entangled from perceptions of opportunity,
particularly when the analytic focus is on
movement success and the forces that per-
suade or dissuade social movement partici-
pation (Kurzman 1996; McAdam 1982; Tar-
row 1988). Where there is a disjuncture be-
tween the two, insurgency may result, but
will probably be curtailed by countermobil-
ization. Southern mill workers’ perceptions
of political opportunity were altered via ra-
dio, creating a belief that RD.R. was on their
side, that they had (federal) justification for
their actions, and that the federal govern-
ment would intervene when the pivotal mo-
ment came. Little intervention, however, ac-
tually occurred.

Our focus on media technology helps
bridge the divide between collective identity
and political opportunity perspectives by ad-
dressing the question of how processes rel-
evant to social movement formation are
manifested across space. However, the study
of media and social movement dynamics
must be supplemented further by theory that
explicitly incorporates aspects of both iden-
tity and opportunity into a single framework
(Meyer and Staggenborg 1996; Oliver and
Johnston 1999). One of the most promising
contemporary lines of work that undertakes
this task is that dealing with social move-
ment culture.

Social movement culture, rather than an
ambiguous construct, is an influential and
clearly defined component of the social
movement dynamic comprising normative
guidelines and practices that create and re-
inforce (1) a sense of group identity, (2) an
alternative interpretational frame of cause
and effect, and (3) a sense of political effi-
cacy (W. Gamson 1995; Taylor and Whittier
1995). Such a conceptual frame is well-
suited for analyzing the influential nature of
music in the social movement repertoire, and
we suspect that extending the focus to other
forms of creative, linguistic, and/or perfor-
mance expression conducive to conscious-
ness-raising, group-building, and solidarity
maintenance, would be worthwhile. !4 In our
view, the melding of these two foci—social
movement culture and the media—offers re-
searchers the most useful set of theoretical
tools for understanding the complex and dy-
namic character of historical, contemporary,
and future movement formation across space
(J. Gamson 1998; W. Gamson 1995; Gamson
and Wolfsfeld 1993; Taylor 1996).

Our analyses also contribute to the grow-
ing body of research on media, communica-
tion technology, and community (Calhoun
1998; Cerulo and Ruane 1998; Purcell
1997). While much of this work focuses on
the contemporary era, specifically on televi-
sion and the Internet, many similar themes
emerge. Do media and new communication
technologies enhance social integration? Do
they produce collective identity? Does such
collective identity facilitate group action?
What tends to be overlooked in this litera-
ture, however, is the historical context in
which new information media unfold and the
consequences for social groups. “We need to
set our discussions of electronic media in a
bit deeper historical context—not just of
technology but of the spatial organization of
power and movements challenging that
power” (Calhoun 1998:375).

While our analyses highlight the power of
radio to transform consciousness and to in-
stigate challenges to existing structures of
inequality, we also acknowledge radio’s
limitations. Our analyses reveal lessons that
may be applicable to understanding the po-
tential influence of television or the Internet
on collective action. These newer technolo-
gies enhance collective experience through
the maintenance of dispersed networks, the
encouragement of “socio-spatial” enclaves,
and the facilitation of group activities (Cal-
houn 1998; Cerulo and Ruane 1998). Like
radio, however, the influence of newer me-
dia and communication technologies on
these social processes may vary, depending
on the level of political autonomy and the
degree to which the information transmitted
appeals to the unique experiences of indi-
viduals and specific social groups (W. Gam-
son et al. 1992).

In the case of radio, the autonomy of local
stations was curbed by the FCC in the mid-
to late 1930s when small owners and univer-
sities, advocating radio in the “public inter-
est” and greater flexibility in what was aired,
lost out to “commercial interests.” More
stringent guidelines for broadcasts that could
be interpreted as “political” or “propaganda”
were put in place, and radio operators who
violated the new policies risked losing their
operating licenses (Federal Radio Commis-
sion 1929; McChesney 1993). The success
of the recording industry and its links to the
big corporate broadcast networks also na-
tionalized music played over the airwaves,
leaving little room or market for music deal-
ing with worker grievances and the concerns
of local populations (Cantril and Allport
[1935] 1971; Malone 1979). Thus, while the
decline in local radio station autonomy and
transmission specificity was in part a func-
tion of institutional bureaucratic tendencies,
it was also a political process—one whose
trajectory leaned toward, although was not
completely determined by, corporate-politi-
cal hegemony.

These issues of limited autonomy and an
overly-generalized appeal apply most
straightforwardly to television, suggesting a
limited impact on collective experience and
collective action.!° However, the internet is
a medium of multidirectional information
flow—and it exists in a multinational con-
text. Thus, it affords its users freedom from
political controls and specificity of group in-
terest, at least at the present time, and it will
therefore probably have strong conse-
quences for group-specific identities and the
coordination of collective action. Like tex-
tile workers and radio in the 1920s and
1930s, however, such relations are tenuous
at best, as they require “‘connection mainte-
nance” (Cerulo and Ruane 1998)—some-
thing that is difficult to nurture and preserve
over time and on a wide geographic and
socio-political scale. Furthermore, like ra-
dio, the potential impact of the Internet may
very well be curbed by regulations and po-
litical oversight, particularly if its use runs
counter to dominant ideological positions
and stratification structures.
Barkan, Steven E. 1984. “Legal Control of the
Southern Civil Rights Movement.” American
Sociological Review 49:552-65.

Billings, Dwight B. 1990. “Religion as Opposi-
tion: A Gramscian Analysis.” American Jour-
nal of Sociology 96:1-31.

Bittner, John. R. 1982. Broadcast Law and Regu-
lation. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Blau, Peter. 1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity:
A Primitive Theory of Social Structure. New

York: Free Press.

Brown, Cliff and Terry Boswell. 1995. “Strike-
breaking Solidarity: The Great Steel Strike of
1919.” American Journal of Sociology 100:
1479-1519.

Brown, Robert J. 1998. Manipulating the Ether:
The Power of Broadcast Radio in Thirties
America. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Com-
pany.

Brueggeman, John and Terry Boswell. 1998.
“Realizing Solidarity: Sources of Interracial
Unionism During the Great Depression.” Work
and Occupations 25:436-82.

Calhoun, Craig. 1998. “Community without Pro-
pinquity Revisited: Communications Technol-
ogy and the Transformation of the Urban Pub-
lic Sphere.” Sociological Inquiry 68:373-97.
Cantril Hadley and Gordon W. Allport. [1935]
1971. The Psychology of Radio. New York:
Arno.

Cerulo, Karen A. and Janet M. Ruane. 1998.
“Coming Together: New Taxonomies for the
Analysis of Social Relations.” Sociological In-
quiry 68:398—-425,.

Clark’s Directory of Southern Textile Mills.
1929. Charlotte, NC: Clark Publishing Com-
pany.

Cornfield, Dan and Mark V. Leners. 1989.
“Unionization in the Rural South: Regional
Patterns of Industrialization and the Process of
Union Organizing.” Research in Rural Sociol-
ogy and Development 4:137-52.

Dahrendorf, Ralf. 1959. Class and Class Conflict
in Industrial Society. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

Davidson’s Textile Blue Book, July 1934-July
1935. 1935. New York: Davidson.

Della Fave, L. Richard. 1980. “The Meek Shall
Not Inherit the Earth.” American Sociological
Review 45:955-71.

. 1986. “Toward and Explication of the
Legitimation Process.” Social Forces 65:476-
500.

Denisoff, R. Serge. 1971. Great Day Coming:
Folk Music and the American Left. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press.

. 1972. Sing a Song of Social Significance.
Bowling Green, KY: Bowling Green Univer-
sity Popular Press.

Dewey, Woody. 1999. Interview by William F.
Danaher. Tape Recording. Charleston, SC, Oc-
tober 16.

Dixon, Dorsey. 1998. Babies in the Mill. Sound

- recording. Oakland, CA: HighTone Records/
HMG.

Epstein, Barbara. 1990. “Rethinking Social
Movement Theory.” Socialist Review 20:35—
66.

Eyerman, Ron and Andrew Jamison. 1998. Mu-
sic and Social Movements: Mobilizing Tradi-
tions in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

Fantasia, Rick. 1988. Cultures of Solidarity:
Consciousness, Action, and Contemporary
American Workers. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.

Federal Radio Commission. 1929. Third Annual
Report of the Federal Radio Commission to the
Congress of the United States Covering the
Period from October 1, 1928, to November 1,
1929, Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.

Flacks, Richard. 1999. “Culture and Social
Movements: Exploring the Power of Song.”
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
American Sociological Association, August,
Chicago, IL.
Gamson, Joshua. 1995. “Must Identity Move-
ments Self-Destruct—A Queer Dilemma.” So-
cial Problems 42:390-407.

. 1998. Freaks Talk Back: Tabloid Talk
Shows and Sexual Nonconformity. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.

Gamson, William A. 1992a. “The Social Psy-
chology of Collective Action.” Pp. 53-76 in
Frontiers in Social Movement Theory, edited
by A. Morris and C. McClurg. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.

. 1992b. Talking Politics. New York:

Cambridge University Press.

. 1995. “Constructing Social Protest.” Pp.
85-106 in Social Movements and Culture, ed-
ited by H. Johnston and B. Klandermans. Min-
neapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Gamson, William A., David Croteau, W. Hoynes,
and T. Sasson. 1992. “Media Images and the
Social Construction of Reality.” Annual Re-
view of Sociology 18:373-93.

Gamson, William A. and David S. Meyer. 1992.
“The Framing of Political Opportunity.” Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Ameri-
can Sociological Association, August, Pitts-
burgh, PA.

Gamson, William A. and G. Wolfsfeld. 1993.
“Movements and Media as Interacting Sys-
tems.” Annals of the American Academy of Po-
litical and Social Science 528:114-25.

Garofalo, Reebee. 1997. Rockin’ Out: Popular
Music in the USA. Boston, MA: Allyn and Ba-
con.

Gellhorn, Martha. 1933. Letter to Harry Hopkins,
Director of the Federal Emergency Relief Ad-
ministration, November 11, 1934. Retrieved
December 20, 1998 (http://newdeal.feri.org/
hopkins/hop08.htm).

Giddens, Anthony. 1982. “Class Structuration
and Class Consciousness.” Pp. 157-74 in
Classes, Power, and Conflict: Classical and
Contemporary Debates, edited by A. Giddens
and D. Held. Berkeley, CA: University of Cali-
fornia Press.

Goffman, Erving. 1981. Forms of Talk. Philadel-
phia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Green, Archie. 1963a. Correspondence, Inter-
view, and Biographical Material on Dorsey
Dixon. Archie Green Papers, Files 795-825,
Southern Folklife Collection, Library of the
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

. 1963b. Textile Mill Songs (Subseries
4.23). File 1277 of the Archie Green Papers,
Southern Folklife Collection, Library of the
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Greenway, John. 1953. American Folksongs of
Protest. Philadelphia, PA: University of Penn-
sylvania Press.

Griffin, Larry, Michael Wallace, and Beth Rubin.
1986. “Capitalist Resistance to the Organiza-
tion of Labor Before the New Deal: Why?
How? Success?” American Sociological Re-
view 51:147-67.

Griffith, Barbara S. 1988. The Crisis of Ameri-
can Labor: Operation Dixie and the Defeat of
the CIO. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University
Press.

Gurlach, Luther P. 1999. “The Structure of So-
cial Movements: Environmental Activism and
Its Opponents.” Pp 85-97 in Waves of Protest:
Social Movements Since the Sixties, edited by
J. Freeman and V. Johnson. New York: Row-
man and Littlefield.

Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd, James Leloudis, Robert
Korstad, Mary Murphy, Lu Ann Jones, and
Christopher B. Daly. 1987. Like a Family: The
Making of a Southern Cotton Mill World.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina
Press.

Hampton, Francis. 1935. “New Leisure: How Is
It Spent? A Study of What One Hundred
Twenty-Two Textile Workers of Leaksville,
Spray, and Draper are Doing with the New
Leisure Created by the N.R.A., as Applied to
Certain Types of Activities.” Masters thesis,
Department of Sociology, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Henry Morgenthau Jr. Collection. 1934. Speech
on Radio: Reaction Letters A thru H. Box 259.
Franklin D. Roosevelt Library Archives,
Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park,
NY.

Hille, Waldemar. 1948. The People’s Song Book.
New York: Boni and Gaer.

Hodges, James A. 1986. New Deal Labor Policy
and the Southern Cotton Textile Industry,
1933-1941. Knoxville, TN: University of Ten-
nessee Press.

Hodson, Randy. 1999. Analyzing Documentary
Accounts. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Hodson, Randy, Deborah Ziegler, and Barbara
Bump. 1987. “Who Crosses the Picket Line?
An Analysis of the CWA Strike of 1983.” La-
bor Studies Journal 12:19-37.

Hogan, John W. L. [1930] 1971. “How Radio
Works.” Pp. 267-74 in Radio and Its Future,
edited by M. Codel. New York: Arno.

Huber, Patrick. 1998. “Battle Songs of the South-
ern Class Struggle: Songs of the Gastonia Tex-
tile Strike of 1929.” Southern Cultures 4:109-
125.

James, David R. 1988. “The Transformation of
the Southern Racial State: Class and Race De-
terminants of Local-State Structures.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 53:191-208.

Jenkins, J. Craig. 1985. The Politics of Insur-
gency. New York: Columbia University Press.

Jenkins, J. Craig and Charles Perrow. 1977. “In-
surgency of the Powerless: Farm Worker
Movements (1946-1972).” American Socio-
logical Review 42:249-68.

Kahan, Michael. 1999. Media as Politics:
Theory, Behavior and Change in America. Up-
per Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Kimeldorf, Howard. 1999. Battling for American
Labor: Wobblies, Craft Workers, and the Mak-
ing of the Union Movement. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.

Kurzman, Charles. 1996. “Structural Opportunity
and Perceived Opportunity in Social Move-
ment Theory: The Iranian Revolution of
1979.” American Sociological Review 61:153-
70.

Lachmann, Richard. 1990. “Class Formation
without Class Struggle: An Elite Conflict
Theory of the Transition to Capitalism.” Amer-
ican Sociological Review 55:398-414.,

Leiter, Jeffrey, Michael Schulman, and Rhonda
Zingraff. 1991. Hanging by a Thread: Social
Change in Southern Textiles. New York: ILR
Press.

Lichterman, Paul. 1999. “Talking Identity in the
Public Sphere: Broad Visions and Small
Spaces in Sexual Identity Politics.” Theory and
Society 28:101-41.

Lieberman, Robbie. 1989. My Song Is My Wea-
pon: People’s Songs, American Communism,
and the Politics of Culture, 1930-1950. Ur-
bana, IL: University of Illinois Press.

Lomax, Alan. 1960. The Folk Songs of North
America. New York: Doubleday.

Lomax, Alan, Woody Guthrie, and Pete Seeger.
1967. Hard Hitting Songs for Hard-Hit Peo-
ple. New York: Oak Publications.

Malone, Bill C. 1968. Country Music USA: A
Fifty Year History. Austin, TX: University of
Texas Press.

. 1979. Southern Music, American Music
Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Press.

Mann, Michael. 1973. Consciousness and Action
among the Western Working Class. London,
England: Macmillan.

Mathews, Jane D. 1982. “The New Feminism and
the Dynamics of Social Change.” Pp. 397-425
in Women’s America: Refocusing the Past, ed-
ited by L. K. Kerber and J. De Hart Mathews.
New York: Oxford University Press.

McAdam, Doug. 1982. Political Process and the
Development of Black Insurgency, 1930-1970.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

. 1983. “Tactical Innovation and the Pace
of Insurgency.” American Sociological Review
48:735-54.

McChesney, Robert W. 1993. Telecommunica-
tions, Mass Media, and Democracy: The Battle
for the Control of Broadcasting, 1928-1935.
New York: Oxford University Press.

McElvaine, Robert S. 1983. Down and Out in the
Great Depression: Letters from the “Forgot-
ten Man.” Chapel Hill, NC: University of
North Carolina Press.

McLaurin, Meltin A. 1971. Paternalism and Pro-
test: Southern Cotton Mill Workers and Orga-
nized Labor, 1875-1905. Westport, CT:
Greenwood.

McLaurin, Meltin A. and Richard A. Peterson.
1992. You Wrote My Life: Lyrical Themes in
Country Music. Philadelphia, PA: Gordon and
Breach.

Melucci, Alberto. 1985. “The Symbolic Chal-
lenge of Contemporary Movements.” Social
Research 52:781-816.

Meyer, David S. and Nancy E Whittier. 1994.
“Social Movement Spillover.” Social Prob-
lems 41:277-98.

Meyer, David S. and Suzanne Staggenborg.
1996. “Movements, Countermovements, and
the Structure of Political Opportunity.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 101:1628-60.

Mills, C. Wright. 1939, “Language, Logic, and
Culture.” American Sociological Review 4:
670-80.

. 1940. “Situated Actions and Vocabular-
ies of Motive.” American Sociological Review
5:904-13.

Minchin, Timothy J. 1997. What Do We Need a
Union For? The TWUA in the South, 1945—
1955. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North
Carolina Press.

Montgomery, David. 1987. The Fall of the House
of Labor. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Morris, Aldon D. 1984. Origins of the Civil
Rights Movement: Black Communities Orga-
nizing for Change. New York: Free Press.

Myers, Daniel J. 1998. “Collective Violence and
Heterogenous Diffusion Processes: U.S. Racial
Rioting from 1964 to 1971.” Working Paper
Series, vol. 1, no. 1. American Sociological
Association Section on Collective Behavior
and Social Movements. Retrieved November
1, 1999 (http://www.nd.edu/~dmyers/cbsm/
voll/myers1.pdf).

. 2000. “The Diffusion of Collective Vio-
lence: Infectiousness, Susceptibility, and Mass
Media Networks.” American Journal of Soci-
ology 106: 173-208.

Nagel, Joane. 1994. “Constructing Ethnicity:
Creating and Recreating Ethnic Identity and
Culture.” Social Problems 41:152-76.

Nolan, Dennis R. and Donald E. Jones. 1976.
“Textile Unionism in the Piedmont, 1901-
1932.” Pp. 48-69 in Essays in Southern Labor
History: Selected Papers, Southern Labor His-
tory Conference, 1976, edited by G. M. Fink
and M. E. Reed. Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Oberschall, Anthony. 1989. “The 1960 Sit-Ins:
Protest Diffusion and Movement Take-Off.”
Research in Social Movements, Conflict, and
Change 11:31-53.
Oliver, Pamela E. 1989. “Bringing the Crowd
Back In: The Nonorganizational Elements of
Social Movements.” Research in Social Move-
ments, Conflict and Change 11:1-30.

Oliver, Pamela E. and Hank Johnston. 1999.
“What a Good Idea! Frames and Ideologies in
Social Movement Research.” Paper presented
at the Annual Meetings of the American So-
ciological Association, Chicago, August.

Olzak, Susan. 1992. The Dynamics of Ethnic
Competition and Conflict. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press.

Parkin, Frank. 1979. The Marxist Theory of
Class: A Bourgeois Critique. London, En-
gland: Tavistock.

Pattillo-McCoy, Mary. 1998. “Church Culture as
a Strategy of Action in the Black Community.”
American Sociological Review 63:767-84.

Peterson, Richard A. 1992. “Class Unconscious-
ness” Pp. 35-62 in You Wrote My Life: Lyri-
cal Themes in Country Music, edited by M. A.
McLaurin and R. A. Peterson. Philadelphia,
PA: Gordon and Breach.

Pichardo, Nelson A. 1995. “The Power Elite and
Elite-Driven Countermovements: The Associ-
ated Farmers of California During the 1930s.”
Sociological Forum 10:21-49.

Pope, Liston. 1942. Millhands and Preachers: A
Study of Gastonia. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press.

Pratt, Ray. 1990. Rhythm and Resistance. New
York: Praeger.

Purcell, Kristen. 1997. “Towards a Communica-
tion Dialectic: Embedded Technology and the
Enhancement of Place.” Sociological Inquiry
67:101-12.

Rogers, Everett M. 1995. Diffusion of Innova-
tions. New York: Free Press.

Rorrer, Kinney. 1982. Rambling Blues: The Life
and Songs of Charlie Poole. London, England:
Old Time Music.

Roscigno, Vincent J. and M. Keith Kimble. 1995.
“Elite Power, Race, and the Persistence of Low
Unionization in the South.” Work and Occu-
pations 22:271-300.

Salmond, John A. 1995. Gastonia 1929: The
Story of the Loray Mill Strike. Chapel Hill,
NC: University of North Carolina Press.

Seeger, Pete. 1992. American Industrial Ballads.
Sound recording. Washington, DC: Smith-
sonian Folkways Recordings.

Sherrill, Homer “Pappy.” 1999. Interview by
William F, Danaher. Tape Recording. Charles-
ton, SC, December 5.

Simon, Bryant. 1998. The Fabric of Defeat: The
Politics of South Carolina Millhands, 1910-
1948. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North
Carolina Press.

Snow, David A. and Robert D. Benford. 1992.
“Master Frames and Cycles of Protest.” Pp
133-155 in Aldon Morris and Carol Mueller,
eds., Frontiers of Social Movement Theory.
New Haven, CT: Yale.

Snow, David A., E. Burke Rochford, Steven K.
Worden, and Robert D. Benford. 1986. “Frame
Alignment Process, Micromobilization, and
Movement Participation.” American Sociologi-
cal Review 51:464-81.

Soule, Sarah A. 1997. “The Student Divestment
Movement in the United States and Tactical
Diffusion: The Shantytown Protest.” Social
Forces 75:855-83

Soule, Sarah A. and Yvonne Zylan. 1997. “Run-
away Train? The Diffusion of State-Level Re-
form in ADC/AFDC Eligibility Requirements,

1950-1967.” American Journal of Sociology
103:733-62.

Spilerman, Seymour. 1970. “The Causes of Ra-
cial Disturbances: A Comparison of Alterna-
tive Explanations.” American Sociological Re-
view 3:627-49.

Stotik, Jeffrey, Thoman E. Shriver, and Sherry
Cable. 1994. “Social Control and Movement
Outcome: The Case of AIM.” Sociological Fo-
cus 27:53-66.

Strang, David and Meyer, John W. 1993. “Insti-
tutional Conditions for Diffusion.” Theory and
Society 22:487-511.

Summers, Harrison B. 1958. A Thirty-Year His-
tory of Programs Carried on National Radio
Networks in the United States, 1926-1956.
New York: Arno Press.

Sussman, Leila A. 1963. Dear FDR: A Study of
Political Letter-Writing. Totowa, NJ: Bedminster.

Swidler, Ann. 1986. “Culture in Action: Symbols
and Strategies.” American Sociological Review
51:273-86.

Tarrow, Sidney. 1988. “National Politics and Col-
lective Action: Recent Theory and Research in
Western Europe and the United States.” Annual
Review of Sociology 14:421-40.
Taylor, Verta. 1996. Rock-A-By Baby: Feminism,
Self Help, and Postpartum Depression. New
York: Routledge.

Taylor, Verta and Nancy E. Whittier. 1992. “Col-
lective Identity in Social Movement Commu-
nities: Lesbian Feminist Mobilization.” Pp.
104-29 in Frontiers in Social Movement The-
ory, edited by A. Morris and C. McClurg. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

. 1995. “Analytical Approaches to Social
Movement Culture: The Culture of the Wo-
men’s Movement.” Pp.163—86 in Social Move-
ments and Culture, edited by H. Johnston and
B. Klandermans. Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press.

Tilly, Charles. 1976. From Mobilization to Revo-
lution. Englewood Ciffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Tippett, Thomas. 1931. When Southern Labor
Stirs. Vol. 4, The Strike at Marion. New York:

Jonathan Cape and Harrison Smith.

Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald and Vincent J. Ros-
cigno. 1996. “Racial Economic Subordination
and White Gain in the U.S. South.” American
Sociological Review 61:565-89.

Tullos, Allen. 1989. Habits of Industry: White
Culture and the Transformation of the Caro-
lina Piedmont. Chapel Hill, NC: University of
North Carolina Press.

Vallas, Stephen P. 1987. “The Labor Process as
a Source of Class Consciousness: A Critical
Examination.” Sociological Forum 2:237-56.

Wiggins, Gene. 1987. Fiddlin’ Georgia Crazy:
Fiddlin’ John Carson, His Real World, and the
World of His Songs. Chicago, IL: University
of Illinois Press.

Wood, Philip. 1986. Southern Capitalism: The
Political Economy of North Carolina, 1880-
1980. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Yellen, Samuel. 1936. “The Southern Textile
Strikes and Gastonia.” Pp. 292-326 in Ameri-
can Labor Struggles. New York: S.A. Russell.
