Disability and Deviance: Normative Adaptations of Role Behavior
Author(s): Lawrence D. Haber and Richard T. Smith

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 36, No. 1 (Feb., 1971),
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 2093509

Accessed: 21-06-2016 19:26 UTC
SSAGE
This paper examines disability as a social process. The designation of some forms of excep-
tional behavior as disability provides a means for the normalization of incapacity in terms of
existing role relationships. The requirements for long-term or permanent exemption from
role obligations involve legitimation and adjustment to role maintenance. Behavioral rewards
and punishments are not effective for regulating behavior recognized as beyond the control
of the individual. Agents of social control may, however, influence or regulate behavior
through their ability to provide or withhold alternative sources of gratification. Sanctions
may be applied in the process of recognition of inadequate role performance, the attribution
of responsibility, or the legitimation of performance failure. The accredited disabled individual
is excused from role performance by legitimation and may be provided with alternative
behavioral patterns for obtaining income, care, rehabilitation or other services. Legitimation
may stipulate the behavioral requirements to consolidate modified expectations into a coherent
pattern of adaptation—as normalization of the behavior of the incapacitated individual. This
conceptualization suggests a more concentrated focus on the elaboration of behavioral alterna-
tives within existing role relationships rather than the proliferation of specialized role reper-
toires.
tions for incapacity and obscures important
conceptual distinctions. We view disability
as a form of adaptive behavior provided for
by the norms of role relationships. As with
other forms of social behavior, the adaptive
enactment of disability may take deviant
forms or may follow the expectations for be-
havorial contingencies. This perspective has
ample precedent in the work of Lemert
(1951, 1967); Mechanic (1966a); Davis
(1961) and others (Cohen, 1959, 1966; Nagi
1969; Sykes and Matza, 1957; Levinson,
1959; Goode, 1967; DeLamater, 1968.) We
believe that the conceptual distinctions in-
volved have implications for role theory and
The term disability, as used here, refers
to the pattern of behavior emergent from in-
capacity—the loss of ability to perform ex-
pected role activities because of a chronic
physical or mental impairment (Daitz, 1965;
Haber, 1967; Nagi, 1969:10-11). This defi-
nition focuses on the behavioral consequences
of impairment. Other definitions have em-
phasized medical conditions and physical
impairments (Wright, 1960:9; American
Medical Association, 1958:3) or social im-
pairments, such as age, unemployment, and
cultural deprivation (Burk, 1967; Ruesch
and Brodsky, 1968).

Analytically, disability is differentiated
from disease, injury, impairment and acute
or short-term incapacity by the nature of the
consequences. Pathological conditions or
functional abnormality do not necessarily
represent limitations in required perfor-
mance. Acute illness and short-term inca-
pacity generally do not entail extensive and
persistent behavioral changes.

Capacity limitations or handicaps result-
ing from mental and physical impairment
differentiate disability from limitations which
are incorporated into the normative social
structure such as age, sex, race, education
and other cultural or social attributes. Al-
though these attributes affect individual
capability, and may in some circumstances
constitute social handicaps, they represent
performance expectations, rather than limit-
ing factors on the ability to meet perfor-
mance expectations.

The recognition, attribution and legitima-
tion of incapacity as disability are part
of the process of normalization, by which
alternative modes of behavior for the ac-
ceptance of role failure are provided. This
process of normalization is the subject of this
paper.
from role obligations. Sick role expectations
are derived, in part, from the recognition
that an individual may be motivated to
engage in illness behavior (Parsons, 1951a:
436-438). Consequently, he may be held
responsible for his behavior. The acceptance
and legitimation of exemption from role
obligations is conditional on meeting the
other sick role obligations.

Although individuals vary in their re-
sponse to disease or injury, most chronic
conditions and impairments are accepted as
not subject to the conscious control of the
individual. Freidson (1965:80-81), for ex-
ample, points out that “most illness, and
most impairments, are not motivated—they
are contingencies of inheritance, accidents of
infection, and trauma.” Excusing an in-
dividual from responsibility for his condition,
however, does not relieve him of accounta-
bility for his subsequent illness behavior.
Role expectations and obligations may be
redefined in terms appropriate to his capaci-
ties and his limitations; the requirements for
the acceptance of short-term and long-term
incapacity differ substantially, however.

Several studies have shown that the role
expectations for acute and chronic illness
are different. The sick role model does not ac-
count for variations among illness expecta-
tions (Twaddle, 1969) nor for distinctions
between sickness and impairment (Gordon,
1966:99-100). Sickness expectations are re-
lated to the attributes of the illness as well
as those of the individual (Kassenbaum
and Baumann, 1965:3). These contingen-
cies are not adequately explained by the
sick role. There has also been little study
of the process by which “medical sanctions,
the approval of intimates or those having
influence over them” (Mechanic and Vol-
kart, 1961:52) confer conditional acceptance
and legitimation of sick role behavior, espe-
cially in relation to chronic illness.

Significant deviations from the modal pat-
terns of behavior may be regarded as viola-
tions of the norms unless there are institu-
tionalized expectations which provide for
variations in behavior. Illness is generally
recognized as an acceptable reason for fail-
ure to meet social obligations. There are
exceptions, however, when the claimed ex-
emption is considered suspect. Motivated ill-
ness behavior, for example, is considered a
special form of deviant behavior in which
the individual knowingly violates the norms
of the group (Parsons, 1951b:452).

Friedson (1965:72—76), however, also
classifies behavioral deviations beyond the
control of the individual as deviant behavior,
including disability among the undesirable
differences which violate valued norms.
Thomas (1966:7) expresses a similar view of
disability as requiring “resocialization into
a deviant social category.”

There are several reasons for questioning
the utility of both sick role and deviance
models for the conceptualization of disability.
The sick role exemption is expected to be
temporary and related to the duration of
illness. Exemption expectations are, however,
the most variable of the sick role elements
(Twaddle, 1969). Some conditions need no
exemption from expected performance.
Chronic or persistent incapacities, on the
other hand, require changes in role relation-
ships and activities which extend beyond
the capacities immediately affected. This
may include a generalized reidentification of
the disabled person, in terms acceptable to
other people, as well as in the disabled per-
son’s self-definition (cf. Lemert, 1967; Me-
chanic, 1966a).

The sick role also assumes that the pa-
tient will maintain the desire to get well;
sick role exemptions should not reward ill-
ness behavior or gratify dependency needs.
For the disabled person with irreversible
impairment or degenerative disorders, the
“desire to get well” is often an inappropriate
expectation; therapeutic agents stress the ac-
ceptance of impairment and reconciliation
to capacity limitations as preferable treat-
ment alternatives (Gray et al., 1969; Lemert,
1967; Fisher, 1958). Normative constraints
which define the condition as undesirable
may be irrelevant or dysfunctional; alterna-
tive strategies are needed to “neutralize” the
impairment or to compensate for reduced
capacities.

The question of responsibility for illness
has a more direct bearing on disability. Treat-
ment of acute illness must be prompt to be
effective; the costs of accepting a false claim
are small relative to the risks of rejecting a
true claim for care (Scheff, 1964). Legitima-
tion of a disability allegation however, may
commit the provider to a long-term, high-
cost obligation. Extended incapacity permits
extensive validation of the claim for exemp-
tion. The risks, therefore, of long-term ex-
emption from performance responsibilities
are greater and the process of decision mak-
ing may be more deliberate.

The attribution of responsibility and the
legitimation of incapacity are relevant to the
examination of both disability and deviance.
Treatment of disability as deviance, how-
ever, creates inconsistencies in the interpre-
tation of adaptive responses to sickness and
disability. Many role relationships specify,
implicitly or explicitly, the reciprocal be-
havior expected in the event of incapacity.t
Deviance definitions of disability imply
that the behavioral adaptations of the dis-
abled are also undesirable and raise questions
about what constitutes appropriate patterns
of behavior for disability.

Both Cohen (1959:481-482) and Levin-
son (1959) suggest that special contingency
tules provide for a range of acceptable role
definitions adaptive to individual differences
and exceptional situations. The notion that
any persistent deviation from expected be-
havior is deviant, without regard to the so-
cial processes for legitimation and “normali-
zation” of behavioral deviations would seem
to ignore meaningful distinctions between
classes of disparate behavior (cf. Cohen,
1966:36).

As an alternative to these concepts, we are
proposing a model of disability in which the
normalization of exceptional behavior is pro-
vided for within the framework of reciprocal
role obligations, as a means of facilitating
role maintenance and social control. Re-
sponses to contingency events such as inca-
pacity may be incorporated into the pattern
of role behavior and role alternatives as in-
stitutionalized expectations of the appropri-
ate agents of social control.

Disability, as discussed here, is a form of
social adaptation to incapacity which orga-
nizes behavior in terms of a distinctive pat-
tern of expectations, similar to the behavioral
adaptations characterized by Lemert (1951:
75; 1967:17, 40-41) as “secondary devia-

1 Marriage vows, for example, specify responsive
behavior “in sickness and in health, for better or for
worse.” Union-management contracts detail the ar-
rangements for temporary and prolonged disability.
The relationship of mother and child specifies care
and nurture.
Disability designations, formal and in-
formal, provide a social mechanism for
maintaining the pattern of social relation-
ships of the impaired individual and the
members of his role set; they also provide
the agencies of social control with a rationale
for alternative rules of behavior in obtaining
or providing economic and social satisfac-
tions.

Control agents attempt to maintain social
order through the support of conforming be-
havior and the suppression of disruptive be-
havior (Cumming, 1968:1—-9). Unpredictable
or disruptive behavior interpreted as will-
ful violation of the norms may be suppressed
by encouraging acceptable behavior or by
punishing or isolating undesirable behavior.

If the undesirable behavior of an individ-
ual is recognized as beyond his control, re-
wards and punishments cannot compel more
adequate performance. The claimant can re-
spond to sanctions only if his behavior is
willful or governable. In the extreme case,
behavioral rewards and punishments are,
therefore, not effective or appropriate for
regulating exempted behavior. The effective-
ness of rewards and punishments are more
usually a matter of degree; the demands for
performance are weighted against the costs
to the individual and to the social system.
Performance expectations and exemptions in
a state prison, for example, are not the same
as the level of reasonable demands in an in-
dustrial plant; the rewards and punishments
available to the control agents and the social
constraints are also different. The costs of
performance may constitute a threat to the
system or a danger to the physical integrity
of the individual. A production line worker
with failing vision may sacrifice speed for
accuracy within certain limits; the reliability
requirements for school bus drivers or airline
pilots are such, however, as to normally ex-
clude epileptics and the visually impaired.

At some point, either the level of perform-
ance falls below the acceptable minimum or
the costs of performance exceed the available
resources. If the limiting factor is beyond
the control of the individual, agents of social
control cannot compel or reward performance
interdicted by incapacity. The nonconform-
ing individual is, however, still dependent on
society for the satisfaction of his material
and social needs (Cohen, 1959:470-472).
After the disability is accepted, however, be-
havioral expectations which take account of
the impaired or residual capacities of the in-
dividual can develop, as variant but equiva-
lent obligations. The behavorial response to
these contingency norms can be sanctioned
by providing or withholding gratification
for conforming or deviant behavior.

Intentionally or unintentionally, these
adapted expectations become means for the
“normalization” of behavior, as a new set of
rules by which to measure or evidence con-
formity. If no acceptable alternatives are
provided for departures from the general
rules for performance, all behavorial devia-
tions appear anomic or deviant (Lemert,
1967:17—21). If the costs of adaptation are
too high for the individual, family or com-
munity to tolerate, the incapable may be
isolated or expelled. Some primitive societies
practice abandonment of the aged and the
helpless, as “the simplest and perhaps the
most humane method of dealing with ines-
capable necessity” (Simmons, 1945:227).
The leper is, of course, the classic outcast
(Leviticus, Chapters 13-14; Gussow and
Tracy, 1968); custodial care institutions, to
some extent, fill the same function (Town-
send, 1962:285-328, 430-438).

The power of social control agencies to
sanction behavior lies, to a large extent, in
their ability to confer or deny legitimacy to
behavior. Three stages may be identified in
the process of normalizing incapacity:
We have identified the incapacity for
normal role performance as the crux of dis-
ability. The start of the process of normaliz-
ing adaptive role performance is the recogni-
tion of “role failure.” The individual is per-
ceived as no longer meeting requirements,
meeting them inadequately, or making un-
usual demands upon the system in meeting
requirements. The recognition may come
from the affected person or from the recip-
rocal members of the interaction. It may be
accepted by either or both members, or
denied by one, but not both. One or the
other member must claim a significant devi-
ation from performance requirements.

Where both parties agree on the existence
of a role failure, (1) the attribution of re-
sponsibility and (2) legitimation are still
open to negotiation. When the parties dis-
agree, the adequacy of performance may be
negotiated, mediated by other agents of
the social structure, or evaluated by tech-
nical standards.
Legitimation establishes the responsibility
for behavior, by accepting or rejecting the
claim for exemption from conventional stan-
dards. Performance deviations are interpreted
as either conscious deviance from rules, or as
the result of forces beyond the individual’s
control. The nature of the proofs may vary
from situation to situation, depending on the
formality of the relationship and the certify-
ing agent.

Control agencies may respond to similar
behavioral phenomena with different orienta-
tions towards treatment and control. The
same person may have his behavior legiti-
mated as incapacity by one organization and
rejected as deviance by another. Stoll, (1968:
120-121), for example, postulates responses
to behavorial deviations based on the agent’s
beliefs about the ability of individuals to
control their own destiny. Other status at-
tributes may be taken into account to legiti-
mate one person’s incapacity and to re-
ject another with the same condition. The
perception of the moral character of attri-
butes may change with the social climate
as, for example, the tendency to regard al-
coholism or gambling as compulsions rather
than character defects (cf. Gusfield, 1967).

The legitimating agent is the gatekeeper
of conformity, separating the compliant dis-
abled from the willful deviant. The deviant,
having been denied the protection of disa-
bility status, may abandon his “inappropri-
ate” behavior or may persist in his devia-
tion from expectations; to maintain his
claim for exemption, he must organize his
behavior around a pattern of secondary de-
viance which preserves the claim to incapac-
ity (Hirschfeld and Behan, 1963; Sokolov,
1967). In order to meet his material and
social needs, he must sustain himself through
performance which will not challenge his
self-definition, such as begging, family sup-
port or marginal employment.
The accredited disabled individual is ex-
cused from his role failure by legitimation
and may be provided with alternative pat-
terns of behavior for meeting the organiza-
tional requirements for care, rehabilitation,
employment, or income maintenance. His be-
havior will also be organized into a pattern of
secondary deviations, relative to the general
norms, but based on alternative patterns of
expected behavior—the constitutive rules for
normalization of exceptional behavior.

It is obvious that the relationship of the
disabled individual with the detection, diag-
nostic or treatment agents is influenced by
the interests each of them has in the legiti-
mation or accreditation of disability. The
claimant for workmen’s compensation is in
a different position from the worker denying
an incapacity to the industrial plant physi-
cian, The disabled man who applies for both
rehabilitation services and income mainte-
nance benefits for disability is expected to
prove both the severity of capacity limita-
tions and the potential for successful utiliza-
tion of services; the definition of the situa-
tion and the constitutive rules may exact
different and possibly conflicting conforming
adaptations from the applicant.

The control agent’s view of the appropri-
ateness of particular forms of adaptation is
affected by his resources, his perception of
his obligations to the client and to his agency,
the social commitments of the agency, and
the organizational needs for survival, main-
tenance and growth. Disability definitions,
for example, may be manipulated to pro-
vide a stable flow of manpower (Mechanic,
1966b:239). Improvements in diagnostic
techniques may affect the administrative
evaluation of disability (Rombold, 1960).
Agency allocations of resources are also reg-
ulated by the continuing needs for support
from clients and sponsors. “Creaming,” for
example, is one way of maximizing the re-
turn on investment.

The contingency norms surrounding the
availability of adaptive behavior options ob-
viously reflect the interest orientations of the
control agents, as well as of the disabled per-
son. The orientation of employers, employ-
ees and their agents towards the definition
and legitimation of disability is conditioned
by the obligations incurred (or benefits con-
ferred) in the accreditation of disability, as
ROLE MAINTENANCE

Legitimation separates the false or deviant
claims for exemption from the “true” or ac-
ceptable claims, as part of the process of
developing an appropriate social response to
the claimed incapacity. The social function
of disability is the stabilization and mainte-
nance of role relationships and obligations to
the extent feasible for the impaired person
and the reciprocal role member. The acknowl-
edgment of incapacity as disability rather
than as deviance sanctions the abridgment of
the role set as a means to reduce the incom-
patibility of perceived demands on the role
occupant (cf. Merton, 1957:379). The be-
havioral alternatives of the disabled indi-
dividual become circumscribed in a series of
conditioning acts or commitments which re-
sult from the response or expectations of
others to the impairment (cf. Goffman,
1961:88).

These responses are conditioned by a con-
tingency which nullifies the conventional
standards for behavior (cf. DeLamater,
1968:450; Sykes and Matza, 1957:667).
The disabled person is no longer able to con-
form to the usual expectations of the inter-
action systems upon which he is dependent
for his social and material needs; the recip-
rocal role members or their functional al-
ternatives are, therefore, called upon to meet
their residual role commitments by providing
alternatives for the losses entailed by role
incapacity.

The development of this adaptive process
starts with the social processes which bring
the applicant to the control agent with a
claim for support, rehabilitation, job place-
ment or other services. The individual has
acknowledged his incapacity and is search-
ing for adaptive mechanisms to normalize his
relationships. These may consist of efforts
to manage the effects of incapacity by: (1)
removing or adjusting the impairment, to
permit a return to conventional expectations;
(2) adjusting the man, through the addition
of new or improved capacities; (3) adjust-
ing the situation, through changes in the role
requirements or the environment to fit ex-
isting capacities; or (4) providing alterna-
tive systems for obtaining need satisfactions,
such as income replacement or institutional
care.

As a result of these efforts at social man-
agement, the disabled individual may re-
cover from his disability or may adapt to
his capacity limitations. Recovery reverses
the process of disability. When the impair-
ment no longer limits the role-relevant ac-
tivity of the individual, he is expected to re-
sume normal role activities. Persistence in
maintaining performance exemptions is re-
garded as deviant behavior.

Successful adaptation to disability con-
tributes to maintenance of the network of
role relationships of the disabled person. The
disabled person who conforms to the expec-
tations of the appropriate control agents re-
ceives institutional support in normalizing
his role relationships. The social, moral, and
economic benefits derived from the relation-
ship with the control agents reward con-
formity to the constitutive norms and dis-
courage behavior which violates these norms.

Adaptations to disability which impose
limitations greater than that required by
capacity impairment are maladaptive for role
maintenance. Invalidism, for example, repre-
sents “one of many patterns of attempted
adaptation to personal difficulties that lead
to the impoverishment or distortion of social
role-taking” (Cameron and Magaret, 1951:
231). The individual may react to impair-
ment by restricting his activities and social
contacts beyond the point made necessary
by the capacity limitation alone.

Some people, of course, are caught between
institutional alternatives, with limited op-
portunities for adaptation and no avenues
of institutional support. The accreditation of
their disability would seem to have marginal
value at best. To be viable, their adaptation
must be to some extent deviant, either to-
wards greater dependency than they require
or towards more independence and greater
use of residual capacities than they are ex-
pected to sustain.

The loss of role capacity introduces a
state of normlessness or “anomie” in which
the individual’s ties with normal role com-
mitment may become attenuated by the
forced consequences of disability. Continuity
with past role obligations may be maintained
A major problem in the legitimation of
disability is the difficulty of determining the
extent to which the impairment is causally
implicated in the presented behavior. Sick-
ness or illness determination requires only
confirmation of the existence of a functional
abnormality or of treatment possibilities.
Disability, however, involves assessment of
capacity for required role performance, not
of impairment. Impairment residuals, for
example, which do not affect capacities re-
quired for role performance are not disabling.
Impairments, which in themselves are not
sufficient to significantly affect performance,
may be disabling when combined with other
personal or situational attributes.

Disability typically emerges from the in-
teraction of the impairment with individual
attributes and the environment, as repre-
sented by the physical and social demands on
the role occupant. The supply and demand
for services also affect the extent to which
an impairment of performance is regarded as
an incapacity. In an economy with a scarcity
of labor, for example, there is more demand
for residual capacities. The society will ac-
cept greater limitations as still representing
“adequate” role performance. In the “econ-
omy” of family relationships, the scarce sup-
ply of marital or parental services and the
valuation of unique services provide greater
scope for adaptation of family relationships
to limitations in performance.? Impairment
is more easily converted into disability, as
role-significant incapacity, when (1) there
is a surplus of skills and (2) performance
requirements are raised to reflect the higher
level of skills available.

The complexity of the relationships which
define disability makes it difficult to evaluate
the extent to which incapacity is due to a
specific impairment or functional limitation,
the adaptability of the role requirements and
of the individual, and the demands of the
physical and social environment. Disability
is essentially a judgment about the combined
effect or interplay of these factors on re-
quired performance. Administrative organi-
zations, however, usually require simplicity,
standardization, and reliability for routin-
ized decision-making. This underlies, at least
in part, the tendency to define disability in
terms of attributes, such as medical impair-
ment (American Medical Association, 1958)
or social impairment (Burk, 1967; Ruesch
and Brodsky, 1968), rather than as interrela-
tionships. Most disability decision-making
compromises between the extremes of identi-
fying disability as medical or social impair-
ment.

Regardless of the normative or administra-
tive standard used for disability, however, it
is the legitimating evaluation which “makes
the disability” and which differentiates dis-
ability from deviance. As Freidson (1965:
74) points out, the meaning imputed to
the condition, not the physical reality, es-
tablishes the significance of the limitation.
The individual who persists in a rejected or
unsupported claim of incapacity is often
labeled a crank or malingerer. Persistence in
the denial of disability, after the incapacity
has been accredited, is considered inappro-
priate compensatory behavior; the illusion of
capacity is felt to interfere with treatment
and recovery possibilities (Gray et al., 1969;
Fisher, 1958:784). Although a more popular
deviation than the former, denial of disability
may create as much of a problem for the
treatment and family allocation system as a
“fictionalized handicap” (Thomas, 1966:11).
The safety of the system may also be threat-
ened by attempts to minimize or conceal ca-
pacity limitation—there is less toleration, for
example, of the mental aberrations of a kin-
dergarten teacher than of a college profes-
sor.

The legitimation process creates the ex-
emption from responsibility and from usual
role requirements by explaining behavioral
variations in normatively acceptable terms.
It may also stipulate further behavioral
requirements to consolidate expectations into
a coherent pattern of adaptation. “Normali-
zation . . . takes place in informal interaction
or through the formal agencies of social con-
troll” (Lemert, 1967:24).

The legitimation of disability is, by defini-
tion, a labeling process. It tends to reinforce
the awareness of identified limitations and
to stabilize behavior considered appropriate
to incapacity. Labeling role failure as disa-
bility reduces critical evaluation by neutraliz-
ing conventional norms and by offering
adaptive alternatives.

The labeled exemption may also discour-
age efforts towards recovery, through the
organization of self-regarding and public
attitudes which freeze the individual into
the socially validated behavior. The re-
sponses to disability or impairment labels
may be distorted by diffuse evaluations of
capacity, limiting behavior in areas not di-
rectly affected by the disability. Identifica-
tion with a condition may infer capacity limi-
tations for the individual beyond those of
the particular case (cf. Mechanic, 1966b:
242). Factors associated with a condition,
but unrelated to capacity, may restrict al-
ternatives (Olshansky, 1968). Workers with
histories of cardiac conditions, for example,
have difficulty in finding employment be-
cause of the potential liability under com-
pensation or insurance agreements. These
evaluations are institutionalized into hiring
patterns through age and physical require-
ments for employment (Irvin, 1960). Fam-
ilies, in their desire to be supportive, may
inhibit adaptive efforts towards indepen-
dence.

Analysts of deviant behavior have pointed
out that labeling may constitute an additional
pressure towards deviance, through the dis-
ruption of primary relations, the closing of
alternative avenues of conventional behavior
and the stabilization of transitory behavior
(Freidson, 1965:84-89, DeLamater, 1968;
Scheff, 1966:80-84). It is apparent that
labeling may have both adaptive and mal-
adaptive consequences; however, it cannot
be considered apart from the initiating be-
havior. Labeling increases the visibility of
the disabled or the deviant and emphasizes
the responses considered appropriate to the
perceived behavior. It is the initiating be-
havior which is disvalued, however, rather
than the label (Cohen, 1966:36-38; Akers,
1968). The legitimation of incapacity is in-
tended to reduce role strain by providing
adaptive opportunities to the disabled.
Faulty judgments and inappropriate re-
sponses may limit the adaptations available
to the disabled (cf. Davis, 1961), but this
would appear to be more a problem of the
appropriateness of the label than of the ef-
fects of labeling.

In much the same way, disability behavior,
or impairment, or disfigurement may be ac-
companied by stigma, as “signs of moral in-
feriority” (Lemert, 1967:42). Stigmatization
does not imply nor does it require deviance
(Cohen, 1966:36; Goffman, 1963). Any per-
ceived disparity of status or capacity may
produce stigmatization. The acceptance of
disability and the extension of role mainten-
ance mechanisms do not restore the incapaci-
tated individual to full use of his resources
nor to full access to the social and economic
advantages of capacity. The denigration of
minority groups, the disabled, and other
socially disadvantaged persons may be ac-
counted for by the perceived limitations in
their social capacities, rather than by viola-
tions of valued norms. It is also possible that
there are no exemptions for incapacity in
such areas as aesthetic norms.

Stigma has positive functions for the dis-
abled (Goode, 1967:12-14; Lemert, 1967:
48-49), as protection against competitive
demands, as well as negative aspects. Stigma
is, in any case, not a necessary condition of
disability, although it must obviously be
This analysis has examined the conceptu-
alization of disability from the viewpoint of
social process and social control. We have
looked at disability as sets of adaptive re-
sponses to the loss or limitation of role ade-
quacy. The adjustive mechanisms provided
by contingency norms permit exemption
from role requirements and stimulate adap-
tations of behavior to maintain the role rela-
tionships of the disabled person. Legitima-
tion sanctions the efforts of role partners and
control agents to provide alternatives for
the exempted role behavior.

We have also attempted to examine sick
role and deviant behavior as alternative
models or approaches to the concept of dis-
ability. The sick role directs attention away
from the crucial element of legitimation of
incapacity and introduces normative con-
straints which appear neither necessary nor
appropriate to chronic disease and pro-
longed incapacity. By relating disability to
the structure of existing normative relation-
ships and the development of contingency
norms, the adaptive response process avoids
many of the conceptual problems raised by
the sick role. This suggests that the ten-
dency to manufacture roles to account for
contingencies may be misdirected. Disability
behavior may be more parsimoniously de-
scribed by focusing on the adaptive mech-
anisms and responses of the major role re-
lationships. This conceptualization also sug-
gests that more research and theory should
be directed towards the elaboration of the be-
havioral alternatives provided by a small set
of significant role relationships rather than
to the proliferation of inventories of special-
ized roles.

To the extent that the conception of dis-
ability discussed here differentiates disability
from deviance on the basis of recognized in-
capacity and sanctioned deviation, it also
sharpens the conceptualization of deviance
as willful or “capable” behavior susceptible
to control by the individual and therefore
susceptible to manipulation by rewards and
punishments. We have drawn this distinction
as a relatively sharp and unambiguous line
between acceptance and nonacceptance of
incapacity. There are, of course, many cir-
cumstances under which the distinction is
ambiguous and the social responses are am-
bivalent; mental illness, alcoholism and obe-
sity, for example, are particularly suscepti-
ble to variations in interpretation.

There are many areas in which society has
institutionalized ways of neutralizing the
commitment to responsibility and extending
partial legitimation to incapacity. Alterna-
tives such as divorce, bankruptcy, and wel-
fare assistance are premised on the assump-
tion that anomic or deviant responses to
incapacity, regardless of responsibility, are
more disruptive than the contingency al-
ternatives. The analysis of disability behav-
ior, as normalizing role responses, suggests
an orientation towards the study of role
structure and role relationships which focuses
on the situational variatioris that differentiate
deviance and conformity in the process of
social regulation.
DeLamater, J.

1968 “On the nature of deviance.” Social Forces

46 (June) :445-455.
Fisher, Saul H.

1958 “Mechanism of denial in physical disabili-
ties.” AMA Archives of Neurology & Psy-
chiatry 80 (December) :782-784.

Freidson, Eliot

1965 “Disability as social deviance.” Chapter 4
in Marvin B. Sussman, Sociology & Re-
habilitation. Washington, D.C.: American
Sociological Association.

Goffman, Erving

1961 Encounters. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

1963 Stigma. Englewood Cliffs. New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall.

Goode, W. J.

1967 “The Protection of the inept.” American

Sociological Review 32 (February) :5-19.
Gordon, Gerald

1966 Role Theory and Illness. New Haven: Col-
lege and University Press.

Gray, R. M., A. M. Reinhardt and J. R. Ward

1969 “Psychosocial factors involved in the re-
habilitation of persons with cardiovascular
diseases.” Rehabilitation Literature 30 (De-
cember) :354-359.

Gusfield, Joseph R.

1967 “Moral passage: The symbolic process in
public designations of deviance.” Social
Problems 15:2 (fall):175-188.

Gussow, Zachary and George S. Tracy

1968 “Status, ideology and adaptation to stig-
matized illness: A study of leprosy.” Hu-
man Organization 27:4 (Winter) :316-325.

Haber, Lawrence D.

1964 “Some problems of research in disability.”
Pp. 19-26 in Proceedings of the Conference
on Medical Sociology and Disease Control
(ed.) by Gerald Gordon. Chicago: Health
Information Foundation.

1967 “Identifying the disabled: Concepts and
methods in the measurement of disability.”
Social Security Bulletin 30 (December):
17-34,

Hirschfeld, A. H. and R. C. Behan

1963 “The accident process I. Etiological con-
siderations of industrial injuries.” Journal
of the American Medical Association 186:3
(October 19) :113-119,

Irvin, E. A.

1960 “Cardiacs can work.” Journal of Occupa-

tional Health 2:2 (February) :71-75.
Kassenbaum, G. G. and B. O. Baumann

1965 “Dimensions of the sick role in chronic
illness.” Journal of Health and Human Be-
havior 6 (spring):16-27.

Lemert, Edwin M.

1951 Social Pathology. New York: McGraw-
Hill.

1967. Human Deviance, Social Problems, and
Social Control. Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

Levinson, Daniel J.

1959 “Role, personality, and social structure in
the organizational setting.” Journal of Ab-
normal and Social Psychology 58:170-180.
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION.

1. Date of, Filing, December 9, 1970.

Publication, AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW.
Frequency of Issue, bi-monthly.

. Office of Publication, Boyd Printing Company, Inc., 49 Sheridan Avenue,
Albany, New York 12210.

. General Business Offices of the Publishers, 1001 Connecticut Ave., N.W.,
Washington, D.C. 20036.

. Publisher, American Sociological Association, 1001 Connecticut Ave.,
N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036; Editor, Karl F. Schuessler, Department
of Sociology, Sycamore Hall 247, Indiana University, Bloomington, In-
diana 47401; Managing Editor N. J. Demerath III, American Sociological
Association.

7. Owner, American Sociological Association.

Bondholders, none.

. The purpose, function and nonprofit status of this organization and the
exempt status for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during
preceding 12 months.

Circulation (a) average number of copies each issue during preceding
12 months, (b) actual number of copies of single issue published nearest
to filing date:
Total no. printed (a) 20,000 (b) 20,000
Paid circulation (mail subscriptions) (a) 17,758 (b) 18,437
Free distribution (a 25 (b) 25
Total distribution (a) 17,783 (b) 18,462
Office use, etc. (a) 2,217 (b) 1,538
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.

N. J. Demerath IIT
Executive Officer
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION.

1.

3
4.
5,
6.

oon

10.

Date of, Filing, December 9, 1970.
Publication, AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW.
Frequency of Issue, bi-monthly.

. Office of Publication, Boyd Printing Company, Inc., 49 Sheridan Avenue,

Albany, New York 12210.

. General Business Offices of the Publishers, 1001 Connecticut Ave., N.W.,

Washington, D.C. 20036.

. Publisher, American Sociological Association, 1001 Connecticut Ave.,

N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036; Editor, Karl F. Schuessler, Department
of Sociology, Sycamore Hall 247, Indiana University, Bloomington, In-
diana 47401; Managing Editor N. J. Demerath III, American Sociological
Association.

. Owner, American Sociological Association.

Bondholders, none.

. The purpose, function and nonprofit status of this organization and the

exempt status for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during
preceding 12 months.

Circulation (a) average number of copies each issue during preceding
12 months, (b) actual number of copies of single issue published nearest
to filing date:

Total no. printed (a) 20,000 (b) 20,000
Paid circulation (mail subscriptions) (a) 17,758 (b) 18,437
Free distribution (a 25 (b) 25
Total distribution (a) 17,783 (b) 18,462
Office use, etc. (a) 2,217 (b) 1,538

I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.

N. J. Demerath IIT
Executive Officer
