@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089340?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
function indicates that the workplaces
of labor force members are spatially
separated from their residences, in part be-
cause of the differentiated pattern of urban
land use. There is also some evidence of ap-
preciable variation in the degree of work-
residence separation among different com-
ponent groups of the labor force.t
On the basis of previous studies, it may be
expected that two of the major determinants
of the degree of work-residence separation
are the socio-economic level of the worker
and the centralization of the workplace. It
is hypothesized (1) that the degree of work-
residence separation varies directly with the
socio-economic level of the worker, (2) that
the degree of separation is directly related
to the centralization of the workplace, and
(3) that the degree of separation is greatest
for workers of high socio-economic level with
centralized workplaces.
Although the relationships between socio-
economic level, centralization of workplace,
and degree of work-residence separation may

Tis literature on urban structure and

* Revision of a paper read at a meeting of the
Society for Social Research of the University of
Chicago, June, 1953. This research was supported
in part by the U. S. Air Force under Contract
Number AF 33(038)-25630, monitored by the
Human Resources Research Institute. Permission
is granted for reproduction, translation, publication
and disposal in whole and in part by or for the
U.S. Government.

1J. Douglas Carroll, Jr., “Some Aspects of the
Home-Work Relationships of Industrial Workers,”
Land Economics, 25 (November, 1949), pp. 413-22;
Carroll, “The Relation of Homes to Work Places
and the Spatial Pattern of Cities,” Social Forces,
30 (March, 1952), pp. 271-82; Helene M. Conant,
“The Locational Influence of Place of Work on
Place of Residence,” M.A. thesis, University of
Chicago, March, 1952; Otis Dudley Duncan and
Beverly Davis, Nos. 5, 13, 20 in the unpublished
series of Urban Analysis Reports, Chicago Com-
munity Inventory, University of Chicago, 1951-53;
Kate K. Liepmann, The Journey to Work, New
York: Oxford University Press, 1944, Part B,
Chapter II; Leo F. Schnore, “The Separation of
Home and Work: A Problem for Human Ecology,”
Social Forces, 32 (May, 1954), pp. 336-43.
obtain as hypothesized for the total labor
force, they may be modified or reversed for
particular subgroups. The effects of other
demographic and economic factors, includ-
ing color, sex, and duration of employment
with the present establishment, on the rela-
tionships are examined.

Data. The data which the study analyzes
were obtained as a by-product of the Occupa-
tional Mobility Survey, conducted in Janu-
ary and February of 1951 in Chicago.? A
systematic sample of approximately 2,000
households was drawn from the city, and
work history schedules were completed for
each person twenty-five years or older in the
sample households who worked full-time for
pay or in his own business for a month or
more during 1950.

The schedule number permitted identifica-
tion of the census tract of residence. In-
formation on color, sex, income, occupation,
family status, and duration of employment
was obtained directly from the schedules. All
identifying information on current work-
place was examined. The schedule provided
no identifying information on workplace for
self-employed persons; hence, they are ex-
cluded from this analysis. In most cases, the
industry group and the name of the employ-
ing firm were available for wage and salary
workers. The addresses of the employing
establishments were located through tele-
phone directories or published firm listings
and assigned to census tracts by means of a
street address coding guide.

For assignment of a workplace location,
it was necessary that there be a single de-
terminable workplace. Cases for which no
workplace could be assigned are of two types:
(1) a single workplace is assumed to exist
but cannot be located because of inadequa-
cies in the data; (2) the type of industry or
occupation is such that no single workplace
can be assumed to exist. The workplace could
be determined for 1,243 of the 1,813 wage
and salary workers, private and govern-
ment.

Thus, 69 per cent of all wage and salary
workers were assigned a workplace address
and are included in the analysis. There was
considerable variation among industry
groups in the percentage of wage and salary
workers for whom a workplace address could
be determined. Workplaces were located for
94 per cent of the 815 workers in manufac-
turing industries; between 66 and 72 per
cent of those employed in wholesale and
retail trade, finance, insurance, and real
estate, and service industries, but only 19
per cent of the wage and salary workers in
public administration and 16 per cent of
those in transportation, communication, and
other utilities could be assigned a workplace
address.

Linear distance between the centers of the
tract of residence and the tract of work, or
in the case of individuals with workplaces
outside the ctiy limits, between tract of resi-
dence and the center of the suburban town,
was used as the measure of separation. This
measure involves a presumably random er-
ror, in that residence and workplace are
located imprecisely, and a systematic error,
in that linear distance tends to understate
traveling distance. But these errors are
judged not to invalidate the kinds of ,com-
parisons attempted.*
Analysis. The present analysis consists
primarily of comparisons of average work-
residence separation for different compon-
ents of the labor force. Because of the high
percentage of exclusions and the crudeness
of the measurements, it is assumed that the
analysis describes roughly, rather than
measures accurately, relationships of the de-
gree of separation to certain demographic
and socio-economic characteristics of labor
force members.

1. It is hypothesized that the worker’s
socio-economic level is directly related to the
degree of spatial separation of his workplace
and residence. This hypothesis is tested using
occupation and income as indexes of socio-
economic level. The present analysis relates
only to wage and salary workers. Because
there is considerable variation by occupation
group and income level in the percentage of
all workers classified as wage and salary
workers, it is especially important that the
findings be interpreted as representing wage
and salary workers within the occupation or
income group rather than the entire group.

The data in Table 1 indicate that the de-
gree of work-residence separation varies di-
rectly with the occupational level. Major
occupation groups (defined as in the 1950
Census) are listed roughly in order of de-
creasing socio-economic level, and the aver-
age separation ranges from 6.9 for profes-
sionals to 4.0 for laborers. It is of some
interest that in terms of work-residence
separation, sales workers resemble mana-
gerial workers and are strikingly different
from clerical workers.

The relationship between degree of sepa-
ration and occupational level is sharpened
when the data for white wage and salary
workers are examined separately. The range
increases from 2.9 miles to 3.7 miles, with
average separations of 7.0 and 3.3 miles for
professionals and laborers respectively. For
nonwhite wage and salary workers, the range
is only 2.0 miles, and no relationship between
degree of separation and occupational level
is evident.

Using income as an index of socio-economic
level, the observed relationships between
degree of separation and socio-economic

 

mean linear distance. But it is unlikely that this
accounts for the observed difference in work-
residence separation between centralized and de-
centralized workers.
level are similar to those just described.
Average separations of 5.9 and 3.1 miles
are observed for the highest and lowest in-
come groups respectively among both total
and white wage and salary workers. For non-
white workers, the greatest average separa-
tion is observed for the moderate income
group, with both the highest and lowest in-
come groups having average separations
somewhat lower.

Thus, for white wage and salary workers
in Chicago, the degree of work-residence
separation appears to vary directly with
socio-economic level. This direct relationship
also obtains for total workers because of
the preponderance of whites in the Chicago
labor force.

One explanation of the findings is sug-
gested by the differentiated pattern of urban
land use. Insofar as workplaces are located
in industrial or commercial areas, adjacent
residential areas tend to be characterized
by low rents and undesirable housing con-
ditions. The socio-economic level limits the
choice of residential areas; consequently,
the proximity of low rental units to the
workplace may serve as a centripetal force
for low socio-economic level workers. At
the same time, housing conditions may deter
higher socio-economic level workers from
seeking housing near their workplaces.
Given the direct relationship of degree of
separation to socio-economic level and the
concentration of nonwhite wage and salary
workers in the low socio-economic levels, it
would be expected that the average separa-
persons working in the central, predomi-
nantly non-residential areas can not reside
in the work area because of an insufficient
number of available housing units; workers
in less centralized areas are not compelled
to reside outside the work area on the basis
of available housing alone.

The direct relationship between degree of
separation and workplace centralization is
not so clear and consistent as that between
degree of separation and socio-economic
level. Persons working in the Central Busi-
ness District, ie., within approximately one
mile of the intersection of State and Madi-
son streets, have a high degree of separation,
6.5 miles on the average; however, average
separation decreases to 3.4 miles for persons
working in the area immediately adjacent to
that separation will be least for those work-
ing in areas adjacent to this residential area
—in this case, those working in centralized
areas.

The initial hypothesis should be some-
what modified. Work-residence separation is
substantially greater for persons employed
in the Central Business District than for
persons employed outside this area; but no
consistent variation between degree of sepa-
ration and distance from the Central Busi-
ness District is evident. This pattern obtains
for total and white wage and salary workers.
For nonwhite workers, there is no clear rela-
tionship of degree of separation and work-
place centralization. Insofar as the areas of
heavy Negro residential concentration are
somewhat centralized in the larger cities of
the United States, similar findings might
be expected, modified by the degree of cen-
tralization of the Negro residential area.

3. The preceding analyses indicate no
clear relationship of work-residence separa-
tion to workplace centralization and to socio-
economic level for nonwhite workers. How-
ever, there is a positive association of
work-residence separation with workplace
centralization and with socio-economic level
for white workers. Hence, the test of the
third hypothesis is restricted to white wage
and salary workers. Further, it is restricted
to workers in manufacturing industries for
whom complete information on all ecological,
demographic, and economic characteristics is
available. As indicated previously, informa-
tion on all characteristics is available for
a considerably higher percentage of workers
in manufacturing than in any other industry
group, and the number of workers in manu-
facturing is considerably larger than the
number in any other industry group. By re-
stricting the analysis to manufacturing
workers, the differences in completeness of
information by industry group are elimi-
nated, and the number of cases remains
sufficient for detailed cross-classification.

Complete information is available for 639
white wage and salary workers in manufac-
turing industries, or 91 per cent of all such
workers in the sample. The cases are di-
chotomized as follows: (1) By occupational
level, the professional, managerial, clerical,
and sales personnel are classified as white-
collar, and craftsmen, operatives, service
workers, and laborers as manual. The white-
collar group corresponds roughly with the
high socio-economic level and the manual
group with the lower socio-economic level.
(2) By workplace centralization, individuals
are classified as working in the Central Busi-
ness District, or as working outside this
area, The work-residence separation for white
workers in manufacturing, cross-classified by
these two characteristics, is shown in Table
4,
side the C.B.D. falls in the .1 to .05 range
of significance, while the difference between
white-collar workers with workplaces in the
C.B.D. and manual workers with workplaces
outside the C.B.D. is significant at the .001
level. This supports the hypothesis that
workers of high socio-economic level with
centralized workplaces have the greatest
work-residence separation.

Controlling workplace centralization some-
what lessens the difference between the high
andthe low socio-economic groups. Similarly
controlling socio-economic level lessens the
difference between workers with centralized
and with decentralized workplaces. Never-
theless, high socio-economic level and work-
place centralization operate independently
as well as jointly to increase work-residence
separation.

Only a limited comparison for nonwhite
workers in manufacturing is possible because
of their occupational distribution and the
small number of sample cases. However,
within the manual group, the average separa-
tion for individuals working in the C.B.D. is
similar to that for individuals working out-
side the area.

The effects of the additional character-
istics of sex, income, and duration of employ-
ment on work-residence separation are ex-
amined for the sample of white wage and
salary workers in manufacturing. The differ-
ence by sex in average separation is of
negligible size for individuals working in the
C.B.D., 7.3 miles for both males and females
in the white-collar group, 5.8 miles for males
and 5.4 miles for females in the manual
group. However, for white-collar workers
outside the C.B.D. the average separation
for males, 6.2 miles, is significantly greater at
the .01 level than that for females, 3.0 miles.
For manual workers outside the C.B.D., the
average separation for males, 4.0 miles, is
slightly greater than that for females, 3.2
miles.

For both males and females, white-collar
workers employed in the C.B.D. have the
greatest work-residence separation. But the
difference between white-collar workers em-
ployed in the C.B.D. and those employed
outside the area is considerably less for males
than for females, and the difference between
the white-collar group and the manual group
is eliminated for females working outside
the C.B.D.

Having controlled workplace centraliza-
tion, occupational level, and sex, there is
apparently little to be gained by adding the
variable of income. The high income sub-
group within each centralization-occupation-
sex group shows a slight tendency toward
greater separation. However, the correlation
of income with occupation is such that con-
trolling occupation eliminates most of the
variation by income.

It is suggested in the literature that
recently hired employees are likely to reside
at greater distances from their workplaces
than are those who have worked with the
same establishment for a longer period.*
The present data fail to support this hypoth-
esis. The average work-residence separation
for all white male wage and salary workers
in manufacturing is 4.7 miles; for the 15
workers who began their employment with
the current establishment in 1951, the av-
erage separation is 3.4 miles; for the 75 who
began in 1950, the average is 4.0 miles; for
31 who began in 1949, 4.7 miles; and for the
135 workers who began their employment
prior to 1941, the average separation is 4.6
miles,

Apparently any tendency for length of
employment to reduce work-residence separa-
tion is counteracted by factors operating in
the opposite direction. For example, the
preceding analysis has shown that workers of
low socio-economic level have lower work-
residence separation than do those of high
socio-economic level. Only 26 per cent of
the white males who began their employ-
ment in 1951, 1950, or 1949 had a weekly
income of $75 or more, whereas 43 per cent
of all white males in manufacturing had a
weekly income of at least $75. In summary,
having controlled workplace centralization,
socio-economic level, and sex, there is rela-
tively little net variation associated with the
additional variable of duration of employ-
ment.

Variations by Manufacturing Group. Con-
siderable variation obtains among manufac-
turing industry groups in degree of work-
residence separation; for example, the
average separation for all workers in non-
ferrous metals industries is 3.4 miles, for
workers in the food industry 4.7 miles, and
for workers employed in printing and pub-
lishing 5.6 miles.

The more detailed analysis of inter-in-
dustry variations is restricted to the 351
white male wage and salary workers, heads
of primary families, employed in manufactur-
ing industries. This restriction eliminates
possible variation resulting from differences
in race, sex, and family status composition.

The lowest observed separation (3.4 miles)
is for workers in fabricated metals industries.
This average separation is significantly dif-
ferent from that observed for workers in
nonelectrical machinery manufacturing (5.2
miles) at the .05 level, from that for workers
in printing and publishing (5.8 miles) at the
-07 level, and from that for employees in
electrical machinery manufacturing (5.7
miles) at the .10 level. The number of cases
in the sample is rather inadequate for a de-
tailed analysis by manufacturing group;
however, the fact that some of the differences
and the difference between the two groups
in nondurable goods manufacturing is sig-
nificant at the .05 level. Thus, within each
manufacturing group, workers of high socio-
economic level tend to have greater separa-
tion than those of low socio-economic level,
and individuals with centralized workplaces
tend to have greater separation than those
with decentralized workplaces.

Central Business District Workers. Work-
residence separation for C.B.D. workers is
considerably higher than for other workers.
There is, of course, the possibility that the
high degree of separation for C.B.D. work-
ers is a function of the occupational compo-
sition of C.B.D. workplaces, for they are
weighted toward the high occupation levels.
specific separations for all white workers
given in Table 1.

The average work-residence separation for
the group of white C.B.D. workers is 6.8
miles, whereas the average for all white
workers is 4.7 miles. If the occupation-spe-
cific separations of the group working in the
C.B.D. are applied to the occupational dis-
tribution of all white workers, a mean of 6.4
miles is obtained; if the occupation-specific
separations for all white workers are applied
to the occupational distribution of the group
working in the C.B.D., an average separation
of 5.3 miles is obtained. Although extremely
crude and based upon very small numbers
of cases, the analysis clearly indicates that
both the occupational composition and the
Taste 6, Distrrutions oF ToTAL RESIDENT POPULATION AND OF THE RESIDENCES OF CENTRAL
Business Districr WorKERS BY ZONAL DISTANCE FROM THE CENTER OF THE CITY, AND

DIsTRIBUTION OF THE RESENCES OF OTHER WorKERS By ZONAL

DISTANCE FROM THE WORKPLACE

 

 

 

Resident Central Business
Population District Workers Other Workers
Zonal Distance 1951 1916 1951 1916 1951 1916
All zones 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
Within 1 mile 0.7 2.8 1.1 3.8 18.6 35.0
1-1.9 miles 4.4 10.8 3.2 11.4 13.1 22.6
2-2.9 miles 8.1 13.4 4.6 11.8 12.3 13.4
3-3.9 miles 10.5 14.2 8.6 16.2 11.1 11.3
44.9 miles 12.7 16.6 11.6 16.4 10.1 6.8
5-6.9 miles 26.2 26.0 28.0 24.3 16.2 7.0
7 miles or more 37.4 16.2 42.9 16.1 18.6 3.9
both 1916 and 1951. In 1916, the index of
dissimilarity between the zonal distributions
of residences of C.B.D. workers and total
resident population was 3.6, ie., 3.6 per
cent of the residences of C.B.D. workers
would have to be relocated in other zones
to make their zonal distribution identical
with that of the total resident population.
By 1951, the index had increased to 7.7.

In both 1916 and 1951, the distribution of
C.B.D. workers by distance from workplace
differs markedly from the distribution for
other workers. In 1916, nearly three-fifths of
the persons working outside the C.B.D. re-
sided within two miles of the workplace,
whereas only 15 per cent of the C.B.D.
workers lived within two miles of the place
of work. In 1951, nearly one-third of the
persons with decentralized workplaces re-
sided within two miles of the workplace, but
only 4 per cent of the C.B.D. workers resided
that close to their workplace.

Despite the increase in mean separation
and the marked redistribution of resident
population, the residential distribution of
C.B.D. workers has remained very similar to
that of the total population in terms of zonal
distance from the center of the city. At the
same time, the residential distribution of
C.B.D. workers has remained strikingly dif-
ferent from that of other workers in terms
of distance from the workplace.

Summary. The differentiated pattern of
urban land use clearly implies a separation
of workplaces and residences for labor force
members. Lack of adequate data on work-
place and residence for labor force members
in the United States has prevented system-
atic description and measurement of work-
residence separation, although its importance
in the organization of urban areas is rec-
ognized. Data obtained as a by-product of
the Occupational Mobility Survey are used
to test a number of propositions appearing
in the literature for the universe of wage and
salary workers residing in the City of Chicago
in 1951.

The analysis supports the proposition that
substantial variation in degree of separation
obtains among groups comprising the labor
force. Degree of separation varies directly
with socio-economic level. Separation is sub-
stantially greater for individuals working in
the Central Business District than for those
working outside the area. Socio-economic
level and degree of workplace centralization
operate jointly as well as independently to
produce work-residence separation.
The findings are consistent with more
general propositions about the structure of
urban areas. Good housing and preferred
residential sites are seldom found in prox-
imity to industrial and commercial areas.
It would probably be possible to reproduce
approximately the observed patterns of dif-
ferentials in work-residence separation with
a model which assumes that labor force
members will reside in that area nearest
their workplace which is compatible with
their socio-economic level; however, such a
model has not yet been adequately tested.

No clear relationship of degree of separa-
tion to socio-economic level or workplace
centralization is evident for nonwhites. But
the finding is not necessarily inconsistent
with the hypothesis that socio-economic level
and workplace centralization are major de-
terminants of work-residence separation. The
existing pattern of residential segregation
of nonwhites, which permits little flexibility
in residential location, may render them in-
operative.

Comparative data on work-residence sepa-
ration in Chicago for 1916 suggest a per-
sistence of work-residence differentials
through time. Although mean separation in-
creased during the period, the work-residence
separation of Central Business District
workers remained substantially greater than
that of other workers. It seems likely that
successive analyses can ascertain general
relationships between work-residence sepa-
ration and ecological, socio-economic, and
demographic variables.
