@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
HE COMMUNITY utilized as the point

I of departure for this survey of inter-

marriages is Derby, Connecticut, the
smallest in area of the 169 townships in the
state. Its population, according to the United
States Census of 1940, totals 10,287. Located
in the lower Naugatuck Valley eight miles
‘west of New Haven, Derby is an industrial
community noted for its production of tex-
tiles and light metal commodities. Approxi-
mately 32 immigrant groups of the Caucasoid
race are represented there, along with a few
Negroes and Chinese. The pattern of their
arrival was essentially the same as that found
in hundreds of other towns and cities along
the Eastern Seaboard. Six Protestant
churches, two Roman Catholic churches, and
an orthodox Jewish synagogue, as well as
several other churches and synagogues in
neighboring communities serve the religious
needs of the people.

The original Jews in the community ar-
rived from Germany during the late nine-
teenth century. Here they peddled their mer-
chandise from door to door and subsequently
opened clothing, jewelry, and millinery stores
in the central business section of the city as
soon as they had accumulated some capital.
It was not until the turn of the century
that Jews immigrated in numbers sufficient
to constitute an independent religious group.
Most of these later immigrants were ortho-
dox Jews from Russia and Poland; a few
came from Hungary and Rumania, Almost
all of them were merchants, catering to the
needs of the immigrant gentiles whose lan-
guages they spoke. In 1905 the Jews or-
ganized a congregation, hiring the hall of a
fraternal organization for Sabbath and Holy
Day services. Previously they had attended
synagogues in nearby communities or had
formed prayer groups in their own homes.
In 1916, when there were approximately fifty
Jewish families in Derby, plans for the erec-
tion of a synagogue were begun. The build-
ing was completed in 1918. A resident rabbi
was secured, a “Jack-of-all trades” who not
only conducted religious services but also
taught the children, served as cantor, slaugh-
tered poultry and cattle, circumcized the
male children, and married and buried the
adults,

To what extent have these “small town”
Jews intermarried? How does their intermar-
riage incidence compare with the rates of
other communities and areas in Europe and
America?

The Jews of Derby, 110 families in all,
have had a high rate of inmarriage, none
intermarrying in 1929-1930 and only one,
Taste I. Summary oF StupIEs OF THE INCIDENCE OF JEWISH INTERMARRIAGE

 

 

Rate of Intermarriage

 

Student Locale Period P Which ae .
Participants*
Engelman? Switzerland 1888 5-39
Engelman* Switzerland Ig00 6.89
Engelman* Switzerland IgIo 8.84
Engelman* Switzerland 1920- 11.66
Fishberg® Hungary 1895-1904 5-83
Ruppin® Hungary 1907-1908 8.30
Ruppin¢ Hungary 1925 20.46
Ruppin¢ Hungary 1935 24.46
Fishberg# Germany IgOI-1904. 14.72
Fishberg* Germany 1905-1907 17-72
Ruppine Germany IQIO-Ig11 21.36
Drachsler/ Germany I91§ 51.00
Ruppin? Germany 1928 34.96
Ruppin? Germany 1933 43.78
Ruppin? Germany 1934 23.89
Ruppin? Germany 1935 15.46
Ruppin? Russia in Europe 1924-1926 12.73
Ruppin? Lithuania 1931 0.39
Ruppin? Czechoslovakia 1933 20.45
Ruppine Latvia 1933 5.14
Silcox and Fisher* Ontario 1920-1930 5.06
Silcox and Fisher* Quebec 1926-1931 2.99
Silcox and Fisher’ Canada (excl. Quebec) 1920-1931 6.52
Silcox and Fisher’ Canada (all) 1926-1931 4.82
Drachsler* New York City 1908-1912 2.27
Brickneré Cincinnati 1916-1919 3-60
Kennedy* New Haven 1870 0.00
Kennedy* New Haven 1900 1,18
Kennedy* New Haven 1930 2.99
Kennedy* New Haven 1940 5.68
Koenig! Stamford 1938" 7.16
Barron Derby 1929-1930 0.00
Barron Derby 1940 16.67

 

2 “Intermarriage Among Jews in Switzerland, 1880-1920,” American Jour. of Sociology, November, 1928,
Vol. XXXIV, p. 518.

> The Jews: A Study of Race and Environment, New York, The Walter Scott Publishing Co., 1911, p. 197.

© The Jewish Fate and Future, London, The Macmillan Co., 1940, p. 108.

4 Op. cit., p. 197.

* OD. cit., p. 108.

1 Democracy and Assimilation, New York, The Macmillan Co., 1920, p. 126.

2 OP. cit., p. 108.

* Catholics, Jews and Protestants, New York, Harper & Bros., 1934, p. 265.

* Op. cit., p. 128.

i Silcox and Fisher, of. cit., p. 264.

* “Single or Triple Melting-Pot? Intermarriage Trends in New Haven, 1870-1940,” American Jour. of
Sociology, January, 1944, Vol. XLIX, p. 333.

4 “The Socioeconomic Structure of an American Jewish Community,” Jews in a Gentile World, edited by
Isacque Graeber and Steuart Henderson Britt, 1942, Chapter VIII, pp. 235-237.

™ Data were collected in 1938. The years of marriage varied.

"The percentages of intermarriage incidence are shown in terms of each 100 marriages in which Jews
participated. For example, if the Jews in Area A had representatives in 150 marriages, 50 of which were
intermarriages, the percentage of intermarriage incidence was 33.33 per cent. Intermarriage percentages in
other studies were not comparable with percentages for Derby, because different bases were used in the per-
centages. That is, some scholars used the total of marriages as a base, some used inmarriages, and others
used marrying individuals. In order to have all incidences of intermarriage on a comparable level, the
meanings of the percentages of the other studies were translated into a uniform meaning; namely, the cases
of intermarriage per 100 marriages in which Jews participated.
rland
rland
tland
rland
ry
ry
ry
ry
ny
ny
ny
ny
ny
ny
ny
ny

. in Europe
nia
oslovakia
L

io

c
a (excl. Quebec)
a (all)

York City

nati

Taven

 

wt MM MRM RHR eA
a female, in 1940. Local informants asserted
that there have been very few cases in the
last twenty years. Several orthdox Jews of
Derby have recently married conservative
and reformed Jews, most of them residents of
the larger neighboring communities of New
Haven and Bridgeport. The Derby Rabbi,
whose other attitudes were ultra-conserva-
tive, had no objection to these inter-denomi-
national unions, When the writer asked him
if he approved of these marriages, he replied:
“Why not? Jews are Jews, whether orthodox
conservative or reformed. The lines are really
meaningless.”

The premarital relations of Jewish boys
and girls in Derby with gentiles are similar
to some caste relations, especially in regard
to the sex taboo. They afford insight into
the high rate of Jewish endogamy. For ex-
ample, although it is quite common for a
Jewish boy in Derby to have friends of his
own sex among gentiles, it is only rarely that
he will have a gentile “girl friend.’’ One or
two “dates” of this sort are sufficient for
the relationship to become a topic of gossip
in the community. In such cases, word
usually reaches Jewish parents quite rapidly
and they plead with their wayward sons to
“stop bothering with ‘Shikses’ because there
are plenty of fine Jewish girls in town.”

More or less the same is true of Jewish
girls. In fact, it is even more difficult for
them than for unmarried Jewish males to
cross the religious line heterosexually. The
male friends of Jewish girls are very care-
fully checked, more so than in the case of
gentile girls, Whereas Jewish boys are also
closely guarded in this respect, they take ad-
vantage of the wider mobility which is a pre-
rogative of their sex to sow their wild oats
among gentile girls “out of town.” Jewish
girls are notably chaste in their premarital
years, but it is common knowledge in the
community that many if not most single Jew-
ish males who engage in premarital inter-
course resort to “Shikses.”

Two Yiddish rhymes reflecting this situa-
tion are often expressed in Jewish “stag”
groups. One is attributed to the average
chaste Jewish girl whose guiding principle
in premarital sex relations is summed up in
To be sure, endogamy prevails among
Derby Jews. Yet it is rare to find the in-
dividual Derby Jew marrying another Jew
of the same community. In short, there seems
to be a conflict between the taboo against
intermarriage and the almost incestuous re-
pulsion against marriage with members of
the in-group with whom contact has been
intimate and prolonged. This conflict is
resolved by community exogamy combined
with religious endogamy. The same phe-
nomenon was noted by Mandelbaum in
“Urbana,” a neighboring small community.
There, it was pointed out, “the young men
are averse to keeping company with the
local girls and the young women seek their
husbands from other places. A group as
small and compact as is Urbana Jewry
comes to take on some of the aspects of an
extended family. Its members are so
familiar with each other’s history and foibles
that there is little room for romantic in-
terest, Moreover, young men desiring to be
fetter-free, feel themselves enmeshed by
local gossip, if they pay particular attention
to an Urbana girl.”

One fact which is incompatible with this
analysis, however, is that it does not apply
to many other Derby groups, most of whom
practice both religious and community
endogamy. Possibly their larger numbers
provide the answer.
Until late in the nineteenth century,
European Jews inmarried almost entirely,
so that one of their scholars? recently re-
marked that inmarriage “formed the strong-
est bond ... making them into a homoge-
neous ethnic unit, able to show a unique
power of resistance against the assimilating
forces of Christianity and Islam. Even Jews
who have become indifferent to their religion
often remain adverse to marrying outside
their community; this is perhaps the last
remnant of their national consciousness.
They feel that, although they have dropped
the Jewish ritual, they will remain Jews so
long as they and their children intermarry
with Jews, and that only a mixed marriage
would finally separate them from their people.
Indeed, intermarriage, as soon as it appears
on a large scale, marks the end of Judaism.”

From the latter part of the nineteenth
century until the advent of Hitler, Jewish
intermarriage with non-Jews increased
steadily throughout Europe and the United
States. The gradual increase was true only
when all incidences were combined, but not
in each specific country, as Table I
demonstrates. That no necessary pattern of
gradual increase in Jewish intermarriage
exists is further corroborated by the ob-
servation that throughout Jewish history
Jews have intermarried more in prosperous
times than in times of economic depression
and social oppression.’

Generally, in the western European
countries where Jews have been numerically
few and “emancipated” in the sense of en-
joying full civil rights and of practicing a
relatively diluted form of Judaism, they
have intermarried proportionately more and
at a faster rate than Jews elsewhere in
Europe. Jewish women nearly everywhere
have been more conservative than Jewish
men in entering intermarriage.* For example,
the Jews of Switzerland in the course of 32

? Ruppin, of. cit., p. 106.

* Coon, Carleton S., “Have the Jews a Racial
Identity?” Jews in a Gentile World, edited by
Isacque Graeber and Steuart Henderson Britt, 1920,
Chap. I, p. 28.

“Ruppin, op cit., p. 111.
years have more than doubled their rate of
intermarriage. In 1888, the first year for
which statistics are available, they inter-
married in 5.39 of every 100 marriages in
which they participated; two years later,
in 1900, the rate increased to 6.89 per cent.
By 1910 the rate was 8.84 per cent and in
1920 it rose to 11.66 per cent. Both sexes
showed an increasing tendency to intermarry,
but the women, except in 1888 when they
outnumbered the men slightly, constituted
the smaller element of Jews entering inter-
marriage. From 1888 to 1920, the men were
52.1 per cent of the Jews who intermarried
whereas the women supplied 47.9 per cent.®

In Hungary, the Jews over a period of
forty years almost quintupled their inter-
marriage rate, In the period from 1895
to 1904, 5.83 per cent of the marriages in-
volving Jews were intermarriages.® In 1907-
1908 the rate was 8.30 per cent. This in-
creased to 20.46 per cent in 1925 and 24.46
per cent in 1935.”

Scandinavian Jews in the early years of
the twentieth century were only a very small
fraction of the population and they ex-
perienced almost as many intermarriages as
inmarriages. Indeed, in Sweden the number
of Jewish intermarriages exceeded the in-
marriages. In that country the rabbis pro-
tested so violently that they refused to
officiate at the intermarriage ceremonies or to
circumcize the children of intermarried
couples. However, the Jewish laymen author-
ized several physicians to perform the cir-
cumcisions.®

In France and Italy, where Jews also
constituted a very small minority and were
treated tolerantly, intermarriages prevailed.
Almost all Jewish families in Italy had
Christian relatives through intermarriages.®
This process was terminated by Italian
legislation in 1938 which prohibited inter-
marriages between Christians and Jews.
English Jews of Spanish and Portuguese
origin have almost disappeared through inter-
marriage with Christians, although the
recent immigrant Jew in England of the
Orthodox faith has remained relatively
steadfast in endogamy.™

Of special interest is the pattern of in-
cidence in Germany. For the first ten years
after the legalization of intermarriages in
Prussia in 1875, only 9.14 per cent of the
marriages in which Jews participated were
intermarriages.12 This increased to 14.72
per cent in 1901-1904, 17.72 per cent in
1905-1907," 21.36 per cent in 1910-1911,'*
and 51.00 per cent in 1915.15 After the
World War, however, the intermarriage rate
declined considerably, the rate being 34.96
per cent in 1928 and 43.78 per cent in
1933. The coming to power of Hitler and
the enactment of the Nuremberg Laws
which included restrictions against intermar-
riage were responsible for another decline
in the ensuing years, the rates being 23.89
per cent in 1934 and 15.46 per cent in
1935.18

Czechoslovakia in 1933 had a Jewish
intermarriage rate of 20.45 per cent, but in
Eastern Europe, except in Soviet Russia,
intermarriages by Jews who are mostly
Orthodox never reached large proportions.
Lithuanian Jews in 1931 had a rate of only
0.39 per cent and Latvian Jews a rate of
5.14 per cent, Jews in European Russia
were affected by emancipating influences of
the Revolution to the extent of having an
intermarriage rate of 12.73 per cent in
1924-19261"
French Catholic cooperation with Orthodox
Jews in aversion to intermarriage and
stringency of regulation, In Ontario during
the period 1920-1930, the rate was 5.06
per cent; in Quebec during the years 1926-
1931, the rate was 2.99 per cent; in Canada,
excluding Quebec, from 1920 through 1931,
6.52 per cent of the marriages participated
in by Jews were intermarriages. In all
Canada during the period 1926-1931 the
rate was 4.82 per cent. The year-by-year
rates in the above mentioned places and
periods of Canada did not show a pattern
of increase, which is further evidence against
the alleged existence of an inevitable trend
in that direction.*® Indeed, there was some
indication of a generally diminishing rate
of Jewish intermarriage. Silcox and Fisher
not only discount the theory that intermar-
riage must progressively increase, but they
also claim that in the case of the Jews at
least, there should be a trend in the opposi-
tion direction. In Canada, they pointed out,
“there does tend to be a hardening of
Jewish communalism as the group is longer
domiciled, and after the second generation
has broken loose for a time, it tends to find
its life more largely within its own cultural
group. Indeed, there is evidence that a very
large proportion of the intermarriage which
takes place concerns Orthodox Jews; as the
Jew becomes successful, he is apt to attach
himself to the liberal synagogue and finds
there a social status more acceptable than
he may discover either outside of Judaism
or in Orthodox Judaism. He then finds his
friends and his mates in that circle.’”°
Jewish males in Canada, as elsewhere, have
been found to intermarry more frequently
than the women, despite the balanced sex
ratio.”

During the colonial period in what is now
the United States, Jews intermarried at a
higher rate than they have ever since that
time, probably because of the scarcity of
Jewish women.”! The first Jewish inter-

* Silcox and Fisher, of. cit., p. 265.
* Ibid., p. 263.

» Ibid., p. 266.

* Ibid., pp. 265-266.
marriage on record occurred in 1660 when
a well-known Jewish doctor in Maryland,
Jacob Lumbrozo, took a Christian wife.?*
The Jewish pioneers who lived in Kentucky
before 1836 disappeared through inter-
marriage, “the descendants of the early
settlers . . . known only by their Jewish
family names and their oriental features.’”?*
Jewish families in New York, Pennsylvania,
Connecticut, and Massachusetts all inter-
married extensively in pre-Revolutionary
times, thus accounting in large part for the
virtual disappearance of the Sephardic
Jews in America.2* Many Sephardic Jews
who have gained prominence in American
public affairs since the Civil War have
married Christians.?®

The German Jews who followed the
Sephardic Jews to America likewise began
to intermarry very frequently after a number
of years of residence, more so in the south-
ern and western states where they were few
in number than in the eastern states.”*

The third wave of immigrant Jews who
came from Eastern Europe have not as yet
intermarried with gentiles to the extent that
their preceding co-religionists have. Indeed,
the three divisions of Jews in the United
States, until recently, married very little
with one another, the earlier arrivals scorn-
ing the later ones as crude, superstitious and
economically indigent, and the latter despis-
ing the former as snobs and _ religious
renegades.”’ As recently as 1925, one student
of immigrant groups®® asserted that “inter-
marriage between a Sephardic Jew and a
Russian Jew, for instance, is as rare, if not
rarer, than intermarriage between Jew and
gentile.” Even within each of these divisions
of Jews there was at first aversion to mar-
riage with some of the  sub-divisions.
Bavarian Jews hesitated to marry with those
German Jews who came from the area near
the Polish border, derisively labelled “Pol-
lacks.” The Russian Jew looked down on the
Polish and Galician Jews and refused to
marry them or to permit his children to
do so.”® Although these intra-Jewish barriers
to marriage have largely disappeared in
. recent times, first generation Jewish parents
may still go through the motions of ex-
pressions of embarrassment when their
children marry the sons and daughters of a
ridiculed sub-group.

The Eastern European Jews, by reason of
their overwhelming numerical superiority
over other Jews, have been the main subject
of intermarriage statistics during the last
thirty years. In New York City during the
years 1908-1912 only 2.27 per cent of the
marriages involving Jews were intermar-
riages. Of all groups Jews and Negroes
ranked lowest in intermarriage percentages.
German and French Jews, the nearest to
Gentiles in cultural traits, had the highest
intermarriage rates of all Jews. Next in
rank were the Jews from Hungary and
Holland, and last of all those from Eastern
Europe.2° Smaller Jewish communities in
the United States whose intermarriage
records are available also show low inci-
dences. According to Rabbi Brickner’s analy-
sis of Jewish marriages in Cincinnati between
1916 and 1919, only 3.60 per cent of the
cases were intermarriages.*t In New Haven
statistics are available beginning in 1870
when no Jewish intermarriages took place.
In 1900 the rate was 1.18 per cent; in 1930,
2.99 per cent of Jewish marriages were inter-
marriages; and in 1940 the rate was 5.68
per cent.3? In Stamford in 1938, 7.16 per
cent of the Jewish marriages functioning at
the time, regardless of the years of their

Broun, Heywood, and Britt, George, Chris-
tians Only, N.Y., The Vanguard Press, 1931, pp.
299-300.

Drachsler, op. cit., pp. 121-124.

* Silcox and Fisher, of. cit., p. 264.

= Kennedy, op. cit., p. 333.
consummation, were intermarriages. In the
overwhelming majority of these intermar-
riage cases, 40 out of 59, the Jewish partners
were male.** In “Buna,” another community
studied recently, Jewish males were also
found to be more likely to intermarry than
Jewish females. However, in the higher in-
come brackets and among the Reformed
Jews, the number of Jewish women entering
intermarriage was proportionately higher.?+

Although the Burlington study compiled
no data about the intermarriage incidence of
both sexes among the Jews, it did reveal that
of the 180 Jewish male householders in the
community whose wives were living, only
seven had intermarried.*® This was the lowest
intermarriage rate of all groups in Burling-
ton. In attitude, too, Burlington Jews were
very conservative, for 53 of the 57 persons
interviewed were of the opinion that Jews
should not intermarry, their main reasons
being the dangers of assimilation, family
conflict and child disorganization that would
ensue.*¢

Two students of Jewish intermarriage have
attempted to define the social psychological
types of Jews who intermarry, using terms
suggested by University of Chicago sociolo-
gists, especially Park and Miller,5’ and
correlating them with W. I. Thomas’ “four
wishes.” The first attempt, by Reuben B.
Resnik,** classified intermarrying Jews in
four types: (1) the emancipated person who
has freed himself from the religious influence
of Judaism and who thus acquires a greater
tendency to intermarry; (2) the rebellious
person who deliberately intermarries in order
to remove his Jewish identity; (3) the de-
tached person who has broken away from
the the Jewish primary group, thus experienc-

ar-
ers
ity
Iso
an
in-
ed
ing
p34
led
of
nat
the
aly
est

ere
ns
ws
ns
ily
ld

ie
cal
ms
lo-

ing a weakening of the old restrictions
against intermarriage; and (4) the ad-
venturous person who looks at marriage as a
new experience and does not care about the
identity of his spouse. No type is pure, each
having some characteristics of the other.
The types are correlated with “the four
wishes,” according to Resnik, as follows:*®

“We see in the desire for new experience the
adventurous person seeking a mate for a new
thrill. The cultural background and other factors
may influence his choice but do not in any
vital way appear to motivate his decision. In
the desire for security we see, for example, Jews
in some cases marrying non-Jews because the
former seem to feel a greater social security
when they are accepted in marriage by members
of the non-Jewish group. The desire for response
is clearly brought out by the sex factor that
enters into the decision of one mate to choose
another regardless of the fact that that person
has or has not the same background. The desire
for recognition takes form in the devices for
securing position and distinction in the eyes of
the social group and, as a result, an enviable
and advantageous social status. This wish in
marriage is exemplified by the rich Jews of
France intermarrying with some of the decadent
aristocracy of that country.”
still nominally a member of the subordinate
Jewish group, intermarries in order to raise
his status or that of his children to that of
the dominant group; and (4) the ac-
culturated person, who having become
“Americanized” and having assumed Gentile
standards, intermarries because no one
among his own Jewish group is acceptable
according to his newly acquired standards.
These concepts and types appear to have
little value because they overlap consider-
ably. Furthermore, they are nebulous to the
extent that they may be used in classifying
almost any individual, whether he inmarries
or intermarries, in one or more types. The
writer fails to see where any patterns or
types of intermarrying individuals exist,
either among Jews or any other groups.
incidence, It varies in time and place accord-
ing to the fluctuations of social conditions.

There is endogamous strength in numbers.
However, unlike some other numerically
small religious groups in Derby, such as the
Greek Orthodox and Greek Catholics, the
Jewish rate of intermarriage has been low.
Two explanations to account for this dis-
crepancy are the following:

1. The Jews are heavily concentrated in
the merchant and professional economic
classes, whereas the Greek Orthodox and
Greek Catholics are recent immigrants from
Peasant Europe and unskilled and semi-
skilled laborers, A higher economic status
provides the Jews with horizontal mobility
to the larger neighboring Jewish com-
munities, permitting them to overcome the
handicap of small numbers.

2. The longer, more varied history of
migration by the Jews, and their centuries
of existence as a minority in proximity to
gentile majorities enabled them to develop
attitudes and techniques of intermarriage
resistance long before their arrival in
America.
