American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Do employees in large organizations receive different economic and noneco-
nomic job rewards than do employees in small organizations? If so, what
explains the relationship between organization size and job rewards? We ex-
amine these questions using a recent nationally representative data set that
provides information on organizations and their employees in the United
States. We find that employees in large organizations have higher earnings,
more fringe benefits and opportunities for promotion, but less autonomy on
the job than do workers employed by small organizations. Our theoretical
framework identifies several possible reasons for the relationship between
organization size and job rewards, including industrial, geographic, organi-
zational, and individual variables. Whether a firm has internal labor markets
is the correlate of organization size most consistently related to job rewards.
gap between stratification and organization
theories by explanations of socioeconomic
achievement that “bring the boss back in”
(Stolzenberg 1978). As Villemez and Bridges
(1988) put it, “[T]he size-of-employer effect
lies precisely on the interstices between
stratification and organizational theory, and
its elaboration is essential to bridging that
crevice” (p. 237).

Despite the vast amount of research on the
correlates of organization size, we know rela-
tively little about how and why size is related
to various stratification outcomes. Size is
generally used as a proxy for other more
theoretically relevant variables that are usu-
ally poorly specified. Kimberly’s (1976) de-
scriptions of size as a “theoretical wasteland”
and as the sociologist’s “black box” are un-
fortunately still accurate. Moreover, only a
few studies have tried to assess the “total
package” of rewards associated with work-
ing for large as opposed to small employers
(Brown, Hamilton, and Medoff 1990; see
also Harrison 1994). Thus, although the posi-
tive relationship between size and earnings
is established, at least for the United States
(Lester 1967; Stolzenberg 1978; Bailey and
Schwenk 1980; Mellow 1982; Hodson 1984;
Weiss and Landau 1984; Evans and Leighton
1988; Villemez and Bridges 1988; Brown
and Medoff 1989; Kalleberg and Van Buren
Our review of the literature identified at least
seven clusters of variables that may explain
why employees of large as opposed to small
organizations differ in their earnings, fringe
benefits, promotion opportunities, and au-
tonomy. These sets of concepts include: (1)
product market characteristics, (2) labor mar-
ket characteristics, (3) relations between the
organization and its institutional environ-
ment, (4) structure of the organization, (5)
unionization, (6) job characteristics, and (7)
quality of the labor force. Previous research
has not shown any of these sets of variables
to be a clearly superior explanation of the re-
lationship between size and economic and
noneconomic job rewards. Moreover, these
sets of variables are neither mutually exclu-
sive nor competing explanations—all sets of
variables may help account for the relation-
ship between size and a particular job reward.

Our theoretical model integrates these ex-
planatory concepts with regard to their rela-
tionships to organization size, and this causal
model structures our analysis. Many of these
concepts cannot be readily ordered in a time
sequence because they are reciprocally re-
lated (Blau and Schoenherr 1971:27). Our
model considers some correlates to be exog-
enous to size because they are part of the
organization’s environment. These exog-
enous correlates include characteristics of
the product and labor markets as well as in-
stitutional forces that may influence both
size and job rewards, thereby producing a
spurious association between size and job re-
wards. Also exogenous to size in an indi-
vidual-level model are employee attributes
A popular theme among labor economists is
that large organizations tend to be found in
highly concentrated industries. Large organi-
zations in concentrated product markets have
greater market power and hence higher “ex-
cess” profits. They are also more likely to be
capital intensive. Profitability and capital in-
tensity are correlated with concentration, and
may help explain why large organizations
tend to pay high wages and provide better
fringe benefits (they may not provide greater
opportunities for advancement or autonomy)
(Weiss 1966; Averitt 1968; Mellow 1982;
DiPrete 1990). Sociologists in the dual
economy/economic segmentation traditions
echo this argument; they often use number
of employees (and its correlates like assets
and capital intensity) as a criterion for divid-
ing the economy into core and periphery eco-
nomic sectors. However, dual economy re-
search has not convincingly explained why
large organizations are persuaded to share
their high profits with their workers
(Sgrensen 1983).
ing to the paucity of information on organi-
zations’ hiring practices. An indirect test
might assume that large organizations in
areas with low unemployment rates are espe-
cially likely to experience a labor shortage.
A labor shortage could encourage employers
to pay higher wages and provide more fringe
benefits; it also could motivate them to re-
tain valued employees by establishing inter-
nal labor markets and providing more oppor-
tunities for promotion (Sengenberger 1981).

Another explanation related to labor mar-
kets rests on the assumption that small manu-
facturing establishments are more likely than
large establishments to be located in small
communities (Lester 1967). Thus, employees
of small establishments could have fewer op-
portunities for alternative employment than
those employed by large organizations in
large, high-paying labor markets. Differences
in earnings by size of organization could thus
reflect size-of-place differences. However,
Brown and Medoff (1989) found little sup-
port for the argument that the relationship
between size and earnings varies between
metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas (also
see Bailey and Schwenk 1980). Large orga-
nizations in urban areas may also, ceteris
paribus, provide more opportunities for inter-
nal advancement in order to motivate em-
ployees to remain with the firm rather than
seek one of the relatively more plentiful jobs
in large geographic areas.
Complexity/differentiation. Large organiza-
tions are more complex and exhibit greater
horizontal and vertical differentiation com-
pared to small organizations (Blau and
Schoenherr 1971; Child 1973). Greater dif-
ferentiation, in turn, is associated, ceteris
paribus, with more opportunities for job mo-
bility and career advancement because there
are more slots within the organization
(Edwards 1979). On the other hand, high
complexity and differentiation create a de-
tailed division of labor characterized by spe-
cialization. The interdependence that accom-
panies such specialization limits an indi-
vidual employee’s autonomy because his or
her actions must coordinate to a substantial
degree with actions of other employees. It is
unclear whether differences in complexity
and differentiation produce differences in
wages or fringe benefits.

Formalization. Large organizations often
have more formalized relations with their
employees (Child 1973). Large Japanese-
style “welfare corporatist” organizations, in
particular, have high levels of formalization
and fringe benefits (Lincoln and Kalleberg
1990). By contrast, formal rules and proce-
dures should decrease employee autonomy
and limit employee discretion; this is consis-
tent with the common view that employment
in large bureaucratic organizations is “alien-
ating” (Lincoln and Kalleberg 1990). The ef-
fect of formalization on earnings is difficult
to anticipate: Although some writers suggest
that formalization may enhance earnings
(Garen 1985; Stolzenberg 1978; Villemez
and: Bridges 1988), formalization may in-
stead be associated with low earnings if it
leads to job simplification. These offsetting
expectations underscore the need to control
for the skill level of occupations within the
establishment because the organization’s oc-
cupational mix may account for any effect of
formalization on earnings.
“Firm internal labor markets.” Large or-
ganizations are also more likely to have
“firm internal labor markets” (FILMs) (Ville-
mez and Bridges 1988; Brown and Medoff
1989; Van Buren 1992). FILMs are job lad-
ders characterized by the progressive devel-
opment of skill and knowledge. These job
ladders provide opportunities for training
and skill acquisition, particularly firm-spe-
cific skills. The tendency of large organiza-
tions to have FILMs suggests that employees
in these firms may have greater chances of
promotion and career advancement. More-
over, these employees are more likely to re-
ceive more fringe benefits because they have
longer tenure with their employers.

The relationships between FILMs and
other job rewards are less clear. With regard
to economic rewards, there are reasons to ex-
pect a negative relationship between internal
labor markets and earnings. If working in an
organization with FILMs is associated with
more fringe benefits and promotion opportu-
nities, then employees should be more will-
ing to work for lower wages than would
workers who are not in a FILM. Employers
with an internal labor market should also
have less need to pay “efficiency wages” and
raise earnings above the market rate. But
there are reasons to expect a positive rela-
tionship between FILMs and earnings. An
institutional reason is that high wages may
reflect a firm’s strategy for establishing a fa-
vorable position and image in the labor mar-
ket. A positive relationship may also be spu-
rious: Organizations with FILMs may face
less competition in their product markets or
secure higher profits for some other reason
and thus pay high wages.

Regarding job autonomy, we might expect
the interdependent nature of jobs in FILMs to
limit the ability of individuals to exercise dis-
cretion. On the other hand, employers often
develop FILMs for highly skilled jobs if they
cannot rely on behavior control mechanisms.
Thus, an employer may allow workers to ex-
ercise autonomy and discretion in order to
motivate them to learn difficult tasks and pass
on their skills to coworkers.
Jobs in large organizations are more likely to
require high skill levels because these em-
ployers invest more in firm-specific training.
Firms may want more qualified workers in
order to reduce monitoring costs (Oi 1983).
Large establishments have more capital-in-
tensive production processes and more spe-
cialized divisions of labor that require high
skill levels (Hamermesh 1980; Mellow
1982). High skill levels should thus be asso-
ciated with higher earnings and greater au-
tonomy.

Another job characteristic that may be re-
lated to size is the extent to which output can
be measured. Oi’s (1983) explanation of the
size/earnings relationship assumed that large
employers sought to reduce high monitoring
costs by hiring better qualified workers. A
related argument also assumes that monitor-
ing costs are higher in large organizations;
instead of hiring more qualified workers, this
view suggests that large employers pay more
because they are less able to accurately judge
their workers’ productivity. The wage premi-
ums paid by large employers thus result from
imperfect information (Mellow 1982; Garen
1985). Brown and Medoff (1989) questioned
this argument by showing that the size/earn-
ings relationship held up, even among piece-
rate workers, a group for whom large employ-
ers have monitoring disadvantages. Difficul-
ties in measuring a job’s output should also
enhance autonomy because the lack of mea-
Large organizations tend to have high qual-
ity labor forces. This may also help explain
the relationship between organization size
and job rewards. Employees of large organi-
zations may earn more, receive better fringe
benefits, and have more opportunities for ad-
vancement and autonomy because they are
“better” workers than employees in small or-
ganizations. Alternatively, large organiza-
tions may attract high quality workers be-
cause they provide better job rewards. Sort-
ing and selection mechanisms channel high
quality workers to large organizations (Evans
and Leighton 1988). Some indicators of la-
bor quality are established prior to labor
force entry (e.g., education, gender, race),
and we regard them as exogenous variables
in our individual-level models. Other indica-
tors (e.g., firm-specific experience) are ac-
quired after entry and may depend on orga-
nization size. Large organizations encourage
long-term employment, which enhances la-
bor quality through training, socialization,
and experience.

Brown and Medoff (1989) found that la-
bor force quality accounted for about one-
half of the size-earnings relationship in sev-
eral data sets. Evans and Leighton (1988)
found that large firms had more highly edu-
cated workers, but found no evidence that
pay premiums in large organizations were a
reward for employees’ greater productivity.
In both studies, the relationship between size
and earnings persisted after labor quality was
controlled.
between organization size and job rewards.
Individual-level data are usually not supple-
mented with detailed information on employ-
ers. Studies that include data on both em-
ployees and their employers (Hodson 1984;
Villemez and Bridges 1988) have lacked
many of the organizational variables we have
identified. Our data set consists of informa-
tion on a heterogeneous sample of organiza-
tions, from the 1991 National Organizations
Survey (NOS), and on their employees, from
the 1991 General Social Survey (GSS). The
GSS is administered by the National Opin-
ion Research Center to an area probability
sample that is representative of the noninsti-
tutionalized U.S. adult population.

The 1991 GSS asked employed individu-
als about their jobs and the name, address,
and phone number of the place where they
were employed. If their spouse was em-
ployed, the same information was obtained.
The GSS sample yielded 1,427 establish-
ments based on 912 respondents and 515
spouses. The 1991 NOS then interviewed
personnel managers in these organizations
about their human resource policies and
practices, the structure of their organization,
and so on. Usable information was not ob-
tained on 300 organizations because of ineli-
gibility (e.g., gone out of business), or be-
cause of refusals or inadequate reports by
GSS respondents. Of the remaining 1,127 es-
tablishments, interviews were completed for
727, yielding a response rate of 64.5 percent.
Typically, informants were personnel direc-
tors, owners, or chief managers. To this data
set, we added information on the industry of
each organization and on the counties in
which GSS respondents resided. We re-
stricted our analysis to GSS respondents be-
cause data for spouses were missing on all
job rewards except earnings.!
number of employees (full-time and part-
time combined), an approach consistent with
most previous studies. Number of employees
is the most relevant measure of size for
studying issues involving human resources,
such as the correlates of job rewards as well
as personnel policies and practices. The
number of persons employed by an organi-
zation also tends to be highly correlated with
other aspects of size, such as economic scale,
assets, sales, profits, volume of inputs/out-
puts, and other financial indicators. We use
the natural logarithm of the number of em-
ployees. The log transformation captures cur-
vilinearity between a unit change in number
of employees and the dependent variables
(Kimberly 1976:583-84).

Our analysis distinguishes between num-
ber of employees in the establishment and
size of the firm. These variables are, of
course, identical for single-establishment
firms, but differ for firms that consist of
more than one establishment. Most previous
studies have focused on the relationship be-
tween establishment size and job rewards be-
cause data on firm size are frequently un-
available (Hamermesh 1980; Stolzenberg
1978). Studies including establishment size
and firm size have generally found that each
size measure has an independent effect on
earnings (Mellow 1982; Villemez and
Bridges 1988; Brown and Medoff 1989).
However, Brown and Medoff (1989) found
that the effect of company (firm) size on
wages was weaker than was that of establish-
ment size. Dunn (1980) reported that the ef-
fect of plant size on wages was not signifi-
cant net of firm size (which was statistically
significant). Evans and Leighton (1988)
found that establishment size had no inde-
pendent effect on wages except for firms
with more than 1,000 employees.? When
fringe benefits are added to wages to obtain
a more complete measure of compensation,
the effect of firm size (and, less so, establish-
ment size) increases (Mellow 1982). Dunn
(1980) found that nonpecuniary job benefits
were lower in large establishments, but that
the value of nonpecuniary benefits was gen-
erally higher in large firms.

It may not be an organization’s size per se
that is salient for stratification outcomes, but
rather its size relative to other organizations
in its industry. For example, the smallest es-
tablishment in the auto industry might be in
a precarious financial position and be unable
to pay high wages, yet this organization
would be much larger than the typical orga-
nization in the personal services industry.
Our models control for relative size by in-
cluding the average establishment size in the
organization’s industry.

Table 1 presents the distribution of our
NOS/GSS sample by establishment size and
firm size. Multiple-establishment firms are
more prevalent than independent companies
in this sample. Large organizations are over-
represented, reflecting the fact that organiza-
tions in the NOS were selected with a prob-
ability proportional to their size (i.e., large
organizations have more employees, so the
chances are greater that an employee of a
large organization would fall in the GSS
sample). Because individuals are the units of
analysis in this paper, we present unweighted
estimates of the parameters in our models.
Table 1. Distribution of Organizations by Number of Employees: NOS/GSS Sample (GSS respon-

dents only), 1991

 

 

Single-Establishment

Multiple-Establishment Organizations

 

 

Organizations Establishment Firm
Number of Employees N Percent N Percent N Percent
1-9 85 39.0 24 9.1 1 4
10-49 57 26.1 61 23.1 3 1.3
alpha = .89) is the proportion of six “per-
sonal” fringe benefits (medical, dental, life
insurance, sick leave, maternity leave, and
pension) provided by the organization that
the respondent actually received.?

Promotion opportunities. Our measure
(mean = 2.31; S.D. = 1.18) is the GSS
respondent’s perceived likelihood of ad-
vancement to a higher position with the
present employer in the next five years (1 =
not very likely, 4 = very likely).

Autonomy. The difficulty of measuring an
intangible benefit like autonomy has led
some researchers (Brown et al. 1990) to use
proxies like tenure and quit rates. We mea-
sure autonomy directly (mean = 2.95; S.D. =
79; Cronbach’s alpha = .83), as the mean of
four items: the extent to which the respon-
dent can work independently, has a lot of say
over what happens on the job, can take part
in making decisions, and is not closely su-
pervised. Values on each item range from 1
= “not at all true” to 4 = “very true.”
Table 2. Zero-Order Correlations between Independent Variables and Measures of Organization
Size and Job Rewards: NOS/GSS Sample, 1991

 

 

Organization Size Job Rewards

 

Establish- Firm Fringe — Promo- Auto-
Independent Variable ment Size Size* Earnings Benefits tions nomy
Large establishments (but not large firms, in
the case of multiple-establishment firms) are
more likely to be influenced by other institu-
tions. The number of fringe benefits (posi-
tively) and autonomy (negatively) are the
only job rewards that are significantly corre-
lated with our measure of institutional influ-
Large establishments and large firms are not
significantly more likely to employ highly
educated persons. Years of school completed
is positively related to all job rewards except
perceived promotion opportunities. The
respondent’s gender is unrelated to establish-
ment size or firm size (size is also unrelated
to the percentage of women in the organiza-
tion). White respondents were less likely to
be found in large establishments. (By con-
trast, Brown et al. [1990:16] found that firms
with more than 500 employees had a smaller
percentage of women than did small firms
[41 percent to 46 percent]; while the percent-
age of Whites was about the same in small
firms and large firms.) White respondents
had greater autonomy than did nonwhites,
but there is no significant relationship of race
with the other job rewards. Women respon-
dents earned less and had less job autonomy
than did male respondents (Villemez and
Bridges 1988).
Establishment size is unrelated to all of the
job characteristics except occupational pres-
tige score (to which it is positively related).
The output of workers is more difficult to
measure in large multiple-establishment
firms. Respondents’ occupation-specific
training time, occupational prestige, and
measurability of worker output are positively
related to all job rewards except future pro-
motion opportunities. Supervisors obtain
higher earnings and more autonomy (but not
more fringe benefits or promotion opportu-
nities) than do nonsupervisors.
Table 3. Unstandardized OLS Coefficients for Regressions of Respondent’s Earnings (Logged) on
Selected Independent Variables: NOS/GSS Sample, 1991

 

 

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5
Independent Variable Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E.
R*(adjusted) 057 310 320 -336 443

 

Note: Numbers in parentheses are standard errors, N = 414 for all models.
*p <.05 “p< 01 *“** 5 < 001 (two-tailed tests)
and firm size.> Model 2 adds employee char-
acteristics and several control variables
(hours worked in the earnings analysis and
self-employment status) to Model 1. Model
3 adds the exogenous variables associated
with the organization’s environment to
Model 2. Model 4 adds the organization vari-
ables that may mediate the relationship be-
tween organization size and job rewards, and
Model 5 adds the remaining individual-level
intervening variables. We excluded from the
analysis cases that had missing data on ei-
ther organization size or a job reward mea-
sure; we substituted means for missing data
on the other variables.”

Regression diagnostics (not reported) re-
vealed heteroscedastic error variances in our
models. These could produce inefficient es-
timates of the standard errors that could pro-
duce large t-statistics and lead to inappropri-
ate conclusions as to the significance of co-
efficients. Logging our size measures some-
what alleviates the problem of nonconstant
variances. In addition, we experimented with
various methods of modeling the hetero-
scedasticity (Fox 1991), but we were unable
to remove it entirely.8 To minimize the im-
occupations in the organization (the GSS
respondent’s occupation, managers, and the
“core” occupation defined as the occupation most
directly involved with producing the organ-
ization’s main good or service). These data en-
abled us to estimate the variance in earnings in
the organization. We used this information to
weight each observation by the inverse of the
standard deviation of earnings in the organiza-
tion. This procedure gives less weight to large es-
tablishments because there is greater variation in
earnings in large organizations. The pattern of re-
sults produced by this analysis (not shown) did
not differ substantially from the results reported
in Table 3.

2 We replicated the analyses reported in Table
3 using two alternative measures of earnings ob-
tained from the NOS: the modal annual earnings
of employees in the organization who had the
same occupation as the GSS respondent, and the
mean modal earnings in the organization (com-
puted as the average of the modal earnings in
three occupations—the GSS respondent’s occu-
pation, the “core” occupation, and managers).
The results using these measures were similar to
those presented in Table 3, although the effect of
establishment size on earnings remained signifi-
cant in all models.

!0 Firm size was more strongly related to earn-
ings (p < .05) in manufacturing industries than it
Table 4. Unstandardized OLS Coefficients for Regressions of Fringe Benefits on Selected Indepen-
dent Variables: NOS/GSS Sample, 1991

 

 

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5
Independent Variable Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E.
R?(adjusted) 359 390 432 449 559

 

Note: Numbers in parentheses are standard errors; N = 438 for all models.
“p< .05 “ps.01 “by <.001 (two-tailed tests)
Table 4 reports results for the determinants
of fringe benefits. Large establishments pro-
vide more fringe benefits. For single-estab-
lishment firms, the effect of establishment
size (logged) on fringe benefits follows an
inverse U-shaped pattern; fringe benefits in-
crease positively with establishment size,
from small up through medium-sized estab-
lishments, then they drop off among the larg-
est establishments. For multiple-establish-
ment firms, however, firm size, not establish-
ment size, is positively and monotonically
associated with fringe benefits, perhaps be-
cause most fringe benefits are distributed
similarly to all units of a firm (Brown et al.
1990). The effects of establishment size and
firm size on fringe benefits are only partly
accounted for by the explanatory variables
(compare Model 5 with Models 1 and 2).
Our indicator of product markets (concen-
tration of industry) and our institutional in-
fluence scale are unrelated to fringe benefits.
Size of county is negatively related to fringe
benefits, while employees in government or-
ganizations and nonprofit organizations re-
ceive more fringe benefits than do employ-
ees in profit-making organizations. Formal-
ization, while not significant, is positively
related to fringe benefits (Models 4 and 5),
which provides some support for the charac-
Table 5 suggests that there are more promo-
tion opportunities in large establishments (in
single-establishment firms). Among mul-
tiple-establishment firms, there is no differ-
ence in promotion opportunities among es-
tablishments or firms of different sizes. Only
the fact that these firms have more than one
establishment appears to be associated with
greater promotion chances. It may be that
most of the mobility in these firms is across
establishments rather than within establish-
ments. The relationship between establish-
ment size and promotion opportunity re-
mains fairly strong even after explanatory
variables are introduced (Models 3 through
5). The net effect of establishment size re-
mains significant after we control for the
presence of internal labor markets, which is,
as expected, a significant and strong predic-
tor of the perceived likelihood of promotion.

Government employees are more likely to
perceive opportunities for promotion. The
respondent’s years of service with his/her
present employer is negatively (and non-
linearly) related to future advancement. In
general, the longer employees have been
with an organization, the greater the prob-
ability that they have received all the promo-
tions that they are likely to obtain (although
the probability of perceived promotions in-
creases after about 29 years of service).
Moreover, full-time employees and supervi-
sors are more likely to perceive that they will
be promoted in the future (Model 5).
Table 5. Unstandardized OLS Coefficients for Regressions of Future Promotions on Selected Inde-
pendent Variables: NOS/GSS Sample, 1991

 

 

Model | Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5
Independent Variable Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E.

 

 

Establishment size (log) 188 (.038)""* .124 (.046)"* .182 (.053)"* .170 (.065)"* .177 (.064)**
(Establishment sizex  -.164 (.063)"* -.113 (.070) -.132 (.069) —111 (.068) -.116 (.065)
lationship among multiple-establishment
firms between firm size and autonomy is
nonmonotonic and displays a shallow U-
shaped pattern. This suggests that employees
have slightly more autonomy in small and
large firms than they do in medium-sized
firms. We cannot completely account for the
Table 6. Unstandardized OLS Coefficients for Regressions of Job Autonomy on Selected Indepen-
dent Variables: NOS/GSS Sample, 1991

 

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5
Independent Variable Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E.

Establishment size (log) -.352 (.058)"**-.194 (.063)"* -.207 (.066)"* -.200 (.079)* -.236 (.076)"*
(Establishment size x 266 (.065)****.114 (.066)* .155 (.070)" .138 (.075) .167 (.074)*8
R(adjusted) 192 271 272 291 351

 

Note: Numbers in parentheses are standard errors; N = 444 for all models.
2 Main effect of establishment size for multiple-establishment firms is significantly different from 0 (p < .05).
“p< .05 “py <.01 “*» < 001 (two-tailed tests)
differentials in autonomy that are associated
with establishment size or firm size (Model
5)—for example, we can account for about
30 to 35 percent of the effect of establish-
ment size on autonomy.

The presence of an internal labor market is
the organizational correlate of size that is
most strongly associated with autonomy:
Employees have less autonomy in organiza-
tions when internal labor markets are
present. Possibly the interdependence of
tasks associated with job ladders inhibits the
exercise of individual discretion. Size of
county is negatively related to autonomy
(Models 3 through 5), although this effect is
relatively weak. On the other hand, the pro-
portion of Whites in the establishment is
positively related to autonomy. A large pro-
portion of White employees may signal
greater trust relations with the employer,
most of whom are presumably White.!! As
anticipated, autonomy is greater among su-
pervisors, the self-employed, and employees
with many years of service.!2
We have attempted to explain these rela-
tionships between size and job rewards on
the basis of other organizational, industrial,
geographic, and individual characteristics.
We have argued that organization size may
be partly regarded as a proxy for other di-
mensions of stratification that we operation-
alized with seven sets of variables. We as-
sumed that some of these explanatory vari-
ables—product and labor market character-
istics and institutional forces—are exog-
enous to size. Other explanatory variables
are endogenous to size and represent inter-
vening variables that may mediate the effect
of organization size on job rewards.

Our measure of the product market (con-
centration of the industry) was generally un-
related to the job rewards. With regard to the
labor market, contrary to expectations, the
size of the county in which the respondent
resides was usually negatively related to job
rewards. However, these conclusions must be
tempered by our use of fairly gross measures
of markets. For example, we do not have a
direct measure of labor markets—our mea-
sures are based on the respondent’s county
or sampling area, which may not coincide
with the labor market in which the respon-
dent participates. Our indicator of institu-
tional influence tended to be unrelated to job
rewards, although we found some relatively
small advantages enjoyed by government
employees with regard to earnings and pro-
motion opportunities, and disadvantages in
fringe benefits for employees of profit-mak-
ing organizations.

The endogenous explanatory variables
were more strongly related to job rewards
and were better able than the exogenous vari-
ables to account for the effect of organiza-
tion size. In particular, the presence of
FILMs was the organizational characteristic
most consistently related to job rewards (ex-
cept fringe benefits). Although our analysis
underscores the importance of internal labor
markets for explaining economic and non-
economic work outcomes, our interpretations
of the effect of internal labor markets are not
unambiguous. Our data indicate whether the
establishment has an internal labor market,
not whether an employee is part of a FILM.
Thus, we have not shown that employees in
FILMs have high earnings, but rather that or-
ganizations with FILMs tend to pay higher
wages than those lacking them. Our explana-
tions for the positive relationship between
FILMs and earnings, and for the negative re-
lationship between FILMs and autonomy, are
indirect and rely on assumptions about un-
measured variables. We need more precise
data to assess alternative explanations for the
effect of internal labor markets on job re-
wards.

We were unable to explain fully why large
establishments provide more fringe benefits
and opportunities for promotion but less au-
tonomy. Nor were we able to explain entirely
why large firms have higher earnings and
more fringe benefits but less autonomy. Our
inability to account for the relationship be-
tween firm size and job rewards probably re-
flects the paucity of information available on
firms. A possible reason for why we could
not explain away the relationship between
establishment size and job rewards is that
some of our explanatory variables are mea-
sured with error: The coefficient for estab-
lishment size may be picking up variation
that should be attributed to one or more of
the explanatory variables. Certain variables
(e.g., complexity/differentiation) are likely to
contain more measurement error than others
(e.g., organization type). Thus, we can more
confidently reject organization type as a pos-
sible explanation of the size effect than we
can conclude that complexity/differentiation
does not account for the link between estab-
lishment size and job rewards.

Nevertheless, it may be neither possible
nor desirable to “expunge the word size from
the lexicon of organization research and to
develop a new vocabulary which captures the
variety formerly encompassed under that
general rubric” (Kimberly 1976:586). Some
portion of the effect of establishment size on
job rewards may actually represent, at least
in part, the consequences of the sheer num-
ber of employees. Simmel (1950, pt. 2,
chaps. 1 and 2) offers a theoretical basis for
this argument. He theorized about the effect
of the number of individuals in a group on
the group’s social characteristics. Simmel ar-
gued for a “quantitative determination of the
group” (p. 87) such that structural differ-
ences among groups are produced by ‘“‘mere
numerical differences” (p. 97).

An argument for the effect of number of
employees per se on job rewards is more ap-
plicable to autonomy and promotions than
to earnings and fringe benefits. Employees
may perceive an inability to exercise discre-
tion and a lack of autonomy on their jobs in
large organizations, ceteris paribus, simply
because there are many people working
there. The more employees in an organiza-
tion, the more likely an individual will feel
that his/her freedom of action is con-
strained. With respect to promotions, large
organizations are more likely than small or-
ganizations to have more vacancies during a
given period. Because large organizations
are more likely to fill vacancies with current
employees (White 1970; Van Buren 1992),
it follows that the absolute number of em-
ployees in an organization positively affects,
ceteris paribus, the number of advancement
opportunities. Individuals in large organiza-
tions see this, cf course, in job postings and
lists of vacancies; they learn about the ad-
vancement of others through network pro-
cesses, which are extremely sensitive to
size. Hence, they correctly perceive more
opportunities for advancement. This net ef-
fect of size constitutes a “real” effect of
number of employees rather than the effect
of other variables for which size is simply a
proxy. Thus the effect of number of employ-
ees remains a plausible interpretation of our
residual size effect.

Finally, our analysis may have been con-
strained by the fact that we have only one re-
spondent for most organizations. We were
unable to separate organizational effects
from individual effects—we could not distin-
guish between-organization effects from the
effects of variables on job rewards within or-
ganizations. In addition, a single measure of
a job reward provides an incomplete picture
of the effect of size and other organization
variables on job rewards. We examined orga-
nization differences in the mean level of a
job reward, not its dispersion within the or-
ganization. Previous studies of this topic
have yielded contrary results: Analyses of the
NOS data suggest greater earnings inequal-
ity in large organizations (Kalleberg and Van
Buren 1994). This result is consistent with
Pfeffer and Langton’s (1988) analysis of aca-
demic departments. On the other hand,
Sakamoto and Chen (1993) report that in the
United States and Japan earnings inequality
declines with firm size. A comprehensive ex-
planation of the impact of organization size
on stratification outcomes should consider
the possibility that size and other explanatory
variables affect the dispersion of job rewards
within the organization as well as their mean
levels.
Establishment size (log) (mean = 4.24; S.D. = 2.11)
is the natural logarithm of the number of full-time
and part-time employees in the establishment. When
both the GSS and the NOS respondent reported this
information, we took the average of the two respons-
es. If information was available from only one
source, we used that information.

Firm size (log) (mean = 8.38; S.D. = 2.26) is the
natural logarithm of the number of full-time and
part-time employees in the entire firm for multiple-
establishment firms.

Multiple-establishment firm (mean = .55; §.D. =
.50) is a dichotomous variable indicating whether a
firm has one (= 0) or more (= 1) establishments.

Mean establishment size in the industry (mean =
3.12; S.D. = .75) is the average size of establish-
ments in the industry in which the respondent’s or-
ganization is classified.
is the proportion of eight functions performed by
separate departments. The eight departments were:
finance, accounting, health and safety, public rela-
tions, personnel/labor relations, research and devel-
opment, long-range planning, and marketing or
sales. Values for “don’t know” responses were im-
puted using logistic regression if the respondent an-
swered five or more other items (Cronbach’s alpha
= .86). Vertical differentiation is measured as the
natural logarithm of the number of levels between
the highest and lowest positions in the establish-
ment. The correlation between our horizontal and
vertical differentiation indicators is .58.

Formalization (mean = .71; S.D. = .36) is the pro-
portion of seven written documents present in the
organization. This measure was calculated for orga-
nizations with data on six or more items. Documents
included were rules and procedures, job descriptions,
job performance, personnel evaluations, hiring and
firing procedures, safety and hygiene practices, and
fringe benefits. Values for “don’t know” responses
were imputed from responses to the other items us-
ing logistic regression (Cronbach’s alpha = .90).

Firm internal labor markets (FILMS) scale (mean
= 2.52; S.D. = .92) is based on eight items. Six of
the items measure the extent to which the manager
perceived that core occupations, managerial occupa-
tions, and the GSS respondent’s occupation are
filled from within the organization and have multi-
ple levels or grades. Two additional items were
asked about the core occupation and the GSS re-
spondent’s occupation: “Is it possible for a [occupa-
tion] to be promoted to a level above [occupation]?”
and “How often does this happen?” Answers ranged
from “not at all” to “very often.” The FILM scale is
the mean score for an establishment on these eight
items. All items were recoded to a 1-4 scale prior to
computing the scale score. High scores indicate the
presence of an internal labor market (Cronbach’s al-
pha = .84). For further information, see Marsden,
Cook, and Knoke (1994).
Training time (mean = 5.46; S.D. = 1.48) is the Spe-
cific Vocational Preparation score for the GSS re-
spondent’s occupation and was taken from the Dic-
tionary of Occupational Titles measures for the 1980
Census (England and Kilbourne 1988). Values
ranged from “short demonstration only” (coded 1)
to “over 10 years” (coded 10).

Measurability of worker output (mean = 1.75;
S.D. = .75) is the average of two items assessing the
GSS respondent’s perception of the difficulty of
measuring the quality and quantity of his or her
work. Values on each item range from “very easy”
(coded 1) to “very hard” (coded 4). Cases with miss-
ing values on both items were assigned the mean
value for this variable.

Supervisor (mean = .37; S.D. = .48) is a dichoto-
mous variable coded | if the GSS respondent super-
vises the work of others, 0 otherwise.

Occupational prestige score (mean = 44.45; S.D.
= 13.64) is the NORC/GSS Occupational Prestige
score for the 1980 Census occupational classifica-
tion.
ing Organization Structure.” Administrative
Science Quarterly 19:168-85.

DiPrete, Thomas A. 1990. “Is There a
Nonspurious Link Between the Market Power
and the Wage Structure of Firms?” Research in
Social Stratification and Mobility 9:283-306.

Dunn, L. F. 1980. “The Effects of Firm and Plant
Size on Employee Well-Being.” Pp. 348-58 in
The Economics of Firm Size, Market Structure,
and Social Performance, edited by J. Siegfried.
Washington, DC: Federal Trade Commission.

Edwards, Richard C. 1979. Contested Terrain.
New York: Basic Books.

England, Paula and Barbara Kilbourne. 1988.
“Occupational Measures from the Dictionary
of Occupational Titles for 1980 Census De-
tailed Occupations.” Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-uni-
versity Consortium for Political and Social Re-
search.

Evans, David S. and Linda S. Leighton. 1988.
“Why Do Smaller Firms Pay Less?” The Jour-
nal of Human Resources 24:299-318.

Fox, John. 1991. Regression Diagnostics.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Garen, John E. 1985. “Worker Heterogeneity, Job
Screening, and Firm Size.” Journal of Politi-
cal Economy 93:715-39.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1980. “Commentary.” Pp.
383-88 in The Economics of Firm Size, Market
Structure, and Social Performance, edited by
J. Siegfried. Washington, DC: Federal Trade
Commission.

Harrison, Bennett. 1994, Lean and Mean: The
Changing Landscape of Corporate Power in
the Age of Flexibility. New York: Basic Books.

Hodson, Randy. 1984. “Companies, Industries,
and the Measurement of Economic Segmenta-
tion.” American Sociological Review 49:335-—
48.

Judge, George G., R. Carter Hill, William E.
Griffiths, Helmut Lutkepohl, and Tsong-Chao
Lee. 1988. Introduction to the Theory and
Practice of Econometrics. New York: John
Wiley and Sons.

Kalleberg, Arne L. and Mark E. Van Buren. 1992.
“Organizations and Economic Stratification: A
Cross-national Analysis of the Size-earnings
Relation.” Research in Social Stratification
and Mobility 11:61-93.

. 1994, “The Structure of Organizational
Earnings Inequality.” American Behavioral
Scientist 37:930-47.

Kimberly, John R. 1976. “Organization Size and
the Structuralist Perspective: A Review, Cri-
tique and Proposal.” Administrative Science
Quarterly 21:571-97.

Lester, Richard A. 1967. “Pay Differentials by
Size of Establishment.” Industrial Relations
7:57-67.

Lincoln, James R. and Arne L. Kalleberg. 1990.
Culture, Control, and Commitment: A Study of
Work Organization and Work Attitudes in the
United States and Japan, Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Marsden, Peter V., Cynthia R. Cook and David
Knoke. 1994. “Measuring Organizational
Structures and Environments.” American Be-
havioral Scientist 37:891-910.

Mellow, Wesley. 1982. “Employer Size and
Wages.” Review of Economics and Statistics
64:495-501.

Oi, Walter Y. 1983. “The Fixed Employment
Costs of Specialized Labor.” Pp. 63-116 in The
Measurement of Labor Cost, edited by J.
Triplett. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press (for NBER).

Pfeffer, Jeffrey and Nancy Langton. 1988. “Wage
Inequality and the Organization of Work: The
Case of Academic Departments.” Administra-
tive Science Quarterly 33:588-606.

Sakamoto, Arthur and Meichu D. Chen. 1993.
“Earnings Inequality and Segmentation by
Firm Size in Japan and the United States.” Re-
search in Social Stratification and Mobility
12:185-211.

Sengenberger, Werner. 1981. “Labour Market
Segmentation and the Business Cycle.” Pp.
243-59 in The Dynamics of Labour Market
Segmentation, edited by F. Wilkinson. New
York: Academic Press.

Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg
Simmel. Translated and edited by K. Wolff.
New York: The Free Press.

Sgrensen, Aage B. 1983. “Sociological Research
on the Labor Market: Conceptual and Method-
ological Issues.” Work and Occupations
10:261-87.

Stolzenberg, Ross M. 1978. “Bringing the Boss
Back In: Employer Size, Employee Schooling,
and Socioeconomic Achievement.” American
Sociological Review 43:813-28.

Van Buren, Mark E. 1992. “Organizational Size
and the Use of Firm Internal Labor Markets in
High Growth Establishments.” Social Science
Research 21:311-27.

Villemez, Wayne J. and William P. Bridges.
1988..“‘When Bigger is Better: Differences in
the Individual-Level Effect of Firm and Estab-
lishment Size.” American Sociological Review
53:237-55.
