American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
SHORTACE of physicians in rural com-
A munities has been noted by some

observers for many years, The Ameri-
can Medical Association apparently now
holds this opinion since it advocated an
expansion of medical education to provide
more doctors for such areas in its 14-point
program of July 19, 1945.

One of the basic causes before the War
of the inadequate supply was that rural
places were not getting a share of physicians
in proportion to their population, In 1923,
counties having no incorporated place of
2,500 or more inhabitants had g2 physicians
per 100,000 population while counties with
cities of 50,000 or more residents had 159
physicians for each such unit of population.
In 1938, the disparity was greater with the
vespective rates for the two groups of
counties being 69 and 174.1

The shortage was aggravated during the
War by entry of many physicians into the
armed forces and by a substantial reduction
in the number of medical-school graduates.
Although a large percentage of Army and
Navy doctors will have been discharged by
September 1946 and although the number of
graduates may exceed pre-war levels within
four or five years, it is unlikely that the
rural supply will become adequate so long
as a highly disproportionate number of
physicians choose to practice in urban places.
It is desirable, therefore, to have more in-
formation on the factors underlying choice
of location in order to try to change the
balance more in favor of rural communities.

Studies by Nelson for Minnesota;? Rice
for Indiana;* and Mountin, Pennell, and
Nicolay* for the country as a whole have
given some emphasis to the economic factor
as a determinant of the distribution of
doctors. In the last mentioned of these
studies, it was reported that community
wealth was of paramount importance among
the factors investigated in determining the
availability of physicians. The following
evidence was given in support of this con-
clusion: “, . . Throughout the range of in-
come, provisions in medical personnel in-
creased in conformity with elevation of in-
come. In counties with the highest per
capita incomes the physician-population
ratio was nearly four times as great as in the
poorest counties; this ratio for physicians
under 45 years of age was eight times as
great. More than one-half of all physicians
in the wealthy counties were under 45 years
of age, but less than one-fourth were in this
category in the poorest counties.”*

The most widely accepted opinions among
doctors and medical students likewise tend
to give emphasis to the economic factors
underlying location. A view that has had
some vogue among apologists for the pre-
war system of training is that there are
enough physicians graduated each year dur-
ing peace time to ensure that wherever
a doctor can make a decent livelihood there
will be one desirous of locating there. Ac-
cording to this opinion, the solution of a
rural shortage is not to be found in the
training of more men or in diverting some

 

can Sociological Review, December 1942, PP. 795
and 8o1.

?Thurman B. Rice, “The Distribution of Phy-
sicians in Indiana,” Journal of the Indiana State
Medical Association, Vol. XXV, April 15, 1932, PP-
157-162.

*Mountin, Pennell, and Nicolay, Loc. Cit., pp.
1945-1053.

® Ibid., p. 1946.
point-of-view believe that men choose a rural
practice who do not care to undergo the
hardships and higher probability of failure
attendant with setting up a practice in an
urban place or who are faced with the
necessity of earning a good income im-
mediately to support a family or to pay off
their debts. Another opinion on the subject
is that the choice of area is usually a matter
of selecting the place that appears to offer
the highest earnings.

These being some of the research findings
and some of the current beliefs on the sub-
ject, it seems clear that analysis of the prob-
lem may be carried forward by showing
that social as well as economic factors are
important in the choice of location, by in-
dicating some of the specific ways in which
the economic factor operates, and by com-
in the 1940 Indiana Medical Directory as
having graduated from medical school in
1920 or later and who were not connected
with the staff or faculty of an institution
such as a state hospital or the University
of Indiana. These samples were selected by
taking every ninth name of the 2251 such
urban and every fifth name of the 621
such rural physicians.

One hundred and fifty-four urban and 66
rural questionnaires were returned. The
urban questionnaires were grouped accord-
ing to size of city, with the population
classes being 2,500 to 25,000; 25,000 to
100,000; and 100,000 and over. The rural
questionnaires were classified in three socio-
economic regions; namely, a northern group
of counties covering about a third of the
state, a central band through which High-
way 40 runs or which are immediately north
or south of it, and the remaining southern
counties, including about two-fifths of the
state. Criteria used in this classification were
farm income, percentage of tenant farms,
size of families, nationality background,
religious affiliation, material possessions,
such as radio and automobile, and voting be-
havior. These criteria tended to separate the
tural districts according to degree of
urbanization, with the central counties being
the most urbanized, the southern counties
the least so, and the northern counties to a
degree in between the other two groups.
The urban and rural respondents were
compared with their total sample in age
and location to determine to what extent
representativeness had been impaired by in-
complete returns. Three classes with a 10-year
interval were used for age distribution. The
three size groups of cities and the three socio-
economic regions were used for distribution
by residence, The largest difference between
respondents and total sample in any age cate-
gory was three percent. The largest difference
in any geographical category was five percent.
Earning a Living. Since the selection of a
location must in almost all cases be limited
to those places in which the doctor would be
able within a reasonable time to support him-
self according to his standard of living,
some persons might have the impression
that physicians have fairly good information
on potential income in various areas and that
they carefully weigh the facts about one
place with those about other places when
making a decision. It is probably incorrect,
however, to assume that many men go
through such an explicit and complete com-
parison of the economic prospects of several
areas. The question is, then, what clues,
information, data, stereotypes, and other
symbols are used in the process of judging
whether or not one is likely to earn the
income which has been set as a minimum.
One indication of the likelihood of such
earnings might be found in the presence of
relatively few doctors in the town considered
for location. This reason was checked as hav-
ing been important in determining their
present location by half of the rural and
by 17 per cent of the urban sample. This
difference of 33 per cent between the two
main sample groups was the largest for any
of the 22 items of the questionnaire. All of
the rural regions had at least 45 per cent
of their physicians who checked this item
as important; whereas, none of the urban
groups had as many as 20 per cent. One ex-
planation of the difference may lie in the
fact that cities are seldom so understaffed
that it is obvious that more doctors are
needed while there are many rural areas with
so few practitioners that when one of them
dies or becomes too old for regular service
it is apparent that a new physician can be-
come established without much difficulty.
It is probably true also that many physicians
will not settle in a rural community unless
this favorable condition exists although will-
ing to do so in a city on the assumption
that in a large place a good man can always
make room for himself,

Some medical school graduates may have
the attitude when making their decision that
they cannot be assured of success in any
particular type of community, that they
might fail in a city as well as in a rural
location, and that they had better start out
wherever they can get a foothold. With this
thinking in the background, a physician
might be influenced in his selection of a place
by an opportunity of stepping into a built-
up practice, of joining an older doctor who
needed assistance, or of continuing as a
resident physician in a hospital in which he
had been an interne.

Thirty-six per cent of the urban and 17
per cent of the rural sample checked the
joining of an older doctor as having been
of importance in their choice of present loca-
tion. Size of city had some bearing on the
urban percentage with 29 per cent of the
physicians from the large cities checking
this factor; whereas, the percentages for the
medium and small-sized cities were 42 and
44 respectively. The rural-urban difference
may be attributed to the fact that village
practices often are not large enough to sup-
port two men. The difference between the
per cent of the physicians in cities of 100,000
or more population marked this item while
from 22 to 33 per cent of those in the other
groups did so. A notation of one of the
doctors practicing in Indianapolis is interest-
ing in this connection, He wrote that this
factor is not likely to be important in large
cities, because professional relationships are
often too tenuous for a new doctor to hope
to retain many of the patients of an older
man.

The process of establishing one’s self in a
location by starting as an interne at some
hospital and staying on appears to have been
important only in the case of physicians in
large cities. Twenty-three per cent of the
doctors from such urban places checked this
reason, 12 per cent of the respondents from
medium-sized places did so, and almost none
from the smaller-sized cities or from the
tural areas acknowledged its influence. These
doctor has lived for some time in another
community, his most important ties there
will consist usually of the friends and rela-
tives he has in the area. Three of the four
items of the questionnaire used to illustrate
the influence of community ties refer to the
man’s home town or to that of his wife. The
fourth item is that of having friends or
relatives in the place and is, of course,
closely related to the other three since it
probably constitutes one of the chief reasons
for wanting to be in one’s home town,
Forty-three per cent of the urban and 14
per cent of the rural sample gave “home
town” as an important reason for their
present location. More than half of the men
in the small and medium-sized cities and
about a third of those in the large cities
checked this item. In a few cases, it was
noted that the physician joined his father
in order to give him the assistance he needed.
per cent of the physicians in the sample
from the central band of counties checked
this item as one of importance. The south-
ern counties, with 22 per cent, had the
highest proportion of rural physicians mark-
ing this reason for location. The difference
is consistent with the fact that the central
areas are most highly urbanized and the
southern areas the least so. The city pull
upon men of the southern villages is prob-
ably less than in other rural communities,
because they would have to travel farther
away from home to open practice in a large
city and in so doing would have to make a
greater break with their cultural background.

The presence of friends or relatives in
town was marked as important by 38 per
cent of the urban and 12 per cent of the
rural sample, Only about two-fifths of the
cases that checked the item of “home town”
general social and physical environment is
indicated by the fact that at least a third
of either the rural or urban sample checked
each of the four items of the questionnaire
that pertained to the type of living avail-
able in the place chosen for practice. The
statement that the town is a nice place to live
was checked by more of the rural physicians
than any of the other items. In the case
of the urban doctors, it was second only
to the presence of good hospitals; an item
that will be considered later under the head-
ing of facilities aiding practice.

The four items shown in table three appear
to have been particularly important in the
location of the rural physicians. Two-thirds
checked the item of the town being a nice
place to live; 59 per cent marked good
churches, schools, and institutions; 39 per
cent indicated that the town’s location near
of the physicians in the southern rural com-
munities, but by only 11 per cent of the
large-city doctors. This difference and the
others found among the various subdivisions
of the samples are generally in accord with
expectation, but some surprise may be felt
that any of the large-city doctors could be-
lieve seriously that they were able to live
and work at a moderate pace. Perhaps, they
had in mind the difference between living
conditions in their city and those of huge
places such as Chicago. Or they might have
been living in a suburb of one of the cities
of about 100,000 population and compared
themselves with acquaintances living in the
downtown part of Indianapolis, a city of
nearly a half million population.

The presence of good churches, schools,
and other institutions was checked more
frequently by physicians of the large cities
than by those of the medium and small-
sized cities and by physicians in the central
rural communities in comparison with those
urban physicians, The three rural sub-
divisions differed among themselves by a
maximum of nine per cent. There was more
difference among the three classes of cities
with 57 per cent of the large-city, 42 per
cent of the medium-sized-city, and 61 per
cent of the small-sized-city physicians check-
ing the statement. The difference between
the medium-sized group and the other two
may arise from the fact that cities like Terre
Haute, Anderson, and East Chicago are
more drab than smaller urban places like
Crawfordsville, Elwood, and Bedford and do
not have all of the compensating features
of big-city life that are found in such a place
as Indianapolis.

The proximity of the town of location
to a large city was given as important by
half of the rural physicians from the central
region and by about a third of those from
each of the other two rural regions, This
difference is consistent with the large pro-
portion of cities of 25,000 or more popula-
are sometimes supposed to be more honest,
more direct in their approach to problems,
and friendlier. City residents are thought
to have fewer prejudices, to spend more
money, and to have a wider range of informa-
tion, Physicians may take such ascribed traits
into consideration when choosing a loca-
tion, either from the point-of-view of their
practice or of having such persons as fellow
citizens and neighbors.

Dealing with city people was given as a
reason for location by 23 per cent of the
urban sample. Differences among the three
urban subdivisions were small, the largest
being that of nine per cent between the
doctors in small cities and those in large
urban places.

Thirty-two and 24 per cent of the rural
physicians respectively stated that the desire
to deal with village people or with farmers
had influenced their selection of a place to
practice. The doctors of the central region
differed up to 25 per cent from those of the
two socio-economic areas in the frequency
with which this reason was given. Such
that is distant from a good general hospital.
Clinics have not been given as much at-
tention as an important factor in location,
but younger doctors may be somewhat con-
cerned with the improvement of their
methods and the furtherance of their educa-
tion that sometimes can be best attained
through clinical practice. The opportunity
of doing research is probably of significance
to only a small group of physicians. One
of the sample group noted on his question-
naire that a doctor interested in research
can do it anywhere; that he does not need
special laboratories and like facilities.
Good hospital facilities were checked as an
important factor in the choice of their pres-
ent location by 69 per cent of the urban
and by 53 per cent of the rural physicians.
Three-fourths of the doctors in the large
and medium-sized cities gave this reason as
an important one while less than half of the
men from the small-sized cities did so. Two-
thirds of the rural physicians from the
central region marked this factor; whereas,
about half of the northern and southern rural
large and medium-sized cities checked this
factor, but less than eight per cent of the
men in any of the other sample subdivisions
did so. This finding is in accord with the
fact that clinics ordinarily are found only
in large urban places.

The only sample subdivision with a size-
able percentage of physicians who checked
the opportunity of doing research as an im-
portant reason for their location was that of
the men in large cities, Twenty-three per
cent of these doctors indicated that they had
been influenced by this factor. In all other
sample subdivisions, less than seven per cent
thought that this item had played a signifi-
cant part in their decision.

Social Action. The choice of location by a
doctor is usually a highly individual matter,
based on opportunities arising out of per-
sonal connections, on special interests that
he might have, on personal application to
some institution, on chance advantages cross-
ing his path, on a scattering of information
about possibilities in certain areas, and on
main samples and the second by about two
per cent. It is noteworthy, however, that
17 per cent of the rural physicians from the
southern region gave the fact of an invitation
rom a community organization as having
influenced their location. This relatively high
percentage probably reflects the greater
difficulty of these rural areas getting even
he minimum number of doctors needed by
relying upon ordinary processes through
which these men select a place in which to
practice,

Rural and Urban Patterns, It is desirable
to consider all of the items together since
requently it is a combination of reasons
rather than a single one that determines
location, It is also useful to distinguish
those items which are common to both rural
and urban physicians and those which dis-
inguish each group from the other.

The presence of good hospital facilities;
the attractiveness of the town as a place
to live; and the existence of good churches,
schools, and other institutions characterized
the location of both rural and urban phy-
sicians. From one-half to two-thirds of both
groups gave these reasons as important ones
in the choice of their present location. The
three items are similar in meaning and, con-
sequently, there was some overlapping in
the checking of them. Two of the three items
were checked in nearly two-thirds of these
cases and 28 per cent of the physicians
checked all three.

The rural physicians checked five of the
22 items from two to three times as fre-
quently as the urban physicians. These five
were: relatively few doctors in town, town
is near a large city, able to work and live
at a moderate pace, wanted to deal with
villagers, and wanted to deal with farmers.
In each case, the item was checked by 24
or more per cent of the rural group and by
less than 18 per cent of the urban group.
The most common rural pattern was a com-
bination of the town being a nice place to
live and its having good institutions with
either the economic factor of there being
relatively few doctors in town or the en-
vironmental factor of being able to work and
live at a moderate pace. This pattern was
found in a third of the rural cases.

The urban physicians, in turn, had five
items which distinguished them from the
rural group and which they checked fre-
quently. These five were: home town, friends
or relatives in town, joined an older doctor,
wanted to deal with city people, and clinics
available. The percentage checking these
factors varied from 23 to 43 and in every
case was two to three times that of the
corresponding rural percentage. The most
common urban pattern was a combination
of the town being a nice place to live and
its having good institutions with the fact
that it was the home town of the doctor.
This pattern was observed in about two-
fifths of the cases from the medium and
small-sized cities and in about a fifth of
those from the large cities.

Conclusion and Recommendations. This
paper started with the fact that rural areas
are not getting as many physicians per unit
of population as urban places. The factors
underlying the location of physicians have
been investigated in order to obtain informa-
tion that might be helpful in attracting more
doctors to rural communities. The data in-
dicate that urban and rural physicians differ
in their reasons for location; that social, as
well as economic, factors are important in
determining the location of both groups; and
that little has been done by medical schools
or by community organizations to influence
directly the distribution of physicians. These
are elementary propositions and were con-
sidered of value largely because emphasis so
far in the study of the subject has been
placed on economic factors. These proposi-
tions formed the framework within which the
investigation was made, The substance of
the work has been a delineation of the rela-
tive importance of certain specified factors
in influencing the choice of location by urban
and rural physicians. These factors have
been summarized in the final section of the
paper, dealing with rural and urban patterns.
All that remains is to formulate a few rec-
ommendations for social action that are
consistent with these findings.

1. The sine qua non of locating in a rural
area is often some assurance that the demand
for service is sufficient to support another
physician. Some men may act solely on the
basis of knowing that there are relatively
few doctors compared with the number of
inhabitants in the area. But whatever can
be done to make the financial prospects of
a new man more definite and concrete will
be of value in getting doctors to settle there.
Some communities have found it possible to
guarantee that the doctor’s income will not
fall below a specified minimum.

2. The desirable features of life and prac-
tice in the area should be used as a strong
subsidiary argument in location in the com-
munity. The qualities of the kind of people
that the doctor would be dealing with; the
strength of the churches and schools; the
opportunity for children to grow up ina safe
and healthful environment; the physical
beauty of the territory; the moderate pace
at which people live; and similar aspects
of the social and physical environment should
be noted,

3. Whatever facilities there may be for
medical practice will be of immediate in-
terest and importance to the men who might
consider locating in the area. For this reason,
if the community has a hospital, steps should
be taken to improve its services. If a hos-
pital is not in the area, plans should be laid
to obtain one. Equipment and supplies may
be obtained on good terms from the Surplus
War Property Board. Once negotiations are
in process, some physicians might be at-
tracted by the idea of taking over the leader-
ship in the venture and pushing ahead on it.

4. Although the organization of a clinic
might be difficult, the problem should be at
least discussed with responsible individuals
in the area and with heads of institutions
who may have some knowledge of the sub-
ject. A county clinic at which the services
of specialists would be available on certain
days of the month might be feasible. If
not, the state government, the state univer-
sity, and the Public Health Service might
be approached to determine whether it would
be possible to have a traveling clinic visit
the area periodically.

5. High-school graduates in the com-
munity should be approached to see who
are interested in taking up the study of
medicine, Whatever can be done to facilitate
the achievement of their goal, to maintain
interest in their progress, and to indicate

the need of the community in obtaining their
services upon graduation may add to the
number of these men who get through medi-
cal school and who return to their home
town to practice. The community might
stimulate this potential source of physicians
by setting up a scholarship for some good
student who otherwise would not be able
to finance a medical education with the pro-
vision that he return after graduation to
practice in the community for a stipulated

. number of years.

6. A public health program should be
worked out in conjunction with state health
officials to increase the interest of residents
of the area in obtaining competent medical
service when ill and in taking measures to
prevent the occurrence of disease.

7. The extension of periodic physical ex:
aminations for rural and village school chil-
dren at county expense and provision of
free medical service for indigent patients
would not only improve the health of the
residents of the areas, but would also serve
as a partial subsidy for a physician who might
need such a guarantee before settling in the
community.

8. A committee of responsible citizens
should be formed to give periodic attention
to such projects as have been described
above, One of the functions of the group
would be to determine when additional doc-
tors were needed and to take whatever direct
measures were found to be necessary to get
them.
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Thu, 16 Jun 2016 04:46:30 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
