http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089342?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
N earlier paper+ presented data de-
A signed to throw light on the possible

selective aspect of rural-urban mi-
gration among youth in Missouri. The data
were drawn from a sample of young people
who attended high school in 116 Missouri
communities from 1939 to 1941 and whose
whereabouts in 1952 were known. The in-
vestigation seemed to support the conclu-
sion that migration from farms and small
towns in Missouri towards urban areas
during the period between 1940 and 1952
tended to be selective of those students with
higher scores on a standard intelligence test.
Both in terms of average score and in
terms of the proportion of those with highest
scores, the migrants seemed definitely su-
perior to the nonmigrants. Those who moved
to larger communities were superior to the
ones remaining at home or moving to smaller
towns, and those migrants who moved be-
yond state boundaries seemed superior to
those who remained within the State of
Missouri.

In the interpretation of the superior test
performance of migrants as compared to
nonmigrants, of migrants to cities as com-
pared to movers to small towns and farms,
or of long distance migrants as compared
to short distance ones, it was suggested that
intelligence in itself was probably not a

1C. T. Pihlblad and C. L. Gregory, “Selective
Aspects of Migration Among Missouri High School
Graduates,” American Sociological Review, 19
(June, 1954), pp. 314-324.
primary factor. There is probably no “natu-
ral tendency” for the less able to stay at
home and for those with higher capacity to
move. The explanation may lie in the fact
that those with higher test intelligence tend
to gravitate to occupations which are associ-
ated more with urban than with rural life.
That is, both in training opportunity and in
the pursuit of occupation, outlets tend to be
limited primarily to cities. The next steps in
the study, therefore, are to analyze the re-
lationship between intelligence ? and occupa-
tion and, secondly, to relate occupation
to various aspects of migration. We shall
undertake the first of these steps in this
paper, leaving the second for a later presenta-
tion.

The relationship between occupation and
test intelligence has been the subject of
considerable investigation.2 Most of the
studies, however, have been limited to a
comparison of the intelligence of school chil-
dren classified on the basis of parental oc-
cupation. A few studies have correlated test
scores achieved while the students were in
school with occupations actually pursued
some time later, but the difficulty of obtain-
ing the data necessary for such studies has
made them rather rare.

The results of both types of studies sup-
port the hypothesis that there tends to be a
hierarchy of occupational structure which is
closely related to test intelligence, whether
the classification is based on the subject’s
parental occupation or on his own occupa-
tion. Those who are engaged in the profes-
sions, or those whose fathers were so en-
gaged, tend to rank highest on test scores,
with the business and clerical groups follow-
ing, while farmers and unskilled workers rank
at the bottom.

The material for the investigation is more
completely described in our earlier paper.*
Briefly, it consists of the Ohio State Uni-
versity Intelligence Test scores for about
5,000 boys and girls who were high school
seniors in 116 Missouri communities in
1939-41. The data also include information
concerning the 1952 residence and occupa-
tion as well as the parental occupation of
each subject, supplied by local informants
such as parents, teachers, neighbors, and
others. Data on 1952 occupation and par-
ental occupation were available for approxi-
mately 4,000 cases.

The occupational classification adopted in
this study is substantially the same as that
utilized in other similar investigations. The
specific occupation for each subject was
grouped into one of the following eleven

 

tellectual Ability and Occupational Grade,” Occu-
pational Psychology, 22 (1948), pp. 197-203;
Noel P. Gist, C. T. Pihlblad, and C. L. Gregory,
Selective Factors in Occupation and Migration, The
University of Missouri Studies, Columbia, Missouri,
1943; Paul Hatt, “Occupation and Social Stratifica-
tion,” American Journal of Sociology, 55 (1950),
pp. 533-43; W. E. Moser, “Vocational Preference
as Related to Mental Ability,” Occupations, 27
(1949), pp. 460-61; Richard Stephenson, “Status
Achievement and the Occupational Pyramid,” So-
cial Forces, 31 (1932), pp. 75-77.

4Philblad and Gregory, op. cit., pp. 314-15.

5See: Frank Lorimer and Frederick Osborn,
Dynamics of Population: Social and Biological
Significance of Changing Birth Rates in the United
States, New York: Macmillan, 1934, Chapter VIII.
categories: professional, teachers, clerical,
business, skilled workers, semi-skilled and
unskilled workers, farmers, personal service,
military service, students, and houewives.
The military service category was used since
a substantial number of the male subjects
were in the armed services in 1952. The
housewife category included considerably
more than half the female subjects who
were married and not gainfully employed.
The fact that males could hardly be re-
ported as housewives, or females as farmers,
and the fact that there were few males re-
ported in “personal service” or females in
military service make the occupational classes
different for males and females.

For the purpose of comparing test per-
formance between occupational groups we
have utilized frequency distributions with
each occupation classified into a high,
medium, and low group on the basis of raw
scores on the Ohio test. Those with scores 60
and above comprise the “high” group, those
with scores from 30 to 59 the “medium”
group, and those with scores below 30 the
“low” group. Comparisons are made also in
terms of arithmetic means for each occupa-
tional group. Since the general test perform-
ance of the girls was significantly superior to
that of the boys, and since occupational dif-
ferences exist between males and females,
each sex group is treated separately. Table 1
presents the 1952 occupations of 1,770 males
and 2,217 females classified into three score
intervals in terms of the Ohio Intelligence
Test,® together with mean score for each
occupational class.

A rather clear relationship between oc-
cupational choice and test score appears in
the tables. There is a rather consistent tend-
ency for the professional, teacher, and mili-
tary groups to recruit a disproportionate

6A serious weakness in the data lies in the
large number of cases for which occupational in-
formation was unreported. In the case of males
this amounted to about one-fourth and for females
about one-seventh of the total number of cases.
If non-reporting were systematic, its extent would
be sufficiently large to distort the results seriously.
To meet this criticism we have compared the test
scores of the unreported group with those for the
group as a whole. The chi square of the two dis-
tributions is not significant at the five per cent
level. The chances that the “unreported” group
comes from a universe different from that of the
“total” are less than one in 1,000.
Professional 1.9 42.3 55.8 67.9 52
Teachers 7.5 55.0 37.5 62.4 80
Clerical 3.6 55.3 41.1 59.5 197
Business and sales 20.0 48.3 31.7 51.2 60
Skilled 10.5 73.7 15.8 49.2 19
Semi-skilled and unskilled 19.6 60.8 19.6 45.0 51
Personal service 12.1 72.7 15.8 47.1 33
Housewives 10.3 57.4 32.3 53.8 1725

 

* Excludes 555 males for whom occupation was unreported and 67 who were unclassifiable.

+The standard error of the difference between all possible pairings of these means ranged from 1
to 5 units on the Ohio Scale. Most of the errors were grouped around 2.5 to 3 units so that any
absolute difference of five or six points or larger on the Ohio Scale is generally statistically significant
at the five per cent level.

+ Excludes 358 females for whom occupation was unreported and 44 who were unclassifiable.
number of individuals with high scores
(above 60). At the other end of the scale
there are relatively few individuals with
scores less than 30 among these three cate-
gories. On the other hand, among farmers
and semi-skilled and unskilled workers the
proportion of those with high scores tends
to be small, and larger numbers of “low”
score individuals are to be found. In the
male sample as a whole, 23 per cent scored
60 and above, while in the professional,
teacher, and military categories the corre-
sponding proportions were 48 per cent, 44
per cent, and 33 per cent. On the other
hand, the skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled,
and farmer categories contained respectively
17 per cent, 15 per cent, and 15 per cent who
Although the same general patterns seem
to prevail, the differences between the oc-
cupational categories are not quite so clear
for the girls. The distributions for the pro-
fessional, teacher, and clerical categories are
skewed toward the high segment of the
continuum, although the deviations from
the distribution for the total sex group are
not so great as those in the male group. It
may be noticed that for the girls the clerical
group ranks above the teacher group with a
chi-square significant at the 1 per cent level.
The distribution for teachers, however, does
not deviate significantly from the total group.
Those classified in the business, the skilled,
the unskilled, and the personal service cate-
gories contain larger proportions of the “low”
and smaller proportions of the “high” (as
compared with the total sample). Deviations
from the total distribution are significant at
thet 5 per cent level for business and un-
skilled workers; however the other differ-
ences are of lesser magnitude. The number
of cases in the skilled and the personal serv-
ice groups is too small to make reliable
comparisons. The distribution for the 1725
housewives was almost identical with that
for the group as a whole.

In Table 1 are shown the mean scores of
males and females for each occupational
group.® For the males there is a consistent
decrease in the average test score from a
high of 66.0 in the professional to a low of
43.2 among the farmers. The occupational
groups arrange themselves in the same order
for the girls, with a mean of 68 in the pro-
fessional to mean of 45.0 in the unskilled.
It may be noted that the personal service
category is a little higher than the unskilled
group among the girls; however the differ-

 

distributions yield chi-squares significant at the
1 per cent level; business and semi-skilled and
unskilled at the 5 per cent level. Not significant
were the differences between the total and teachers,
skilled workers, personal service and housewives.
8The question as to the significance of the
differences between the means shown in Table 1,
in light of the underreporting mentioned above,
has been raised. This criticism can be anticipated
by comparing the means for the non-reported
group with those for the total sample. For males
the “no reports” showed a mean of 49.7 as com-
pared with 48.1 for the total excluding “no re-
ports.” For females the corresponding means were
50.4 and 54.5. Absolute differences of less than 5
points are not significant at the 5 per cent level.
ence is not statistically significant. Note-
worthy also is the fact that girls are
consistently superior to boys in each occupa-
tional group although the differences are
statistically significant only in the “total”
and the “clerical” categories.

Special attention might be directed to the
military group among the males. This cate-
gory is composed of men who have enlisted
or re-enlisted after service during World
War II. None would have been serving at
this time to meet the legal military service
requirement. It is a category in which one
would have found few cases before the war.
Somewhat contrary to expectations, we found
this a relatively superior group. On the basis
of the total distribution one would have
expected thirty individuals to score 60 or
higher, but actually forty-five made a score
of 60 or better. The difference between the
military group and all males was about
three times the standard error of the differ-
ence.

Among the girls clerical occupations at-
tracted a relatively higher proportion of
superior individuals than among boys. On
the basis of the distribution between the
low, medium, and high categories the cleri-
cals appeared somewhat superior to teachers
among the girls, although the mean score
for teachers was slightly higher than for the
clericals. The difference in means was too
small to be statistically significant. Perhaps
the differential occupational opportunity for
boys and girls causes the girls to be content
with less prestigeful occupations. It may also
be that clerical jobs for women carry more
prestige, are better remunerated, and are
more sought after in the rural communities
from which most of these people came than
are jobs in teaching, for example. Note that
the mean score for teachers among the boys
is relatively higher than it is for girls, while
the reverse is true of the clerical ratio.
section discussion is confined to the simple
relation between intelligence and father’s
occupation.

In Table 2 1,741 males and 1,784 females
are classified by occupation of father into
high, medium, and low categories based on
the Ohio scores.? The same general pattern

9 Again the underreporting of occupational data
raises the question as to the distribution of test
scores in the underreported group. Again the answer
is the same. The unreported groups for both sexes
are almost identical in distribution of test scores
and in mean score with the total sample. The
underreporting seems to have been entirely random,
at least as far as test intelligence is concened.
order as they do when the ranking is based
on the student’s own occupation. Significantly
larger proportions of high score subjects
and smaller proportions of low score indi-
viduals come from home backgrounds in the
professions than is true for the group as a
whole.1° Sons and daughters of teachers also
appear to outrank the group as a whole, al-
though the small number of cases in this
category makes the comparison somewhat
unreliable.4 At the other extreme are the
sons and daughters of farmers, both of whom
are significantly below the total group dis-
tribution. The daughters of business-class
fathers appear to be significantly above the
total for all girls with higher proportions of
“high” score and lower proportions of “low”
score cases.!2 The sons of fathers engaged
in business are a representative sample of
the total male group. The clerical occupa-
tions appear to produce a disproportionate
share of “high” score individuals in both
sexes, although the number of cases (21
males and 8 females) is too small to yield
a significant chi-square. The sons and daugh-
ters of manual workers, skilled or unskilled,
are not significantly different in their score
distribution from the total of the given sex
group. Attention is directed to the fact that
the manual occupations generally select the
low scoring students, but students coming
from homes in which the father is engaged
in a manual occupation are a fair cross-sec-
tion of the total population.

Table 2 shows the mean test scores by
parental occupation separately for each sex.
Since about 60 per cent of all the subjects
came from farm homes, this group exerts
a statistically dominant influence on the
sex groups as a whole. In spite of this fact,
both the sons and daughters of farmers ex-
hibit means significantly lower than the
total group mean.1® These differences are
statistically significant at the 1 per cent
level. The sons of teachers also had an
equally high mean score, although the
daughters did not do so well. Again, the
number of cases is too small to make the
mean differences significant. Although the
average performance of daughters of busi-
ness men is 12 per cent above the group
average for all girls, the mean score for
the sons of business class fathers is not
significantly different from that of the total
average. The mean scores for sons and
daughters of manual workers were close to
the total group means but were not signifi-
cantly different at the 5 per cent level. This
suggests that the break in the continuum of

1 Chi-square values are significant at the 5 per
cent level for boys but not for girls.

12 Chi-square values are significant at the 1 per
cent level.

18 The critical ratio for males was 3.2 and for
females 3.0.
mean scores in the occupational series comes
between the farm children and the children
of fathers in other occupations. Probably
the difference reflects the generally poorer
test performance of farm children as com-
pared with town and city groups, a differ-
ence that shows up in a great number of
studies of intelligence of school children.

So far, in our discussion, we have dealt
with the relationship between test intelli-
gence and occupational choice as well as
occupational background. A significant re-
lationship between test score and occupation
has been demonstrated in both relationships.
A logical next step in the study would be an
analysis of the role of intelligence in the
shift between the parental occupation and
the subjects own occupation. That intelli-
gence does play a role is suggested by the
fact that considerably greater differences
in test scores appear between the occupa-
tional groups when the classification is based
on the subject’s own occupation than when
it is based on the father’s occupation. This
difference could be produced by a tendency
for the high score individuals, who were
sons of manual workers and farmers, to
gravitate toward white collar occupations,
while the low score subjects, who were
reared in white collar backgrounds, shift
toward the manual occupations. The test
of this hypothesis seems, however, more
closely related to the whole problem of oc-
cupational shifts between father’s and sub-
ject’s own occupation than it does to the
central theme of this paper. Complete dis-
cussion must be deferred to a later paper.
Professional 3.6 41.7 54.8
Teacher 8.9 48.2 42.9
Students 0.0 57.1 42.9
Clerical 16.7 55.6 27.8
Military 5.5 58.9 35.6
Business and sales 6.0 59.4 34.7
Skilled 6.2 62.9 30.9
Semi-skilled and unskilled 15.1 57.4 27.5
Farmers 11.1 61.7 27.2
Personal service 16.6 83.4 0.0

Ucn mh arhw

84
56
14
36
73
251
178
251
342
12

 

* Does not include 755 married women for whom data on husband’s occupation were not reported
or were unclassifiable. Differences between the distribution of the “no report” group and the total sample
were not significant at the five per cent level. It is unlikely that the non reporting of occupational infor-
mation biased the results in any significant degree. The mean of the unreported group (54.1) was almost

exactly the same (53.9) as that for the entire sample.
tionately from among women with lower
scores. Wives of persons in military service
included a somewhat smaller proportion of
low score and higher proportion of high
score subjects than did the group as a whole.
Lowest of all were the wives of personal
service workers, although here again the total
group was very small.

A comparison of mean scores between the
various occupational levels shows the wives
of students, professional workers, and teach-
ers signficantly superior. Critical ratios be-
tween the means of wives of professionals
and the means for clerical, sales people,
manual workers and farmers are highly sig-
nificant. In general, significant differences
classified by husbands’ occupation. The
rank order for each occupational group for
each of the five series is also presented. The
relative position of each occupation in each
series, with respect to the mean test score,
can thus be compared with the position of
the same occupation in every other series.
Table 4 shows rather consistently that
the professions other than teaching, and the
student category rank first, second and third
in all classifications where they appear.
These occupations tend to attract a dispro-
portionate number of persons of high intelli-
gence and consistently to show the highest
average scores. Next follows clerical work,
which selects high score women relatively
more than high score men. Sons and daugh-
ters of clerical workers both ranked third
although high score wives did not seek out
clerical husbands. Male subjects who en-
tered military service, as well as women who
married service men, ranked somewhat above
the average for the sample as a whole, with
a rank of 4 in both series. Persons who
stantial business affairs, small entrepreneurs,
and sales people at all levels.

Consistently ranking at the bottom of the
scale in each of the five series were manual
workers, both skilled and unskilled, personal
service workers, and farmers. Between these
classes differences in test performance were
insignificant.

Taking all three groups together, there
seems to be a distinct tendency for the
brighter boys and girls in rural areas and in
small towns of Missouri, to find their occu-
pational levels in the higher prestige occupa-
tions, especially the professional groups,
while those who perform more poorly on
tests are more likely to become manual
worker and farmers with somewhat lower
rankings on the prestige scale. What the
mechanism of this process is, and what its
implications may be, are not entirely clear.
Whether the same tendency would appear in
large urban high schools we do not know.

It is certainly true that the sons of pro-
a study of how perceptions of the

attitudes of members of occupational
groups, and communication with members
of such groups, are related to individuals’
own attitudes. Before describing the study,
some of the theoretical considerations will
be outlined, and the hypotheses tested will
be presented.

One of the writers has set forth some ele-
ments of a theory of communicative acts.
The theory assumes that by means of com-
munication individuals are able to maintain
simultaneous orientation toward one another
and toward the object of their communica-
tion, That is, communication enables people
to know something about how each feels
toward the other and also about the object
of communication. Such knowledge is held
to be essential in establishing both the “ready
calculability” of others’ behavior and the
basis for consensus which are so essential to
the maintenance of social systems.

When the orientations of persons are simi-
lar, both toward each other and toward ob-
jects common to them, their collective adap-
tation toward their common environment
is presumably facilitated. When people are
mutually attracted to each other and have
similar attitudes, it is easier to know how
the others will act, and to check or validate
one’s own attitudes, than in the absence of
these conditions. If this is assumed, then

T:: paper presents a partial report of
communication leading to similarity of at-
titudes will be rewarded. When attraction
toward the other persons is positive, simi-
larity of attitude will be more rewarding
than in the absence of such attraction.
Similarly, if the attitude is strongly held,
the discovery, via communication, of simi-
lar attitudes on the part of others will be
more rewarding than if the attitude is one
of relative indifference.

Since similarity of orientation can be
achieved through communication, communi-
cation is important in influencing attitudes,
particularly when the communicators are
members of a group and when an attitude is
intensely held. Communication conveys not
only feelings about another person or some
issue but also information or facts which may
affect another’s attitude.

If one is interested in the psychological
processes by which communicators maintain
common orientations toward common aspects
of their environment, it is necessary to make
certain assumptions not only about “objec-
tive” similarity but also about individual per-
ceptions of others’ orientations. Accuracy of
such perceptions is likely to increase with
increased opportunity to obtain information,
via communication, and to decrease as a
result of the “distorting” influences associ-
ated with the affective components of inter-
personal attraction and intensity of own
orientations. Whatever the degree of accu-
racy involved, such perceptions presumably
influence communicative behavior (both in
transmitting and in receiving information),
and thus in turn influence the nature of the
