American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
In sociological literature the term “role”
has been used in two distinct, though inter-
related ways. It refers to the imitation and
testing out by the child of different sequences
of adult behavior. It refers also to culturally
conditioned patterns of behavior, i.e. to the
end-products of socialization, though the
literature hardly clarifies whether “cultural
roles” are the ever-changing river-beds or
the railways of adult conduct.

Mr. Foote clearly addresses himself to the
first, the genetic aspect of “role-taking.” He
notes that the “role-theory” of individual
growth, as Mead and Dewey formulated it,
lacks a theory of motivation. This is not,
strictly speaking, correct, since both authors
imply a dominant motivation which prompts
the individual to play the roles of others.
Dewey emphasized the importance for the
individual of fitting into the adult “defini-
tions of the situation,” while Mead empha-
sized the desire of the individual to associate,
to play-act with others, in the game as well
as in the serious business of living. The
impulse of compliance and the associative
impulse, one might say.

It is true, however, that in their concern
with a behavioristic approach neither Mead
nor Dewey paid much attention to motiva-
tion; hence their social psychology is not
concerned with the individual, but with the
gestural mechanisms of his socialization.
Since social psychology is a field of confused
jargon, it might be useful to remark on a
tendency of the Neo-Freudian school, which
has much in common with Mr. Foote’s
remedy for the dilemma of behaviorism.
Many disciples of Freud have commented
on the paradox of a therapy which aims at
the emotional restoration of a patient by
literally taking him apart. They have at-
tempted to restore the individual’s person-
ality, as it were, though they have done so
in a variety of ways. Erickson speaks of ego-
identity, Fromm speaks of self-realization
(in the Hegelian tradition), others again
speak of ego-structure or strength. And the
bridge to the Behaviorists is established by
Sullivan who speaks of the self as an out-
growth of reflected appraisals.

Mr. Foote’s emphasis on identification
parallels these developments from the other
side. As the Neo-Freudians seek to restore
the individual’s identity as a reaction to the
disintegrative effects of Freudian therapy, so
Foote wants to restore the individual’s iden-
tity as a reaction to his disintegration into a
role-playing automaton. I think these efforts
are useful, though the different theories give
sometimes the impression of being matters
of taste or preference. Foote inveighs against
the predispositionists, but one may wonder
whether an individual’s personal history does
not turn out to be a history of past identifi-
cations, which establish cumulative predis-
positions for future actions. And that in
turn is hardly different from Erickson’s
concept of ego-identity, which is the pat-
terned outgrowth of past interpersonal ex-
periences. I suspect that such differences of
emphasis as remain are due to the more
pessimistic orientation of the Neo-Freudian
and the more optimistic orientation of the
Behavioristic school. We are apparently
much in need of a preliminary synthesis of
these approaches so that we may trade
clarity for a profusion of terms, each of
which refers to similar phenomena albeit
with some connotative differences. The Neo-
Freudian concern with character-structure
and the concern with motivation on the part
of social behaviorists facilitate such a syn-
thesis, but they do not establish it.
