@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
S ome students of comparative industrial de-
velopment, notably “convergence theorists”
of the “American Liberal School,” have suggest-
ed that as industrialization progresses a shift oc-
curs from ascriptive to achievement-based crite-
ria in the allocation of individuals to social posi-
tions (Kerr, Dunlop, Harbison, and Myers 1960;
Lipset 1969; Treiman 1970).' This implies con-
vergence in processes of stratification as nations
reach similar levels of industrialization. Other
researchers have questioned convergence theo-
ries, maintaining that cross-societal differences
in institutional structures produce variations in
stratification processes that convergence theories
cannot explain (e.g., Erickson and Goldthorpe
1987a,b; Haller, Konig, Krause, and Kurz 1985;
Goldthorpe 1966, 1984). For example, industri-

* Direct all correspondence to Daniel H. Krym-
kowski, Department of Sociology, Dartmouth Col-
lege, Hanover, NH 03755. I thank Kazimierz SJom-
czyriski, Zbigniew Sawiriski, Stanley Udy, Tadeusz
Krauze, Wlodzimierz WesoJowski, and the Editor and
anonymous reviewers of ASR for their helpful com-
ments on previous drafts of this paper. This research
began as my dissertation, and I thank Robert Hauser,
Robert Mare, Charles Halaby, and David Featherman
for fruitful comments at that stage. Support from
Dartmouth College’s Burke Research Initiation Fund
for Assistant Professors is gratefully acknowledged.
The paper was completed while the author was a Vis-
iting Scholar at the Polish Academy of Sciences in
Warsaw.

'For a discussion of the relationship between in-
dustrialization and stratification processes other than
status attainment, see Form (1979).
alism arguments stress the increasing importance
of formal education for occupational placement
in advanced service economies (Featherman and
Hauser 1978, chap. 5). However, education may
be just as important or more important in less
industrialized societies, especially if the educa-
tional systems provide vocational training as well
as general education. The link between education
and occupation may be governed more by the
structure of the particular educational system than
by the level of industrialization, and no unam-
biguous hypothesis emerges regarding the effects
of industrialization on this connection.

The effect of industrialization on other param-
eters of the stratification process is also equivocal,
e.g., the relationship between social origin and
subsequent attainment. While some authors ar-
gue that the effect of industrialization is essentially
linear, with ascription declining as industrializa-
tion advances (e.g. Treiman 1970), others find
nonlinearities in the process (e.g., Jackman 1975;
Grusky 1983). The latter authors hypothesize that
initial industrialization, which often occurs rap-
idly and involves an extensive shift out of farm-
ing, decreases ascription, but once a certain level
of industrialization is reached, the payoffs to de-
creased ascription may lessen.”

Furthermore, some researchers have found that
industrialization has little impact on origin effects
(Grusky and Hauser 1984). Others have conjec-

? This is important for Poland which underwent a
postwar transformation from a largely farming econ-
omy to a manufacturing economy.
tured that although highly developed societies
may exhibit decreased direct effects of social
origins on social destinations, they may also
display greater indirect effects of origins through
educational attainment (Parsons 1970).

I consider the impact of cross-societal varia-
tion in educational structures on the process of
status attainment. Although the nature of its role
in the attainment process is often disputed (com-
pare Bowles and Gintis 1976 to Blau and Duncan
1967), it is widely agreed that educational insti-
tutions provide the primary mechanism by which
individuals are assigned to social destinations.
Further, this is true not only of Western capitalist
societies. Some scholars have argued that educa-
tional institutions are most influential in state
socialist societies because of their role in perpet-
uating class reproduction (Bauman 1966, p. 537)
and recruiting elites (Konrad and Szelenyi 1979).
Thus, the importance of educational structures
transcends the boundaries of political systems.

Since there are reliatively few comparative
studies of status attainment, the simple model
pictured in Figure 1 can serve as an adequate
baseline (Treiman and Yip 1989, pp. 374-5).
Using data for males in Poland, the United States,
and West Germany, I test whether intercountry
differences in educational institutions affect spe-
cific parameters of this model. Because of the
very large farm population in Poland, I estimate
the parameters of this model for all men and for
those from a nonfarm background to test whether
findings are influenced by the large number of
men from farm origins in Poland.
keep the number of countries relatively small to
examine institutional structures in some detail.
Second, it was important to select countries with
contrasting levels of industrialization and types
of educational systems. Third, while the princi-
pal institution considered is the educational sys-
tem, I wanted to examine the impact of other
institutions in a preliminary way.

Poland, the U.S., and West Germany satisfy
these conditions. They provide interesting con-
trasts in levels of industrialization and in educa-
tional systems. The U.S. and West Germany share
similar levels of industrialization but have quite
different educational systems, which allows us
to isolate the effects of the latter. Poland is less
industrialized than the other two countries, but
its educational system is more similar to West
Germany’s. If its stratification patterns resemble
those of West Germany, this would suggest that
educational structure can override the impact of
industrialization, contradicting theses of conver-
gence in stratification processes. Finally, because
Poland is a state socialist society, I can examine
the role of certain political factors in the status
attainment process.
sjooyss Azasiny,

   

         

I

t

€

Jooyss Areurig g

9

L

8

6

Jooypg JeuoNeI0A,
fir neokt— ol
Jooyag Arepuoseg . zi
Teoruyoa], €l
yeuones0,-1s0g vw
. st
wineddhT “ 1
Jeuones0,-isog — OOS TeoHUYoa], ul
Arepuoseg-1s0d t
Slooyss s0y3Iy

pue sonisioatugQ
suopeSiepury pue sjooysselg

1
z
£

Jooyss Arewnig
9

L

8

6
Tooyss Yat ol
ul
SONISIOATUQ) a
pure sagajjop +L
atenpelsiopug, st

| ol

Arepuosag-1s0g 19410 +1

sjooypg [euolssajolg
pure olenpein
The most important contrast is the primary to
secondary school transition, which functions
much more as a point of student differentiation
in Poland and West Germany than in the United
States. In West Germany, all students attend el-
ementary school from age six until age ten, while
in Poland schooling begins at age seven and lasts
until age fourteen. At this point in their educa-
tional careers, students in both countries are
tracked based on criteria such as standardized
examinations, grades, and teacher evaluations.
Once tracked, a student’s educational career is
determined, as there is very little intertrack mo-
bility. Virtually the only path to the university in
West Germany is the gymnasium; in Poland it is
the lyceum.

Since Poland is a state socialist society, con-
crete measures have been taken during the post-
war period to allow students from farm and man-
ual social backgrounds greater access to all levels
of the educational system. For example, bonus
points have been given to university applicants
from farm and manual backgrounds. Thus, the
Polish educational system is charged with alter-
ing basic aspects of the social structure (Adamski
and Hayrynen 1978, p. 242).

The United States system is characterized by
an absence of rigidly demarcated points of tran-
sition involving such instruments as state-run
standardized examinations. Curricular tracking
exists, e.g., the college preparatory curricula in
many high schools, but the U.S. system of tracking
is much less rigid and differentiated and all stu-
dents attend school under the “same roof” (Ru-
binson 1986, pp. 521-3). Collins has characterized
the American system as one in which selection
takes place mainly through attrition, as a “contest”
Tuns its course (Collins 1979).
al training is available at both the secondary and
tertiary levels in the United States, ties to the
economy are not as extensive.

In Germany, the government created a varie-
gated educational system to meet the needs of
the economy and the government bureaucracy
(Ringer 1979). A highly selective and differenti-
ated system was established to avoid creating an
“urban, educated proletariat” (Ringer 1979, p.
50) or a cadre of “angry young men who have
elite skills without elite station” (Turner 1960, p.
132). Thus, access to higher education was highly
restricted, open mainly to students from favored
backgrounds.

Primary school leavers in West Germany enter
one of three tracks: (1) basic school; (2) middle
school; (3) gymnasium. The majority enroll in
basic school, which is closely tied to various ap-
prenticeships in craft shops and in industry. Most
of these students end their education after their
apprenticeship and begin work, although some
continue on for intermediate or higher level
technical training. The middle school has some-
what higher performance standards than the ba-
sic school and leads to careers in midrange tech-
nical and commercial occupations. As the prin-
cipal path to the university, the gymnasium em-
phasizes a general education program, but there
are explicit links between this general academic
track and careers in the civil service. Thus, at
every level of the West German educational
system, certain training prepares students for
specific occupations.

Poland features similar connections between
educational and occupational attainment; cen-
tralized planning seeks to match the supply of and
demand for persons with particular types of train-
ing. Manpower needs are stressed to coordinate
“educational planning with social and economic
planning” (Szczepariski 1978, p. 1) and adapt the
educational system to the needs of the economy
(Liberska 1979, p. 10). This tends to result in a
“rigid allocation of young men to jobs by level of
education” (Haller and Mach 1981, p. 71).

After completing primary school, most students
enter one of three tracks: (1) basic vocational
school; (2) secondary vocational school; (3)
grammar school (lyceum). The majority of stu-
dents enroll in the first track, which provides
training in manual occupations. The second track
leads to employment in middle-level clerical and
industrial jobs, or to higher level technical train-
ing. The grammar track is the main route to the
university; the vast majority of university stu-
dents originate in this track.
I focus on three specific issues: inequality of ed-
ucational opportunity, inequality of occupational
opportunity, and the allocating effect of education.
Hypotheses concerning the first and third issues
derive directly from our discussion of the three
educational systems.

(1) Because of early tracking, inequality of
educational opportunity should be severest in
Germany (see also Miiller and Mayer 1975, pp.
45-6). Insofar as ability — the primary basis of
tracking — is related social origin, this will re-
produce inequality. This has been the case for a
number of societies (Sewell and Hauser 1975;
Psacharopoulos 1977; Dronkers and de Jong
1979). Furthermore, the earlier tracking is be-
gun, the larger the origin effect. The later in the
educational career tracking occurs, the more time
non-origin factors have to influence a child’s ed-
ucational success.

Origin-dependent factors aside from ability also
come into play in the educational attainment
process, especially in early selection processes.
An example of this is the cultural capital provid-
ed to a youngster from a family of favorable
social origin (DiMaggio 1982; DiMaggio and
Mohr 1985). In addition, teachers have some say
in the selection process as well, both directly
(Grittner 1983) and indirectly through their en-
couragement (Sewell and Hauser 1975). Teach-
ers often play a central role in tracking decisions,
and they may be influenced by social origins in
making their recommendations (Garnier and Hout
1976; Hout and Garnier 1979).

Poland also features extensive tracking, but it
occurs later in the educational career. Certain
educational policies have also been adopted by
the Polish authorities to weaken the relationship
between origins and destinations. But probably
more important for Poland is its postwar trans-
formation from a largely agricultural economy
to a manufacturing economy. This “initial indus-
trialization,” as discussed by a number of authors
(see Grusky and Hauser 1984, p. 20; Erickson
and Goldthorpe 1987a, p. 55), is said to promote
equality of opportunity, since it requires external
use of the educational system to train a labor
force for manual and nonmanual work.‘ The ed-
ucation system, it is argued, uses achievement-
based rather than ascription-based criteria of se-
lection. Thus, I expect inequality of educational
opportunity in Poland to be less than that in West
Germany and probably similar to the United
States pattern.

(2) Ihave no clear expectations regarding the
comparative inequality of occupational opportu-
nity among the three countries. Common under-
standing often stresses the United States as an
exceptional case that features more extensive
occupational opportunities than other countries,
but this view has recently been criticized (see
Erickson and Goldthorpe 1985). Some research
suggests greater inequality of opportunity in West
Germany (see Miiller and Mayer 1975 for a re-
view), but this research has not been explicitly
comparative, and it has more often dealt with
rather large occupational groupings rather than
occupational status. Finally, previous research
concerning Poland has found greater equality of
occupational opportunity than in some other
countries (Pohoski, P6ntinen, and Zag6rski 1978),
but the societies considered and the methodolo-
gies employed differed from the present analysis.
TI expect, however, that the massive postwar in-
dustrialization in Poland has resulted in some re-
duction in inequality of occupational opportunity.

(3) Because of the extensive links between ed-
ucational and occupational structures in Poland
and West Germany, education should be more
influential in allocating individuals to occupa-
tional positions in the two European countries.
Although Collins deems the United States “the

4Moreover, in Poland the decimation of the popu-

lation during World War II depleted the labor force
further necessitating a massive educational effort.
Father’s
Occupation

1

  
 

Son’s
Education

  

Occupation

  
 

Father’s
Education

Treiman score
YyrVgi SEI score
¥3+Yigi Indigenous prestige score
Yyr¥e: Education in years

Y50¥ 7: Education in canonical score
1972 of a .5 percent stratified random sample of
the entire Polish adult population. These data have
been found to be highly representative when
compared to census information (Zagérski 1976).

The U.S. data are from the 1973 Occupational
Changes in a Generation Survey. This stratified,
multistage cluster sample was drawn as an ad-
junct to the March 1973 Current Population Sur-
vey (Featherman and Hauser 1975). The survey
represents men aged 20-65 in the civilian nonin-
stitutional population. These data have been ex-
tensively analyzed over the past decade (see
Hauser 1987).

The West German data come from the 1976
ALLBUS survey, conducted under the guidance
of the Center for Surveys, Methods, and Analy-
sis at the University of Mannheim. These data
were designed to be comparable to the General
Social Surveys carried out by the National
Opinion Research Center in the United States.
The target population was persons 18 years of
age and older living in the Federal Republic of
Germany. Multistage stratified random sampling
procedures were used. For further technical in-
Table 1. Means and Standard Deviations of Variables: All Men and Men of Nonfarm Background in Poland, the U.S., and

 

 

 

 

West Germany
All Men Nonfarm Men
West West

Variable Poland US. Germany Poland US. Germany
Father’s SIOPS 32.225 38.387 40.817 31.197 38.811 41.297

(8.450) (11.246) (11.255) (12.945) (12.395) (12.317)
Father’s education 6.163 8.408 8.401 7.604 9.064 8.736

(2.667) (4.036) (2.790) (2.929) (3.967) (2.981)
Respondent’s education 8.732 11.945 10.368 10.007 12.539 10.650

(3.083) (3.238) (2.852) (2.944) (2.891) (2.964)
Respondent’s SIOPS 32.650 42.060 43.604 35.373 43.454 45,281

(12.368) (13.257) (12.418) (14.814) (13.499) (12.381)
N 25,728 16,390 394 10,840 12,300 303

 

Note: Standard deviations in parentheses. SIOPS denotes Treiman’s Standard International Occupational Prestige Score.
Education is measured in years.
type measures of occupational position: the
Treiman (1977) Standard International Occupa-
tional Prestige Scale (SIOPS); a local, indige-
nous occupational prestige score; and a local,
indigenous socioeconomic status score. Validity
coefficients published elsewhere (Krymkowski
1988, p. 201) show that the occupational con-
struct is dominated by socioeconomic status, so
the prestige scores are included as an additional
(though flawed) measure of socioeconomic sta-
tus.” In addition, the Treiman score, because it is
a standard measure, establishes a basis for inter-
societal comparison.

For Poland, I use the Sfomczyriski/Kacpro-
wicz Prestige Score and the Sfomczyriski/
Kacprowicz Socioeconomic Status Score
(SJomezyriski and Kacprowicz 1979) as indige-
nous indicators. The Polish Prestige Score is a
reputational index: of occupational prestige
(Slomezyriski and Kacprowicz 1979, p. 27-37),
created using a methodology similar to that for

 

made that race should be added in the case of the
United States to more fully specify social background.
Arguments could also be made to add variables to the
models for the European countries. Since the data sets
available preclude a “full” specification of social
background in all three countries, I have chosen the
basic model of Figure 3 in the interest of estimating
the same model for each country.

7 Results published elsewhere (Krymkowski 1988,
p. 201) also show that the intercorrelations among the
indicators are, for the most part, quite high. The ex-
ception concems the Treiman score, which is some-
what more weakly associated with the other indica-
tors, especially in Poland. The multiple-indicator model
thus leads to different substantive findings than a model
that measures occupational attainment using only the
Treiman score (Krymkowski 1988, p. 203-204).
obtaining prestige scores in the United States.
The Socioeconomic Status Score for Poland is a
replicate of the Duncan Socioeconomic Index
(Sfomcezyriski and Kacprowicz 1979, p. 89-93).

For the U.S., Iemploy the Siegel Prestige Score
(Siegel 1971) and the MSEI2 update of the Dun-
can Socioeconomic Index (Featherman and
Stevens 1982). For West Germany I utilize the
Magnitude Prestige Score and the Wegener So-
cioeconomic Status Score (Wegener 1985). The
Magnitude Prestige Score is, again, a reputation-
al index of occupational prestige, while the So-
cioeconomic Status score was created using a
factor analysis of three aspects of occupations:
(1) average income; (2) average education; (3)
average subjective class placement of the indi-
viduals engaged in the occupation. Although the
West German score was created using a slightly
different methodology, it does feature the average
education and income levels of occupations as
chief components.

To establish a comparable metric for occupa-
tional attainment, I normalize the unobservable
using the Treiman score. This is the logical choice,
as SIOPS is the only indicator that is identical in
all three countries. Thus, the variance of the oc-
cupational construct is the variance the Treiman
score shares with the other indicators.

Two indicators are used for father’s and son’s
education. To establish a comparable cross-
country metric for the educational attainment la-
tent construct, years of education is utilized. Al-
though years of schooling is a good measure of
educational attainment for the United States, it is
not a good measure for some European coun-
tries. In West Germany, for instance, certain types
of vocational schooling that require similar years
to complete result in very different occupational
outcomes. Thus, it is necessary to supplement
years of schooling with a measure of educational
attainment that reflects the “value” of each level
of education for occupational attainment.

To accomplish this, I construct an effect-pro-
portional score for educational attainment in each
country. The general methodological idea behind
the effect-proportional score was discussed in
detail by Lyons (1971), and such a measure was
employed in a comparative analysis of status at-

®For Poland characteristics of the entire labor force
were used to construct the socioeconomic status score,
while male characteristics were used for the U.S. and
West Germany. Kazimierz M. Sofomczyoriski has
informed me in a private communication that this
difference regarding Poland is inconsequential.
tainment by Treiman and Terrell (1975). The
construction of the score is straightforward. First,
the mean level of occupational attainment for
respondents in each educational category is
computed.? Second, these mean values (or ef-
fect-proportional values) are used as measures of
individual educational attainment for both re-
spondent’s and father’s education. Put another
way, this procedure creates an educational at-
tainment scale by utilizing the average value of
occupational attainment for each level of educa-
tion. Assigning values in this way linearizes and
maximizes the relationship between educational
attainment and occupational attainment.'°

However, a problem arises in a multiple indi-
cator model: which of three indicators of occu-
pational attainment should be used? By means of
acanonical correlation analysis, all three are used.
I code the educational levels as a series of dum-
my variables and then canonically correlate these
variables with the three occupational measures.
The raw canonical weights that result for the ed-
ucation dummies are used as the effect-propor-
tional values. Both the years of schooling and the
canonical education measures are presented in
Table 2. In all three countries, the relationship
between years of schooling and the effect-pro-
portional values is nonlinear. See Krymkowski
(1988, pp. 196-7) for further details.

lalso specify certain correlated errors between
the measures of educational and occupational at-
tainment; these correlated errors are denoted by
curved arrows in Figure 3. Models with and
without correlated errors yield qualitatively sim-
ilar findings, but I prefer the model with correlat-
ed errors. The correlations make substantive sense
in that they are posited to occur between similar
and identical indicators, and they improve the fit
of the model. See Krymkowski (1988) for details
on the measurement model.

°In the U.S. case, the “educational categories” are
years of education, because years of schooling is a
good measure of educational attainment for the Unit-
ed States.

©The unstandardized coefficient from the simple
regression of occupational attainment on the effect-
proportional score for education will be 1 in each
country. This raises no problem of interpretation in the
context of the multiple indicator model, because the
metric of the education construct is years of schooling.
Cross-societal comparison of unstandardized effects
is thus possible, because the metrics of the unobserv-
able variables are the same in each country (years of
schooling and the Treiman score for occupation). In
the present context, however, I am more interested in
measures of association than in measures of effect.
West Germany:

University graduate 17 3.120 3.222

Engineering school 15 2.624 2.868

Special vocational school 12 956 1.191

Technical school 12 1.603 1.794

Abitur (usually following 13 2.091 2.543
Gymnasium)

Mittlere Reife (Realschule) 10 936 1.231

Business or other 9 613 892
vocational school

Trade or agriculture 9 065 327
vocational school

Basic school completed 8 .220 566

Basic school not completed 7 .000 .000

 

Note: The years mappings for Poland are from Zagérski
(1986); for West Germany, they are from Herz (1986).
Canonical score refers to the raw canonical weights obtained
from canonical correlation analysis. See text for details.
The substantive hypotheses under consideration
are assessed using the measures of association
produced by the structural equation models rath-
er than measures of effect. That is, I am con-
cemed with correlation-type measures as opposed
to regression slopes. The reason for this is quite
simple, even though some previous work has
tested such hypotheses using measures of effect
(e.g., Meyer, Tuma, and Zagérski 1979).

For example, to assess inequality of educa-
tional opportunity, I use R? from the regression
of educational attainment on social background
(Hauser and Featherman 1976). Taking the ex-
tent of educational inequality as a given in each
country, this measure provides an estimate of the
percent of the variation in education accounted
for by social background, i.e., it is a measure of
the extent to which social background determines
educational attainment. Such a statistic is prefer-
able to a regression slope, which simply gauges
the rate of return per unit of the independent vari-
able in terms of the dependent variable. Slopes
can be affected by true differences in the vari-
ances of the variables, and I am treating those
variances as given, fixed quantities.

Clearly, measures of association reflect not only
the true scatter in attempting to predict one vari-
able from other variables, but also measurement
error. In this analysis, I am striving to reduce
measurement error, and in the context of the
multiple indicator model I correct for measure-
ment error in occupational status. I do not correct
for measurement error in education, though I at-
tempt to keep it at a minimum by utilizing effect-
proportional scores.

Inequality of occupational opportunity, or the
total impact of social origins on social destina-
tions, is assessed using R? from a model that es-
timates the effect of social background on social
destinations. This model, however, excludes
measures of educational attainment (it is a re-
duced-form model). Hence, the R? indicates the
extent to which occupational attainment depends
on social background.

The allocating effect of education vis-a-vis
occupation is also measured using a proportional
statistic. I compute the percent of occupational
variance “uniquely” explained by education, i.e.,
I calculate the extent to which education explains
that portion of the variance in occupation not
explained by social background. This statistic
gives an indication of the degree to which educa-
tional attainment uniquely determines occupa-
tional attainment.
The results for all men are displayed in Table 3.
The large L? values for Poland and the United
States are a function of the large sample sizes in
these countries. In terms ofthe goodness-of-fit
index,. the model does a satisfactory job of ac-
counting for the observed covariances in the three
countries.

Table 3 reports the association statistics, which
test the substantive concerns discussed earlier.
Inequality of educational opportunity, measured
as the R? from the regression of education on
social background, is greatest in West Germany
(.278), followed by Poland (.223), and the Unit-
ed States (.220). Thus, the West German value is
about 25 percent greater than values in the other
two countries.'!

Inequality of occupational opportunity, mea-
sured by the R? from the regression of social
destinations on social origins, is much larger in
West Germany than in the other two countries.
The West German value (.309) is approximately

" Although I do not report tests of significance for
the intercountry differences in association measures,
any difference that is large enough to be substantively
interesting is statistically significant. This is due to
the sample sizes, which are especially large in two of.
the three countries. As Kendall and Stuart (1979, p.
363) show, the variance of R? rapidly goes to zero as
sample size increases.
I examine the association statistics separately for
men of nonfarm backgrounds because the status
attainment process of these men may differ from
that of men from farm origins. Since occupation-
al inheritance is known to be extensive in the
farm sector, the associations observed for all men
may be reduced in magnitude when looking only
at men of nonfarm origin. That is, some of the
observed intercountry differences may be due to
differing proportions of men of nonfarm back-
ground in the three countries. This may be espe-
cially important for Poland, which has the largest
farm population — about 58 percent of the Polish
men came froma farm background (see Table 1).

Table 3 gives the results of the model in Figure
3 for men of nonfarm background. The results
are similar to those for all men though some of
the magnitudes differ. Inequality of educational
opportunity is again greatest in West Germany,
Most of the findings are in agreement with the
substantive hypotheses. First, inequality of edu-
cational opportunity was greatest in West Germa-
ny, as predicted. Although Poland’s educational
system is similar to its West German counterpart,
Poland as a state socialist society has had an his-
toric commitment to combatting inequality of op-
portunity. Thus, its political system may have
influenced the status attainment process. But
Poland has also undergone major upheavals over
the course of this century. The most significant in
the present context has been a massive transfor-
mation from a farming economy to an industrial
economy, which has necessitated retraining the
labor force to meet the changing economy’s needs.
Industrialization is influential, then, but not in the
manner predicted by proponents of the industrial-
ism thesis. Industrialization seems to have “non-
linear” effects, with early, rather extensive indus-
trialization playing the key role.

The total association between social origins
and social destinations is higher in the European
countries, especially in West Germany. Consis-
tent with previous research, inequality of occu-
pational opportunity is highest in West Germa-
ny. Poland displays slightly more inequality of
occupational opportunity than the United States,
but much less than in West Germany. As with
inequality of educational opportunity, the com-
mitment of socialist Poland to the widening of
opportunities for people of disadvantaged social
backgrounds has probably loosened the associa-
tion between origins and destinations, but the
continuing transformation of the labor force in
Poland has probably been more important. This
transformation affected farmers as they moved
out of farming usually into manual occupations,
and men of nonfarm origins as they moved into
occupations dissimilar from their occupational
origins. In short, extensive structural mobility in
Poland loosened the impact of social origins on
social destinations (see Zagérski 1984).

The allocating effect of education was stron-
gest in the European countries, but the intercoun-
try differences were not large, especially com-
paring the U.S. and West Germany. This is prob-
Simple models have uncovered similarities and
differences in the status attainment process in
three societies. Many of the findings were in line
with my hypotheses, which were largely based
on the anticipated effects of differences in educa-
tional systems. Some findings directly contra-
dicted predictions derived from industrialism ar-
guments. For example, West Germany consis-
tently exhibited a stronger association between
social origins and social destinations than the other
two countries, even though industrialization in
West Germany is greater than Poland, and simi-
lar to that in the United States. Industrialization
arguments are thus difficult to translate into pre-
dictions about the status attainment process.

The discovery of certain differences among
the countries can probably be traced, at least in
part, to the special attention paid to measurement
decisions. The use of both identical indicators to
specify common metrics and country-specific
indicators to increase content validity has not been
done before.

Especially important is the measurement of
education. The use of effect-proportional scores
for education permits the comparison of attain-
ment processes for social systems with vastly
different educational structures. These scores are
preferable to the construction of identical educa-
tion classification schemes, which may be impos-
sible for widely differing educational institutions.

This analysis represents a first step in the anal-
ysis of status attainment in Poland, the U.S., and
West Germany. First, it considers a very simple
model. Given present data availability it is diffi-
cult to overcome this problem, but future analy-
ses should include more variables. It would be
interesting, for example, to have cross-societal
indicators of ability and other important mea-
sures, for some of these variables may operate in
different ways in different cultures. Some recent
work suggests that ability operates in a similar
way across a variety of societies, however.
Sfomczytiski (1986, p. 97) noted that the corre-
lation between ability and educational attainment
in Poland was similar to that found in analyses of
a number of Western societies.

Second, this analysis deals only with men. The
roles of women may differ more intersocietally
than those of men, so the sampling universe
eventually needs to be enlarged.’? Third, age,
period, and cohort effects need to be examined in
light of the fact that the twentieth century has
witnessed many dramatic events, especially as
regards the European countries. Finally, more
recent data sets need to be considered — Poland
in particular is undergoing a period of extensive
institutional change, although the educational
system to date has changed little. West Germany,
on the other hand, witnessed an opening up of
educational opportunities in the 1980’s.
Comparative Perspective, edited by Erik Allardt
and WJodzimierz Wesofowski. Warsaw: Polish
Scientific Publishers.

Apanasewicz, Nellie. 1976. The Educational System
of Poland. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.

Bauman, Zygmunt. 1966. “Economic Growth, Social
Structure, and Elite Formation.” Pp. 534-40 in
Class, Status, and Power, edited by Reinhard Ben-
dix and Seymour Martin Lipset. New York: The
Free Press.

Blau Peter M. and Otis Dudley Duncan. 1967. The
American Occupational Structure. New York: The
Free Press.

Bodenman, Paul. 1977. The Educational System of the
Federal Republic of Germany. Washington DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.

Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. 1976. Schooling
in Capitalist America. New York: Basic Books.
Collins, Randall. 1979. The Credential Society. New

York: Academic Press.

DiMaggio, Paul. 1982. “Cultural Capital and School
Success: the Impact of Status Culture Participation
on the Grades of U.S. High School Students.”
American Sociological Review 47:189-201.

DiMaggio, Paul and John. Mohr. 1985. “Cultural Cap-
ital, Educational Attainment, and Marital Selec-
tion.” American Journal of Sociology 90:1231-61.

Dronkers, Jaap and Ulkje de Jong. 1979. “Jencks and
Fagerlind in a Dutch Way.” Social Science Infor-
mation 18:761-81.

Erickson, Robert and John H. Goldthorpe. 1985. “Are
American Rates of Social Mobility Exceptionally
High?” European Sociological Review 1:1-22.

. 1987a. “Commonality and Variation in
Social Fluidity in Industrial Nations. Part I: A Model
for Evaluating the ‘FJH Hypothesis’.” European
Sociological Review 3:54-77.

. 1987b. “Commonality and Variation in
Social Fluidity in Industrial Nations. Part II: The
Model of Core Social Fluidity Applied.” European
Sociological Review 3:145-66.

Featherman, David L. and Robert M. Hauser. 1975.
“Design for a Replicate Study of Social Mobility in
the United States.” Pp. 219-52 in Social Indicator
Models, edited by Kenneth C. Land and Seymour
Spilerman. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

. 1978. Opportunity and Change. New York:
Academic Press.

Featherman, David L. and Gillian Stevens. 1982. “A
Revised Index of Occupational Status: Application
in Analysis of Sex Differences in Attainment.” Pp.
141-82 in Social Structure and Behavior, edited by
Robert M. Hauser, David Mechanic, Archibald O.
Haller, and Taissa S. Hauser. New York: Academ-
ic Press.

Form, William. 1979. “Comparative Industrial Soci-
ology and the Convergence Hypothesis.” Annual
Review of Sociology 5:1-25.

Garnier, Maurice and Michael Hout. 1976. “Inequal-
ity of Educational Opportunity in France and the
United States.” Social Science Research 5:225-46.

Goldthorpe, John H. 1966. “Social Stratification in
Industrial Society.” Pp. 648-59 in Class, Status and
Power, edited by Reinhard Bendix and Seymour
Martin Lipset. New York: The Free Press.

. 1984. “The End of Convergence: Corpo-
ratist and Dualist Trends in Modern Western Soci-
eties.” Pp. 315-43 in Order and Conflict in Con-
temporary Capitalism, edited by John H. Gold-
thorpe. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Goldthorpe, John H. and Walter Miiller. 1982. CAS-
MIN Research Proposal. CASMIN Project: Uni-
versity of Mannheim, West Germany.

Grittner, Frank. 1983. Schooling and Educational
Competency in Germany: What Can We Learn from
the Federal Republic? Unpublished manuscript. State
Department of Public Instruction, Madison, WI.

Grusky, David B. 1983. “Industrialization and the
Status Attainment Process.” American Sociologi-
cal Review 48:494-505.

Grusky, David B. and Robert M. Hauser. 1984.
“Comparative Social Mobility Revisited.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 49:19-38.

Haller, Max and Bogdan Mach. 1981. “Structural
Changes and Mobility in Capitalist and Socialist
Society.” VASMA Working Paper No. 17: Uni-
versity of Mannheim, West Germany.

Haller, Max, Wolfgang Konig, Peter Krause, and Ka-
rin Kurz. 1985. “Patterns of Career Mobility and
Structural Positions in Advanced Capitalist Societ-
ies: A Comparison of Men in Austria, France, and
the United States.” American Sociological Review
50:579-602.

Hauser, Robert M. 1987. “The 1962 and 1973 Occu-
pational Changes in a Generation Surveys.” Work-
ing Paper 87-5. Center for Demography and Ecol-
ogy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.

Hauser, Robert M. and David L. Featherman. 1976.
“Equality of Schooling: Trends and Prospects.”
Sociology of Education 49:99-120.

Herz, Thomas. 1986. Social Mobility: An ISSC
Workbook in Comparative Analysis. New York:
Campus Verlag.

Hout, Michael and Maurice Garnier. 1979. “Curricu-
lum Placement and Educational Stratification in
France.” Sociology of Education 53:146-56.

Intemational Labour Office. 1973. Yearbook of La-
bour Statistics. Geneva: Intemational Labour Office.

Jackman, Robert W. 1975. Politics and Social Ine-
quality: A Comparative Analysis. New York: Wiley.

Jéreskog, Karl G. and Dag Sérbom. 1984. LISREL VI
User’ s Guide. Mooresville, IN: Scientific Software.

Kendall, Maurice G. and Alan Stuart. 1979. The Ad-
vanced Theory of Statistics, Volume 2. London:
Charles Griffin and Company.

Kerckhoff, Alan C. 1984. “The Current State of Mo-
bility Research.” Sociological Quarterly 25:139-53.

Kerr, Clark, John T. Dunlop, Frederick H. Harbison,
and Charles A. Myers. 1960. Industrialism and In-
dustrial Man. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Universi-
ty Press.

K6nig, Wolfgang, Paul Liittinger, and Walter Miiller.
1988. “A Comparative Analysis of the Develop-
ment and Structure of Educational Systems.”
CASMIN Working paper No. 12. University of
Mannheim, West Germany.

Kolankiewicz, George and Paul G. Lewis. 1988. Po-
land. London and New York: Pinter Publishers.
Konrad, George and Ivan Szelényi. 1979. The Intel-
lectuals on the Road to Class Power. New York:

Harcourt Brace.

Krymkowski, Daniel H. 1988. “Measurement in the
Comparative Study of the Process of Stratification.”
Social Science Research 17:191-205.

Liberska, Barbara. 1979. Education and Youth Em-
ployment in Poland. Berkeley, CA: Carnegie
Council on Policy Studies in Higher Education.

Lipset, Seymour Martin. 1969. Revolution and
Counter Revolution. London: Heinemann.

Lyons, Morgan. 1971. “Techniques for Using Ordi-
nal Measures in Regression and Path Analysis.”
Pp. 147-71 in Sociological Methodology, edited by
Herbert Costner. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Maurice, Marc, Francois Sellier, and Jean-Jacques
Silvestre. 1986. The Social Foundations of Indus-
trial Power. Cambridge, MA: The Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Press.

Max Planck Institute for Human Development and
Education. 1983. Between Elite and Mass Educa-
tion: Education in the Federal Republic of Germa-
ny. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Meyer, John W., Nancy Brandon Tuma, and Krzysz-
tof Zagérski. 1979. “Education and Occupational
Mobility: A Comparison of Polish and American
Men.” American Journal of Sociology 84:978-86.

Miiller, Walter and Karl Ulrich Mayer. 1975. “Social
Stratification and Stratification Research in the
Federal Republic of Germany, 1954-1975.” Sozi-
alpolitisches Entscheidungs- und Indikatoren-sys-
tem Working Paper, Mannheim, West Germany.

Parsons, Talcott. 1970. “Equality and Inequality in
Modern Society, or Social Stratification Revisit-
ed.” Pp. 13-72 in Social Stratification: Research and
Theory for the 1970s, edited by Edward O. Lau-
mann. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.

Pohoski, Micha}, Seppo Péntinen, and Krzysztof
Zag6rski. 1978. “Social Mobility and Socio-Eco-
nomic Achievement.” Pp. 147-82 in Social Struc-
ture and Change: Finland and Poland in Com-
parative Perspective, edited by Erik Allardt and
Wlodzimierz Wesofowski. Warsaw: Polish Scien-
tific Publishers.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1977. “Family Background,
Education and Achievement: a Path Model of Earn-
ings Determinants in the U.K. and Some Alterna-
tives.” British Journal of Sociology 28:321-35.

Ringer, Fritz. 1979. Education and Society in Modern
Europe. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Rubinson, Richard. 1986. “Class Formation, Politics,
and Institutions: Schooling in the United States.”
American Journal of Sociology 92:519-48.

Sewell, William H. and Robert M. Hauser. 1975.
Education, Occupation, and Earnings. New York:
Academic Press.

Siegel, Paul M. 1971. Prestige in the American Occu-
pational Structure. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Sociology, University of Chicago.

SYomczyriski, Kazimierz M. and Grazyna Kacprow-
icz. 1979. Skale Zawodéw. Warsaw: Polish Acad-
emy of Sciences.

SlYomezyriski, Kazimierz M. 1986. “The Attainment
of Occupational Status: A Model with Multiple
Indicator Constructs.” Pp. in Social Stratification in
Poland, edited by Kazimierz M. SYomczyriski and
Tadeusz K. Krauze. White Plains, NY: M.E. Sharpe.

Szezepariski, Jan. 1978. Systems of Higher Education:
Poland. New York: Interbook.

Treiman, Donald. 1970. “Industrialization and Social
Stratification.” Pp. 207-34 in Social Stratification:
Research and Theory for the 1970s, edited by Ed-
ward O. Laumann. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.

. 1977. Occupational Prestige in Compar-
ative Perspective. New York: Academic Press.
Treiman, Donald J. and Kermit Terrell. 1975. “The
Process of Status Attainment in the U.S. and Great
Britain.” American Journal of Sociology 81:563-83.
Treiman, Donald J. and Kam-Bor Yip. 1989. “Educa-
tional and Occupational Attainment in 21 Coun-
tries.” Pp. 373-94 in Cross-National Research in
Sociology, edited by Melvin L. Kohn. Newbury
Park: Sage.

Tumer, Ralph H. 1960. “Sponsored and Contest Mo-
bility and the School System.” American Socio-
logical Review 25:855-67.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1989. Statistical Abstract
of the United States: 1989. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.

Wegener, Bernd. 1985. “Gibt es Sozialprestige?”
Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie 14:209-35.

Zagorski, Krzysztof. 1976. “Changes of Socio-Occu-
pational Mobility in Poland.” Polish Sociological
Bulletin 1976(2):17-30.

. 1984. “Comparisons of Social Mobility in
Different Socio-Economic Systems.” Pp. 13-41 in
International Comparative Research: Social Struc-
tures and Public Institutions in Eastern and West-
ern Europe, edited by Manfred Niessen, Jules Pe-
schar, and Chantal Kourilsky. Oxford: Pergamon.

. 1986. Occupation and Education Map-
pings. Personal communication.

Zentralarchiv fiir Empirische Sozialforschung (ZFEG).
1982. Umfragen aus der Empirischen Sozialfors-
chung 1945-1982. New York: Campus Verlag.
