@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
democracy as a method of government

that a democracy is so cumbersome that
it cannot mobilize for quick action to meet
the exigencies of war. It is also maintained
that a democracy cannot control or disci-
pline its people sufficiently to carry through
a program requiring a high degree of mobili-
zation of national resources. The main con-
tention is that authority is not sufficiently
centralized and the people not adequately
schooled in obedience to provide quick and
decisive action on a national scale.

Some of our experiences in the present
war are useful in assessing whether a democ-
racy is capable of a high degree of mobili-
zation, and if so, what methods it employs.
Probably the most pertinent example would
be the methods used by the United States
to control manpower and to channel it into
the most urgent wartime needs. This article
is not intended as a comprehensive analysis
of our wartime manpower program. It will
deal primarily with the system of local com-
mittees set up to apportion labor to the most
urgent needs, However, some background
of the general manpower situation is neces-
sary to view these committees in their proper
perspective.

We entered the war with a problem of un-
employment which had never been solved
since the depression years. Therefore, in
the early stages of war production, man-
power was not a serious shortage problem.
Later, as munitions industries mushroomed
and the demands for a large number of
workers quickly materialized, the workers
were recruited largely through offering high
wage levels for munitions industries and
depending on migration to supplement labor
forces within the localities.

By 1943 it became apparent that we had
reached a stage in the war at which a lack
of sufficient manpower of the right skills in

[ IS THE contention of those who oppose
Since the possibility of migration, or inter-
regional recruitment, as it was called by
the War Manpower Commission, to the West
Coast was no longer practical because of the
crowded living conditions and the lack of
sources for recruitment, it was decided that
the time had come to examine the allocation
of labor within labor market areas, Studies
were made, therefore, of the major West
Coast cities in which labor shortages for air-
craft and shipbuilding were most serious, It
was discovered that sufficient labor was
available in non-essential industries within
the area to fill the demands if they could
be transferred into the war plants.

Two steps were necessary before this
transfer could be accomplished. First, by
some means it had to be decided which were
the industries of high urgency; and second,
a method of channeling workers into these
industries had to be devised,

Early attempts were made to accomplish
both these ends through action from the
Washington office of the War Manpower
Commission. It soon became apparent, how-
ever, that this course of action would be
ineffective because: (1) the War Manpower
Commission in Washington was too far away
to determine in detail which were the most
urgent industries in West Coast communi-
ties; and (2) since it had no strong sanctions
or penalties to apply for violations of its
regulations, it still had to depend primarily
on voluntary co-operation with its program.

Thus came into being a decentralized
system of manpower control for labor market
areas. In the cities of San Francisco, Los
Angeles, San Diego, Portland, and Seattle,
a dual committee structure was set up. First,
Production Urgency Committees, whose
function was to determine the relative ur-
gency in reference to the war program of
various plants within the area; second, Man-
power Priorities Committees, whose function
was to set up a system of priorities for re-
ferral of manpower by the U. S. Employ-
ment Service and to place manpower ceilings
on plants. The ceiling was the maximum
number of workers a plant could employ;
it was intended to prevent labor hoarding
over and above actual needs,

These committees were composed of repre-
sentatives of various Federal agencies having
an interest in war production. Thus, the
concept of the “claimant agency,” which
had been originated in the allocation of criti-
cally short materials, was extended to the al-
location of manpower. The following agencies
normally were represented on these com-
mittees: Army Service Forces, Aircraft Re-
sources Control Office (Army and Navy),
Navy, Maritime Commission, War Food
Administration, Smaller War Plants Corpo-
ration, War Manpower Commission (Chair-
man, Manpower Priorities Committee) and
the following offices of the War Production
Board—District Manager (usually Chair-
man of the Production Urgency Committee),
Office of Civilian Requirements, and the
Office of Labor Production, This system was
later extended to more than 100 labor market
areas in all parts of the nation.

In evaluating the activities of these com-
mittees, the first question which arises is,
were they successful in accomplishing their
purposes? The answer is yes, partially.
Through the activities of these committees,
the problem of staffing aircraft and other
plants on the West Coast was greatly re-
lieved. In some other areas, the committees
also were effective, depending on how strong
a position they took in the application of
the ratings and ceilings, and how much co-
operation they secured from labor and
management in complying with their actions.

A brief analysis of specific functions of
the committees is necessary in order to assess
their effectiveness adequately.

The first major function of the Production
Urgency Committees was to review con-
tracts placed by Government procurement
agencies in labor shortage areas to determine
whether manpower was available to fulfill
the contract. In carrying out this function,
the committees were virtually helpless. Only
in a very few instances were contracts actu-
ally blocked by Production Urgency Com-
mittee Clearance, The Army or Navy or
Maritime Commission ordinarily insisted
that considerations other than manpower
were compelling, such as the existence of
suitable facilities, know-how of management,
or comparative unit cost. Thus, tight in-
dustrial areas tended to become progressively
tighter in labor supply.

The second major function of the Pro-
duction Urgency Committees was that of
assignment of urgency ratings, based on a
7-point scale according to importance in
the war program and whether the product
was critically short, In implementing this
function, the committees had a tendency to
go to one of two extremes. Some committees
were highly restrictive in granting urgency
ratings, so that only a few select plants got
preference, even though there were many
others which, on the basis of their product,
might have merited equal treatment. Other
committees granted so many high urgencies
that it was impossible to begin to satisfy
the labor demands of all. After the urgency
and corresponding priority ratings were set,
there was still the matter of controlling re-
ferrals in accordance with the ratings. There
were so many “leaks” in the early stages
of the program that a regulation was es-
tablished channeling all referrals through
the U. S. Employment Service. Even then,
competitive factors, such as wage rates or
stability of an industry and the development
of a “black market” in labor, prevented a
fully successful operation of the priority
referral system,

In an attempt to put “teeth” into the
Government’s manpower controls, the au-
thorities tied them to allocation of critical
materials (steel, copper, aluminum) and to
authorization to construct facilities. Thus
were created two more Production Urgency
Committee functions; review of applica-
tions for controlled materials to deter-
mine whether manpower was available
for the production contemplated, and
similar review of proposed construc-
tion projects. In order to obtain steel
for production other than that under direct
military contract, an establishment had to
pass the test not only of a fairly direct con-
nection of his product with the war, but
of not using manpower needed in the areas
for more urgent production. The same test
applied to new construction. Rather im-
pressive percentages of denials of such ap-
plications for manpower reasons are recorded
in the tight labor market areas. The major
discrepancy in this program was that in-
dustries not needing controlled materials
were subject only to the much less effective
manpower ceiling program. On the construc-
tion side, there was a perennial argument
in many Production Urgency Committees as
to whether if all but the highest urgent con-
struction projects were denied, building
trades workers could be forced into produc-
tion jobs in war plants, On the balance sheet,
we can credit the Production Urgency Com-
mittees with fairly effective work in these
functions,

The Manpower Priorities Committees set
priority ratings based on the urgency set
by the Production Urgency Committees. The
U, S. Employment Service then gave prefer-
ence in referrals of workers to those plants
having high priority ratings. These com-
mittees also set ceilings for male and some-
times for female workers, depending on
how scarce each type of labor was in the
given area. In the tighter areas, “non-essen-
tial” industries were supposed to have their
ceilings cut in order to provide more labor
for “essential” industries. The priority re-
ferral program operated with only a modi-
cum of success. Since there were many excep-
tions permitted for protection of workers,
competitive factors such as wage rates and
desirability of the employment still had pri-
mary weight in determining where an employe
would work. For men of draft age, the
prospect of induction channeled many of
them into “essential” industries. The acid
test of this program came in the attempt
to force workers in “non-essential” industries
to transfer to critical war industries. This
program succeeded only in a handful of com-
munities and there only where voluntary
agreements were reached to protect the
seniority rights of workers and where man-
agement willingly released the workers.

Another pertinent factor in the operation
of these committees is the amount of local
autonomy granted the committees. In the
early stages, the committees were given a
good deal of authority locally, probably
a maximum of authority in view of the fact
that all members were employees of federal
agencies. The whole idea at first was that
men “on the spot” were in a better posi-
tion to make a realistic appraisal of the
labor needs in the area, always against a
backdrop of guidance as to urgency of cer-
tain products nationally, As time went on,
however, there was a tendency for the vari-
ous agencies to provide more and more
direction from headquarters. This trend ap-
plied particularly to the military agencies.
The concept of local autonomy of a Captain
or Lieutenant is diametrically opposed to
the “line of command” process in a military
hierarchy.

An appeals process was set up for the local
Production Urgency Committees, with a com-
mittee in Washington to pass on decisions
appealed from local committees. In
many instances, the appeals committee de-
cided issues “too hot to handle” locally,
ie., cases involving an important economic
consideration to the community, The War
Production Board developed a National Pro-
duction Urgency List, commonly known as
the “must list,” which contained the highest
urgency production programs. During late
1944 and early 1945, this list became so long
that anything not on it could hardly compete
for manpower in tight areas. In addition, an
urgency guide was issued for practically all
types of production. Thus, the committees
became more and more “rubber stamps” for
Washington action.

On many issues, the committees were
divided into “military” and “civilian” blocs.
The tendency on the part of the military
procurement agencies was to define any
program in which they had prime contracts
or perhaps sub-contracts as “military” and
any other program as “civilian.” Such items
as food, transportation, fuel, and other pro-
duction basic to the conduct of the war were
labeled by the military as “civilian” pro-
grams. Thus, there was a tendency for the
Army, Navy, Aircraft Resources Control
Office, and Maritime Commission to form a
military bloc and the other representatives,
a civilian bloc, At the extreme of the civilian
bloc were the Office of Civilian Requirements
and the Smaller War Plants Corporation
which had a tendency to advocate approval
of all but obviously unessential production
and to grant moderately high urgency ratings
to any program filling a domestic civilian
need.

The activities of these committees had a
cyclical pattern which might be character-
ized generally as “tough” and “lenient”
cycles. The committees were established na-
tionally during the spring and summer of
1944. That period represented a “tough”
cycle. In the fall of 1944, often described
as the “honeymoon” period because of pre-
dictions of an early end of the European
war and reconversion to civilian goods, came
the “lenient” period. At this time, many
civilian programs got underway in what was
known as the “spot authorization” program.
After military reverses and recurrence of a
shortage of certain munitions, came an ex-
tremely tough period during which the mili-
tary agencies insisted on denial of practically
all types of civilian production. It was not
until following V-E Day that this cycle
reversed itself.

With the end of the war, the Production
Urgency and Manpower Priorities Commit-
tees were abolished, along with most war-
time production controls, In keeping with
post-war psychology, these controls were
lifted so summarily as to cause a somewhat
chaotic condition in industrial reconversion,
particularly in labor relations. The stage has
been reached at which public opinion is
demanding government intervention and con-
trol to prevent the disrupting effect of strikes
in the return to civilian production, Without
the pressing needs of the prosecution of the
war and the ability of the president to ex-
ercise full war-time emergency powers, con-
trol of production and manpower will be
extremely difficult. Those who do not like
the controls will appeal to our traditional
pattern of individual rights and will fight
what they will insist is government infringe-
ment on those rights.

The reader may well ask at this point,
what all this discussion has to do with the
opening remarks about democratic controls
in wartime. There are a few propositions
I want to state and I shall attempt to relate
the experience with manpower controls to
these propositions.

1. In a democratic society of the type we
have in the United States, controls during
wartime, as well as in peace, depend for
their success on the backing of public opinion
and upon voluntary compliance of the ma-
jority of the citizenry. In the experience with
the Production Urgency and Manpower Pri-
orities Committees, there is no question that
the committee controls worked best where
both management and labor in the com-
munity supported them and co-operated with
them. The effect of local public opinion ap-
parently was the strongest element in com-
pliance with committee rulings, except in
the few programs where definite sanctions,
such as threat of the draft or of loss of
priorities for materials, could be applied.

2. A democracy is capable of a moderate
degree of mobilization of its human and ma-
terial resources in an emergency, but cannot
attain anything approaching absolute mobili-
zation. Never in the war period did the
United States approach the degree of mobili-
zation of manpower (particularly woman-
power) which was possible in totalitarian
states such as Germany, Japan and Russia
(with due respect to the significant dif-
ferences in Russian totalitarianism as com-
pared with that of the other two nations).
However, because of our tremendous re-
sources, and because others stalled the enemy
while we were mobilizing, we were able to
move toward victory. One might speculate
as to whether that victory might have come
sooner with full mobilization from the begin-
ning.

3- Controls based on public approval and
voluntary co-operation are not fully effec-
tive, but require much less effort on the
part of authorities for enforcement than
totalitarian controls and are more stable.
For violation of manpower regulations, there
were no criminal penalties, no elaborate en-
forcement system, no gestapo to check up
on individuals or business establishments.
The only individual sanction was the threat
of the draft for men of draft age. The only
sanction for business was possible denial of
materials or lack of referrals of labor. What
ever success has been achieved has been done
without a large overhead for enforcement.

4. Wartime controls, along with public
opinion, follow a cyclical pattern, Public
opinion veers from over-optimism to over-
pessimism, The controls are lax in the opti-
mistic periods and rigid in the pessimistic
periods. The manpower committee controls
definitely followed this pattern. In response
to the extreme swings of public opinion, the
committee rulings were “tough” in one
period and “soft” in another. It is probable
that a study of these cycles would reveal
many common elements with other types of
social and economic controls.

5. In application of wartime controls,
there is considerable confusion over the
amount of centralization of authority to be
applied. Ordinarily there are cycles in this
process, with a general trend toward more
centralization as the war progresses. In a
democracy, this centralization never ap-
proaches an absolute condition. Although
the Production Urgency and Manpower Pri-
orities Committees were intended to have
maximum local autonomy, their history was
one of increasing direction from Washington.
This trend is interesting, in view of the fact
that the committees were established because
it was conceded that the job could not be
done from headquarters,

6. Where a portion of the human and
material resources is placed under military
control, but a large portion is not, friction
between military and civilian blocs is in-
evitable, with each attempting to increase
its sphere of control. The tendency of the
committees to split into such blocs has been
noted above. In this case the rivalry was
over a share of the short manpower supply
with an indirect relation to allocation of ma-
terials as well. In the post-war period, there
are evidences of a carry-over of this conflict
into spheres such as peacetime military train-
ing, foreign area control, veteran status, and
scientific research,

In this article, a narrow segment of war-
time social control has been analyzed. Its
significance is not fully revealed unless
studied in relation to the whole milieu of
wartime controls. The general thesis toward
which the conclusions in this article point,
subject to confirmation by a study of parallel
conditions, is this:

A society in which social controls are
based primarily on voluntary group action
and indirect sanctions is relatively slow to
mobilize in time of crisis, but through the
long pull has more strength and stability
than one in which controls are totalitarian
in the sense of being imposed from above.
