@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Hawley’s theory that the distribution of system power in the urban community is related to
its capacity for mobilization on public issues is examined in the framework of a model specify-
ing mobilization, the scope of municipal government, the MPO ratio and organizational dimen-
sions of system power (employment concentration and absentee-ownership) as consequences of
the city’s functional role in an urban division of labor. The model treats mobilization as an
unobserved variable mediating the effects of community structure on three policy variables:
municipal government expenditures, urban renewal and poverty program funding. Coefficients
estimated under the model suggest that, while the MPO ratio is strongly dependent on urban
function and organizational structure, its direct effect on mobilization is stronger than effects
produced by these factors. The model postulating mobilization is then compared with the
results of separate regressions calculated for each policy variable. The data indicate that it
constitutes a reasonably good fit to regression estimates where municipal expenditures and
urban renewal success are dependent variables but not in the case of poverty funds. With regard
to the latter, the organizational measures of system power prove more important than the MPO
ratio. Furthermore, governmental scope is found to be a moderately important variable inter-
vening between elements of community structure and policy consequences, but its influence is
considerably less than that of other variables in the model. In conclusion, general support is
claimed for an ecological approach which views urban public policy as the end result of a
sequence of conditions originating with city size and economic function.
policies to one regarding the ability of the
community to “mobilize” itself to act in con-
cert on matters of public concern. Third,
Hawley’s study suggested a new methodology
of community power research, one that used
data from such sources as the U.S. Census to
yield measures on a variety of variables for a
large sample of cities.

The present investigation will employ a
similar methodology to deal with some unre-
solved issues raised by Hawley’s work. Specif-
ically, my objectives are to: (1) conceptualize
and measure ecological or system power as an
attribute of the primary collective units of the
community, organizations; (2) examine the
validity of the concept of mobilization as a
Hawley hypothesized that the ability of a
community to undertake urban renewal pro-
jects depended on the distribution of system
power.’ Arguing that power refers to the
presence of functions that adminster or co-
ordinate a system, he proposed that the pro-
portion of the local population in managerial
roles could be viewed as an indicator of the
distribution of power which would lend itself
to ready calculation from published sources.
Thus, he computed the ratio of employment
in occupations classed as managers, officials
and proprietors to the total employed labor
force of the city. The higher this ratio, pre-
sumably, the greater the number of persons
performing managerial functions and the
greater the dispersion of power. It was Haw-
ley’s specific theory that participation in man-
agerial activity should be inversely related to
the degree of urban renewal success, for the
likelihood that decision-making would be-
come immobilized through controversy would
increase as more actors became involved in de-
cision-making processes. His data yielded sub-
stantial support for this hypothesis: under a
variety of controls, the MPO ratio was nega-
tively associated with urban renewal success
over a set of American cities.

Among the investigations this study pro-
voked was a series of attempts to ascertain the
similarity between Hawley’s index of power
distribution and those derived from “qualita-
tive” methods such as interviews with local
elites. The surprising finding was that the
Following these writers, it is my position
that the validity of the MPO ratio does not
stand or fall on its association with measures
pertaining to the political reputation or parti-
cipation of individual leaders. It is meaningful
to consider the distribution of resources and
personnel among functional units based in the
community as a dimension of power which
may be unrelated or even inversely related to
the pattern of elite participation in decision-
making. However, the MPO ratio as a measure
of power may be criticized on other grounds,
reflecting certain features of the ecological ap-
proach which limit its usefulness for studying
power and other organizational problems.

Ecologists have made broad claims for the
utility of their approach as a means of under-
standing social organization (Schnore, 1958;
Duncan and Schnore, 1959; Gibbs and Martin,
1959; Duncan, 1961). Their use of this con-
cept, however, is generally limited to prob-
lems of functional differentiation and inter-
dependence. For example, Duncan and
Schnore (1959:142) write: “Ecological struc-
ture is conceived as an organization of func-
tions—activities that are dependent on other
activities.”” Moreover, these writers argue that
in the study of social organization: “.. . the
elementary unit of analysis—the ‘atom’ so to
speak—is the ‘pattern of activity’ or simply
‘activity.’ ”’* As a central organizational vari-
able, power or dominance is also defined in
functional terms. It becomes a particular kind
of activity—a set of tasks which serve to co-
ordinate the execution of sustenance func-
tions. Thus, Hawley equates power with the
performance of managerial functions in his
study of urban renewal.

The issue to be raised here is that one can
distinguish between power as an organization
of resources and population necessary to ex-
ecute a function from the nature of the func-
tion itself. The former conception directs at-
tention to the structure of collective units
which engage in community action instead of
the type of action undertaken. Hawley’s ap-
proach is consistent with that of ecologists
generally in focusing on the nature of func-
tional tasks to the exclusion of functional
units.“ Its limitations are evident if one con-
siders the meaning of the MPO ratio. If it in-
forms us of the number of individuals in
managerial roles, it tells nothing about the or-
ganizational base over which these managers
exercise control. Hence, the owner of a corner
grocery store receives the same weight in Haw-
ley’s index as his counterpart in an industrial
corporation employing thousands of workers.

I suggest, then, that the problem of power
as a property of the urban ecosystem is best
addressed in the analysis of the aggregate of
organizational units in the community which
perform its basic tasks, generate its resources,
structure the activities of its population and
govern its linkages to the larger society. Two
dimensions of such organizational power may
be treated: (1) among the local units present
in a city, one may consider the distribution of
control over local resources and employment;
(2) given a particular power distribution
among agents residing in a specific urban
place, one should ask further whether these
actors are autonomous or dependent on ad-
ministrative control originating outside the
city in question. In one sense, system power is
centralized if resources and employment are
concentrated in relatively few units, and
these, moreover, are locally controlled.*®

By stressing the organizational aspects of
system power, however, I do not mean to ig-
nore function altogether. If power in terms of
organization is conceptually distinct from
power as a type of function, it is nevertheless
true that the two are causally related. The
nature of the task performed by an enterprise
sets definite constraints on its structure and
scale, the latter conceived both in terms of the
size of individual operating units and the de-
gree to which activities are concentrated in
federated corporate structures with branch
plants in multiple urban sites (Bain, 1954;
Pappenfort, 1959; Thompson, 1965:159).
ren, 1970). Common to most of these ap-
proaches is the assumption that structural
characteristics of the city determine its
capacity for collective action, its “mobiliza-
tion” potential. The inference is that for the
city to be an effective system, it must achieve
a high level of coordination among its ele-
ments and a commitment to action which will
permit resources to be channeled into new
areas of collective endeavor.

It is particularly important to note that the
concept of mobilization implies a process
which is relatively invariant across different
types of policy outcomes. The prevailing ori-
entation is to ignore those facets of the com-
munity policy-making process which may be
unique to particular issues and regard all such
programs, expenditures and resolutions as
consequences of a single underlying
dynamic.® Although it is a variable of central
theoretical importance, mobilization is never
directly measured. It is treated as an unob-
served mechanism which accounts for the rela-
tionship between various quantitative indi-
cators of policy-making (urban renewal pro-
jects, budget expenditures, fluoridation pro-
grams, etc.) and measured properties of com-
munity structure (size, economic base, form
of government, ethnicity and occupational
composition). Although the issue is glossed
over in the literature, it is important to ob-
serve that these policy outputs themselves are
not indicators of mobilization but rather con-
sequences. While this might seem a trivial
point to some, I would suggest that an ac-
curate model of these phenomena should
At this point, it is useful to consider a pos-
sible causal sequence by which a community’s
role in a territorial division of labor affects its
capacity to take action on matters of public
policy. This approach embodies a basic eco-
logical principle: that cities are interdepen-
dent units in a national system and the
characteristics of a given urban place reflect
the specific functions it performs with refer-
ence to that larger system (Duncan and Reiss,
1956).

Consistent with the ecological approach to
power, I suggest that the functional role
played by a given city in relation to the
broader society determines the organization
of the task units that comprise it. Such organi-
zation, in turn, has consequences for the exer-
cise of managerial functions in the urban com-
munity. In an earlier article only recently
made easily accessible to sociologists, Mills
and Ullmer (1970) examined the effects on
community welfare of the same two dimen-
sions of community organization considered
here: concentration and external control. In
their view, the most significant impact of such
arrangements was through their tendency to
diminish the occupational stratum of small
businessmen: local owners and managers of
small-scale enterprise. Following their argu-
ment, I hypothesize that where “system”
power is structured in such a way that local
sustenance activities are controlled by large
absentee-owned organizations, managerial
functons are narrowly channeled in the ad-
ministration of the few dominant units in
which most of the population is employed.
Thus, a high MPO ratio is likely to imply
small-scale, locally controlled units and a low
one, large-scale, externally-owned enter-
prises.”

The structure of city government is
specified as the next link in this causal chain.
A common theme in the comparative urban
policy-making literature has been the extent
to which the structure of municipal govern-
ment mediates the impact of ecological
characteristics of the community on the na-
ture of its decision outputs (Lineberry and
Fowler, 1967). The main focus of such work
has been on a “reformed-nonreformed” di-
mension of local government. Although there
is a good deal of evidence that this factor is
systematically related to such variables as the
community’s economic function, size, class
and ethnic composition, etc. (Kessel, 1962;
Alford and Scoble, 1965), the best data indi-
cate that it adds relatively little to these as a
predictor of public innovation or performance
(Aiken and Alford, 1970).

Attention has recently been directed to
another aspect of municipal government
which is seen to have important consequences
for policy-making. Turk (1973) and Liebert
(1974) have conducted independent studies
which reveal that the functional “diversity” or
“scope” of local government is related to the
volume of policy produced. By governmental
scope is meant the range of services provided
by city hall. Both writers draw from the
formal organizations literature to argue that
more differentiated governmental organiza-
tions should exhibit a greater capacity for
mobilization or innovation. Liebert
(1974:770), however, advances a second claim
which raises serious questions about the valid-
ity of one frequently used indicator of com-
munity performance, general municipal
government expenditures. Because cities vary
widely in the number of services they provide,
he argues, it is incorrect to treat municipal
spending as an “output” measure unless con-
sideration is given to governmental scope. In
his words: “.. .the overwhelming evidence is
that ‘general municipal expenditures’ is a two-
dimensional variable representing both the de-
gree of functional inclusiveness and the level
of municipal performance in the provision of
public services.”

Liebert’s emphasis is on a set of historical
and regional circumstances through which cer-
tain cities were legally assigned more roles
than others. Neither he nor Turk attempt to
examine the degree to which governmental
scope depends on community composition in
a fashion similar to that of reformism. This
can be treated as one objective of the present
study: to assess the extent to which govern-
mental scope conveys the effects of com-
munity structure on policy outputs. Since
analyses of reformism in local government re-
gard this pattern as dependent on the occupa-
tional and ethnic composition of the city (Al-
ford and Scoble, 1965; Banfield and Wilson,
1963; Kessel, 1962), it is probably correct to
locate governmental scope subsequent to the
performance of managerial occupational roles
in the causal sequence under scrutiny here.
Given the finding that the influence of city
officials tends to be low where that of mana-
gerial elites is high (Morlock, 1974) and Lie-
bert’s suggestion that the power of such offi-
cials may be high where city government per-
forms many functions, one might expect that
employment in managerial occupations would
have a negative effect on governmental scope.

The next variable of interest is mobiliza-
tion, the process believed to convey the ef-
fects of community structure on the level of
policy outputs, the latter representing the end
product of this system of relationships. My
strategy will be to first present and interpret a
model specifying mobilization, and subse-
quently to test the adequacy of that model in
reproducing the coefficients estimated under
separate models predicting individual policy
variables.
on path analysis, a method for dealing with
causal systems now well established in the
sociological literature (Duncan, 1966). The
units of analysis are the central cities of the
largest 110 metropolitan areas in the United
States circa 1965. One or more measures of
each property discussed above has been made
on each city with the exception of mobiliza-
tion. I have no data concerning this process.
Indeed, its ambiguous meaning in the litera-
ture would make it very difficult to define
operationally. Still, it may be useful to con-
ceive of mobilization as an unobserved vari-
able and use techniques currently being pro-
posed in the path analysis literature for identi-
fying its role in the system under considera-
tion (Costner, 1969; Land, 1970; Hauser and
Goldberger, 1971).

Beginning with the most remote cause, I
follow strong precedents in the ecological
literature by indexing a city’s functional role
in the national division of labor by its popula-
tion size and dominant economic activity. Pat-
terns of functional variation by size underlie
nearly all approaches to the urban hierarchy
such as central place theory (Berry and Pred,
1961) and metropolitan dominance (Bogue,
1949; Duncan et al., 1960). Furthermore, the
variety of functions exhibited by American
cities is largely reducible to a manufacturing-
nonmanufacturing dimension (Duncan et al.,
1960; Hadden and Borgatta, 1965; Berry,
1972). As Duncan and Reiss (1956:14) point
out: “The relation between manufacturing
and almost any other function tends to be
substitutive.” Thus, the specific indicators of
“exogenous” variables in this analysis are pop-
ulation size (transformed to its natural loga-
rithm) and the percent of the urban labor
force in manufacturing.*®

The two organizational dimensions of the

 

8 The population size variable has been trans-
formed for each city to its natural logarithm to ad-
just for skewness in its distribution. The source of
the population data is the County and City Data
Book, 1962 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1962). The
manufacturing data pertain to the SMSA in which
the selected community is the central city. They
were obtained from the Office of Business Eco-
nomics of the U.S. Department of Commerce and
cover patterns of employment by industry for 215
SMSAs as of 1960.
community’s ecological structure discussed
above, concentration and external control, are
measured respectively by a Gini index of con-
centration of employment in employing units
and an index of employment in absentee-
owned plants. The Gini acquires high values in
cities where a small proportion of the total
number of organizational units employs a
large percentage of total employment.® Ex-
ternal control is the percent of total city em-
ployment in plants operated by manufactur-
ing corporations which were listed among the
1000 largest in 1963-64 with headquarters
outside the city in question.'® Although the
concentration data cover all nongovernmental
employment, the absentee-ownership data
were available only for manufacturing.

As in Hawley’s study, the level of manager-
ial activity is indexed by the MPO ratio." Re-
garding governmental scope, I employ a mea-
sure designed by Turk (1970) which taps the
extent to which money spent by city govern-
ment is evenly distributed across the following
functions: police and fire protection, health
care, highways, education and welfare. This
index has low values in cities where few or no
municipal funds go to one or more of the
above services.’ ?

 

9 These data were coded from County Business
Patterns, 1967 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1967)
and also refer to the SMSA. The CBP data consist of
tallies of employing units by size and industry (non-
governmental) for all counties and SMSAs in the
United States. Technical discussions of the Gini co-
efficient may be found in Duncan and Duncan
(1955) and Alker and Russett (1966).

10 These data were derived from the Fortune Plant
and Product Directory, 1963-64 (Editors of Fortune,
1964) which contains information on headquarters
and branch plant location for the largest 1000 manu-
facturing corporations in the United States. The
measure of absentee-ownership used here is quite
similar to one constructed by Michael Aiken (1970)
in an investigation of related topics.

11 The source of these data is the United States
Census (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1960).

12 The measure of governmental scope is identical
in calculation to Gibbs and Martin’s index of the
division of labor (1962). The formula is:
where X = municipal government expenditures for
the “i”th function, and i ranges across the six func-
tions referred to in the text. These data were coded
from the County and City Data Book, 1962 (U.S.
Bureau of the Census, 1962). It must be acknowl
edged that the present analysis of governmental
scope or diversity is not a direct replication of
Liebert’s research, since it is based on Turk’s rather
than Liebert’s measure. Turk’s measure is somewhat
more general, since it pertains to city government
activity on six service dimensions, whereas Liebert’s
measure involves only two: education and welfare.
Moreover, Liebert’s data refer to the possession of
legal responsibility by the city for these services,
while those used by Turk refer to the distribution of
expenditures. It is not inconceivable that some muni-
cipal government funds may go to the provision of
services for which the formal responsibility lies with
another agency.
estimated by ordinary least-squares regression,
and the coefficients are partial regression
slopes in standard form. Paths with coeffi-
cients smaller than .05 were deleted and the
regressions re-calculated.

As for estimating the paths to and from
mobilization, Hauser and Goldberger (1971)
suggest canonical correlation as a means of ob-
taining efficient estimates in overidentified
models such as the present one.'* With all
variables prior to mobilization treated as the
“independent” set and those subsequent to it
as the “dependent” set, a pair of first canon-
ical variates was extracted which correlated at
587. Obtaining the coefficients for paths
leading to mobilization, one substitutes the
variable weights on the independent canonical
variate. Thus, mobilization becomes a linear
combination of its predictors. The estimates
s les 3
7 "9
v. Ge \ &d
x)

diysueumo uolyeuqUesu0D
-eequesqy

  
          

(he ezis
uo1zetndog a
edoos
yequeuudencs

ve
851

an ™

>< a ea:
a |

3 3

|

res
of mobilization’s effects on the policy vari-
ables are simply the zero-order correlations
between the linear composite and these indi-
cators (Hauser and Goldberger, 1971:113).

The correlations among the disturbances
associated with the policy variables may then
be obtained by conventional techniques (Dun-
can, 1966). One aspect of the model which
may concern some readers is that no distur-
bance term is specified with reference to
mobilization. This is an omission necessitated
by the canonical model which may seem at
odds with reality. The assumption that an un-
observed process mediates the effects of this
system of variables on policy outputs need
not imply that it has no determinants but
those included here. However, as Hauser and
Goldberger (1971:100) observe, permitting v,
w and x to be intercorrelated virtually sub-
sumes the notion of a source of residual vari-
ance in mobilization. That is, the residual cor-
relations among the policy variables which are
unaccounted for by the measured predictors
could result from a disturbance in mobiliza-
tion or a source unrelated to it, but it would
be impossible to tell the difference without
measuring this property directly. In other
words, the data would be equally compatible
with two models; one specifying a disturbance
in mobilization and uncorrelated disturbances
in the policies, or one specifying that the
former is zero and the latter correlated. In
either case, the important thing is that one
acknowledges that the correlations among the
policy indicators are not wholly explained by
the set of measured predictors.
ance.

The index of governmental scope is direct-
ly affected by all preceding terms in the
model, but the pattern is somewhat at odds
with expectations. The influence of the MPO
ratio is small and positive. Although its antici-
pated negative correlation with scope appears
at the zero-order level (rt = -.222), this is ap-
parently explained by the mutual dependence
(in opposite directions) of these two variables
on manufacturing and concentration. Thus,
city governments of broad functional scope
are likely to appear in manufacturing cities
with high employment concentration and
some tendency toward local rather than ab-
sentee-ownership. It is possible that the ser-
vice burden placed on municipal government
is greater in cities dominated by large manu-
facturing plants (Thompson, 1965:286), re-
quiring a wider range of functions to be per-
formed by city hall. Furthermore, there is evi-
dence that large-plant manufacturing cities
can generate more municipal revenue at lower
tax rates than their nonmanufacturing coun-
terparts (Groves and Riew, 1963), enabling
municipal government to provide more ser-
vices while reducing its dependence on
agencies such as state and county government.

Given the kind of data available for the
present analysis, it is impossible to address
adequately Liebert’s suggestion that historical
factors played a major role in determining
variation in the scope of municipal govern-
ment. However, his view that such conditions
resulted in the early-established cities of the
Northeast having diversified government can
be empirically evaluated. One might argue
Although age and presence in the North-
east are indeed related to governmental scope,
their effects are small and they do not signifi-
cantly disturb those of variables in Figure 1.
Moreover, their addition to the equation in-
creases the explained variance in governmental
scope by less than 2%.

Next, let us consider mobilization. The pat-
tern of effects would seem to offer clear con-
firmation for Hawley’s view that the MPO
ratio identifies a dimension of community
structure which makes a strong independent
contribution to the probability of successful
decision-making. Concentration and absentee-
ownership, portrayed here as competing facets
of system power, fail to display a comparable
influence on mobilization. Moreover, govern-
mental scope, while having a significant effect,
can hardly be said to “mediate” the effects of
the ecological composition of the city on
mobilization.

Direct effects are also evident from the
“exogenous” variables, size and manufactur-
ing. It may be useful to consider them relative
to the various indirect paths through which
they influence mobilization.’® Such a pro-
cedure may enhance understanding of the
mechanisms through which a city’s role in the
national urban system affects its capacity to
act on public issues.

Research on comparative urban policy-
making has consistently revealed that popula-
tion size is associated with a greater volume of
outputs (Aiken and Alford, 1970). This find-
ing is clearly replicated in the present analysis.
In addition to a substantial direct contribu-
tion to mobilization, the indirect effects of
size are virtually in every instance positive.
The indirect paths sum to .258.

It is always difficult to account satisfac-
torily for the influence of variables like city
size on patterns of community performance.
There is a sense in which it might be viewed as
a “residual” term. If the model were perfectly
accurate, it might be possible to identify all
the structural changes which occur in the city,
as it changes in size, which have direct conse-
quences for decision-making processes. Other
writers, attempting to devise a theoretical ex-
planation for the importance of size, have sug-
gested that it reflects organizational density
(Aiken and Alford, 1970) and extralocal inte-
gration (Turk, 1970). The idea that size indi-
cates the number of ties linking an urban
place to the broader social environment is, of
course, a central principle in human ecology
(@uncan et al., 1960), one with potentially
important implications for the capacity to
generate local policy. The largest cities have
the greatest extralocal influence and visibility,
improving their competitive position vis a vis
smaller places in obtaining such resources as
state and federal funds for local projects.

Although direct and indirect effects of size
on mobilization are positive, the same is not
true in the case of manufacturing. Its direct
effect is negative (-.176 ) as is that produced
by its tendency to increase absentee-owner-
ship (-.070). However, by increasing concen-
tration and governmental scope and reducing
the MPO ratio, manufacturing makes a posi-
tive contribution to mobilization. Such posi-
tive indirect effects, in fact, outweigh the
negative influence, yielding a total effect of
.246. Thus, while both size and manufacturing
have positive implications for mobilization,
the pattern is more complex in the case of
manufacturing, for it operates in such a way
as to alter a range of community characteris-
tics which may have opposing consequences
for policy-making.
that justifies the specification of an unob-
served process of mobilization. The test con-
sists of a comparison between the results ob-
tained under the assumption of mobilization
with those produced by independent regres-
sions of each policy measure on the observed
predictors.'” The relevant calculations are
presented in Table 2.

A first assessment of the accuracy of the
model specifying mobilization concerns its
ability to account for the variance in the
policy variables relative to the model which is
not “constrained” by this assumption. By this
criterion, the constrained model seems to fit the
data fairly well. The difference between the
two estimates of R? is very small in the cases
of municipal expenditures and urban renewal,
although it is somewhat greater with respect
to poverty program funding.
A second comparison can be made between
the path coefficients obtained by the “uncon-
strained” regressions of the policy variables on
the observed predictors with the “reduced
form” coefficients corresponding to the same
paths under the constrained model. The latter
are simply the products of the paths from an
observed predictor to mobilization and from
it to a policy measure. Thus, the reduced form
coefficient for the regression of expenditures
on population size is just (.433)(.525) = .227.

Considering municipal expenditures at
greater length, Table 2 indicates a rather close
correspondence between the constrained and
unconstrained coefficients. The effects of
manufacturing and the MPO ratio are some-
what understated by the constrained model,
but on the whole the fit seems rather good. In
the case of urban renewal, the fit again is gen-
erally good with some minor deviations from
the true values associated with concentration
and manufacturing. The constrained model is
least capable of recovering the pattern of ef-
fects with regard to poverty funding. In fact,
the conclusion reached earlier concerning the
greater importance of Hawley’s “functional”
measure of system power for mobilization
than the “organizational” measures used here
(concentration and absentee-ownership) is
clearly wrong with respect to this policy out-
put. Of the variables in the model, the hierar-
chy of effects is led by concentration, then
absentee-ownership and size, with the remain-
ing variables playing relatively minor roles.

It would seem, then, that which dimension
of system power, functional or organizational,
best accounts for community policy outputs
depends on the type of policy under consider-
ation. There is not space here to adequately
explore the reasons for this finding, but one
might recall Turk’s (1970) suggestion that the
poverty program at the time these data were
collected had not yet attracted the public at-
tention nor aroused the controversy character-
istic of programs such as urban renewal and
might therefore be seen as a “relatively pure
instance of interorganizational relations.” Im-
plied in his statement is the view that the par-
ticipation of established organizations in com-
munity affairs differs in nature from that of
The principal issues with which this study
has been concerned are the following: (1) the
utility of an ecological approach to com-
munity decision-making which views policy
outputs as the result of a sequence of causes
originating in the city’s functional role in a
national urban system; (2) the extent to
which an organizational dimension of ecologi-
cal or community power might prove more
meaningful than the functional dimension im-
plied by Hawley’s MPO ratio; (3) the extent
to which the scope of city government ex-
plains variation among communities in the
level of policy-making and the degree to
which governmental scope depends on a set
of ecological causes; (4) the utility and valid-
ity of treating diverse policies as outcomes of
a single process termed “mobilization.”

Reviewing the implications of the analysis
for each issue in turn, I would suggest, first,
that an ecological model specifying size and
function as basic exogenous characteristics of
the urban community receives general sup-
port, as these properties have been found to
influence a chain of elements of urban struc-
ture which have distinct consequences for lo-
cal policy-making.

Second, the conception of ecological or
system power as the organization associated
with the performance of an urban function
would also appear to be meaningful in light of
the data. Concentration and
absentee-ownership are facets of the
distribution of power and resources in the
locality which are strongly dependent on city
size and function and have equally significant
consequences for the distribution of
managerial roles (the MPO ratio), the
structure of city government and the level of
urban policy-making. Whether the direct in-
fluence of these organizational variables on
policy outputs is greater than that of the MPO
ratio depends on the type of policy, but it is
interesting to note that, whether system
power is conceived in organizational or func-
tional terms, Hawley’s theory that decision-
making is enhanced where such power is con-
centrated would seem to find support.

Third, the scope of city government is re-
vealed as an important intervening variable,
conveying some of the impact of ecological
structure on policy outputs. It does not, how-
ever, make a very large contribution to the
prediction of outputs, its direct effects being
considerably smaller than those of other vari-
ables in the model. One might conclude that
while the concept of governmental scope is a
useful addition to the repertoire of commun-
ity traits known to influence decision-making
patterns, it does not render spurious all other
observed associations between policy variables
and community properties.

Finally, it is not easy to pass judgment on
the usefulness of the concept of mobilization
in the present analysis. The conclusions I
would draw are roughly similar to those
reached by other writers dealing with similar
problems involving multiple-indicator situa-
tions and unobserved variables (Hauser,
1972). Like that of socioeconomic status,
concepts such as mobilization, innovation or
collective action appear to be theoretically ap-
pealing ways of describing an unobserved pro-
cess believed to account for patterns of simil-
arity among a set of measured variables. In the
present case, the approach employing mobili-
zation permitted the construction of a far
more parsimonious model explaining three
policy variables than could have been pro-
duced without it. Furthermore, in the case of
two of these variables, the coefficients esti-
mates under that model exhibited a rather
good fit to those generated by regressing each
policy indicator separately on the set of de-
terminants. It is nevertheless clear that certain
valuable information would have been lost if
one accepted the hypothesis of mobilization
uncritically without proceeding to consider
any sources of uniqueness among the three
policies. The result would have been an overly
conservative judgment regarding the impact of
organizational variables on policy-making. It
would seem that decisions regarding the valid-
ity of concepts like mobilization must pro-
ceed on a case by case basis. Their usefulness
is likely to vary from one body of data to the
next. This is not to discourage such efforts; on
the contrary, it is highly desirable that sys-
tematic attempts be made to isolate such pat-
terns of similarity among policy outputs in
order to better understand their variability
across communities and the conditions
responsible for it.
Bain, Joe S.

1954 ‘Economics of scale, concentration, and the
condition of entry in twenty manufacturing
industries.” American Economic Review
19:15-39,

Banfield, Edward C. and James Q. Wilson
1963 City Politics. New York: Random House.
Berry, Brian J. L.

1972 “Latent structure of the American urban
system with international comparisons.” Pp.
11-60 in B. J. L. Berry (ed.), City Classifica-
tion Handbook: Methods and Applications.
New York: Wiley-Interscience.

Berry, Brian J. L. and Allen J. Pred

1961 Central Place Studies: A Bibliography of
Theory and Applications: Philadelphia: Re-
gional Science Institute.

Blalock, Hubert M.

1969 Theory Construction: From Verbal to
Mathematical Formulations. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Bogue, Donald J.

1949 The Structure of the Metropolitan Com-
munity. Ann Arbor: Horace H. Rackham
School of Graduate Studies, University of
Michigan.

Clark, Terry N.

1968 “Community structure, decision-making,
budget expenditures, and urban renewal in
51° American communities.” American
Sociological Review 33:576-93.

1973 Community Power and Policy Outputs.
Beverly Hills: Sage.

Costner, Herbert L.

1969 “Theory, deduction, and rules of corre-
spondence.” American Journal of Sociology
72:245-63.

Crain, Robert L. and Donald B. Rosenthal

1967 “Community status as a dimension of local
decision-making.” American Sociological
Review 72:970-84.

Duncan, Otis Dudley

1961 “From social system to ecosystem.” Socio-
logical Inquiry 31:140-9.

1966 “Path analysis: sociological examples.”
American Journal of Sociology 72:1-16.

1971 ‘‘Path analysis: sociological examples:
addenda.” Pp. 136-8 in H. M. Blalock (ed.),
Causal Models in the Social Sciences.
Chicago: Aldine-Atherton

Duncan, Otis Dudley and Beverly Duncan

1955 “A methodological analysis of segregation
indexes.” American Sociological Review
20:210-7.

Duncan, Otis Dudley and Albert J. Reiss, Jr.

1956 Social Characteristics of Urban and Rural

Communities, 1950. New York: Wiley.
Duncan, Otis Dudley and Leo F. Schnore

1959 “Cultural, behavioral, and ecological per-

spectives in the study of social organiza-
tion.” American Journal of Sociology
65:132-46.
Duncan, Otis Dudley, W. Richard Scott, Stanley Lieb-
erson, Beverly Duncan and Hal. H. Winsborough

1960 Metropolis and Region. Baltimore: Johns

Hopkins Press.
Editors of Fortune

1963 Plant and Product Directory (Volume 1).

New York: Time, Inc.
Gibbs, Jack P. and Walter F. Martin

1959 “Toward a theoretical system of human eco-
logy.” Pacific Sociological Review 2:29-36.

1962 “Urbanization, technology, and the division
of labor: international patterns.” American
Sociological Review 27:667-77.

Groves, Harold M. and John Riew

1963 “The impact of industry on local taxes: a
simple model.” National Tax Journal
16:137-45.

Hadden, Jeffrey K. and Edgar F. Borgatta

1965 American Cities: Their Social Character-

istics. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Hauser, Robert M.

1972 “Disaggregating a social-psychological model
of educational attainment.” Social Science
Research 1:159-88.

Hauser, Robert M. and Arthur S. Goldberger

1971 “The treatment of unobserved variables in
path analysis.” Pp. 81-117 in H. L. Costner
(ed.), Sociological Methodology, 1973-74.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Hawley, Amos H.

1950 Human Ecology: A Theory of Community
Structure. New York: Ronald.

1963 ‘Community power and urban renewal suc-
cess.” American Journal of Sociology
68:422-31.

Kessel, John H.

1962 “Governmental structure and political en-
vironment: a statistical note about Ameri-
can cities.” American Political Science Re-
view 56:615-20.

Land, Kenneth C,

1970 “On the estimation of path coefficients for
unmeasured variables from correlations
among observed variables.” Social Forces
48:506-11.

Liebert, Roland J.

1974 “Municipal functions, structure, and ex-
penditures: a reanalysis of recent research.”
Social Science Quarterly 54:765-83.

Lineberry, Robert L. and Edmund P. Fowler

1967 “Reformism and public policies in American
cities.” American Political Science Review
61:701-16.

Long, Norton

1969 “The corporation, its satellites, and the local
community.” Pp. 163-76 in David W. Minar
and Scott Greer (eds.), The Concept of
Community. Chicago: Aldine.
Mills, C. Wright and Melville J. Ullmer

1970 “Small business and civic welfare.” Pp.
124-54 in Michael Aiken and Paul E. Mott
(eds.). The Structure of Community Power.
New York: Random House.

Morlock, Laura L.

1974 “Business interests, countervailing groups,
and the balance of influence in 91 cities.”
Pp. 309-28 in Willis D. Hawley and Fred-
erick M. Wirt (eds.), The Search for Com-
munity Power, 2nd edition. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Pappenfort, Donnell M.

1959 “The ecological field and the metropolitan
community: manufacturing and manage-
ment.” American Journal of Sociology
64:380-5.

Parsons, Talcott

1957 “The distribution of power in American

society.” World Politics 10:620-34.
Schnore, Leo F.

1957 “Satellites and suburbs.” Social Forces
26:121-9.

1958 “Social morphology and human ecology.”
American Journal of Sociology 71:620-34.

Schulze, Robert O.

1958 “The role of economic dominants in com-
munity power structures.” American Socio-
logical Review 23:3-9.

Straits, Bruce C.

1965 “Community adoption and implementation
of urban renewal.” American Journal of
Sociology 71:590-613.

Thompson, Wilbur R.

1965 A Preface to Urban Economics. Baltimore:

Johns Hopkins Press.
Turk, Herman

1970 ‘“Interorganizational networks in urban
society: initial perspectives and comparative
research.” American Sociological Review
35:1-18.
1973 Interorganizational Activation in Urban
Communities: Deductions from the Concept
of System. Rose Monograph Series. Wash-
ington, D.C. American Sociological Associa-
tion.

U.S. Bureau of the Census

1960 United States Census of Population: General
Social and Economic Characteristics. Wash-
ington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

1962 County and City Data Book. Washington,
D.C.: U.S.Government Printing Office.

1967 County Business Patterns. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Housing and Home Finance Agency

1960 Fourteenth Annual Report. Washington, D.

C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Office of Economic Opportunity

1966 Poverty Program Information as of April 1,
1966. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Office of
Economic Opportunity.

Vidich, Arthur J. and Joseph Bensman

1958 Small Town in Mass Society. Princeton, N.

J.: Princeton University Press.
Walton, John

1967 “The vertical axis of community organiza-
tion and the structure of power.” Social Sci-
ence Quarterly 48:353-68.

Warren, Roland L.

1970 “Toward a non-utopian normative model of
the community.” American Sociological Re-
view 35:219-27.

1972 The Community in America, 2nd edition.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Williams, James M.

1973 “The ecological approach in measuring com-
munity power concentration: an analysis of
Hawley’s MPO ratio.” American Sociologi-
cal Review 38:230-42.
