@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
The tendency for persons with similar amounts of schooling to marry one another is linked to
other aspects of marriage behavior and to patterns of social stratification. Whether persons
with similar amounts of formal schooling marry each other depends partly on their prefer-
ences and partly on the structure of the marriage market. An important aspect of the
marriage market is the timing of the transition out of school and into marriage. Marriages
between persons with different amounts of schooling are less likely for highly educated
persons and for persons who marry shortly after leaving school. Census and Current Popu-
lation Survey data from 1940 to 1987 indicate that the association between spouses’ school-
ing increased between the 1930s and the 1970s and was stable or decreased in the 1980s.
This trend occurred partly because the time gap between schooling and marriage shortened
from the 1930s to the 1960s as a result of increased educational attainment and lowered age
at marriage; the time gap lengthened in the 1970s and 1980s as a result of increased age at
marriage. After estimated trends in educational assortative mating are adjusted for the
length of time between school leaving and marriage, some evidence of increased homogamy
from the 1930s to the 1980s remains. This may result from increasing competition in the
marriage market for wives with good prospects in the labor market. Increases in educational
homogamy may increase inequality among families and in the socioeconomic achievement
of their offspring.
I examine how some of these changes have
affected the relationship between husbands’ and
wives’ educational attainment over the past 50
years in the United States. The association be-
tween the schooling levels of newlyweds in-
creased from the 1930s until the 1970s and then
declined. These changes may have resulted from
well-known trends in average levels of educa-
tional attainment and age at marriage.

Educational attainment is a particularly im-
portant dimension of assortative mating. It is both
a consequence of family background and also a
key determinant of labor market success and of
other aspects of lifestyle (e.g., Hyman, Wright,
and Reed 1975; Jencks et al. 1979). As a result,
schooling affects mate selection and the organi-
zation of marriage markets. It broadly defines
strata within which persons may prefer to marry
and serves as a trait that may signal the desirabil-

 

cilities of the Center for Demography and Ecology at
the University of Wisconsin — Madison, which are
supported by the Center for Population Research of
the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (HD-5876). I thank Robert Hauser, John
Logan, Judith Seltzer, Linda Waite, Christopher Win-
ship, the Editor, and ASR reviewers for comments on
an earlier draft; and Julia Gray, Cheryl Knobeloch,
and Meei-Shenn Tzeng for research assistance.
Educational homogamy may also vary with the
educational attainment of marriage partners. The
educational hierarchy creates barriers to marriage
between persons with different amounts of
schooling (e.g., between high school graduates
and dropouts, between persons who attend col-
lege and those who do not, etc.). Homogamous
marriages are, by definition, more common when
it is difficult to marry across barriers, but some
barriers may be a greater impediment than oth-
ers. Throughout this century, typical ages at mar-
riage have ranged from the late teens through the
twenties. Thus, college students are more likely
to meet prospective spouses while in school than
are elementary or high school students. More-
over, when potential spouses do meet in school,
they may be more likely to enter an educational-
ly homogamous marriage when they meet at an
advanced stage of the schooling process than
when they meet at lower levels of schooling. This
happens because, at successive levels of school-
ing, the ultimate educational status of students still
in school is increasingly homogeneous (e.g., Mare
1980). Elementary and secondary schools contain
students who will drop out with low levels of
schooling as well as those who will pursue higher
education. In contrast, colleges comprise only
students who will attain at least some college.
When two “high school sweethearts” marry, they
are less likely to create an educationally homog-
amous marriage than two “college sweethearts.”
Because the remaining educational careers of the
former couple are potentially longer, they are
less certain and have greater potential for educa-
tional differences between spouses than they do
for the latter couple.

These considerations imply that: (1) Marriages
between persons who differ in educational at-
tainment may be more common at some levels of
the educational hierarchy than at others. Barriers
to educational intermarriage may be weaker at
low levels of the schooling distribution than at
higher levels. (2) The effect of time gap between
school departure and marriage on educational
homogamy is greater at high levels of schooling
than at lower levels. Because colleges have a
greater homogenizing effect on marriage than
elementary and secondary schools, marriage
across barriers at the college level may be more
sensitive to the amount of time between leaving
school and marriage. Because it is easier to cross
barriers to intermarriage early in the schooling
process, delay of marriage after leaving school
may not substantially alter these barriers. In con-
trast, because marriage across educational barri-
ers later in the schooling process is harder, per-
sons who delay marriage after leaving college
are more likely to escape an educationally ho-
mogenous circle of acquaintances.'
Potentially important sources of change in edu-
cational assortative mating are trends in the tim-
ing of leaving school and marriage. Secular in-
creases in average educational attainment have
dramatically raised the average age at which per-
sons leave school. Between the 1930s and the
1970s, in contrast, the average age at first mar-
riage declined substantially (e.g., Cherlin 1981;
Espenshade 1985). Since the 1970s, age at mar-
riage has increased, but continued high levels of
educational attainment imply that the gap be-
tween school-leaving and marriage in the 1980s
is shorter than it was in the 1930s. The down-
ward trend in age at marriage, coupled with the
upward trend in educational attainment, implies
an increasingly close link between school depar-
ture and entry into marriage since the 1930s
(Winsborough 1978). Thus, the combined trends
suggest that between the 1930s and the 1970s
single persons were increasingly likely to meet
potential spouses while they were still in school.
Because school classes are educationally homo-
Beyond changes in the timing of marriage and
school departure, other changes may have influ-
enced patterns of assortative mating. Increases in
women’s participation in the labor force and in
the seriousness with which women pursue ca-
reers have altered the expectations of both sexes
for marriage (England and Farkas 1986; Oppen-
heimer 1988). While these changes may partly
account for later marriage and higher rates of
marital disruption, they may also cause persons
to seek partners more similar on socioeconomic
status than they traditionally have sought. If men
increasingly see women as breadwinners as well
as mothers and homemakers, and women’s pref-
erences for men are unchanged, then men with
the best prospects in the labor market will seek
women who also have the best earnings poten-
tial? Men with poorer labor market prospects
may also seek women with good earnings poten-
tial, but because their competitive position is
weaker, they must marry women with somewhat
lower economic potential. Increasing competi-
tion for spouses with good economic prospects
may increase the educational homogamy of mar-

* These changes, however, may be confined to the
more advantaged sectors of the population. Among
the least advantaged, the growing importance of
women’s careers may be less salient in decision-mak-
ing about whether and whom to marry than whether
either partner brings enough economic resources to
sustain a marriage (Wilson 1987).
(1) Couples in which both husband and wife
are aged 16-34 and married for the first time
within approximately one year prior to the cen-
sus or CPS (“newlyweds”). Marriages less than
one year prior to the census or CPS reveal the
incidence of marriages with various combina-
tions of husbands’ and wives’ characteristics,

* Another possible outcome of these changes is that
individuals will be less likely to marry at all if their
only other option is to marry someone with poor eco-
nomic prospects. In such a marriage market, relative-
ly few marriages between persons who are unequal in
socioeconomic status will occur. As a result, the pro-
portion of existing marriages that are educationally
homogamous will increase. This argument is consis-
tent with secular trends toward late marriage and in-
creasing proportions who remain unmarried in the
1970s and 1980s.

5 Because the extracts from the PUMS and CPS
files were originally designed for a comparative anal-
ysis of assortative mating among blacks and nonblacks,
they excluded marriages between the races. As a re-
sult, interracial marriages are omitted from the present
analyses reported. Although it would have been pref-
erable to include them, they constitute less than one
percent of all marriages. It is extremely unlikely,
therefore, that excluding interracial marriages affects
the results.

°The 1950 census contains no information on edu-
cational assortative mating. Because educational at-
tainment was asked only of sample persons and most
households contained only one sample individual,
educational attainment is not available for both mem-
bers of a couple. In 1940 educational attainment was
(2) Couples in which both spouses are aged 21-
39 and were married for the first time approxi-
mately five to six years prior to the census or
CPS. These marriages reflect both assortative
mating and differential patterns of marital disso-
lution, but are included for several reasons. First,
compared to newlyweds, couples married between
five and six years earlier include relatively few
persons whose schooling is not completed. Thus,
they are comparatively free from the potential
distortion in estimated assortative mating on ed-
ucation that may occur when schooling complet-
ed after marriage is ignored.’ Second, these mar-
riages provide additional cohorts for the time se-
ries. Together with marriages for newlyweds, they
provide observations on cohorts marrying in 1935
and 1940 and every five years from 1955 to 1980,
as well as 1980-1982 and 1985-1987. Finally, the
time series of assortative mating for these mar-
riages, when considered alone, is an independent
replication of trends and patterns observed in the
time series for newlyweds.®

 

recorded for all persons. In the 1960, 1970, and 1980
censuses, educational attainment was a sample item,
but since households were sampling units, rather than
persons, educational attainment was recorded for all
members of sample households.

7 Substantial proportions of the population obtain
further schooling after marriage. Among persons aged
30-49 in 1987, more than 40 percent of both sexes
attended school at some time after entering their first
marriage (Bumpass and Call 1989, Table 4).

5 For the 1960, 1970, and 1980 censuses, the sam-
ple includes couples who married 0-12 and 60-72
months prior to the census. Because the 1940 census
records age of first marriage in years rather than
months, my 1940 samples include couples who mar-
ried when their age was the same as or one year less
than their age at the census date (for newlyweds) and
when their age was five or six years less than their age
at the census date. For marriages just prior to the
census, this procedure guarantees that the sample in-
cludes all marriages occurring during the 12 months
before the 1940 census, plus approximately one-half
of marriages occurring 13-24 months prior to the cen-
sus. For the older marriage group, this procedure
guarantees that the sample includes all marriages oc-
curring 60-72 months prior to the 1940 census and
about one-half of marriages occurring 72-84 months
prior to the 1940 census.

Although each PUMS file is a 1 percent sample,
the 1940 couples included in the analysis are less than
one percent of couples marrying one to two (or five to
six) years prior to the 1940 census. My 1940 samples
include only recently married couples for whom age
at first marriage can be ascertained. Age at first mar-
riage was obtained only for couples in which the
woman was part of the 5 percent person sample of the
1940 census (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1973). With-
in the 1940 PUMS, all households contain at least one
person who was part of the 5 percent sample, but not
all sample households contain an ever married wom-
an who was a sample person (U.S. Bureau of the
Census 1983). My samples include only couples from
the latter households.

Because the CPS samples are small relative to the
census PUMS, I pooled the CPS samples for 1985,
1986, and 1987. Analyses of the June 1985-1987 CPS
samples indicate that patterns of educational assorta-
tive mating are similar across the three surveys. In
addition, the CPS samples include couples who en-
tered their first marriage during the 24-month period
or the 54-78-month period prior to the survey. I focus
on first marriages rather than later or all marriages
because the censuses provide no information on the
date or age of later marriages and, in any case, at least
some of the marriage market processes investigated
here are more likely to pertain to first marriages.

° The sample numbers of marriages occurring be-
tween five and six years before the 1940, 1960, 1970,
and 1980 censuses and the 1985-1987 CPSs are 4,910,
8,015, 8,601, 9,676, and 4,232 respectively.

' It is possible to analyze assortative mating using
association models, which treat educational attain-
ment as a quantitative variable and yield measures of
association analogous to correlation coefficients be-
Formally, the crossings model is as follows. Let
m,, denote the expected number of marriages
between husbands in schooling category i and
wives in schooling category j that are observed in
year t; d#(d™) be dichotomous (0,1) variables that
denote whether or not a husband (wife) is in
schooling category i (j); and dt be dichotomous
variables that denote whether a marriage is ob-
served in year t (i= 10-11, 12, 13-15, 216; j = 10-
11, 12, 13-15, 216; t = 1960, 1970, 1980, 1985-
1987). Further, let d¢ (k = 2, 3, 4, 5) be dichoto-
mous variables for marriage across four educa-
tional barriers. If Y,, and Y,, denote the highest
year of schooling completed for husbands and
wives respectively,
marriage to the expected number of marriages is
illustrated in Table 1, which is adapted from
Johnson (1980, p. 104). Each crossing parameter
corresponds to a single move across adjacent
levels of schooling of spouses. The greater the
distance between prospective spouses, the more
barriers they must cross. If the odds of marriage
across each barrier are less than even (i.€., Vir< 1
for all k), then the model implies that the difficul-
ty of intermarriage varies directly with the differ-
ences between men and women in their educa-
tional attainment. Differences across observation
years in the v,, provide evidence of changes in
educational homogamy.

In practice, crossings models are inadequate to
fully summarize patterns of assortative mating
within each survey year, which include asymme-
try (hypergamy or hypogamy) in assortative
mating plus other symmetric associations that
are not reducible to the four educational barriers
discussed here. For assortative mating within
years, therefore, I use less parsimonious models,
discussed below. The crossings model, however,
effectively captures patterns of change between
years, and thus the analysis of change in assorta-
tive mating focuses on crossings parameters.
over this period. In 1940, for example, fewer
than 50 percent of newlyweds had completed
high school whereas, by 1985-87, more than 85
percent had done so. Only 10-15 percent of new-
lyweds had some post-secondary schooling in
1940, in contrast to over 45 percent in 1985-87.
Within each year, educational attainment for
husbands is more variable than for wives. For
example, relative to wives, more husbands have
less than 10 years or more than 15 years of
schooling. This pattern is most pronounced in
1940 and subsides until, in the 1980s, the educa-
tion distributions of husbands and wives are ap-
proximately symmetric.

Table 2 also provides some of the basic data on
changes in assortative mating since 1940. A sim-
ple measure of educational homogamy is the per-
centage of marriages involving men and women
of the same educational strata. In 1940, about 52
percent of marriages are educationally homoga-
mous, a quantity dominated by the large percent-
age of couples in which both spouses have fewer
than 10 years of schooling. After an abrupt de-
cline between 1940 and 1960 (Rockwell 1976),
the percentage of marriages involving spouses in
the same schooling categories rises monotonical-
ly, from 47 percent in 1960 to 53 percent in 1985-
1987. A more liberal measure of homogamy, the
percentage of marriages between spouses who
differ by at most one educational level, also indi-
cates increasing educational homogamy, rising
monotonically from 83 percent of marriages in
1940 to 88 percent in 1980 and 1985-1987.

These crude measures suggest that education-
al homogamy has increased over the past 30 to
50 years, but they are not conclusive. The per-
centages of marriages that are homogamous ne-
glect information about the ease with which per-
sons can marry outside their own educational
group, which is provided by the off-diagonal cells
of the intermarriage tables. In addition, compari-
sons of percentages in various categories in the
joint distribution of spouses’ schooling confound
changes due to trends in associations between
husbands’ and wives’ schooling with trends in
the marginal distribution of schooling for each
sex. In view of the dramatic changes in the distri-
bution of schooling, these changes in marginal
distributions may distort the assessment of trends
in assortative mating.
tative mating between 1940 and 1985-1987." In
general, the results for newlyweds and for mar-
riages occurring five to six years before the cen-
sus or CPS are similar, although the measure of
global fit for most models is poorer for the latter
group of marriages.

Model 2 in Table 3 allows for unrestricted as-
sociation between the schooling of husbands and

'? The BIC (Bayesian Information Criterion) statis-
tic is an index of fit that adjusts the G? statistic for
sample size. BIC = G? — (d.f.)log(N), where d.f. is the
degrees of freedom of the model and N is the sample
size. The more negative the value of BIC, the better
the fit of the model to the data (Raftery 1986).
wives, but constrains this association to be con-
stant over time. This model accounts for most of
the association in the table, as indicated by the
big drop in G? from Model 1, in which the edu-
cational attainments of husbands and wives are
assumed to be independent. Although this model
fails to fit the data by conventional standards (p <
.01), the fit is nonetheless good for such large
samples. Models 3, 4, and 5 include alternative
restrictions on the cross-sectional association of
spouses’ schooling, but also assume no change in
the pattern of assortative mating. Model 3 as-
sumes that assortative mating patterns are sym-
metric, once the disparate marginal distributions
of husbands’ and wives’ schooling are taken into
account, i.e., the probability of a marriage be-
tween two persons with unequal schooling is un-
affected by whether the husband or the wife has
more schooling. By the G? criterion, Model 3 fits
the data worse than Model 2 (for newlyweds, G3
— G3 = 48, df. = 6, p < .01). Model 4, however,
which includes an additional parameter for
asymmetry (P), fits the data much better than
Model 3 and, for newlyweds, no worse than
Model 2 (Gj — G3 = 4.9, d.f. = 5, p = .4). Model 4
allows for a uniform tendency for women to mar-
ry up (or down) (hypergamy or hypogamy) across
combinations of spouses’ schooling. Parameter
estimates for this model (not shown here) indi-
cate that, net of the marginal distributions of
spouses’ schooling, husbands are somewhat more
likely to have more schooling than their wives
than the reverse pattern. Model 5 also allows for
asymmetry but replaces the symmetric associa-
tion parameters with the crossings parameters for
the four educational barriers discussed above. The
fit is much worse, indicating that the crossings
model is too simple to capture the cross-sectional
pattern of educational assortative mating.
Models 6-10 relax the assumption that the as-
sociation between spouses’ schooling has been
invariant over time. Model 6 includes the same
parameters for the association of spouses’
schooling as Model 4 plus time-specific cross-
ings effects. This model fits the data better than
Model 4 (for newlyweds G?- G? = 48.7, d.f. = 16,
p<.01) and remarkably well overall (p = .3) for
the newlywed sample. This result suggests that
(1) patterns of educational assortative mating
changed between 1940 and the mid-1980s and
(2) changes in couples’ abilities to marry across
educational barriers are sufficient to capture the
temporal variation in the assortative mating data.
Model 7 augments Model 6 with parameters for
year-specific levels of hypergamy or hypogamy,
but these do not significantly improve the fit of
the model (G2 — G? = 2.6, 4 d.f., p = .6). The
general tendency for women to marry men of
higher educational status has not changed signif-
icantly over time. Model 8 contains the same
parameters for change in assortative mating as
Model 6, but, like Model 2, imposes no restriction
on the cross-sectional pattern of assortative mat-
ing. This model fits better than Model 2, but not
better than Model 6. Models 9 and 10 allow for
more general patterns of change than Models 6
through 8 by including year-specific parameters
for symmetric association. These models do not
fit better than models that confine the year-specific
effects to the crossings parameters.'*

The negative BIC statistics for Models 2
through 10 suggest that these models are all bet-
ter than the saturated model and that Model 4,
which assumes no changes in educational assor-
tative mating, is most likely to be the true model

'S Models 9 and 10 implicitly include year-specific
parameters for each diagonal cell. That they do not
improve upon Models 6 or 8 suggests that there is no
change in endogamy within educational strata once
changes in education barriers are taken into account.
In analyses not reported here, models that include
year-specific diagonals and crossings parameters (but
not the general year-specific effects included in Mod-
els 9 and 10) do not improve upon Model 6 or Model 8.
among those listed. By the G? criterion, howev-
er, models that include year-specific crossings
parameters fit the data well whereas Model 4
does not fit as well. Moreover, as shown below,
the changes in the crossings parameters estimat-
ed in Models 6-8 are similar for newlyweds and
for marriages five to six years before. That the
changes in educational assortative mating are
observed in two independent samples provides
firm evidence for their existence.

Although the measures of global fit for mar-
riages five to six years prior to the census or CPS
are generally worse than those for newlyweds,
the results for the two groups are similar and
point to a similar conclusion: the incidence of
marriages that cross the several educational bar-
riers has changed significantly over time.'*

'' The models for marriages occurring between five
and six years before the census or CPS were estimat-
ed as replications of the corresponding models for
newlyweds. Attempts to find other, better fitting
models for these marriages were unsuccessful.
Although Model 8 does not fit the data for new-
lyweds significantly better than Model 6, it does
fit somewhat better for marriages occurring five
or six years before the censuses and CPSs. The
two models yield nearly identical estimates for
changes in the crossings parameters. Table 4 re-
ports the year-specific crossings parameters esti-
mated in Model 8. These parameters measure
trends in the ease with which persons marry across
educational thresholds. Columns | and 4 of Ta-
ble 4 list the 6 parameters for the log odds of
marrying across educational barriers; columns 2
and 5 show the corresponding odds (Vv) and col-
umns 3 and 6 show the normal (z) statistics for the
null hypotheses of no difference in log odds of
crossing educational barriers between 1940 and
subsequent years.

These results suggest that the association be-
tween spouses’ educational attainments has
strengthened since 1940, although the trends are
neither monotonic nor the same for all educa-
tional barriers. Increasing educational homoga-
my is most apparent for marriages in which one
spouse has at least 16 years of schooling and the
other has less than 16 years. Among newlyweds,
the odds of a marriage occurring between a per-
son with at least 16 years of schooling and a
person with less than 16 years declined from .439
in 1940 to .330 in 1980 and increased slightly to
.351 in 1985-87. The z-statistics indicate that
changes over 10-year periods are not statistically
significant, but the odds of marriage across the
16+/<16 year barrier are significantly higher in
1940 than in each observation year since. A sim-
ilar pattern holds for marriages that occurred be-
tween five and six years prior to the census or
CPS: The odds of marriage between college
graduates and persons with less schooling are
highest in 1940 and decline thereafter. For both
sets of marriage cohorts, educational homogamy
increased from 1940 to 1970 and may have sta-
bilized or decreased somewhat in the 1980s.

Marriages in which one partner has at least
some post-secondary schooling and the other does
not (13+/<13) and in which one partner has at
least 12 years of schooling and the other does not
(12+/<12) also provide evidence of increased
educational homogamy since 1940, although the
decreases in intermarriage are smaller and less
consistent than for the 16+/<16 barrier. For the
13+/<13 barrier, moreover, the increase in edu-
cational homogamy since 1940 is reversed in the
1980s, possibly as a result of an increased age at
marriage during the most recent period.

Marriages between persons with less than 10
years of schooling and those with at least 10
years do not follow the same trends. The odds of
marriage across the 10+/<10 barrier increase be-
tween 1940 and 1970 and subside thereafter. In
1940, a large proportion of persons had fewer
than 10 years of schooling (see Table 2). The
proportion in this education category has fallen
dramatically and, within this category, the aver-
age educational level has increased (Duncan
1968). Marriage between persons with less than
10 years of schooling and those with 10 or more
years may have increased mainly because of the
changing composition of the lowest educational
category. Persons with less than 10 years of
schooling in 1970 are closer in their level of
schooling to persons with 10 or 11 years of
schooling than were their counterparts in 1940.
This change in composition, rather than reduced
barriers to intermarriage, appears to account for
reduced educational homogamy at this level from
1940 to 1970.

The solid lines in Figure 1 show the estimates
from the two sets of marriage cohorts of the odds
of crossing barriers to educational intermarriage.
Estimates for newlyweds are plotted on the year
when they are observed, and marriages occur-
ring five or six years before the observation year
are plotted on the years when they occurred. Ex-
cept for the 10+/<10 barrier, the trend lines sug-
gest that these estimates can be plotted together
in a single time series for each barrier. As noted,
educational homogamy increases most for mar-
riages between college graduates and persons with
less than a college degree. Changes in intermar-
riage at intermediate educational levels (13+/<13
and 12+/<12) are smaller and more erratic, but
suggest increasing homogamy between 1940 and
the 1960s. For the 10+/<10 barrier, in contrast,
intermarriage increases between 1940 and 1960
and fluctuates erratically thereafter. For the three
highest educational barriers the trend toward in-
creasing educational homogamy may have
stopped or even reversed in the 1980s. In sum-
mary, marriage across educational barriers gen-
erally declined until the 1970s and then increased
slightly. Changes were greatest at the highest
educational barriers, which are most likely to be
affected by changes in the timing of marriage
relative to leaving school. These results suggest
that trends in educational attainment and age at
marriage may have increased educational ho-
mogamy between the depression years and the
1970s.
Odds of Crossing Education Barrier

S
io

1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985
Year of Marriage

—O— 10+/<10 —— 134/<13 —A— 124/<12 —O— 16+/<16

- O-— 10+/<10 adj — 4M — 13+/<13 adj -A- 12+/<12 adj -O- 16+/<16 adj
1935 1940 1945 1950 = 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 = 1985
Year of Marriage
1970, and then fell to less than 6 percent, roughly
parallel to the trend for women.

These trends in age at marriage, in concert with
the educational trends documented in Table 2,
affect the time elapsed between school-leaving
and marriage. Census and CPS data do not record
the age at school-leaving, but it can be estimated
from information on age at marriage and highest
grade of school completed by assuming that indi-
viduals progress through school without delay of
entry, interruptions, or grade repeats.'5 While this
assumption is not strictly true, it is adequate to
capture the effects of broad trends in the timing of
school-leaving and marriage. Table 6 reports
trends in the estimated years between leaving
school and marriage for newlyweds from 1940 to
1985-1987. In every period, women marry more
quickly after Jeaving school, a reflection of their
younger age at marriage and approximately equal
level of educational attainment compared to men.
Between 1940 and 1970, the average length of
time between school departure and entry into
marriage declined substantially for both sexes.
About 15 percent of wives who married in 1939-
1940 did so within a year after leaving school,
compared to almost 45 percent of wives who
married in 1969-1970. Among husbands, the per-
centage marrying within a year after leaving school
also increased dramatically, from about 2.5 per-
l estimate the effect of marriage timing on edu-
cational assortative mating by using a log-linear
model with the following sets of parameters: (1)
time-dependent distributions of spouses’ levels
of schooling; (2) unrestricted cross-sectional as-
sociation between spouses’ levels of schooling;
(3) time-dependent crossings parameters for ed-
ucational assortative mating; (4) time-dependent
distributions of husband’s and wife’s length of
time between schooling-leaving and marriage;
(5) unrestricted cross-sectional association be-
tween spouses’ lengths of time between leaving
school and marriage; (6) time-dependent associ-
ations between husband’s level of schooling and
his time between leaving school and marriage,
husband’s level of schooling and wife’s time be-
tween leaving school and marriage, wife’s level
of schooling and her time between leaving school
and marriage, and wife’s level of schooling and
husband’s time between leaving school and mar-
riage; and (7) cross-sectional linear associations
between crossings parameters for marriage across
educational barriers and husband’s and wife’s
time between leaving school and marriage.
Terms (1), (2), and (3) are the same as.those in
Model 8 for the table of husband’s and wife’s
schooling and year (see Table 3). Terms (4), (5),
and (6) allow for variation in husband’s and wife’s
timing of marriage with year, with each other,
and with husband’s and wife’s levels of school-
ing. For this analysis, terms (1), (2), (4), (5), and
(6) are nuisance parameters for summarizing es-
sential variation in the tables and are not reported
here. Term (7) allows for the hypothesis that ed-
ucational assortative mating, as measured by
crossings parameters, varies with time between
leaving school and marriage, and term (3) repre-
sents the change in educational assortative mat-
ing that remains once the timing of leaving school
and marriage is taken into account. (If husband’s
and wife’s times between leaving school and
marriage are denoted as M and F respectively
and the other dimensions are denoted as in Table
3, then this model can be written, HW, MF, CM,,
CF,, CY, MY, FY, HMY, HFY, WFY, WMY;
where the L subscript denotes linear association.)'°

'© The tables include 3,125 cells and the model has
461 parameters. For both newlyweds and persons who
married five to six years before, the models appear to
fit reasonably well — much better than models that
ignore trends in the distributions of spouses’ school-
The linear effects of time between leaving school
and marriage on the odds of crossing the four
barriers to educational intermarriage are general-
ly consistent with the conjectures presented above
(Figure 2).'’ First, the odds of crossing educa-
tional barriers to marriage are generally lower at
the upper end of the schooling distribution, indi-
cating higher levels of educational homogamy.
Second, barriers to educational intermarriage
typically decline as the time between leaving
school and marriage increases.

Finally, the effect of time between leaving
school and marriage is usually greatest for cross-
ing barriers at the upper end of the schooling
distribution. For barriers at the college level (13+/
<13 and 16+/<16), the odds of intermarriage in-
crease substantially with time between leaving

 

ing and time between leaving school and marriage.
For newlyweds, the scaled deviance (-2 times the dif-
ference in log likelihoods of the estimated and satu-
rated models) is 3344; for persons marrying five to
six years before, it is 3241 (on 2664 degrees of free-
dom for each group). Although these quantities seem
satisfactory for such large samples, they should be
interpreted cautiously because the five-way tables have
many cells with zero frequencies. The scaled devi-
ances for these tables may not follow chi-square dis-
tributions.

'’The associations of time between leaving school
and marriage and the crossings parameters are con-
strained to be linear for ease of presentation. Depar-
aeLJEyA pue [ooYydS Busreay] Usamjag Sua,
“9 sy id

a
svo

 

—— T T

Spuegsny pamsjman,

 

(S10) 260

(y20') 7s0-

 

42]218g Bujjooysg 8uyss015 Jo SPPO
aBeuueyy pue ooysg Suraea’] usamiag suea,

L< “go

or

 

 

+91/91> —&

 

+EL/El>

i

+21/01> —

+01/01> F |

 

£

“t

>
sz0

 

r T

 

SIB2A 9-5 POLIUEY SPAM,

 

 

 

T

T

 

49}18g Burjooyrg Bujssos> Jo sppO

L< “go
—

SUeaA 9-5 PALEY §
school and marriage. At the college level, for
both husbands and wives among newlyweds and
persons marrying five to six years before, the
odds of intermarriage are about 50 percent great-
er for persons who marry more than seven years
after they leave school than for persons who marry
less than two years after school departure. For
the barriers at lower schooling levels, the effects
of time between schooling and marriage are less
clear cut. For marriages between high school
graduates and high school dropouts (12+/<12) in
both cohorts, husband’s time since leaving school

 

tures from linearity, though sometimes statistically
significant, are small and do not affect the interpreta-
tions presented here. The coefficients reported in Fig-
ure 2 denote the effects of a change between adjacent
categories of the distribution of times between leav-
ing school and marriage on the log odds of crossing
each barrier. Because most of the categories corre-
strongly affects intermarriage, but the effect for
wife’s time since leaving school is negligible.
For the 10+/<10 barrier, time between leaving
school and marriage has no effect on the odds of
intermarriage for any of the groups.

These patterns indicate that relative timing of
leaving schooling and marriage affects the
strength of association between husband’s and
wife’s schooling. They also suggest that varying
heterogeneity in ultimate educational attainment
among school classes affects the degree to which
education differences are a barrier to marriage.
Year-specific crossings parameters estimated for
the model described above measure changes in
the incidence of marriages across educational
thresholds, adjusted for trends in length of time
between leaving school and marriage for hus-
bands and wives (Table 7). Column 1 contains
the log odds of marrying across educational bar-
riers for newlyweds, column 2 shows the corte-
sponding odds, and column 3 shows the z-statis-
tics for the hypotheses of no change in adjusted
log odds of crossing educational barriers between
1940 and subsequent years. Columns 4 through
6 present the corresponding quantities for mar-
riages five to six years before the census or CPS.
The dashed lines in Figure | are the estimates of
the adjusted odds from the two sets of marriage
cohorts.

Once trends in the timing of leaving school
and marriage are taken into account, changes in
educational assortative mating are somewhat
smaller than the unadjusted changes. The trend
toward increased barriers to intermarriage remains
strongest at the upper end of the schooling distri-
bution. The adjusted odds of crossing the 16+/
<16 barrier between 1940 and 1980 decreased
slightly less than the unadjusted odds but in the
1980s, where the unadjusted odds level off or
begin to increase, the adjusted odds continue to
fall. The changes in parameters are small, but
they suggest that (1) changes in the timing of
marriage account for some of the decline in the
incidence of marriage across the 16+/<16 barrier
up to 1980 and in the turnaround after 1980, and
(2) the increase in educational homogamy at the
upper end of the schooling distribution is only
partly due to changes in the timing of leaving
school and marriage.

For the 13+/<13 barrier, changes in the timing
of leaving school and marriage account for most
of the decrease in marriage across the barrier.
None of the contrasts in adjusted log odds of
intermarriage between 1940 and the later years is
statistically significant, and only in the 1980s is
there any evidence of reduced intermarriage. This
suggests that changes in the timing of marriage
account for the observed turnaround after 1975
and that once the effect of marriage timing is
taken into account, marriage across the 13+/<13
barrier is decreasing, similar to the 16+/<16 bar-
rier. Further observations on intermarriage in the
1980s are required to establish this result with
certainty.
Barriers to marriage between persons with un-
equal amounts of formal schooling increased be-
tween the 1930s and the present. These increases
may be the result of well-known trends in aver-
age educational attainment, age at leaving school,
and age at marriage. The degree to which schools
affect the selection of marriage partners is dictat-
ed by the degree to which leaving school and
marriage occur closely together and by the edu-
cational attainments of marriage partners. Varia-
tion in the average age at leaving school and
marriage and in educational attainment induce
variation in educational assortative mating. Be-
cause college students are more homogeneous in
their ultimate educational attainments than ele-
mentary or secondary school students, the time
between leaving school and marrying affects the
ease with which persons marry across education
barriers more strongly at the upper end of the
schooling distribution. In view of trends toward
increasing proportions of persons attending at
least some college, this suggests educational ho-
mogamy will be more sensitive to trends and
fluctuations in the timing of marriage than it has
been in the past.

Some of the trend toward increased education-
al assortative mating remains after the relative
timing of leaving school and entry into marriage
is taken into account, especially for marriages
between college graduates and persons without
college degrees. Several other changes in the
timing and organization of men’s and women’s
lives over the past five decades may have affect-
ed the likelihood of finding a spouse within the
same educational stratum. Changes in rates of
participation in the armed forces, in rates of
childbearing before marriage, in the incidence of
cohabitation between unmarried persons, in
women’s labor force participation, and in the sta-
tus of jobs held by women also affect the timing
of marriage and exposure to potential spouses of
varying educational statuses. Whether these trends
account for changes in educational assortative
mating requires more study.

Beyond the changing structure of early adult
life, other trends may also influence patterns of
assortative mating. As women participate in the
labor force at higher rates and for larger fractions
of their lives, their economic value to potential
male spouses becomes more salient than in the
past (Oppenheimer 1988). This suggests that
men’s and women’s views of the marriage mar-
ket are becoming increasingly symmetrical. Men
may increasingly seek women with the best la-
bor market prospects, and those men whose own
labor market prospects are strong will fare best
in the competition for these women. The result
may be a higher correlation between educational
attainments of husbands and wives.

Whatever the sources of change in the associa-
tion between husbands’ and wives’ schooling,
these changes may affect educational (and per-
haps other socioeconomic) inequality within the
parents’ generation and the strength of the link
between parents’ education and that of their off-
spring. If barriers to marriage between educa-
tional strata increase, then between-family ine-
quality will increase and the proportion of varia-
tion in children’s socioeconomic attainment that
is determined by parental social standing will
also increase (e.g., Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman
1981; Epstein and Guttman 1984). However,
these changes may be offset by secular declines
in educational inequality among fathers and
among mothers. The relative importance of these
effects on family inequality and educational mo-
bility requires further analysis. My results none-
theless suggest that future trends in age at mar-
riage — for example, a reversion either to the
post-World War II pattern of early marriage or to
the depression pattern of late marriage — will
affect both the structure of marriage and inequality
within and between generations.
Blau, Peter M. and Otis Dudley Duncan. 1967. The
American Occupational Structure. New York: John
Wiley and Sons.

Bumpass, Larry L. and Vaughn R. A. Call. 1989.
“The Timing of Marriage and Education.” (Na-
tional Survey of Families and Households Work-
ing Paper No. 10). Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin, Center for Demography and Ecology.

Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi L. and Marcus W. Feldman.
1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A
Quantitative Approach. (Monographs in Popula-
tion and Biology 16). Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.

Cherlin, Andrew J. 1981. Marriage, Divorce, Re-
marriage. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Duncan, Beverly. 1968. “Trends in Output and Dis-
tribution of Schooling.” Pp. 601-72 in Indicators of
Social Change, edited by E. B. Sheldon and W. E.
Moore. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Eckland, Bruce K. 1968. “Theories of Mate Selec-
tion.” Eugenics Quarterly 15:71-84.

England, Paula and George Farkas. 1986. Households,
Employment, and Gender: A Social, Economic, and
Demographic View. New York: Aldine.

Epstein, Elizabeth and Ruth Guttman. 1984. “Mate
Selection in Man: Evidence, Theory and Outcome.”
Social Biology 31:243-78.

Espenshade, Thomas J. 1985. “Marriage Trends in
America: Estimates, Implications, and Causes.”
Population and Development Review 11:193-246.

Goodman, Leo A. 1979. “Simple Models for the
Analysis of Association in Cross-Classifications
Having Ordered Categories.” Journal of the Amer-
ican Statistical Association 76:537-52.

Hauser, Robert M. 1982. “The Structure of Social
Relationships: Cross-Classifications of Mobility,
Kinship, and Friendship.” Pp. 205-67 in Social
Structure and Behavior: Essays in Honor of Willi-
am Hamilton Sewell, edited by R. Hauser, D. Me-
chanic, A. Haller, and T. Hauser. New York: Aca-
demic Press.

Hout, Michael. 1982. “The Association Between Hus-
bands’ and Wives’ Occupations in Two-Earner
Families.” American Journal of Sociology 88:397-
409.

Hyman, Herbert H., Charles R. Wright, and John
Shelton Reed. 1975. The Enduring Effects of Edu-
cation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jencks, Christopher, Susan Bartlett, Mary Corcoran,
James Crouse, David Eaglesfield, Gregory Jack-
son, Kent McClelland, Peter Mueser, Michael Ol-
neck, Joseph Schwartz, Sherry Ward, and Jill Wil-
liams. 1979. Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of
Economic Success in America. New York: Basic
Books.

Johnson, Robert A. 1980. Religious Assortative Mat-
ing in the United States. New York: Academic
Press.

Johnson, Ronald C., Frank M. Ahern, and Robert E.
Cole. 1980. “Secular Change in Degree of Assorta-
tive Mating for Ability?” Behavior Genetics 10:1-8.

Mare, Robert D. 1980. “Social Background and School
Continuation Decisions.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 75:295-305.

Oppenheimer, Valerie K. 1988. “A Theory of Mar-
riage Timing: Assortative Mating Under Varying
Degrees of Uncertainty.” American Journal of
Sociology 94:563-91.

Pagnini, Deanna L. and S. Philip Morgan. 1990. “In-
termarriage and Social Distance Among U. S. Im-
migrants at the Turn of the Century.” American
Journal of Sociology 96:405-32.

Raftery, Adrian E. 1986. “Choosing Models for Cross-
Classifications.” American Sociological Review 51:
145-6.

Rockwell, Richard. 1976. “Historical Trends and
Variations in Educational Homogamy.” Journal of
Marriage and the Family 38:83-96.
U. S. Bureau of the Census. 1973. Population and
Housing Inquiries in U.S. Decennial Censuses,
1790-1970. Working Paper 39. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Commerce.

. 1983. Census of Population, 1940: Public
Use Microdata Sample Technical Documentation.
Washington, D.C.: US Department of Commerce.

Warren, Bruce L. 1966. “A Multiple Variable Ap-
proach to the Assortative Mating Phenomenon.”
Eugenics Quarterly 13:285-90.

Wilson, William J. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged:
The Inner City, The Underclass, and Public Poli-
cy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Winsborough, Halliman H. 1978. “Statistical Histo-
ries of the Life Cycle of Birth Cohorts: The Tran-
sition from School Boy to Adult Male.” Pp. 231-59
in Social Demography, edited by K. E. Taeuber, L.
L. Bumpass, and J. A. Sweet. New York: Academic
Press.
