http://www.jstor.org/stable/2091280?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
spects. Some involve vitriolic ex-

changes of threats and denunciations
while others run their course through rou-
tine hearings and are resolved before un-
filled council chambers. The same issue—
for example, fluoridation—may run its
course in undramatic fashion in one town,
but prove to be the trigger for an explosive
confrontation in another town with seem-
ingly similar characteristics. This paper ad-
dresses itself to the structural differences
between those communities in which such
outbursts occur and those in which they do
not.

In particular, two ways of carrying on
conflict in the local community are con-
trasted. In conventional conflicts, estab-
lished means of political expression are used
to influence the outcome of issues. Oppo-
nents regard each other as mistaken or as
pursuing different but legitimate goals, but
not as the representatives of evil forces.
Such tactics as threats of punishment, per-
sonal vilification, and deliberate, conscious
deceptions are not involved. In contrast to
conventional conflicts, rancorous conflicts
are characterized by the belief that norms
about the waging of political conflict in
American communities have been violated.
In such conflicts, actions occur which pro-
duce a shared belief that tactics used to in-
fluence the outcome are “dirty,” ‘“under-
handed,” “vicious” and so forth.

Some communities are much more prone
than others to rancorous conflicts. The dif-
ferences between rancorous and conventional
communities can be organized under three
general headings: structural conduciveness,
structural strain, and structural integra-

Cores. 's issues differ in many re-
tion.’ Conduciveness refers to the extent to
which structural characteristics in the com-
munity permit or encourage rancorous con-
flicts. Strain refers to the extent to which
structural characteristics generate discontent
or dissatisfaction among the community
members. Integration refers to the extent to
which structural characteristics prevent or
inhibit rancorous conflict. Although integra-
tion is just the other side of conduciveness,
each refers to different structural elements.
In other words, we do not consider the ab-
sence of integration as an element of con-
duciveness or the presence of integration as
the absence of conduciveness.

The three categories of determinant are
highly related to each other. High condu-
civeness will not produce rancorous conflict
if unaccompanied by strain nor if, although
accompanied by strain, structural integra-
tion is great. High strain will not produce
rancorous conflict unless the social structure
is conducive to conflict and structural inte-
gration is inadequate. The absence of struc-
tural integration will not produce rancorous
conflict if there is little strain or conducive-
ness. In other words, we should expect ran-
corous conflicts to occur most frequently in
those communities characterized by high
conduciveness, high strain, and low integra-
tion.

Structural Conduciveness. Such highly
general categories as conduciveness, strain,
and integration need specification if they are
to be measured. With respect to conducive-
ness, we will focus on two aspects of com-
munity social structure: the degree to which
it encourages widespread citizen participa-
tion and the degree to which it offers highly
visible targets for the expression of rancor.

Participative Political Structure. The more
the political structure permits or encourages
widespread citizen participation, the greater
is the conduciveness to rancorous conflict.
Since it is typically argued that such con-
flict is encouraged by the closing of channels
of legitimate political expression, this hy-
pothesis needs defense. The argument for
the proposition may take a weak or a strong
form. In the weak form, a distinction is
made between the intensity and the fre-
quency of rancorous conflict. In high partic-
ipation communities, it is argued, the politi-
cal system offers not only an instrumental
channel but an expressive one as well. Mild
discontent which might otherwise find no
outlet or a non-political one is encouraged
to find political expression. In finding fre-
quent release in this fashion, such discontent
does not build up an explosive potential. Al-
though rancorous conflicts may occur less
frequently in communities with a non-par-
ticipative political structure, they have more
intensity when they do occur.

The stronger form of the argument is a
denial of the counter-proposition that the
blocking of channels of political expression
encourages rancorous conflict. This argu-
ment challenges the assumption that there
is a reservoir of discontent which will either
find controlled outlet in legitimate political
expression or will accumulate until the dam
bursts. Instead, it is assumed that the relief
or exacerbation of discontent depends on the
nature of the resultant decisions made and
not on the catharsis which comes from politi-
cal expression. If the political system allows
for high political participation but does not
deal successfully with the sources of dis-
satisfaction, then rancorous conflicts are
more likely to occur because strain is com-
bined with high conduciveness. Only when
political participation is combined with the
influence which can alleviate the source of
discontent do rancorous conflicts become
less likely. This argument does not imply
that high citizen participation is necessarily
conducive to rancorous conflict (and hence
is bad), but merely that participation does
not automatically remove strain.

Given the truth of this proposition, then
it is false that such actions as civil rights
demonstrations must lessen the probability
of other less orderly expressions. As long as
the underlying sources of strain are not dealt
with, such participation simply increases
structural conduciveness and thus makes
other expressions more likely. Of course, if
the action also helps to remove the strain,
for example, by aiding the passage of re-
medial legislation, then the met effect may
be to reduce the probability of other less
orderly expressions.

A study of fluoridation by Crain, Katz,
and Rosenthal contains some suggestive re-
sults concerning this hypothesis.? They find
that the participative nature of the political
structure affects both the degree of contro-
versy about fluoridation and the likelihood
of its adoption. “Governments which do not
place ‘obstacles’ such as political parties be-
tween the citizen and the decision-makers
experience the pattern of a large number of
referenda and high controversy [as well as
high rejection].” Fluoridation is at least
more likely to provoke strong controversy
where participative political structures pro-
vide conduciveness.®

Solidary Groups. The greater the clarity
of solidary groups within a social structure,
the greater is the conduciveness to rancorous
conflict. Communities differ in the extent to
which they contain sub-groups with: (1)
feelings of membership or identification with
a group or collectivity; (2) feelings of com-
mon interest with respect to political de-
cisions; (3) a common style of life, norms,
and values; (4) a high rate of interaction

2 Robert L. Crain, Elihu Katz, and Donald B.
Rosenthal, The Fluoridation Decision: Community
Structure and Innovation, forthcoming.

The volatile nature of California politics may
be due (among other things) to the structural con-
duciveness stemming from a long tradition of
initiative and referendum.
among themselves. The degree of solidarity
of a sub-group is its magnitude on the above
characteristics; the clarity of solidary group
structure is the extent to which there exist
community sub-groups of high solidarity.

Clearly identifiable solidary groups are
conducive to rancorous conflict because they
provide readily identifiable targets for hos-
tility. Such subdivisions of the community
do not in themselves signify cleavage. Never-
theless, any clear-cut basis of differentiation
among the citizens of a town may provide a
structural basis for the development of inter-
group hostility if there also exist strains and
low integration among solidary groups.

Structural Strain. Any part of the social
structure may produce strains which are
relevant for rancorous conflict in the com-
munity. Many strains originate outside of
the community but have ramifications for
the social and political life of the town.
There are undoubtedly strains deriving from
fear of nuclear war, increasing bureaucrati-
zation, depersonalization, commercialism,
manipulation, and so forth. Such strains
may make their own contributions to ran-
corous conflicts in the community, but they
are felt by all communities, rancorous as
well as conventional. Therefore, we must
turn to strains which can differentiate our
communities in order to explain why some
are prone to rancorous conflict and others
are not.

There are many possibilities, Although the
specification of such strains requires detailed
knowledge of the particular communities in
question, it seems likely that they are con-
nected with change. The change might in-
clude, for example, rapid economic growth
or decline, heavy in-migration or out-migra-
tion, or shifts in the distribution of power
in the community. For two reasons I have
chosen to focus on strains emanating from
a shift in political control: (1) the existence
or non-existence of a shift in control sharply
differentiates the communities studied here;
(2) a shift in political control is likely to be
a reflection of other strains as well as a
creator of strains in its own right.

Shifts in political control are a source of
structural strain which contribute to ran-
corous conflict. I have in mind here some-
thing broader than the circulation of elites.
In particular, two kinds of shift will be con-
sidered. They have in common the existence
of a relatively homogeneous group whose
leaders find that they face competition in
areas of decision-making where they did
not before, or that they are competing less
successfully than before. In one type of
community, there are clear solidary groups
with one gaining or losing political power
relative to others. In a second type of com-
munity, a homogeneous native population
has been, or threatens to be, supplanted by
a large, heterogeneous, and politically ac-
tive group of newcomers.

Structural Integration. Strain and con-
duciveness deal with those characteristics of
social structure that promote or encourage
rancorous conflict. We now turn our atten-
tion to those features which tend to control
or inhibit such expressions. Basically, we
expect rancorous and conventional commu-
nities to differ in the extent to which po-
tential antagonists are bound together. In
particular, we examine the connections which
exist between those with different opinions
on community issues. Are proponents and
opponents bound by associational ties, by
friendship, or by shared backgrounds? If
they are not, then we should expect a given
amount of strain and conduciveness to be
more likely to produce rancorous conflict.
We will consider three kinds of tie here.

Organizational Ties. The greater the de-
gree of common organizational membership
among proponents and opponents, the greater
the resistance to rancorous conflict. If the
organizational life of a community puts po-
tential antagonists together in a variety of
meetings over a variety of issues, they are
likely to find occasions for agreement, to
develop bonds of friendship, a sense of joint
accomplishment, and other integrative ties.
When a disagreement occurs, it should be
less likely to produce the kind of break in
a relationship which rancorous conflict rep-
resents.

Interpersonal Ties. The greater the de-
gree of friendship among proponents and
opponents, the greater the resistance to ran-
corous conflict. If potential antagonists
know each other well socially, such friend-
ship bonds should help to provide that de-
gree of trust and belief in good faith which
inhibit rancorous conflicts.

Shared Background. The more proponents
and opponents tend to be of different length
of residence, nationality background, educa-
tion, and religion, the less the resistance to
rancorous conflict. These four bases of dif-
ferentiation were chosen because they seemed
particularly likely to be correlated with par-
tisan divisions in the set of New England
communities we studied. Since these are the
bases of differentiation that presumably un-
derlie solidary groups, this hypothesis might
appear to be simply another statement of
the earlier one on structural conduciveness.
We argued above that the existence of clear
sub-groups was conducive to rancorous con-
flict but that they did not, in themselves,
signify cleavage. It is possible to have sol-
idary groups which cross-cut issues, thus
giving proponents and opponents an impor-
tant common group membership. It is also
possible to find the opposite—that propo-
nents and opponents have different back-
ground characteristics but lack any feeling
of membership or identification with dis-
tinct community sub-groups. Even where
clear solidary groups are not present, the
absence of these integrative bonds should
make such communities more vulnerable to
rancorous conflict. Finally, it is possible to
have full fledged cleavages in which clearly
defined solidary groups exist and do cor-
respond to divisions on issues. This condi-
tion combines conduciveness with lack of
integration; when strain is added, we should
particularly expect rancorous conflict.
maining eight were more or less independent
cities with some industrial base of their own.
All but two of the communities were in
Maine or Massachusetts.

Material on these communities was gath-
ered through interviews with 426 informants,
an average of twenty-four per town, supple-
mented by information from a variety of
documents. Interviewing was done by teams
of three or four individuals who stayed in
each community for several days. Three is-
sues were studied in each town, one of which,
fluoridation, was common to all eighteen.
The presence of a decision on fluoridation
was, in fact, the basis of selection of these
communities; the eighteen comprise all
those New England communities which made
a fluoridation decision during an eighteen-
month period of data collection.

Before any interviewing began, each town
was investigated through such sources as
the local newspaper, formal statistical data
from the state and federal censuses, city
planning reports, annual town reports, and
various state manuals. The persons inter-
viewed fell into two categories: active par-
tisans on both sides of each of the three is-
sues; and people named by these “issue
leaders” as influential in the community,
ie., as “reputational leaders.”

Identifying Rancorous Conflicts. Respon-
dents were not asked directly about the fair-
ness or legitimacy of the tactics used to in-
fluence the outcome of the three issues
studied in their town. They were asked what
those in favor did and what those against
did to promote their side, in addition to a
number of more specific questions about
activities designed to influence the outcome.
To identify rancorous conflict, we must rely
on charges made spontaneously about the
illegitimacy of tactics used. Despite the ab-
sence of direct efforts to elicit such state-
ments and the reluctance of some informants
to discuss such matters with outsiders, there
were 161 different charges of illegitimate
tactics made by the 426 people interviewed.

We coded various kinds of charge. They
had in common the belief on the part of the
informant that individuals or groups in the
community deliberately and with full con-
sciousness used improper means in an at-
tempt to influence the outcome of a com-
munity decision. In a few cases, the objec-
tionable tactics were not specified, but the
campaign as a whole was described as dirty,
vicious or underhanded. More specific
charges concerned the use of threats, efforts
to degrade or humiliate, attempts to punish
people in ways like depriving them of their
jobs, lying, and deliberate efforts to play
on prejudice or irrational fears.>

In some communities, as many as half of
the informants made such charges on at
least one issue, while in others there was no
more than a single charge. Even though
some of the charges were doubtful, the
existence of charges by independent infor-
mants will be taken as sufficient evidence in
itself of the collective phenomenon of ran-
corous conflict. In other words, we simply
require assurance that the belief in illegiti-
mate tactics is a shared and not an idio-
syncratic one; the veracity of a charge of
dirty politics is generally a matter of inter-
pretation in any event.

Those communities in which such charges
are prevalent will be called rancorous; those
in which they are rare will be called con-
ventional. The following criterion divides
the eighteen towns into two groups of nine:
all towns in which at least two individuals
make charges of illegitimate tactics on at
least two different issues are rancorous; the
remainder are conventional. In the nine ran-
corous towns so defined, an average of ten
informants per town make such charges
and in none of them do fewer than six differ-
ent individuals make charges. In the nine
conventional towns, an average of three in-
formants per town make such charges and
in only one of them® do more than four
individuals make a charge.

Selection of Issues. Since we are classifying
towns as a whole by what happens on as
few as two issues, the question of how each
issue was selected is important. The two
issues studied in addition to fluoridation
were chosen because of their local salience.
To the extent that controversy, and especially
hostile controversy, made issues salient to
informants, it is highly unlikely that un-
chosen issues would produce as many charges
of illegitimate tactics as chosen ones. Among
the rancorous towns, there may have been
other rancorous conflicts in addition to the
ones studied, but this would not alter the
classification of the town as rancorous or
conventional.

Both “issue leaders” and “reputational
leaders” were asked to name the most im-
portant issues that had arisen in their town
in the previous five years and they named,
or. the average, between three and four is-
sues. Clearly, there are many competing
criteria of importance.’ Degree of contro-
versy, amount of money involved, and num-
ber of people affected are a few of those
that might be invoked. Some issues may
qualify on more than one criterion. Issues
which involve a lot of money are likely
to affect many people and in different ways,
and thus provoke controversy.

Perhaps this latter fact accounts for the
relatively high degree of consensus which
one gets in answer to a question on import-
ant issues. Of the 54 issues studied, 26
were mentioned by a majority of the re-
spondents in the town.8 Furthermore, there

7 A number of authors have addressed themselves
to the problems involved in selecting issues to study.
See, for example, Nelson Polsby, Community Power
and Political Theory (New Haven: Yale University
Press), 1963, pp. 95-97; and Linton C. Freeman
et al. Local Community Leadership (Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press), 1960, pp. 7-8.

8 Issues were selected for study through exami-
nation of community newspapers and some informal
checking with newspaper editors and city clerks. It
was possible to miss issues on whose importance
there was considerable consensus since this could
not be discovered until the interviews were com-
pleted. Thus, five issues named by a majority of
respondents were mot studied. Three of these were
in rancorous towns and their inclusion would, thus,
not affect the classification of the town. In one
conventional town, none of the three issues studied
produced as many as two charges; thus, the inclu-
sion of the missed issue would not be sufficient to
change the classification of the town even if it did
produce charges. The other conventional town
could have been shifted into the rancorous column
by the inclusion of the missed issue, but there is
was a good deal of convergence on the issue
mentioned first or singled out as most im-
portant. In eleven of the eighteen towns,
a majority mentioned a particular issue first
or as most important, and in all but one of
these the issue was included in the 54
studied.® Eighteen of the issues concern
fluoridation, eleven concern schools, eleven
are issues over the development of some new
community facility or service, eight are
zoning issues, and the other six are an as-
sortment which includes changes in the form
of government and urban renewal.

Independent Variables. Participative Polit-
ical Structure. This variable refers to the
formal political structure of the community.
Indices of a participative structure include
formal provision for frequent referenda, di-
rect primaries, and other occasions for direct
citizen participation in decision-making.

New England communities are peculiar
in political structure. An extremely large
number of decisions are made by the electo-
rate rather than by representative bodies.
In some instances, state laws make referenda
mandatory. For example, fluoridation can
only be adopted through this form of de-
cision in Maine and Massachusetts. Only
12 of the 54 issues studied were decided by
representative decision-making bodies. How-
ever, since eleven of the communities studied
had a town meeting form of government
but seven did not, they can be differentiated
on this basis. Nevertheless those designated
here as “non-participative” would hardly
warrant this description if we considered
a national sample of communities.

Solidary Groups. The identification of
solidary groups, when they play a prominent
role in the political life of a town, is not
difficult. They become such a salient part
of the social landscape that their existence
is explicitly or implicitly recognized in al-
most any detailed description of the town.

no indication from examining the few sparse com-
ments about this issue that it would have.

® What consensus exists is not an artifact of the
use of active partisans as respondents. A compari-
son of self-rated actives and inactives shows almost
no differences in their mention of issues or ratings
of community concern about issues. On 23 of the
26 issues mentioned by a majority of all respon-
dents, a majority of inactive informants named the
issue as well. On seven of these issues, there is
actually a higher proportion of mentions among
inactive respondents.
Communities were classified as having
clearly defined solidary groups if 50% or
more of the respondents in the town men-
tioned some specific group or set of groups.
Nine of the eighteen towns have clearly
defined solidary groups by this criterion.
Seven of these nine have ethnic groupings
while the other two have separate geograph-
ical enclaves which are not ethnically dis-
tinct. There is an element of arbitrariness
in the ethnic label for those seven towns,
since members of some of these solidary
groups not only have the same ethnic origin
but also live in a particular section of town,
hold predominantly working class jobs, have
the same religion, speak a common second
language other than English, go to separate
schools, and share a similar political ethos.
The ethnic label is shorthand for a large
number of similarities.

Shifts in Political Control. Respondents
were asked a number of questions on po-
litical agreement and disagreement among
groups and leaders in the town. At the end
of this series, they were asked, “You’ve
given me a description of the way the town
is now. Has the town been like this through-
out the last ten or fifteen years?” and, if
Tf at least five respondents explicitly men-
tioned such shifts, the community was char-
acterized as undergoing shifts in political
control. Four of the nine communities with
solidary groups can be so characterized and
three of those without solidary groups have
recently undergone the radical transforma-
tion from a small, homogeneous, independent
town to a much more heterogeneous, sub-
urban town.

Organizational Ties. Respondents in each
community were asked which “men’s or
women’s clubs and organizations are most
active in community affairs?” The eight
most frequently mentioned organizations
were coded and membership in these organ-
izations was ascertained for all respondents.
Our measure of organizational ties centers
on the extent to which a single major organi-
zation provides a common focus for people
active in political affairs. Here, we measure
the ratio of the largest number of respondent-
memberships in any single organization to
the total number of respondents in the town.

Interpersonal Ties. Respondents were
asked to name active partisans on each side
of each of the issues. They were also asked
to indicate how well they knew each of the
individuals named, using a scale with four
degrees of acquaintanceship—from “an inti-
mate friend” at one end, to “someone I have
no contact with” at the other end. To form
an overall measure of proponent-opponent 1°

 

10 The terms proponent and opponent are used
friendship ties this information was used in
the following way: only those friendship
ratings for people named on the side which
the particular respondent opposed were
counted and these ratings were averaged
for all respondents.

Shared Background, This measure focuses
on four variables—length of residence, na-
tionality background, education and religion.
On each dimension, we ask to what extent
the maximum possible correlation between
issue position and the variable in question
was achieved. The scores on the four dimen-
sions are summed to form a coefficient of
cleavage which expresses the total amount
of cleavage on a given issue.

More specifically, each of the four vari-
ables is dichotomized as follows: (1) length
of residence is split at the median for a
town; (2) nationality background is divided
into the most frequent and all others; (3)
education is divided into college and non-
college; (4) religion is divided into the most
frequent and all others. Respondents’ posi-
tions on each variable are compared, in
turn, with positions on the issues, each
separate combination of variable and issue
forming a separate two-by-two table. The
marginals of this table are used to calculate
expected frequencies and maximum possible
frequencies. The difference between the
maximum possible and the expected fre-
quency forms the denominator for the co-
efficient; the difference between the expected
and the actual frequency constitutes the
numerator.

It is important to point out that whenever

 

to include both active and inactive supporters of
a position, ie. we include those who have ex-
pressed an opinion about the issue even if they
have not made any attempt at influencing the
outcome,

11 For example, if there are 10 Protestants and
10 Catholics among 12 proponents and 8 opponents
on fluoridation, we would expect by chance to get
six Protestant proponents. However, we could get
as many as 10 or as few as 2. Thus, the denomina-
tor of the coefficient of cleavage (CC) would be:
10 (Maximum frequency)—6 (Expected frequency)
==4. If there were actually nine Protestant propo-
nents, the numerator of the CC would be: 9 (Ac-
tual frequency)—6 (Expected frequency) =3, and
the CC would be 340.75. The direction of rela-
tionship has no significance here. To avoid artificial
results due to discontinuity and to simplify calcu-
lation, the expected frequencies were always
rounded to the nearest integer.
As Table 1 indicates, shifts in political
control are clearly related to rancorous con-
flict in this particular set of New England
communities. Only one of the nine con-
ventional towns is undergoing political
change while two-thirds of the rancorous
towns are undergoing such change. Are these
rancorous towns also higher on our measures
of conduciveness and lower on integration
than the conventional towns?

There is a limit to how far one can
examine interrelationships among variables
with only eighteen communities. Neverthe-
less, some attempt at this is necessary even
at the risk of breaking these eighteen cases
down into meaninglessly small cells. Eight-
een may be a small number, but it is a great
deal larger than the case study or compari-
son of two or three communities which is
typical of the literature on community poli-
tics.

There is little overall relationship between
the measures of conduciveness used here—
participative political structure and presence
of clear solidary groups—and the presence
of rancorous conflict. As Table 2 indicates,
communities without town meetings are
about as likely to have rancorous conflicts
as those with them. Solidary groups are
present about as often in rancorous as in
conventional ones. These results are not, in
themselves, negative evidence since we would
not expect higher conduciveness alone (with-
out evidence of strain) to produce differ-
ences between the two kinds of community.
However, there is little suggestion in these
data that, for those seven towns with political
instability, the presence of town meetings
or solidary groups increases the likelihood
of rancorous conflict. It is true that four
out of five politically unstable communities
which have town meetings are rancorous,
but then both of the unstable towns without
town meetings are rancorous also. Three out
of four of the unstable towns with solidary
groups are rancorous but all three of the un-
stable towns without such groups are ran-
corous. Put another way, the one exception
among the seven politically unstable commu-
nities is mot lower on our measures of con-
duciveness; it has both solidary groups and
town meetings to accompany its political
strain but still it is not rancorous. For the
measures used here the evidence on the con-
duciveness hypotheses must be considered
inconclusive at best.

There is no overall relationship between
rancorous conflict and the extent to which
some organization provides a central focus
for those involved in community affairs.
However, if we focus specifically on the
seven politically unstable towns, there is
some indication that this variable does have
an effect. Using as our measure the ratio
of the largest number of respondent mem-
berships in any single organization to the
total number of respondents in a town, we
find that the six politically unstable ran-
corous communities have an average ratio
of 0.32 as against 0.41 for the eleven towns
without political strain (p<0.05); the one
conventional town among the politically un-
stable has a ratio of 0.45, well above aver-
age on this measure of integration.

The average degree of acquaintance among
opponents is substantially lower in rancorous
than in conventional towns—2.89 vs. 2.39
(p<0.05, using a one tailed test).12 Among
the politically unstable towns, the relation-
ship is even stronger; the average is 2.97
for the six rancorous towns and the score is
1.50 for the conventional town, ranking it
first among the set of 18 in friendship
among opponents.

The Coefficient of Cleavage, our last meas-
ure of integration or lack of integration,
shows similar results. As Table 3 indicates,
six of eight towns which have at least one
issue with a high degree of cleavage between
proponents and opponents are rancorous.
Five of the six politically unstable and
rancorous towns have such sharp differences
between proponents and opponents but only
three of the other twelve.

Summary. In the towns studied here there
were four exceptions to the relationship be-
tween political instability and the appearance
of rancorous conflict. One of these, a town
which is politically changing but is not
rancorous, scores high on all our measures
of integration. But there are also three
towns without the kind of political strain
measured here which are rancorous. One of
these three is the only town among the
eighteen which is experiencing severe eco-
nomic strain. Seven years earlier, a major
mill closed and the unemployment rate re-
mained quite high. Numerous stores were
empty on Main Street and many of those
who were able to leave had already done so.
The two other exceptions are not so easily
explained. Not only are they not undergoing
any political or other obvious strain but
they score high on our measures of integra-
tion as well. One can, of course, always find
some sort of strain in any town but in the
absence of special evidence to suggest such
strains, rancorous conflict in these two com-
munities must be regarded as unexplained
by the hypotheses presented here.

There are two final variables which while
they play no role in the hypotheses, might
well be affecting the results. The first of
these—the type of community—has no re-
lationship to rancorous conflict for this set
of towns; four of the nine rancorous com-
munities and four of the nine conventional
ones are independent towns rather than
suburbs or resorts. Size of town, the second
control variable, also has no overall rela-
tionship to rancorous conflict; five of the
nine largest and four of the nine smallest
towns are rancorous. Nevertheless it turns
out that all of the exceptions fall among
those with population under 5000. As Table
4 indicates, there is a perfect relationship
between political instability and rancorous
conflict for communities over 5000.
which political change provides or reflects,
the conduciveness which a participative
structure and solidary groups provide, and
the integrative ties which a common organi-
zational focus, friendships, and common
bonds of nationality, religion, education and
length of residence provide.

Rancorous conflict is similar in many
respects to what Smelser has called “the
hostile outburst.” 1° But there are some dif-
ferences worth noting. Connotatively, the
term “hostile outburst” conjures up images
of such dramatic and violent events as the
Los Angeles riots. In the small communities
studied here, even the most rancorous issue
did not produce so much as a black eye. At
best, we find a little public vilification and
an occasional mild threat. However, even in
a large community, it is easy to underrate
the humiliation caused by apparently minor
attacks. There was a day when men fought
duels over insults no worse than many in-
cluded here as manifestations of rancorous
conflict.

A more important difference between the
hostile outburst and the phenomenon de-
scribed here resides in the relationship of
rancorous conflict to collective behavior.
Collective behavior is the mobilization of
noninstitutionalized action on the basis of a
generalized belief which redefines social ac-
tion.14 In Smelser’s formulation, a critical
element of the belief involved in collective
behavior is its “short-circuiting” of the nec-
essary steps between the highly generalized
component of action on which the belief
“Smale, op. cit.

14This is a paraphrase of Smelser, of. cit., pp.
67-73. The brief discussion of relevant portions
which is necessary here does not do full justice to
Smelser’s highly complex and interconnected dis-
cussion of collective behavior.
focuses and the specific operative solutions
which are expected to follow from collective
action. For example, the belief that the re-
moval of encroachments of the federal gov-
ernment will ameliorate a variety of specific
frustrations illustrates this sort of compres-
sion from generalized belief to operative
solution. The hostile outburst in particular,
involves “not only a redefinition of general-
ized forces in an ambiguous situation but
also an identification and modification of
persons thought to be agencies of these
forces. The modification is to be effected by
destroying, injuring, removing, or restrict-
ing a person or class of persons considered
responsible for the evils at hand.” 15

By defining rancorous conflict in terms of
beliefs about the means of influence used
rather than the nature of the target of the
generalized belief, we may include some
episodes which would not be considered
collective behavior as defined above. Spe-
cifically, it is not a criterion for inclusion
that the target of the rancor be regarded
as symbolic of some more generalized evil.
Scapegoating need not be involved. In the
issues studied here, it is frequently but not
necessarily the case that the targets of
rancor are regarded as symbolic of larger
forces. Political opponents may be seen as
agents or dupes of intricate conspiracies
aimed at removing precious freedoms, or as
tools of a giant “power grab.” But they may
also be seen as themselves, the ultimate
perpetrators of some mischief. Nor is it as-
sumed that these perceptions are inaccurate
or oversimplified; the charges made may be
true, the targets of hostility may be guilty.

This paper has a purpose more general
than understanding modes of community
conflict. Both the specific variables used and
the general strategy of analysis are relevant
to a wide variety of political expression.
The politics of fluoridation is not so far re-
moved from battles over open-occupancy
housing or school Bible readings. The pres-
ent explanation of rancorous conflict in small
communities is not very different in kind
from the explanation we would use in con-
trasting countries with or without revolu-
tionary movements. Of course, the content
of such general classes of variable as struc-
tural conduciveness, strain, and integration

15 [bid., p. 101.
IVEN the inclusive nature of the con-
G cept, it is not surprising that a variety

of disciplines are concerned with eco-
nomic development, nor is it surprising that
they differ in their emphases. Whereas econ-
omists traditionally have stressed the pe-
cuniary aspects of economic development,
like capital formation, terms of trade and
income differentials, sociologists and espe-
cially human ecologists have concerned
themselves more with non-monetary vari-
ables, such as technology, urbanization, edu-
cation, and the structure of the labor force.?

* The research reported in this paper was carried
out in the Population Research Center, The Uni-
versity of Texas.

1 For a sample of works on economic develop-
ment and related phenomena from a sociological
perspective see Robert M. Dinkel, “Population
These sociological studies have contributed
to our understanding of economic develop-
ment largely because they focus on phe-
nomena which are taken for granted in eco-

Growth and Economic Development,” Social Forces,
43 (May, 1965), pp. 461-470; Nathan Keyfitz,
“Age Distribution as a Challenge to Development,”
American Journal of Sociology, 70 (May, 1965),
pp. 659-668; John H. Kunkel, “Values and Be-
havior in Economic Development,” Economic De-
velopment and Cultural Change, 13 (April, 1965),
pp. 257-277; Phillips Cutright, “Political Structure,
Economic Development, and National Security Pro-
grams,” American Journal of Sociology, 70 (March,
1965), pp. 537-550; Edward G. Stockwell, “Fer-
tility, Mortality, and Economic Status of Under-
developed Areas,” Social Forces, 41 (May, 1963),
pp. 390-395; Wilbert E. Moore and Bert F. Hoselitz
(eds.), Industrialization and Society, Paris: Unesco,
1963; Neil J. Smelser, The Sociology of Economic
Life, Engelwood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,
