American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Late in 1975, suit was filed in federal court
charging that the means by which the
Chicago school system placed children in
classes for the mentally retarded were in-
herently discriminatory. Represented by
the Legal Assistance Foundation of
Chicago, a group of parents with children
assigned to classes for the mentally re-
tarded (Parents in Action on Special Edu-
cation [P.A.S.E.]) claimed that the school
system was using IQ tests as the primary
selection device and that such tests were
culturally biased against minority stu-
dents. School officials responded in part
that, while IQ tests were indeed used to
screen for retarded children needing spe-
cial handling, a wide variety of other in-
formation was also employed: achieve-
ment tests, evidence of physical handi-
caps, psychological adjustment, family
background, and a host of additional at-
tributes. Moreover, IQ scores were never
used as the principal screening device.
Rather, thé ‘‘whole child’’ was considered
(P.A.S.E., et al., vs. Hannon, et al., U. S.
District Court, Northern District of II-
linois, Eastern Division, 1980, No. 74 C
3586).

It is hardly news to sociologists that
people-processing institutions function
through some complicated amalgam of
formal and informal procedures (e.g.,
Cicourel, 1968; Cicourel and Kitsuse,
1963; Scheff, 1967; Zimmerman, 1969a,
1971) and that the ‘‘official statistics’’ of
such institutions figure prominently in the
ways individuals are characterized and
sorted (e.g., Sudnow, 1965; Wheeler,
1969; Zimmerman, 1969b). Nor should
there be any surprise that test scores and
other official statistics of school systems
are important in determining how students
are tracked. However, with the exception
of Jane Mercer’s (1973) important and
controversial work, very little is known
about the particular role of IQ tests in
identifying ‘‘retarded’’ children.

There is, of course, a much larger con-
troversy about the general validity of IQ
' In the eyes of some, the answer to this question
may appear to be substantively trivial. A federal
statute, Public Law 94-142, speaks to the education
of the handicapped and, in particular, to the kinds of
screening devices that are now required. However,
there are at least two reasons why that legislation is
essentially irrelevant. First, Public Law 94-142, at
best, specifies a broad set of processural steps by
which placement should occur, but it does not re-
quire the use of IQ tests or any particular screening
vehicle. For example, whatever the bureaucratic
mechanisms by which children are placed in classes
for the mentally retarded, they are not to be racially
or culturally discriminatory. More important for our
purposes here, the legislation requires that no single
procedure be the sole criterion for determining the
appropriate educational program for a child. In
short, the legislation makes precisely the same issues
problematic that we address. Second, our data span
the period between January 1973 and December of
1976. Public Law 94-142 was enacted on November
29, 1975, and the sections relevant to EMH classes
were, according to attorneys currently litigating the
issues (Wallace Winter of Legal Assistance Founda-
tion of Chicago and Jerrold Oppenheim of Commu-
nity Action Legal Services, Inc., New York), not
enacted until September of 1977. Consequently, at
the very worst, the legislation is relevant for only the
final year of our data. In any case, the results we will
report later consistently hold up when the data are
analyzed separately year by year. Finally, it may be
worth noting in passing that, if the issues surround-
ing the use of IQ scores for placing school children in
classes for the mentally retarded were settled by
legislation, two recent, lengthy, expensive, and con-
troversial trials would have been unnecessary (Larry
P. vs. Riles in California (1979) and P.A.S.E. et al.,
vs. Hannon et al. (1980), in Illinois).
with the use of IQ scores and a prevailing
rhetoric which states that the ‘‘whole
child’’ should be considered, IQ scores,
per se, may have little influence on which
students are directed to classes for the
educably mentally handicapped (EMH).
Moreover, there certainly is no dearth of
alternative indicators measuring
‘‘achievement,”’ or a shortage of qualita-
tive assessments from teachers, parents,
and guidance counselors. Finally, to the
extent that IQ tests covary substantially
with these alternative tracking vehicles,
little unique variance may exist in any
case. On the other hand, IQ scores may
retain a certain validity in the minds of
school officials (and parents), may build
on organizational practices dating back
many years, and may reinforce school
practices that clearly single out certain
students as being special and, therefore, in
need of isolation from the mainstream.
Furthermore, if retarded children are
viewed. as particularly troublesome, IQ
tests perhaps can be used to rationalize
thorough tracking that might be difficult to
justify solely on the basis of poor reading
or poor mathematical skills. That is, if IQ
scores are indicators of fundamental and
stable mental deficiency, retarded stu-
dents may be ‘‘properly”’ segregated from
their peers. In short, IQ scores cannot
help but play a significant role in the
placement process.

We address the importance of IQ tests
in the processes by which Chicago
elementary students are placed in classes
for the mentally retarded. The analysis
proceeds in two steps: first, examination
of factors that determine the placement
recommendation made by school psy-
chologists who have the primary respon-
sibility for assessing the merits of each
student’s case; second, examination of
factors affecting the actual placement.
While the focus on the Chicago school
system may seem to jeopardize the gener-
alizability of our analysis, there is, how-
ever, no reason to believe that the
Chicago experience is unique. Indeed,
similar concerns were recently litigated in
California, and the presiding judge issued
a permanent injunction prohibiting the use
of IQ tests in that state’s evaluation of
children for EMH placements (Larry P. et
Our data were collected at the request of
the plaintiffs in P.A.S.E. vs. Hannon et al.
They are based on a systematic random
sample of all children directed to school
counseling personnel for educational
testing and/or evaluation between 1973-
1976.2 The relevant referral practice,
known in the school district as ‘‘blue-
slipping,’’ usually originates from the ac-
tions of a teacher; on occasion, though,
other persons also make referrals. After
each evaluation (which, by the way, does
not even always entail a personal inter-
view between the school psychologist and
the subject), a child study record is filled
out, keypunched, and transferred onto
machine-readable magnetic tapes.

A separate set of records, the student
membership file, is maintained on all stu-
dents by the school system. This database
comprises all classroom assignments for
an individual during his/her tenure in this
school system and is gathered by another
department within the school bureau-
cracy. As far as we can tell, no coordina-
tion exists between these two data-
collection efforts. From this student
membership file, records were searched
and matched with those in the child study
file, generating what we call the ‘‘merged
file.”’

The child study file included 6,292 cases
and was used for analysis of placement
recommendation (e.g., a referral by the
psychologist to an EMH class). The
merged file had an N of 5,514 and was
used for the analysis of actual placement.
The difference in sample sizes is attrib-
uted to the fact that not all observations in
the child-study file matched correspond-
ing records in the student-membership
file, and vice versa. The school district,
having delegated different record-keeping
functions to separate departments, appar-
ently failed to impose any rigorous stan-
dards of quality control. In any case, there
is no reason to suspect that cases were not
lost at random; nor did comparisons of
means and variances between the ‘‘full’’
sample and the subset do anything to
undermine this belief.

In both the child-study and merged files
a few individuals appear more than once.
This is because some children were blue-
slipped on multiple occasions, thereby
necessitating the completion of a second,
third, or fourth record. Duplicate obser-
vations on the same child are included
here because new or updated information
is typically involved. That is, additional
tests and other diagnostic procedures may
have been undertaken, and changes in
placement recommendations may have
occurred. Only those student-membership
records (i.e., classroom assignments) sub-
sequent to a child-study record were used
for matching in the merged file. For those
with multiple child-study records, each
extra entry constitutes an observation in
the merged file. In other words, the basic
unit of analysis for placement recom-
mendation is the child study record,
allowing for multiple observations on the
same person. The unit of analysis for ac-
tual placement is the merged file, again
permitting duplications.

Practically all of the variables used in
our analysis were drawn from the child-
study record. As noted earlier, these rec-
VOUT LTA INADLE MCT ANU Ao)
PHS (PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED SENSORY)
OTHSP (OTHER SPECIAL EDUCATION)

   
 
  
  
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

MENTAL RETARDATION

WHITE
BLACK
HISPANIC
OTHER

MALE
FEMALE

POVERTY
WELFARE
CROWDED HOME

 

EMH PLACEMENT EMH
RECOMMENDATION PLACEMENT

SEIZURES/CONVULSIONS/
EPILEPSY
NEUROLOGICAL DISORDER

PARENT OR SIBLING
MENTALLY HANDICAPPED
PARENT OR SIBLING
CRIMINAL /DELINQUENT
MENTAL ILLNESS IN FAMILY
INADEQUATE PARENT
FOREIGN LANGUAGE ENVIRONMENT
BROKEN HOME
FOSTER/BOARDING HOME

1Q
POOR ACHIEVEMENT
TESTS INDEX

SOCIAL MISFIT
INDEX
of the model. This will not be done for two
reasons. First, the model has substantial
face validity and most of the exogenous
variables have figured significantly in the
research of others. Thus, there seems no
reason to justify the use of prior place-
ment as a predictor of placement recom-
mendation, and factors such as race, gen-
der, and socioeconomic status are
routinely included in these kinds of mod-
els. Second, the critical question here is
whether or not IQ scores, per se, are im-
portant. We are including somewhat less
common causal variables (e.g., ‘‘mental
factors’? and ‘‘social disorganization
characteristics’’) in order to ‘‘stack the
deck’’ as much as possible against finding
an important role for IQ scores, given that
they are under such intense fire. In other
words, if IQ does prove to be important,
we want to allow. for the possibility that
any officially recorded characteristic of
school children be taken into account if it
might make spurious the causal role of IQ.

All of the exogenous variables, with
three exceptions, are binary variables,
coded either as a 1 or 0. The three ex-
ceptions are IQ, a Low Achievement
Index, and a Social Misfit Index. The Low
Achievement Index was ultimately
created by summing three dummy vari-
ables on achievement test scores for
reading, spelling, and arithmetic. Since
the zero-order correlations between the
original three standardized academic tests
were quite high (r = .83 between reading
and spelling, r = .71 between reading and
arithmetic, and r = .68 between spelling
and arithmetic), there was the prospect of
serious multicollinearity had they been
treated as distinct exogenous variables.
For each skill, a dummy variable was first
generated by assigning a value of 1 to
those who scored two or more grades
below their expected level of learning. We
proceeded in this manner because of im-
pressionistic information from interviews
with school personnel which led us to be-
lieve that this was how achievement tests
were interpreted. The three binary vari-
ables were then simply summed, yielding
a score between 0 and 3.3

The Social Misfit Index was con-
structed by summing six binary behavioral
factors and two binary reasons for re-
ferral.4 The scores on this index could
range from 0 to 6, although 5 was the
highest any child received. IQ was, of
course, an interval variable. It ranged
from 6 to 157 in our sample. Slightly less
than 5% of the sample scored lower than
three standard deviations below the na-
tional mean, and only 2.5% scored higher
than one standard deviation above the na-
tional mean.

Upon completing an evaluation, the
psychologist typically makes a recom-
mendation for education placement. In
this instance, the vast majority were for
EMH (31.3%) or for regular classes
(38.4%). Learning disability programs
(LDP) received the third largest number of
recommendations (20.2%) with the remain-
der distributed among the trainable men-
tally handicapped (TMH), with 2.92%, and
miscellaneous other special education
programs (7.39%). Because we are
primarily interested in how students are
referred to EMH and whether they actu-
ally end up there, comparisons will be
made only between EMH- and regular-
placement recommendations. While this
strategy decreases the sample size, it
permits a much more incisive analysis. If
the dependent variable were EMH vs.
non-EMH recommendation, the null cate-
gory would include several rather dif-
ferent outcomes, perhaps responding
quite differently to exogenous factors.
Moreover, while it is certainly fair to in-
quire about the relationships between
EMH and TMH or between EMH and
LDP, such queries may be deferred. In
short, we are focusing on the two recom-
mendations that account for over two-
thirds of the total and around which most
controversy has revolved. (See Shih, 1980
for the other comparisons.)

The decision to compare only EMH
with regular classes in placement recom-
mendation was also made in the analysis
of actual assignments. In this instance,
only about 13% of the sample cases were
lost. Almost two-thirds (64%) of the as-
signments after a child’s first evaluation
were to regular classes, and 23.05% were
to EMH classes.

As implied above, actual assignments
did not fully correspond to placement rec-
ommendations (23% vs. 31.3% for EMH
and 64% vs. 38.4% for regular classes,
respectively). The disparities point to the
existence of an intervening process be-
tween the psychologist’s recommendation
and the actual delivery of the child to the
prescribed setting. A number of factors
come into play at this point. One is that
the child’s case often is subjected to a
‘‘multidisciplinary staffing’’ that involves
social workers, teachers, and other spe-
cialists. in addition to the examining psy-
chologists. In theory, this body has the
power to overrule the psychologist’s rec-
ommendation and alter the disposition of
the case. Furthermore, even in the major-
ity of those cases where the decision of
the psychologist is upheld, a lag often oc-
curs if there is a scarcity of space in the
special education program.

Substantively, this procedural delay
poses a second opportunity to examine
the relative weight of IQ and other factors.
One speculation is that this lag offers an
occasion for routinized testing procedures
to be ‘‘humanized’’ through a considera-
tion of mitigating circumstances. Alterna-
tively, the delay may provide a chance for
IQ to further affect the disposition of the
case.

To summarize, our proposed model of
the relationships between IQ and EMH
recommendation and placement is illus-
trated in Figure 1. The left column con-
sists of the dummy exogenous variables
plus three indicators of cognitive and be-
havioral status of the child at time of
evaluation. They are followed by place-
ment recommendation (center column)
and actual placement (right column).

At first, Figure 1 suggests that we have
a two-equation recursive model for which
ordinary least squares would be the ap-
propriate statistical technique. However,
given our binary endogenous variables,
the application of the linear probability
model risks inefficient estimates of the re-
gression coefficients and inconsistent
standard errors (and, hence, significant
tests) as a result of the heteroskedasticity
that necessarily follows (Pindyck and
Rubinfeld, 1977:238—40). One solution is
to apply generalized least squares, which
in this instance is made very attractive
because estimates of the residual vari-
ances are easily obtained (Pindyck and
Rubinfeld, 1977:241-2). As a matter of
fact, we initially proceeded in this fashion.

Unfortunately, three complications
counsel against using the generalized
least-squares technique. First, because
the implied substantive processes are
rather similar, there is good reason to sus-
pect that the residuals in the two
equations are correlated. Consequently,
the OLS and GLS estimates for the
placement equation are likely to be biased
and inconsistent (Hanushek and Jackson,
1977:231). Luckily, a relatively easy solu-
tion exists through instrumental variable
procedures in which the predicted values
for the probability of EMH recom-
mendations are used as a substitute for the
observed dummy variable in the second
equation (Hanushek and Jackson,
1977:234-6). While instrumental variable
procedures are justifiable only in asymp-
totic terms (i.e., for large samples), our
sample sizes are certainly adequate by
conventional standards.

Second, there are strong theoretical
reasons for being uneasy with the implied
linear relationships between the exoge-
nous and endogenous variables in Figure 1.
For example, it is unlikely that the dif-
ference between an IQ of 100 and an IQ of
110 will have any effect on the probability
of an EMH recommendation or assign-
ment to such classes (i.e., these are
clearly ‘‘normal’’ IQ scores). Similarly,
the differences between IQ’ scores of 40
and 50 will have little or no impact (i.e,
these. are clearly ‘‘retarded’’ IQ scores).
In contrast, difference in IQ scores be-
tween 75 and 85 should have a relatively
large influence because it is within this
range, especially, that the outcome is
problematic. In other words, the marginal
influence of variations in IQ scores should
be larger in the middle ranges than at
either extreme. This argues for what is
essentially a ‘‘tipping’’ effect that applies
also in the aggregate for most of the binary
exogenous variables, where changes in
the probabilities in the middle ranges
should have the largest effects on both
EMH recommendation and EMH assign-
ment. Such phenomena suggest fitting to
the data some ‘‘S-shaped’’ function,
rather than a linear form, and at least two
popular options exist: the cumulative
normal and the logistic distribution. The
former leads to probit analysis while the
latter leads to logit procedures. In prac-
tice, there is little advantage of one over
the other although the logit approach is
better justified by theoretical models of
choice (McFadden, 1974; Nerlove and
Press, 1973). It also has the extra virtue of
producing coefficients that some persons
find easier to interpret (Hanushek and
Jackson, 1977:205-7).

Finally, about 10% of our sample re-
flects observations on the same child.
These cases are probably not independent
of one another, thereby raising the issue of
cross-sectional serial correlation within
equations. In the least-square context,
such nonindependence produces ineffi-
cient estimates of the regression coeffi-
cients and inconsistent standard errors
(Kmenta, 1971:273-82). Maximum-
likelihood logit procedures are smilarly
affected. Unfortunately, there is no easy
solution to this problem. While it is possi-
ble to adjust for the cross-sectional serial
correlations by introducing a dummy vari-
able for each child appearing more than
once in the sample, the loss in degrees of
freedom is too large and represents
genuine overkill if the correlations are
modest. Such considerations also argue
against the deletion of all multiple obser-
vations on the same individual, which
would (in addition) risk sample selection
bias (Heckman, 1979).

What then are the implications of these
problems for our analysis? The problem of
correlated residuals across equations will
be handled through instrumental variable
procedures. The problem of fitting an
‘*S-shaped’’ function form will be ad-
dressed with logit procedures employing
maximum-likelihood techniques
(Hanushek and Jackson, 1977:200-3).°
The complications produced by cross-
sectional residual correlations within
equations will not be directly addressed,
despite the fact that such correlations are
formally in violation of maximum-
likelihood assumptions. We did, however,
estimate our models with the full sample
and with the subset in which duplicate
observations were deleted, and the results
were Virtually identical.

As an introduction to our analysis, it
may be helpful to describe briefly some
basic characteristics of our sample. About
60% of child-study records are for black
children; a little more than 30% for whites;
slightly less than 8% for Hispanics; with
the balance distributed among various
other minority groups. Two-thirds of
those blue-slipped are male. The mean age
is 10.8 years, and the median age is 11.
Excluding those who were already in spe-
cial education, the grade levels range from
nursery school to ninth grade. The mean
IQ score is 81.22.

The majority of our sample were al-
ready attending school. About seven out
of ten were enrolled in regular classes at
the time of referral. One out of six was
already in programs for the EMH. The
balance was distributed in various types of
special education classes or not regis-
tered. Consequently, our analysis is not
only of those perceived to be in need of
educational evaluation and counseling in
the normal classrooms but also includes
children who were already in special edu-
cation and were referred again for further
testing and/or evaluation.

In sum, our subjects are predominantly
children in the middle stages of their pri-
mary education, with average IQ scores of
more than one standard deviation below
the mean of their peers across the coun-
try. The majority were participants in the
regular curriculum at the time of blue-
slipping. All were subjected to educational
evaluation and/or testing.

Given the large number of variables that
will figure significantly in the analyses to
follow, there exists a wide array of ad-
ditional descriptive material that could, in
principle, be discussed. We will focus
here on several bivariate relationships that
may prove to be of particular interest.
(See Shih, 1980, for a further considera-
tion). Table 1 shows the mean and stan-
dard deviation of IQ for whites, blacks,
Hispanics, boys, and girls. Perhaps the
most important conclusion is that, con-
sistent with past research, blacks score
about 12 points lower than whites on their
IQ tests despite the fact that our sample is
far more homogenous than the usual ran-
dom sample of school children.® That is,
the process of blue-slipping selects a sub-
set of children from the school population
that presumably has been experiencing
some relatively common set of classroom
difficulties. In any case, the IQ disparity
implies that, should IQ tests prove to be
an important placement variable (perhaps
via placement recommendation), blacks
will more likely be found in classes for the
mentally retarded, all other things being
equal. Moreover, because the mean for
blacks in what approximates a normal
distribution falls near the point at which
placement in classes for the mentally re-
tarded becomes a genuine issue, a rela-
tively large ‘‘overrepresentation’’ of
blacks could well result; we are not at one
of the distribution’s tails. Hispanics score
Initially, we hoped to estimate our two-
equation nonrecursive model with the full
set of variables listed on Figure 1. How-
ever, this strategy was abandoned when it
became apparent that the maximum-
likelihood logit procedure we used (PRE-
DICT in SAS79 by Barr et al., 1979) was
extremely sensitive to exogenous vari-
ables having little variance. Many itera-
tions were required prior to convergence,
and some of the resulting coefficients and
their standard errors were highly im-
plausible. Consequently, all exogenous
dummy variables with splits worse than
.95 to .05 were discarded. We assumed
that nothing of interest would be lost since
significant t-values for such variables are
difficult to achieve. Nonetheless, to
further justify our decision we ran OLS
and GLS procedures with the full set of
predictors. Not only were the results
similar for the two procedures but also
none of the variables discarded in the logit
model came close to statistical
significance. Perhaps most importantly,
the overall substantive story from the
least-squares approaches was virtually a
replication of the logit findings. We sus-
pect this comparability across techniques
results, in part, from the relatively large
sample size, along with the substantial ex-
planatory power of a few exogenous vari-
ables.

Table 2 shows the results for the
equations in which placement recom-
mendation of the counseling personnel is
examined. Relying on the conventional
-05 level (for a two-tailed test), it is appar-
ent that five exogenous variables have
Statistically significant effects. The
chances of a child receiving EMH-
placement recommendation are increased
if he/she performs poorly on the achieve-
ment tests or if the classroom teacher cites
retardation as the reason for referral. On
the other hand, the chances of an EMH
recommendation are reduced if a child
scores high on the Social Misfit Index, if
he/she was originally placed in a regular
class, or if he/she has a high IQ score.
Perhaps the only real surprise in our re-
sults is the indication that EMH classes
probably do not serve as a dumping
ground for behaviorally disruptive chil-
dren as Milofsky (1976) and others have
claimed.®

In order to evaluate the size of the
statistically significant effects, one could
employ the logit coefficients in the first
column in Table 2. These coefficients re-
flect the change in a particular exogenous
variable. Because the log of odds is hardly
an everyday metric, the logit coefficients
were transformed into the metric of prob-
abilities. While this was done easily
(Hanushek and Jackson, 1977:189), there
is an unfortunate complication. The mar-
ginal impact of any given exogenous vari-
able depends on the predicted probability
of EMH recommendation and, therefore,
on the values of each of the other exoge-
nous variables for a particular child. (The
marginal impact of each regressor varies.
The smallest effects are associated with
either high or low probabilities of EMH
recommendation. Its largest effects are
associated with probabilities around .50.)
The usual solution is to report the margi-
nal effects for some reasonable proba-
bility. For current discussion, the margi-
nal effects reported are for the EMH-
recommendation probability of .50. In
sum, we are reporting the impact of each
regressor at what was referred to earlier as
the tipping point. While such effects are
the largest possible, the relative influence
of each exogenous variable remains the
same regardless of probability level.?

In the right column, for each unit in-
crease in the Social Misfit Index (which
ranges from 0 to 8) the probability of an
EMH recommendation decreases by .03.
Because a child’s score rarely varies by
more than three units in this scale, the
likely impact is usually less than .09.1°
Each unit increase in the Low Achieve-
ment Index increases the chances of an
EMH recommendation by .03. Because
the index ranges from 0 to 3, the maximum
effect is 9%. Children who are already
placed in regular classes at the time of
‘‘blue-slipping’’ have a .19 smaller proba-
bility of being recipients of EMH recom-
mendations. Students referred because of
alleged retardation have a .15 greater
probability of EMH recommendation.
Last—and certainly not least—with each
point increase in a child’s IQ score, his or
her chances of receiving an EMH recom-
mendation drop by .06. Clearly, a few IQ
points can make a critical difference in the
type of placement recommendation a child
receives.

What are the overall conclusions from
Table 2?

First, it is readily apparent that—
holding constant a range of competing
factors such as achievement test scores,
behavioral problems, and race—IQ has an
enormous effect on EMH-placement rec-
ommendations. In the minds of school
psychologists, at least, IQ scores do mat-
ter, and this, in turn, raises two important
issues. To begin with, a difference of only
five IQ points, for example, apparently
alters the probability of an EMH recom-
mendation by well over .30 at or near the
50/50 tipping point (keeping in mind the
‘*S-shaped”’ functional form). For any in-
dividual child, a five-point variation can
easily result from a host of arbitrary fac-
tors: mood, fatigue, scoring errors, and
the like. Thus, the recommendation for
EMH placement is likely to assume a ca-
pricious quality that nevertheless has
enormous implications for a student’s
later educational experience. In addition,
for our sample, the IQ scores for blacks
are, on the average, twelve points lower
than those for whites. Consequently,
blacks will, on the average, face a greater
likelihood of EMH placement. Keeping
in mind that IQ distributions are concen-
trated in their middle ranges, the overrep-
resentation of blacks will be substantial.

Second, the inertia of tracking is nontriv-
ial, Students coming from regular classes
have a reduced chance (about 19%) of
receiving EMH recommendation. If EMH
classes are beneficial, students from reg-
ular classes may well be penalized. On the
other hand, if EMH classes are beneficial,
students from regular classes may well be
penalized. On the other hand, if EMH
classes are damaging, then students from
EMH classes continue to suffer.

Third, if the classroom teacher refers a
student with the tentative label of ‘‘re-
tarded,’’ the chances of EMH recom-
mendation are markedly increased. What
is perhaps most significant about this fact
is that it is, of course, impossible to de-
termine on what basis the teacher makes
the ‘‘diagnosis.’’ One might, therefore, be
justifiably concerned about the validity of
the diagnosis.!!

Fourth, no evidence has been found
that, once a variety of factors has been
held constant, a counselor’s recom-
mendation for EMH is motivated by any
desire to ‘‘dump’’ behaviorally problem-
atic children into EMH classes. Indeed, the
effect is precisely the reverse: children
with behavioral problems have a some-
what smaller probability of being recom-
'2 For both of the models reported in Table 2 and
Table 3, we explored the possibility of a large
number of interaction effects with respect to the
impact of IQ. For example, we considered the possi-
bility that IQ had a larger effect for blacks or His-
panics or boys. However, these efforts floundered
on difficulties with multicollinearity so that, in effect,
large standard errors and unstable estimates proved
to be unsurmountable hurdles. In other words, we
were unable to find any meaningful interaction ef-
fects over and above the main effects. We also ex-
amined (within OLS and GLS frameworks) the im-
pact of IQ formulated, alternatively, as a spline
function and in terms of a small set of dummy vari-
ables. The goal was to assess the validity of the
logistic functional form. We found nothing in these
efforts to suggest that the logit formulation was inap-
propriate or that some other functional relationship
was better. Moreover, employing either the spline or
dummy variable form cost several degrees of free-
dom and increased markedly the multicollinearity.

13 The two-step procedure we used in our instru-
mental variable strategy necessarily produced biased
standard errors. In essence, the estimate of the re-
sidual standard deviation is derived in part from the
instrumental variable rather than the actual en-
dogenous regressor. When proper adjustments are
made (Hanushek and Jackson, 1977:268-9), all t-
values reported in Table 2 are multiplied by a factor
of about two. However, this leaves the substantive
story unchanged (no null findings become statisti-
cally significant).
ment for placement recommendation
rather than the binary EMH-
recommendation variable. Perhaps the
most important initial question is whether
any of our exogenous variables continues
to have any direct influence after place-
ment recommendation is taken into ac-
count.

Relying on the predicted probability of
.50 to locate marginal influences, a rec-
ommendation for placement into EMH in-
creases the probability of such class as-
signment by .63.'4 While this is a large
effect and statistically significant, there is
obviously sufficient room for other vari-
ables to influence actual placement. As a
matter of fact, six other variables have
effects greater than by chance.

Students who were in regular classes
have a dramatically smaller probability
(.62 smaller) of being assigned to EMH
(see fn. 7). Boys have a .07 greater likeli-
hood. For each unit increment in the Low
Achievement Index, the prospect of EMH
placement increases by .04. Each unit in-
crease in the Social Misfit Index reduces
the probability of EMH placement by .04.
A referral for retardation increases the
probability of an EMH placement by .11,
and, finally, each additional IQ point re-
sults in a .01 reduction in that probability.
_ A number of important implications can
be drawn from these findings. Most obvi-
ously, the effect of tracking is under-
scored. Indeed, the very large effect of the
counselor’s recommendation for place-
ment into EMH is approximately can-
celled out by the very large effect of being
a member of the regular class. When one
recalls that an original placement in reg-
ular classes also reduces the prospects of
an EMH recommendation by .19, the net
(reduced form) effect is to reduce the
probability of an EMH placement by
about .70. While these types of large,
linear extrapolations yield overestimates
in the context of the logistic curve, there
can be little question that movement into
and out of regular classes is often difficult.
We cannot find any evidence that shows
EMH classes to be ‘‘dumping grounds”’
for children with behavioral problems.
Also, both achievement tests and IQ tests
make minor differences in actual place-
ment over and above their prior effects on
placement recommendation. Compared to
the impact on recommendation, the effect
of IQ is trimmed by a factor of ten, while
the effect of low achievement-test scores
remains about the same. In the context of
the importance of coming from regular
classes and the recommendation received,
IQ has a relatively small role in explaining
actual assignment to EMH classes.

On the other hand, the effect of the
classroom teacher’s initial ‘‘diagnosis”’
remains salient even after the counselor’s
recommendation is considered. This sug-
gests that school administrators check
back with the classroom teacher after the
student’s session with the psychologist,
and, at that point, the teacher can provide
additional input to the ultimate placement
decision. Indeed, the total effect (i.e., the
reduced-form effect) of the teacher’s as-
sessment approaches .20.

Finally, there is no indication of
discrimination—either direct or
reverse—against blacks or Hispanics. On
the other hand, boys are a bit more likely
to be placed in EMH classes, ceteris
paribus, so that who one is still seems to
matter. Perhaps behavioral factors not
tapped by our Social Misfit Index are the
We have found that IQ level and the cur-
riculum at time of blue-slipping are the
most powerful causes of recommendation
for placement into EMH classes.
Moreover, the latter has a large additional
influence when it comes to actual class
assignment, even though the psycholo-
gist’s recommendations have been
provided to the school administrators.

These findings have very clear implica-
tions for the issues posed in our introduc-
tion. Far from being solely a matter of
academic interest and debate, IQ scores
cast a long shadow on students’ educa-
tional and vocational careers. The effect is
particularly consequential for black
youngsters whose overrepresentation in
EMH programs may be significantly at-
tributed to their lower IQ scores. Fur-
thermore, it is important to recall that
performance on achievement tests has al-
ready been taken into account.

Unfortunately, we have little data to
help us understand why IQ scores figure
so significantly in EMH recommendations
and placements. Nevertheless, two dis-
tinct possibilities come to mind.

First, school officials may really believe
that IQ tests are accurate measures of in-
nate intelligence or, at least, that they are
the best diagnostic tool currently avail-
able. Depositions taken during the lawsuit
against the Chicago Board of Education
(P.A.S.E., et al., vs. Joseph P. Hannon, et
al.) suggest some support for the latter.
That is, some children are retarded and in
need of special classes. In other words,
school officials, perhaps pressed by in-
creasing demands for their accountability,
have seized upon the IQ test as the best
diagnostic tool available (in their view),
despite its flaws.

Second, students, parents, and school
officials are certainly aware that EMH
placement marks a critical choice point in
any student’s career; EMH placement is
not something to be taken lightly.'5 Given
the importance of the EMH placement,
achievement tests, which do not neces-
sarily identify something that is funda-
mentally wrong with the child, may be an
insufficiently compelling indicator. That
is, because EMH classes are presumably
for children who are innately disadvan-
taged, one needs a test which truly ad-
dresses innate intellectual abilities.

A student’s placement prior to blue-
slipping is also critical. However, the rea-
sons for this effect are unclear. Such
placements introduce substantial inertia in
both the recommendation and placement
process, so that past placement decisions
affect future placement decisions. If one
has faith in the validity of past place-
ments, then this may be healthy: a stu-
dent’s track record serves to check the
influence of small and/or transient varia-
tion in school performance. If, however,
one is skeptical about the validity of past
placements, then the tracking process
exacerbates earlier misjudgments. Should
one be prepared to give school officials
the benefit of the doubt, perhaps they sub-
scribe to the former view.

At the same time, it is important to keep
in mind that the current controversies sur-
rounding the use of IQ tests are a con-
tinuation of an ongoing debate that has
spanned this century (Cronbach, 1975).
Thus, even though the issues have be-

'S It is important to keep in mind that, unless, at the
very start, students are placed outside EMH classes
(which rarely occurs), they remain in EMH classes
throughout their educational careers.
come especially visible of late, in part due
to Jensen’s work and the greater involve-
ment of the federal government in the
education of handicapped children, our
findings may also reflect educational pol-
icy from the past that has become
routinized in the present practices of
school officials. That is, as a vestige of
earlier policies, IQ scores may figure sig-
nificantly in the placement process.
School systems, like most large bureau-
cracies, are hardly known for their ability
to respond rapidly to a changing environ-
ment.

Finally, our findings take on special im-
portance in the context of the litigation
surrounding P.A.S.E. et al. The results
reported here were introduced by the
plaintiffs in the course of trial and, in the
summer of 1980, Judge John Grady ruled
in favor of the defendants. The judge con-
curred with our conclusion that the results
of IQ tests dominated the recommenda-
tion and placement process. However, in
contrast to the Larry P. decision in
California by Judge Robert Peckham,
Judge Grady did not find compelling evi-
dence that IQ tests were culturally biased.
In other words, the salient role of IQ tests
in the selection process was fully proper.
Given these conflicting rulings and ongo-
ing controversy about the role of IQ tests
in American schools, it is clear that far
more litigation lies ahead.
Cicourel, Aaron V., and Kitsuse, John I.

1963 The Educational Decision Makers. New

York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Columbia Law Review

1973 ‘‘Legal implications of the use of stan-
dardized ability tests in employment and
education.”’ 68:691-744.

Cronbach, Lee J.

1969 ‘‘Heredity, environment, and educational
policy.’’ Harvard Educational Review
39:338-347.

1975 ‘*Five decades of controversy over mental
testing."’ American Psychologist 30:1-14.

Dorfman, D. D.

1978 ‘The Cyril Burt question: new findings.”

Science 201:1177-86.
Edgerton, Robert B.

1976 The Cloak of Competence. Berkeley: Uni-

versity of California Press.
Fehr, F. S.

1969 ‘Critique of hereditarian accounts of ‘intel-
ligence’ and contrary findings: a reply to
Jensen.’’ Harvard Educational Review
39:571-80.

Gordon, Robert A., and Rudert, Eileen E.

1979 **Bad news concerning IQ tests.’ Sociol-

ogy of Education 52:174-90.
Guterman, Stanley S.

1979 ‘‘IQ tests in research on social stratifica-
tion: the cross-class validity of the tests and
measures of scholastic aptitude.’’ Sociol-
ogy of Education 52:163-73.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Jackson, John E.

1977 Statistical Method .for Social Scientists.

New York: Academic Press.
Heckman, J.

1978 ‘*Dummy endogenous variables in a simul-
taneous equation system.’’ Econometrica
47:931-1050.

1979 ‘‘Sample selection bias as a specification
error.’’ Econometrica 47:153-61.

Herrnstein, R. J.

1973 1.Q. in the Meritocracy. Boston: Little,

Brown.
Jensen, Arthur R.

1969 **How much can we boost IQ and scholastic
achievement?”’ Harvard Educational Re-
view 39:1-123.

Kamin, Leon J.

1974 The Science and Politics of I.Q. Potomac,

Maryland: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kirp, David L.

1973 ‘‘Schools as sorters: the constitutional and
policy implications of student classifica-
tion.”’ University of Pennsylvania Law Re-
view 121:705-97.

Kmenta, Jan

1971 Elements of Econometrics. New York:
Macmillan.

MacMillan, Donald L., Jones, Reginald L., and
Aloia, Gregory F.

1974 “The mentally retarded label: a theoretical
analysis and review of research.”’ American
Journal of Mental Deficiency 79:241-61.

Maddala, G. S.
1977 Econometrics. New York: McGraw Hill.
McFadden, D.

1974 ‘Conditional logit analysis of qualitative
choice behavior,’ in P. Zerembka (ed.),
Frontiers in Econometrics. New York: Ac-
ademic Press.

Mercer, Jane R.

1973 Labeling the Mentally Retarded. Berkeley:

University of California Press.
Milofsky, Carl

1976 Special Education: A Sociological Study of

California Programs. New York: Praeger.
Nerlove, M., and Press, S. J.

1973 Univariate and Multivariate Log-Linear
and Logistics Models. Santa Monica: The
Rand Corporation.

Pindyck, Robert S., and Rubinfeld, Daniel L.

1976 Econometric Methods and Economic Fore-

casting. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ray, S., R. A. Berk and W. T. Bielby

1980 ‘Correcting sample selection bias for
bivariate logistic distributions: some
theoretical results,” paper read at the 1980
meetings of the American Statistical Asso-
ciation.

Scheff, Thomas J. (ed.)

1967 Mental Illness and Social Processes. New

York: Harper and Row.
Shih, Anthony

1980 ‘‘IQ and EMH: The Chicago experience.”
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Depart-
ment of Sociology, University of California,
Santa Barbara.

Shockley, William

1972 ‘*Dysgenics, geneticity, raceology: a chal-
lenge to the intellectual responsibility of
teachers.’”” Phi Delta Kappan 53:297-312.

Sudnow, David

1965 ‘‘Normal crimes: sociological features of
the penal code in a Public Defender Of-
fice."’ Social Problems 12:255-76.

University of Michigan Law Review

1973 **Segregation of poor and minority children
into classes for the mentally retarded by the
use of IQ tests.”’ 71:1212-50.

Wheeler, Stanton (ed.)

1969 On Record. New York: Russell Sage Foun-

dation.
Zimmerman, Don H.

1969a ‘‘Tasks and troubles: the practical bases of
work activities in a public assistance or-
ganization,’ in D. A. Hansen (ed.), Explo-
rations in Sociology and Counseling. Bos-
ton: Houghton Mifflin.

1969b ‘‘Record keeping and the intake process in
a public welfare agency,”’ in S. Wheeler
(ed.), On Record. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.

1971 ‘‘The practicalities of rule use,” in J.
Douglas (ed.), Understanding Everyday
Life. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
