American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
The intergenerational occupational
mobility of males has been the subject of
intensive empirical study by sociologists for
several decades, both in the United States and
in other industrial nations. More recently,
multivariate models have been extensively
employed to study the occupational status
attainment of males in the United States (Blau
and Durcan, 1967; Duncan et al., 1972;
Jencks et al., 1972; Sewell and Hauser, 1975).
As a result of this research, a considerable
body of knowledge has been accumulated on
the occupational mobility and _ status
attainment of males.

Although women comprised 38.4 percent
of the labor force in 1974 (U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 1975:336), comparatively little is
known about female mobility and status
attainment. It has only been in the last few
The NORC General Social Surveys of 1972-1974 are utilized to compare white working males
and females with respect to the process of occupational status attainment. The occupational
status of each sex is quite similar, although males are somewhat more likely to have high and
low status jobs. The process of status attainment is also the same for males and females.
Education is the strongest determinant of status for each sex, with family background
characteristics showing only a small direct influence on status. The determinants of educational
attainment are also much the same for white working males and females, although number of
siblings has a significantly stronger effect for males. There is no evidence that the education of
the like-sexed parent is a stronger influence on educational attainment than that of the
opposite-sexed parent. An extended model of occupational status attainment is also estimated
for females. Although full-time workers and married women have slightly higher status than
part-time workers and unmarried women, respectively, the number of children at home has no
effect on the occupational status of working women.
for occupational mobility, they found the
status attainment processes of males and
females to be quite similar.

This paper represents an attempt to
add to the comparatively meager body of
knowledge concerning the occupational
status attainment process of females.
Representative samples of white males and
females in the U.S. labor force will be
compared with respect to the basic model
of status attainment (Duncan et al.,
1972). In addition, an extended model of
female status attainment will be estimated.
Thus, this study is, in part, a replication
of the work of Treiman and Terrell
(1975). However, the General Social Sur-
vey (GSS) data (described in the following
section) used in this study are superior to
that available to Treiman and Terrell in
several respects. Their male data were
gathered five years earlier than their female
data, whereas the GSS male and female data
are for the same years. Their sample was re-
stricted to respondents 30-44 years of age,
whereas the General Social Surveys are for
adults 18 years and older, and their data did
not contain as many family background vari-
ables as the GSS data. In addition, the GSS
samples are five and ten years more recent
than Treiman and Terrell’s female and male
samples, respectively. Thus, the GSS data per-
mit a more valid comparison of the male and
female status attainment processes, as well as
the addition of new variables to the female
model of status attainment.
General Social Surveys (GSS). Each survey is a
national sample of the non-institutionalized
population of the United States, 18 years of
age or older. The sample is a multi-stage area
probability sample to the block level with
quotas based on sex, age and employment
status within blocks. The combined number
of respondents is 4,601. The bulk of the
analysis will focus on 1,381 white males and
778 white females who were working full
time, part time or with a job but not at work
because of temporary illness, vacation or
strike at the time of the surveys.

Occupational status will be measured by
Duncan’s (1961) Socioeconomic Index
(SEI).? Two factors in the construction of the
Duncan SEI naturally lead to questions con-
cerning its validity for measuring the occupa-
tional status of women (Parnes et al., 1970;
Haug, 1975). First, the SEI scores were com-
puted from the income and education of male
incumbents. Second, the NORC prestige
ratings used to determine the weights for in-
come and education were generated in a con-
text which suggested that respondents were to
rate occupations on the basis of male incum-
bents. Thus, the fact that the SEI scores were
computed from data on males suggests that a
certain amount of error will result when using
the SEI to measure female status.

Treiman and Terrell (1975:176) have re-
viewed a considerable amount of evidence
bearing on the validity of using socioeconomic
and prestige scales constructed for males to
measure the occupational status of females.
For instance, Parnes et al. (1970) and Bose
(1973) have found for samples of occupations
that socioeconomic scores computed from the
income and education of female incumbents
are highly correlated with scores computed
for male incumbents (r’s equal .92 to .94).3 In
addition, Bose (1973) has shown that prestige
scores for male incumbents are correlated .97
with prestige scores for female incumbents,
for a sample of 108 occupations. Based on
such facts as these, Treiman and Terrell
(1975:176) concluded that there is a single
status hierarchy for male and female workers.
They also concluded that since male and
female prestige scores were slightly more high-
ly correlated than male and female socio-
economic scores (Bose, 1973), a prestige scale
is preferable for comparing males and females.
However, since previous multivariate studies
of status attainment have overwhelmingly re-
lied on the SEI, the use of the SEI in this
study has the advantage of increasing its com-
parability with other research, without appre-
ciably increasing errors. Although present evi-
dence suggests that the SEI may be used for
females without too much error, a certain
amount of caution should be exercised when
comparing the male and female findings. How-
ever, it is felt that the SEI is sufficient for
describing the major outlines of the female
Although it is well known that the male
and female occupational distributions are very
different (to be described in more detail
later), Treiman and Terrell (1975) found the
male and female prestige distributions to be
quite similar with respect to the mean,
standard deviation, and shape of the distribu-
tion, although males were more heavily con-
centrated in the extreme upper tail. Although
the GSS data with respect to socioeconomic
status basically support the findings of
Treiman and Terrell, the sex differences will
be examined in some detail.

The male and female SEI distributions are
similar with respect to their means and stan-
dard deviations (Table 1). The means are near-
ly equal, with females averaging one point
higher than males, while the standard devia-
tions differ somewhat more, with the female
variance being only .9 as great as the male
variance.
The similarity of the male and female
means and the somewhat smaller female stan-
dard deviation suggest a smaller percentage of
high and low scores for females. This is borne
out by the percentage distributions in Table 1.
In each of the four lowest categories, the fe-
male proportion is smaller than that of the
males, with 46.2 percent of the males having
scores below 40 versus only 36.6 percent of
the females. At the high end of the scale, 7.8
percent of the males are above 80 whereas
only 2.3 percent of the females are above that
point. There are no females in the highest
category, which includes the scores for the
legal and medical professions.

Although women are somewhat less likely
than men to be in the lower status jobs and
the very highest status jobs, the overall shape
of the two distributions is roughly the same.
The index of dissimilarity for the ten categor-
ies shown in Table 1 is 15, which indicates
that only a relatively small percentage of
women (or men) would have to change cate-
gories in order to make the two distributions
equal.

We have seen that the male and female SEI
distributions are equal with respect to the
mean, that the female standard deviation is
somewhat smaller, that the shape of the two
distributions is similar, that females are less
likely than males to have high and low scores
and that the two distributions differ by an
index of dissimilarity of 15. Given these facts,
some researchers might stress the similarity of
male and female socioeconomic status, while
others might stress the dissimilarity. One way
of gaining some perspective on this issue is to
compare these sex differences with racial dif-
ferences in socioeconomic status and with sex
differences on other variables.

In the 1962 OCG data (Duncan et al.,
1972), the mean SEI of black males is less
than half as large as the mean of white males
(17.7 and 39.6, respectively), while the stan-
dard deviation for black males is only .62 as
great as for white males (15.3 and 24.5,
respectively). The racial differences for males
in the OCG survey are clearly far greater than
the sex differences for whites in the GSS sur-
Male and female workers are considerably
more similar with respect to their father’s
socioeconomic status than with respect to
their own status. Although females come from
a slightly higher background, on the average,
the variance in the socioeconomic back-
grounds of males and females is equal (Table
1). As suggested by the similar means and
equal standard deviations, the index of dis-
similarity between the fathers of males and
females is only 8.3, about half as great as the
dissimilarity between males and females them-
selves.

If the socioeconomic distributions of males
and females are more dissimilar than their
socioeconomic backgrounds, their occupa-
tional distributions are even more dissimilar.
In 1973, the male and female occupational
distributions for ten major Census categories
(professional, managerial, sales, clerical, etc.)
differed by an index of dissimilarity of 41
(U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975:350), over
two and one-half times more dissimilar than
their socioeconomic distributions. The dis-
similarity in the occupations of males and
females is due primarily to the greater concen-
tration of women in clerical and service jobs
and the greater concentration of men in man-
agement and crafts.

To summarize, white males and females in
the work force differ more with respect to
socioeconomic status than did their fathers,
but these differences are much less than either
racial differences in status or sex differences
in type of work.

Although the mean SEI scores of males and
females are equal, it might be argued that if
more women entered the labor force, the fe-
male SEI distribution might be lowered. One
reviewer commented that “many women can
choose to stay out of the labor force. This
fact may mean that the bottom end of the
‘true’ female occupational SES distribution is
cut off, since working at a low SES job may
be less attractive than not working at all.”

In an attempt to shed some light on this
possibility, women in the labor force were
compared with housewives who were not in
the labor force and were under 65 years of
age. Compared to the working women, the
housewives had a year less education, slightly
more brothers and sisters and had fathers with
slightly lower SEI scores and slightly less edu-
cation. Given the relationship between these
variables and the occupational status of work-
ing females (to be discussed in a later section),
these facts suggest that if these housewives
were willing and able to find employment,
they would end up with lower occupational
status than the presently working women, on
the average. To estimate the probable occupa-
tional status of the housewives, the means of
the background variables and education were
entered into the regression equation for
females (Table 3). The predicted SEI score for
the average housewife is 39.9, which is four
points below the mean for working women.
Although this suggests a lower SEI distribu-
tion for females, the mean score for all fe-
males, if all the housewives entered the labor
force at the predicted level, would only be
about one point less than the average male
SEI score, hardly an important difference.

The possibility of a lower female socio-
economic distribution is also suggested by
other data. Housewives in the GSS were asked
if they had ever worked for as long as one
year. For the 73 percent who had, the mean
SEI score was 41.8, only about two points
below the mean for working women. Al-
though this also suggests some lowering of the
female SEI distribution, the drop would be
less than that suggested by the regression exer-
cise. Although it is impossible, of course, to
predict reliably from cross-sectional data what
might occur if a large proportion of house-
wives entered the labor force, the evidence re-
viewed here with respect to the socio-
economic characteristics of housewives and
their past work experience does not support
the prediction of a significantly lower status
distribution for women.
Since education has repeatedly been shown
to be the most important determinant of oc-
cupational status (Duncan et al., 1972; Sewell
and Hauser, 1975), possible sex differences in
the process of educational attainment will be
investigated before proceeding to the deter-
minants of occupational status.

Previous research by Sewell and Shah
(1967; 1968), and more recently by Alex-
ander and Eckland (1974), has shown sex dif-
ferences in educational attainment net of sex
differences in background and academic abili-
ty. Females get less education than would be
expected on the basis of other relevant varia-
bles. They have also shown that sex interacts
with other factors related to educational at-
tainment in such a way that for females,
family status is a stronger determinant of edu-
cation than is mental ability, while for males,
the opposite relative effects occur (Alexander
and Eckland, 1974). Such findings suggest
that education is more of a luxury for females
and more of a necessity for males. Although
this paper deals primarily with working males
and females only, and although the GSS does
not contain data on mental ability during the
N eyeurto.y

vt st Let 6€ SE TT oer “CS eewoy
. i uve g[eUlo]

  

      

(1aS) uoryedno9Q

OvET

LLET ee Sr 8s - or 9” sv oe~ St- ONnaD voreonpy
IZ Ovez vee Te 6e° - 1s ve" stv ST (aS Vd) Yonedns99 s 1ey}ey
O€TT cv 16 St 6" cw - 99° we oe™ COngavd vonronpy s.s9y24
OTZT Le 96 ow 8e Le £9" - La 9e- ONGAVW) YoHeoNpy s,r0y10W
O8ET tt ve St- oe St ce St- - 6 (Sas) s3unaqis

(adv) 38v

    

LET

  

soqqeirea,

  

TaSVd ONdaAVd ONdAVW aov

  

 

(Mojaqg Soe pue [eUOsEIG] aAOge S2TLUIOJ) HL 6 I-ZLET ‘XE AQ 9010,J 10geT oY} JO SIoQUIOW OYA, 1OJ SUOT}EIAD plepuejg pue suey] ‘suOTIeTaIIOD *Z o1qeL
(1aS) voredns09

(ona voneonpy

(aS Vd) Yonedns99 s 1ey}ey
COngavd vonronpy s.s9y24
CONGaAVN) YoHeonpy s,r9y1OW
(Sas) s3unaqis

(adv) 23V
schooling process, the sex interactions just
mentioned should alert us to the possibility
that family background may explain more of
the variation in the educational attainments of
females than of males.

A more specific sex interaction effect was
suggested by Treiman and Terrell (1975).
They found that the education of working fe-
males was more strongly affected by their
mother’s education than by their father’s edu-
cation, while father’s education had a stronger
effect for working males. Treiman and Terrell
suggested that these interaction effects might
be due to like-sexed role modeling. However,
they were cautious about this possibility due
to the fact that their male sample did not con-
tain data on mother’s education, and thus
they were forced to estimate the correlations
involving mother’s education, as well as the
means and standard deviations.

Turning to the GSS data on education, we
find that although the mean educational at-
tainments of working males and females are
equal (Table 2), the male and female educa-
tional distributions are not the same. As sug-
gested by the smaller female standard devia-
tion, females are more concentrated in the
center of the distribution at twelve years of
schooling. Males are more likely to have left
school before entering high school and to have
finished four years of college or more. Given
the positive correlation between schooling and
occupational status (Table 2), the different
shapes of the male and female educational dis-
tributions help explain why females are less
likely to be found in the upper and lower tails
of the occupational status distribution (Table

1).
ences do not quite reach the .05 level of sig-
nificance.“ Given the fact that Treiman and
Terrell were forced to estimate all relevant
statistics for mother’s education in their male
sample, the absence of like-sexed effects in
the GSS data appears to be the more reliable
finding.

The proportion of variation in educational
attainment explained by the basic model is
only slightly greater for females than for
males (.28 and .26, respectively). Thus, the
overall effect of the family background vari-
ables on the education of working females is
about the same as for working males. This is
not consistent, in any important sense, with
the findings of Sewell and Shah (1967; 1968)
and Alexander and Eckland (1974) concern-
ing the greater role played by socioeconomic
background with respect to the schooling
completed by females. However, Treiman and
Terrell (1975) found that socioeconomic
background was more important for nonwork-
ing women than for working women. Thus,
we compared housewives under 65 years of
age who were not in the workforce with work-
ing women under 65 and found that the ex-
plained variation in educational attainment
was somewhat higher for the housewives (.37
versus .31). When both working women and
housewives are combined, the explained varia-
tion is still somewhat greater than that of
working men (.34 and .28, respectively).
Thus, for women overall, socioeconomic back-
ground is a more important determinant of
educational attainment than for males, a find-
ing consistent with past research. However,
for working women, the process of educa-
tional attainment is more similar to that of
males. Perhaps, as Treiman and Terrell (1975)
suggested, the factors that lessen the influence
of family on educational attainment may be
the same factors that influence some women
to reject the traditional role of housewife.

The only statistically significant sex inter-
action in the basic model of educational at-
tainment is for number of siblings (p <
01). The levels of significance of all other
interaction terms are greater than .10. The
direct effect of siblings on years of school
completed is twice as great for males as for
females. For males who differ by three
siblings, those with the smaller number of
brothers and sisters will average about one
more year of school, whereas the difference
for comparable females will only be half a
year. The standardized coefficients show that
for males, number of siblings has a slightly
greater effect than either father’s status or
head’s education, while for females, number
of siblings is less important than the latter two
variables. A possible explanation of the sex
interaction with siblings is that sons are more
likely than daughters to drop out of school
early to supplement family income in case of
need, and need tends to be greater as the size
of the family increases.

Although a sex difference with respect to
the effect of siblings has been noted, all in all
Multivariate models for the occupational
status attainment of males have consistently
found that education is the main determinant
of occupational status. Most of the effect that
family background factors (father’s occupa-
tion, father’s education and number of sib-
lings) have on occupational status is indirectly
channeled through son’s education (Duncan et
al., 1972; Sewell and Hauser, 1975). However,
when white males are compared with black
males it is found that the effects of education
and family background on status are much
weaker for blacks than for whites (Duncan,
1968; Jencks et al., 1972). The explained
variation for blacks is less than half that for
whites. This difference between the black and
white models has usually been attributed to
racial discrimination.

Since it is often assumed that women are
discriminated against in the job market, it
would be logical to expect that the parameters
of the occupational status attainment model
would be weaker for females than for males.
This particularly might be expected for the
direct effect of education on status, the
strongest effect for males. On the other hand,
married women are by and large “free” to par-
ticipate or not to participate in the labor force
since the breadwinner role normally belongs
to the husband. This “freedom” would allow
women to stay out of the labor force when
they cannot find jobs at a status level com-
mensurate with their education. To the extent
that this option is exercised, we might expect
the potentially dampening effect of discrimi-
nation to be offset with the result that the
relationship between education and status
among women might be similar to the rela-
tionship for males. There might even be
reason to expect a stronger relationship
among women. Duncan et al. (1972) found
that the effect of education on occupational
status is weakened somewhat by age. It is
assumed that this results from the decreasing
importance of education as experience in the
labor market increases. Since women often
enter the labor force at an older age than men
and participate more intermittently than men,
women tend to have less labor force experi-
ence than men (Suter and Miller, 1973). Thus,
we might expect female occupational status to
be more closely determined by education than
is the case for males. Whatever the outcome of
these somewhat opposing factors, there are
certainly plausible reasons to expect sex inter-
actions with respect to the determinants of
occupational status.

The coefficients of the model of occupa-
tional attainment are shown in Table 3 for
males and females. As Treiman and Terrell
(1975) found, the male and female models are
quite similar. They are also nearly identical to
earlier models for males (Duncan et al., 1972).
The direct effect of education is the major
determinant of status for both sexes. Father’s
status has only a small, but statistically signifi-
cant effect. The effect of parent’s education
on status is not significant for either sex.

Comparison of the male and female coef-
ficients shows that the standardized coeffi-
cient for education is slightly stronger for
males, while the unstandardized coefficient is
slightly greater for females, due to differences
between the male and female standard devia-
tions. However, the male and female educa-
tion coefficients are not significantly different
(the level of significance is approximately
.35). Thus, we cannot conclude that the occu-
pational status return to investment in
schooling differs by sex. Each year of school-
ing is worth about four status points, on the
average, for white men and women. This sup-
ports Treiman and Terrell’s (1975) findings
with respect to occupational prestige.

Turning to other coefficients in the model,
the coefficient for age is significantly different
from zero for males, while it is not for fe-
males, and the coefficient for siblings is signi-
ficant for females and not for males. The sex
interaction with age is highly significant at the
.001 level. This is probably because age serves
as a better measure of labor force experience
for males than for females. The sex inter-
action with siblings is not quite significant at
the .05 level (p = .09), and an explanation for
the existence of such a sex difference will not
be ventured. The small sex interactions with
respect to age and siblings seem rather trivial,
given the small effects of age and siblings rela-
tive to that of education. When the model of
status attainment is estimated for males and
females together, the increase in explained
variation resulting from the addition of a main
sex effect and sex interaction effects is only
seven-tenths of a percent, a statistically signifi-
cant but hardly a substantively important
increase.

Although discrimination and less labor
force experience were suggested as plausible
reasons for expecting sex differences in the
determinants of occupational status, no sub-
stantial differences were found. For both
sexes, education is the dominant determinant
of status with only a small direct effect due to
family background.

However, the reader should be reminded
that the variables in the basic model of occu-
pational status only explain a little over one-
third of the variation. The addition of intelli-
gence scores is known to significantly increase
the explained variation, but still leaves over
half the variation in status unexplained
(Jencks et al., 1972; Duncan et al., 1972).
Thus, it is possible that the presently unmea-
sured variables which explain the remaining
variation might be different for males and fe-
males. They might also show the present
model to be misspecified in such a way that
variables presently in the model may show sex
interactions.
tended female model of occupational status
attainment. Marital status might affect the
status attainments of females for several rea-
sons. Currently married women often find
their occupational endeavors to be secondary
in precedence to those of their husbands, and
possibly secondary in importance to their role
of homemaking. Thus, their marital status
tends to constrain their free and full participa-
tion in the labor market, possibly lowering
their level of status attainment and the rela-
tionship between education and status, be-
cause they are forced to accept positions for
which the status is not commensurate with
their education. Women not currently married
would not be faced with these constraints and
thus might show greater attainment. But as
previously mentioned, married women are
also “free” to participate in the labor market
and thus might choose to participate only
under optimal conditions, thus reducing the
constraining effects of marriage. Whatever the
outcome, it seems worthwhile to investigate
the effect of marital status by including it in a
status attainment model for females.

The primary responsibility for the care of
children in the home traditionally belongs to
women. This responsibility might also tend to
limit their commitment to occupational roles
and their freedom to participate in the labor
force to their fullest ability. Thus, the status
attainments of women with children in the
home, whether currently married or not,
might be reduced. Three variables which
measure the number of children in the home
will be included in the model: number of
babies (under age 6), number of pre-teenagers
(age 6 through 12) and number of teenagers
(age 13 through 17).

The last additional variable to be included
in the extended female model indicates
whether the woman is a full-time worker or a
part-time worker. Female workers are much
more likely to be part-time workers than are
males (29.3 percent versus 6.6 percent). Since
part-time workers tend to have lower occupa-
tional status than full-time workers and since
such a significant proportion of women work
part-time, work status might act as an impor-
tant determinant of status, independently of
the other socioeconomic variables in the
model.

The standardized and unstandardized coef-
ficients for the extended female model are
given in Table 4. The coefficients for the
background variables and for education are
the same as in the basic model. The addition
of the marital, children and work status vari-
ables increases the explained variation by two
percent, a statistically significant but relative-
ly small increase. Of the new variables, work
status has the strongest effect, marital status
the next strongest effect and the children at
home variables do not show statistically signi-
ficant effects. Working full-time, as opposed
to part-time, is worth about five status points.
The direct effect of work status is the same
strength as the effect of father’s occupational
status. Currently married women have about a
3.5 status point advantage over the nonmar-
tied women. This suggests that the “freedom”
to enter the labor force outweighs the possible
handicaps of marriage for married female
workers. However, the effect due to marital
status is relatively weak.®
Using the NORC General Social Surveys of
1972-1974, we have found the occupational
status attainments and the determinants of
occupational status of white working males
and females to be quite similar. As measured
by Duncan’s Socioeconomic Index (SEI), the
occupational status distributions of males and
females are very similar, both with respect to
the mean and the shape of the distributions.
The most important difference between the
two status hierarchies is the greater concentra-
tion of males at both the upper and lower
ends of the distributions. Although working
females have more education and come from
higher status families than nonworking house-
wives, the data do not suggest that the occu-
pational status of females would be appreci-
ably lowered if a larger proportion of women
were in the workforce.

With respect to the basic model of status
attainment, education is by far the most
important determinant of occupational status
for both white men and women. And, the
process of educational attainment is much the
same for working men and women. There is
no evidence that the education of the like-
sexed parent has a greater effect on the num-
ber of years of school completed than does
the education of the opposite-sexed parent.
The effect of family background on the edu-
cation of working women is somewhat less
than for nonworking housewives, however.
The only significant sex differences in the
basic model of status attainment are for the
effect of number of siblings on education and
the effect of age on occupational status (the
effect being stronger for males in each case).

Examination of an extended model of
status attainment for white females revealed
small but significant positive effects for full-
time workers versus part-time workers and for
married women versus nonmarried women.
The number of children at home had no effect
on occupational status, however, and the ex-
tended model provided little additional ex-
planatory power over that of the basic model.

The reader should be reminded that these
findings only pertain to whites. It should not
be assumed that the absence of sex differences
in the status attainment process among whites
can be generalized to blacks. Treiman and
Terrell (1975) found that for blacks, the ex-
plained variation in both education and occu-
pational prestige was considerably higher for
females than for males. The occupational
prestige return to years of school completed
was also considerably higher for females.
Thus, important sex differences apparently
exist in the black population.

The conclusions which seem to emerge
with greatest clarity from this analysis are,
first, that the white male and female occupa-
tional status structures are very much alike
and second, that education is the most im-
portant factor for allocating both males and
females to positions in the status hierarchies.
It should be remembered, however, that the
similar status hierarchies are built on quite dis-
similar occupational structures. In the GSS
data, two-thirds of the working women are
concentrated in white-collar jobs, more than
half of which are clerical, while less than half
of the men are found in white-collar jobs. The
concentration of women in white-collar jobs is
responsible for the female prestige and status
parity with males. This parity does not result
in income equality, of course, as females earn
much less than males, even when they have
the same status as males (Suter and Miller,
1973; Treiman and Terrell, 1975).

In light of the well-known sex inequalities
with respect to type of occupation and in-
come, the male-female status parity may
appear surprising. However, this parity can be
viewed as an integral part of a pervasive in-
equality of sex roles, albeit a highly paternalis-
tic aspect. The white-collar jobs in which the
majority of women are found are cleaner,
more comfortable and safer than the male
dominated blue-collar jobs. They also possess
relatively higher status. Thus, society seems to
protect the “weaker” sex, to a greater degree
than males, from the rigors and unpleasant-
ness of the lower status blue-collar jobs. Such
paternalism tends to increase the occupational
status of females relative to males. However,
within the blue-collar and white-collar cate-
gories, females tend to be in lower status jobs
than males. The concentration of females in
service and clerical occupations within the
blue-collar and white-collar categories, respec-
tively, results in a lower mean status for
women in each category. The lower female
status within categories counterbalances the
tendency for women to have higher status due
to their concentration in the white-collar cate-
gory, and thus produces the status equality of
males and females. When viewed from this
perspective, the equality of male and female
occupational status is not so anomalous with
respect to other sex inequalities.
Bose, Christine E.

1973 Jobs and Gender: Sex and Occupational
Prestige. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity, Center for Metropolitan Planning and
Research.

Carter, Nancy

1972 “The effects of sex and marital status ona
social-psychological model of occupational
status attainment.” Unpublished master’s
thesis, University of Wisconsin.

DeJong, Peter Y., Milton J. Brawer and Stanley S.
Robin

1971 “Patterns of female intergenerational occu-
pational mobility: a comparison with male
patterns of intergenerational occupational
mobility.” American Sociological Review
36:1033-42.

Duncan, Otis Dudley

1961 ‘“‘A socioeconomic index for all occupa-
tions.” Chapter 6 in Albert J. Reiss, Jr.,
Otis Dudley Duncan, Paul K. Hatt and C.
C. North (eds.), Occupations and Social
Status. Glencoe: Free Press.

1968 “Inheritance of poverty or inheritance of
race?” Pp. 85-110 in Daniel P. Moynihan
(ed.), On Understanding Poverty. New
York: Basic Books.

Duncan, Otis D., David L. Featherman and Beverly
Duncan

1972 Socioeconomic Background and Achieve-

ment. New York: Seminar.
Featherman, David L. and Robert M. Hauser

1975 “Sexual inequalities and socioeconomic
achievement in the U.S., 1962-1973.”
Paper presented at the Population Associa-
tion of America, Annual Meeting, Seattle,
Washington.

Haug, Marie R.

1975 “Sex role variations in occupational pres-

tige ratings.” Sociological Focus 8:47-56.

Hauser, Robert M., David L. Featherman and Dennis
P. Hogan

1974 “Race and sex in the structure of occupa-
tional mobility in the United States,
1962.” Paper presented at the 8th World
Congress of Sociology, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Jencks, Christopher, Marshall Smith, Henry Acland,
Mary Jo Bane, David Cohen, Herbert Gintis, Bar-
bara Heyns and Stephen Michelson.

1972 Inequality. New York: Basic Books.

Parnes, Herbert S., John R. Shea, Ruth S. Spitz and
Frederick A. Zeller

1970 Dual Careers. Volume 1. Washington D.C.:
U.S. Department of Labor, Manpower Re-
search Monograph No. 21.

Sewell, William H. and Robert M. Hauser

1975 Education, Occupation, and Earnings. New
York: Academic Press.

Sewell, William H. and Vimal P. Shah

1967 “Socioeconomic status, intelligence, and
the attainment of higher education.”
Sociology of Education 40:1-23.

1968 “Parents’ education and children’s educa-
tional aspirations and achievements.”
American Sociological Review 33:191-209.

Suter, Larry E. and Herman P. Miller

1973 “Income differences between men and
career women.” American Journal of
Sociology 78:962-74.

Treiman, Donald J. and Kermit Terrell

1975 “Sex and the process of status attainment:
a comparison of working women and
men.’’ American Sociological Review
40:174-200.

Tyree, Andrea and Judith Treas

1974 “The occupational and marital mobility of
women.” American Sociological Review
39:294-302.

U.S. Bureau of the Census

1975 The Statistical Abstract of the United
States. New York: Grosset and Dunlap.

Wang, Linda

1973 “The female status attainment process and
occupational mobility.” Unpublished M.S.
thesis, University of Wisconsin.
