American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
logical status of motives. We shall ad-

dress this issue by describing how or-
dinary actors employ “motive” as a practi-
cal method for organizing their everyday
environments. Since motive is used by ordi-
nary societal members to manage their
orderly routines, our explication wili be a
formulation of the ways in which members’
practices are grounded in their knowledge.
We shall suggest, that all sociological con-
ceptions require some version of the com-
mon sense member (of his practical knowl-
edge); and we shall depict motive as one
common sense device for ascribing social
membership, since motives are used by mem-
bers to link particular concrete activities to
generally available social rules. Motive, then,
is one collective procedure for accomplish-
ing social interaction, and for sorting out
the various possibilities for social treatment
by linking specific act and social rules in
such a way as to generate the constellation
of social actions that observers call “per-
sons,” “members” and “membership.” 1

Or intention is to explicate the socio-
Social scientists tend to conceive of mo-
tives as private and internal characteristics
of persons which impinge upon and coerce
these persons into various behaviors. In this
view, motives are seen simultaneously (1)
as “causal” antecedent variables (antecedent
to the event of interest), and (2) as charac-
teristic “states” of persons engaging in the
behavior. We maintain that these senses of
motive are inadequate because they issue
from a common misconception of motive,
namely that motives are concrete, private
and interior “mainsprings” that reside in

 

quately concrete conception of analysis; e.g., in su-
perficially focusing upon the surface features of the
approach—the concern with “meaning,” with the
“actor’s point of view,” etc—he loses sight of the
analytic character of ethnomethodology and of
analysis in general. Wilson (1970), on the other
hand, may understand ethnomethodology but not
what to do about it. If ethnomethodology obviates
literal description, then suggesting that we be “more
explicit and self-concious” (1970:706) is regressive
if not vacuous — it is only to ask that we improve
on the same literal procedures. As to the contrast
between this paper and ethnomethodology, we must
first record the great influence of the writings of
Garfinkel (1957), though this influence has not
worked itself out in our thinking in the ways it has
in his students. Ethnomethodology, as it is practiced
by these students, not only fails to supply our pro-
gram with its rationale but denies this rationale at
critical analytic points. Ethnomethodology seeks to
“rigorously describe” ordinary usage, and despite its
significant transformation of standards for conceiv-
ing of and describing such usage, it still conducts its
inquiries under the auspices of a concrete, positivis-
tic conception of adequacy. Ethnomethodology con-
ceives of such descriptions of usage as analytic “so-
lutions” to their tasks, whereas our interest is in the
production of the idea which makes any conception
of relevant usage itself possible. Whereas ethno-
methodology uses the ordinary world “seriously”
(they hope to solve analytic problems by doing nat-
uralistic science on this world), we treat the every-
day world as a proximate occasion for initiating in-
quiry and not as a “fact” to be reproduced. In our
respective attitudes toward ordinary language and
the everyday world, we have about as much in
common with ethnomethodology as Heidegger shares
with Austin. Finally, ethnomethodologists would
regard our task in this paper as a stipulative exer-
cise in legislating the use of a “concept,” while we
would treat such an objection as a failure of analytic
nerve, as the typical positivist gambit (which goes
back at least as far as Protagoras) of refusing to
exercise analytic authority, despite the fact that
such authority grounds their entire enterprise with
its intelligibility. Some of these issues are taken up
in detail in work now under way.

2 This misconception leads to the contention that
motives are only peripheral to the classic tradition
of, say, Marx or Durkheim—that human motiva-
tion plays the role of unstated premises and is
properly disregarded for analytic purposes (the eco-
logical argument), or requires explication only in
order to account for more of the variance (the so-
cial psychological argument of Homans, 1964; In-
keles, 1959), We contend instead that motive plays
a central role in such traditions, a role we can recog-
nize if we grasp the analytic status of motive rather
than its concrete character.

3 For example, the sociological import of economic
determinism in Marx is not the impersonal effects of
brute facts upon an organism, but rather his formu-
lation of a meaningful environment constructed by
and seen from the perspective of a typical actor. To
say “economic determinism exists” is to decide to
formulate actors as oriented to selected particular
The classic roster of terms used by soci-
ologists—social class, community, religion,
suicide, bureaucracy, conflict, and the like—
all require in their various ways this sort of
conception. Motive then, serves as a theo-
orist’s election that some rule is relevant for
explicating the character of some event as
an instance of action. Motive is not in this
regard a thing in the world but a way of con-
ceiving social action.

In a more precisely sociological sense, it
is observers who introduce a topic into be-
havior, whether motives or any other. Thus,
to say that “social class exists,” or that some
group is high on need achievement, is for an
observer to decide that some collection of
persons is oriented to their status as a col-
lective actor and is to be conceived as acting
under the auspices of such an orientation.
When an observer asserts that the American
workers constitute a social class, he is de-
ciding that the collection conceivable as
American workers presently show in their
behavior their status as a collective actor, the
identity of which the observer provides on
the basis of their relation to the instruments
of production.*

The upshot of all this—that motives func-
tion as observers’ rules of relevance—is that
though motives might be described as per-
sonal properties or characteristics of persons,
they acquire their analytic force as observ-
ers’ rules for depicting grounds of conduct.>
Motives are a way for an observer to assign
relevance to behavior in order that it may
be recognized as another instance of norma-
tively ordered action.

It should now be clear why motives can-
not be private and internal; if motives are
sociologically depicted in the ascription of
rules, the ascription of rules itself requires
(presupposes) the use of a language that is
public and observable. Even when we speak
of “hidden” motives, we are of course en-
gaged in fully intelligible and observable
courses of treatment—some public criterion
enables us to grasp the topic. The so-called
hidden motives, slips, and the like are ob-
servable states of affairs which can be dis-
cussed in sensible and concerted ways. To
treat motives as private is to confuse the
state of affairs which motives report with
the analytic status of the term, which status
is supplied by the public and by generally
available rules that make motive reports so-
cially possible and observable modes of social
action.®
give a motive is not to locate a cause of the
action, but is for some observer to assert
how a behavior is socially intelligible by
ascribing a socially available actor’s orienta-
tion.” Questions of orientation do not require
factual solutions (they are not either true or
false), but rather, grammatical solutions. To
talk motives is to talk grammar.

At the same time, however, social psycholo-
gists have used motive as a technical term
designed to unravel the causal patterning of
a sequence of actions (Atkinson, 1958; Cat-
tell, 1957; Lindzey, 1958; Smelser and Smel-
ser, 1963; White, 1963), e.g. need achieve-
ment as an antecedent of economic develop-
ment (McClelland, et al., 1953). One prob-
lem with such technical usage is that it does
not reformulate motive from the perspective
of a practical member; i.e., it ignores motive
as a social course of action, and so it fails to
provide for the relevance of motive as an
activity engaged in by practical members.’

To treat motive as a cause, as in “What
was his motive for suicide?” is to commit
one version of the fallacy which Austin
(1965) and others have discussed in detail:
the fallacy of presuming that suicide is an
act which somehow describes some ante-
cedent state of mind which preceded or
caused it. On the contrary, to recognize the
act of suicide as an intelligible event-of-con-
duct is to assign to that behavior its identity
as social action, in this case by formulating
a motive. Thus, motive is a rule which de-
picts the social character of the act itself.
It is not that his suicide reports some ante-
cedent depression, or that murdering his wife
reports his jealousy, or that leaving the
party reports upon his boredom. Rather, the
character of the suicide, the murder, the de-
parture are identified through the clarifica-
tion of unstated circumstances which make
these actions socially recognizable as suicide,
murder and departure. To say “I want a mo-
tive for the murdered wife” is not to say that
I want merely his antecedent state of mind
which the wife’s murder follows, but is in-
stead to explicate the situation (the context,
knowledge, conditions) which makes the
event socially possible (a recognizable mur-
der).

The best criticism of the causal account
of motive is to be found in Melden’s Free
Action (1961) in which he demonstrates that
since any conception of a cause presupposes
a description of the very action for which
the cause is identified, these accounts violate
the necessary assumption of the analytic in-
dependence of cause and effect in the Hu-
mean model of causality. That is, some thing
cannot be cited as a cause of an event if this
“something” is involved (presupposed) in the
very description of the event; analyses of
motive accounts show that whatever is cited
as a motive serves to more fully and com-
pletely characterize the event for which it
is formulated, and cannot then be treated as
independent of the event. Melden says: “this
explanation does not refer to a present mo-
ment, sliced off from what has gone before
and what will follow, but to the present ac-
tion as an incident in the total proceed-
ings” ® (1961, 98-99).

This is why it is elliptical to assert that
motive describes only and simply a state of
mind, when instead it serves to demand an
explication of the circumstances which con-
fer upon this putative state of mind its rea-
sonableness as an account. Because such an
explication amounts to a theory or formula-
tion, it would be more correct to say that
the quest for a motive (why did he kill her?)
is a request for a theory.
We have sought to show that motive ac-
quires its analytic character as a public
(methodic) product rather than as a private
“state,” and that it is to be understood
grammatically (as part of the meaning of
an action) rather than as a factual report
on some contingent, antecedent event. Now,
however, we want to show how the analytic
sense of motive is not located through a
report of usage, but rather by formulating
the conditions of knowledge which make
such usage possible.

One option to the technical causal idea
is thought to be a conception of motives
as members’ purposes, reasons, justifications
and accounts (Gerth and Mills, 1953;
Schutz, 1962; Scott and Lyman, 1968;
Shwayder, 1966). In this tradition, the
actor is used by the observer as a research
informant, whose report acquires analytic
status because the actor is thought to be
a privileged and exclusive source on ques-
tions of his motive.

The paradigmatic procedure here is to
ask the actor, “Why ... ?” and expect him
to cite a reason, goal, or intention, e.g.,
“Why did you leave the party?”; “Because
I was bored”; “In order to make my ap-
pointment”; etc. In some cases we take
these reasons and call them symbols and
meanings, but that sort of substitution does
not really tell us much about the methodi-
cal ways in which such statements are gen-
erated to begin with—how, for example, the
actor is constrained to cite a reason at all;
how it takes the form it does (giving a
reason instead of, say, telling a joke); how
it comes to be acceptable to the hearer that
it is an answer. In other words, its status
as a common sense practical device, as op-
posed to mere idiosyncratic noise or gesture
or cue, remains unstated.1° The methodic
social and hence sociological feature of mo-
tive lies not in the concrete, substantive
reason an actor would give for his behavior,
but in the organized and sanctionable con-
ditions that would regularly produce the
giving of a reason by a competent member
in the first place. The reason given is no
more than the surface expression of some
underlying rule(s) that the former requires
in order to be understood (Chomsky, 1965).

The surface performance which is dis-
played in the use of motive might be that
of offering a reason, goal, or intention, but
to provide an account of motive in these
terms is to ignore the deep structure which
makes the surface display possible at all.
As we shall investigate below, motive ac-
quires its analytic status by virtue of the
fact that it requires for its use certain deep
structures for conceiving of “person,” “mem-
ber,” “responsibility,” “biography,” and the
like; these deep structures are absolutely
necessary for an ordinary member’s com-
petent and sensible employ of motive as a
device, because they generate the variety
of surface reasons he may cite in any par-
ticular case. It is through these deep condi-
tions that an analytic conception of the
ordinary sociological use of motive is pro-
vided.

It should be clear then, that the similarity
which typical symbolic interaction accounts
appear to achieve with our present formula-
tion—through such phrases as “vocabularies
of motives” and the like—is misleading, for
they treat concrete speech acts—such as
giving reasons or justifications, or citing in-
tentions—as providing an analytic explica-
tion of motive, whereas we treat such usage
as surface phenomena which are made pos-
sible by deeper conditions of knowledge.
The concrete character of such versions of
motive is conveyed in their practice of treat-
ing motive as the practical actor’s expression
of his knowledge, in contrast to the present
suggestion that analytic status is supplied
through some conception of an observer’s
method of constructing a practical actor
(no matter what he is concretely taken to
perform or say).

For example, Gerth and Mills (1953:116)
cite Weber as we do but interpret him as
using motive as equivalent to “an adequate
reason for conduct.” On the other hand, we
are saying that this usage fails to capture
the analytic character of motive as an ob-
server’s decision to treat or reformulate some
behavior as a reason, and that this is an
entirely different matter. So too, they see
motive as “ascribed through talk” (1953:
114) and as a “term” of the talk itself,
whereas, in our view, speech is just a medium
for the concrete expression of motive, but
it is a set of prior and deeper conditions
of knowledge which permit an observer to
treat talk as intelligibly predicating motive.
The symbolic interactionist finds it impos-
sible to formulate a version of motive that
is analytically distinct from conventional
versions, because he still conceives of motive
as a practical actor’s concrete report of his
state of mind: he only shifts his focus from
the state-of-mind to the talk, by treating
the talk as some sort of public indicator of
the mind. Gerth and Mills show this quite
explicitly when they eventually surrender
to a concern for questions such as what the
differences are between professed motives
and “real motives” (1953:119), and with
the actor’s degree of “awareness” of his
motives (1953:125). These are not the ques-
tions of those who have grasped the analytic
character of motive.1?

We can now locate the major difficulty
which unifies the various conventional ac-
counts of motives, i.e., the conception which
appears to unify the various sorts of troubles
we have been discussing; these accounts
pose the problem of motives as a factual
rather than a grammatical one, which leads
easily to the trap of treating motives as
causes, as states-of-persons, and as concrete
speech-acts such as reasons, accounts, and
justifications, And these accounts treat mo-
tives as raising a concrete, factual question
of “why?” rather than as attempts to for-
mulate the socially organized conditions
under which such a question is sensible to
those who raise them. Any strategy which
equates the factual surface structure of mo-
tive talk with an analytic conception of
Motives acquire their analytic status as
observers’ rules. They are not forces or
events in the world extraneous to an ob-
server. Motives are sociologically possible
only because some practical observer has
methods and procedures—i.e., rules—for
locating them as events in the world, not
because that is where they really are. Be-
cause events cannot “exist” sociologically
except as courses of treatment, and because
courses of treatment are not intelligible ex-
cept through available social rule, motives
cannot be located except by rule. Conse-
quently, motives are accomplished exclu-
sively through the use of such methods and
procedures.

When a member says “He had the jealous
motive to .......... ,” we expect that the
statement can be understood as a descrip-
tion of possible behavior. Of course, there
can be disagreement with the surface con-

12 We are not prescribing how motive-talk should
be accomplished; rather, we are stating that under
any and all occasions of motive-talk in our society,
to which we have reference, such talk requires mem-
bers to make certain assumptions about their envi-
ronments. Furthermore, their talk shows that they
make these assumptions. Again, whether members
know these conditions or can report them to us is
analytically irrevelant in the same sense that Chom-
sky’s native speakers cannot concretely reproduce
his theory even though they do show its correctness
and provide for its formulability through their be-
havior.
tent of the statement—perhaps he did not
have the jealous motive—but it nevertheless
remains an intelligible remark because it
describes an understandable or socially pos-
sible motivated action. Others do not think
every such statement literal nonsense. This
is again to distinguish between concrete
surface phenomena or causal properties
(whether the object does or does not have
the jealous motive) and the analytic deep
structure that makes such phenomena pos-
sible (that an observer can talk intelligibily
about jealous motive, whatever the factual
status of his talk).

The point here is that there must be some
rule—of language, interpretation, or culture
—by which motive-talk takes life as a de-
scription.

Now to say that some rule is available
is to remove the sociological habitat of mo-
tive from object (the person who had the
jealous motive) to discourse about the ob-
ject (how it is understood that a motive
ascription has been made). This is to say,
again, that the sociological import of motive
resides in its procedural implications for the
treatment of objects and not in the states
of the objects themselves. Motive is a pro-
cedure.

This first feature brings motive into the
full corpus of sociological ideas: rules must
exist for such a procedure as motive to exist.
They are socially organized treatments.
Motive is not something an actor has—it
is not a property of an actor. It is not some-
thing the sociologist decides that some per-
son owns, in the sense that it is the “thing”
which he owns. Rather, motive is a mem-
ber’s method for deciding what alter owns.
Thus, the sociologist does not search for
motives in objects of talk and treatment,
but in the talk and treatment itself.1%

One socially organized condition for ad-
dressing the topic of motive, therefore, is
the assumption of the availability or rele-
vance of a motive ascription rule. The neces-
sary availability of such a rule, or rules,
can be seen by noting that motives are a

13 Note, though, that the concrete talk—the speech
act(s), the usage—does not provide the observer
with the motive (as some versions of sociology
might have one believe), but such analytic status is
located in terms of the observer’s decision as to
what must be known in order to recognize in the
talk, the analytic “presence” of motive.
One rule for the ascription of motives
therefore is that the observer-user knows
there are motive-ascribing rules. A con-
comitant of this first rule is that the ascriber
know (assume, presume) that the object
knows there are motive-ascribing rules.

In order to be called motivated, the object
of an ascription cannot be treated as if he
were doing the behavior haphazardly or co-
incidentally. He is, in other words, treated
as if he has the capacity to “know what he’s
doing.” Any object thought to be unable
to know what it is doing cannot be treated
as motivated, even though that object re-
sembles a human organism, e.g., a brute or
an infant. That ascribers know there are
rules requires that they impute knowledge
to the object that there are rules.‘* Other-
wise, the ascriber’s knowledge could not be
conceived by him to be a practical guide
to the object’s behavior, since the latter
could not be deemed to be oriented.

Alter, as rule-guided, incorporates the
fundamental sociological principle that gen-
erally available rules are the analytic equiva-
lent of membership (community, group,
pair, etc.). Rules make actors’ methodicity
and concert possible by transforming what
would otherwise be nonsense into intelligible
social behavior. That alter can be conceived
(by observing ego and sociologist) to be
rule-guided encompasses the status of mo-
tives within general sociology: motive, as
with any other sociological classification,
refers to certain actions by rule-guided
ascribers and objects. The ascriber is rule-
guided in his characterization of an object,
while the object is (assumed to be) rule-
guided in his behavior, and thus assumed
to “know what he’s doing.” Both ego and
alter assume of one another that they are,
or could be, doing motives. Each is a
theorizer, in the sense that both must be
looking to rules in order to carry off their
activity as doing motives. For motive treat-
ment to occur, as for any kind of member-
ship treatment to occur, ego and alter must
necessarily generate for one another their
status as members oriented to rules. Here
a set of concrete activities is so formulated
that those activities become members
through the application of a corpus of rules.
This is a detailed way of saying they are
members of a social relation.1®

By “rule-guided” we do not mean that
actors are automata governed by abstract
rules, that rules are clear and unchanging and
automatically applied, or that it cannot be
difficult, confusing, and vague for members
to act like members. We do not mean that
actors are rule-governed (Bennet, 1964). On
the contrary, it is those who can behave but
not act whom we conceive to be rule-governed
automata, for they seem only to play out as
mechanisms the untransformed universal
needs and drives of every man.'® The dis-
tinction between rule-governed and rule-
guided is comparable to the one between be-
havior and action, and it is surely correct
that the use of rules by members is an ac-
complishment in the hardiest sense of the
term. We are only asserting that ego and
alter must assume, however difficult the ap-
plication of substantive ascriptions, that
some corpus of membership rules is being
used in behavioral displays before they can
be characterized by substantive motive
schema. It is necessary that ascriber and ob-
ject are assumed to be of a certain kind,
namely theorizers.

We are not suggesting either that members
always neatly agree on what is happening
around them, or that the substance of rules
is common to all interactants. Whether be-
havior goes well or badly, whether it “de-
viates” or “conforms,” is not an issue. We do
not equate the deep notion of theoreticity
with the substance of interaction. Theoretic-
ity is the observed, rule-guided identification
of the doing of anything at all, whether well
or badly, whether deviant or conforming.
(Even to be considered one or the other
requires that some imputation of rule be
used.)

Take the case of mental illness. If the
person is conceived by members to be doing
nothing in particular, to be merely a set of
either random or universal behaviors, then
no question of motive will ever arise (or will
arise only once, to be dismissed by the find-
ing of nonmembership). Only when being
crazy can be seen as organized or rule-guided
—again, as being a display of some member-
ship—does the possibility of motivated men-
tal patients occur.

To be theoretic is thus to be conceivable
by some observer as methodically rule-
guided, rather than haphazard in behavior.
To ascribe a motive, among other ascriptions,
A third organized condition of motive
ascription is a grammar that locates for a
potential or would-be ascriber those condi-
tions in the world which give notice that an
ascription is to be done. The grammar moves
a motive rule into behavior, from availability
to ascription. It is a (collection of) rule(s)
of use for the doing of an ascription. It de-
picts for the observer a procedure for ac-
tually ascribing available designations to a
world populated by members. The grammar
links a phenomenon in the world to the avail-
able corpus of designations.

This grammar of motives is used whenever
an event is to be collected within a biography.
We may think of the biography as a collec-
tion of “owned experiences,” in that actors
conceive themselves as having particular pasts
which routinely inform an observer about the
possibilities for their behavior; and we may
think of events as some observer’s definition
of a situated environment of objects, specific
to time and place. Motives are the social
characterizations, generally available, the
grammar which is used when biography and
event are to be linked. The grammar
produces for the ascriber a relation be-
tween some practical phenomenon and
the common sense biography with which
that event now comes to be associated
through the process of ascription. A common
sense biography is the observer’s version of
a set of owned experiences (husband), a set
which comes into contact with, or is juxta-
posed against, particular concrete (and hence
socially problematic) phenomena in the
world (dead wife). The grammar is the rule
(connect the experience—husband—with the
event—dead wife) that conjoins the two as
an accomplishment of organized and con-
certed treatment (a jealous motive).

Imagine a hypothetical community where
a murder is committed, and the husband of
the victim is eventually identified as the
killer. Initially, everyone could be suspect,
and to “look for the motive” is to address
the links between the murder and various
collections of owned experience in the com-
munity. The ways these experiences are
joined with murdered wife methodically gen-
erate the motivated (or not) character of any
link.

The idea of motive thus serves to formulate
for members their interactions, insofar as
they conceive interaction as experiences
framed in events. Actors are thought by ob-
servers to have biographies and to engage the
world with them. The grammar produces
the link between the two. Motives are re-
sources for connecting an event with a bi-
ography, and they generate the event as a
member of the class of experiences owned
by a body (as depicted in common sense).

Similarly, motives depict for us how the
event shows or displays a biography. Insofar
as the biography and the event can be seen
to be membership, this is done through the
ascription of motive. Otherwise—in the ab-
sence of such a grammar—observers would
be unable to organize the current and flow
of socially intelligible events, nor could they
observe the products of biography; i-.e., they
could not see interaction as a course of
history. They would be without a temporal
method. Events could only be seen to be
performed and disembodied, not enacted
by some theoretic-nontheoretic incumbent of
a situated social world. Motives thus char-
acterize biographies enacting events are spe-
cific to events and distinctive of biographies.
They are a grammar in that they methodi-
cally collect these disparate phenomena. And
they are social in that they transform what
would otherwise be fragmentary series of
unconnected immediate events into generally
intelligible social courses of behavior. It is
through motive as a culturally available
designation that the observer recovers alter’s
membership out of observed temporal phe-
nomena, because motives delineate the bi-
ographical auspices of acts in situations.
mar poses a selectional problem for its user
in this sense: it has to include a search
procedure for deciding the relevance of one
biography (one collection) as compared to
other possibilities. The search procedure is
essentially the rule for showing the possible
relevance of the biography for the event.
Such a rule amounts to the formulation of
a type-of-person.

Thus, when users formulate the biography
called “husband,” the relevance of which to
the event “murdered wife’ is decided through
a formulation of circumstances and char-
acteristics such as jealousy, they are formu-
lating the biography (husband) as the type
of person whose jealously could produce the
event of murdered wife. In this way the
grammar is a provision for explicating the
link between the biography and the event and
this explication is supplied by the formula-
tion of a type of person.

The grammar of motives enables members
regularly to address the fact that the rele-
vance of biography to event is formulable
through a rule which locates the owner of
the biography as the type of person who
would do the event.” Type of person, then,
explicates the circumstances and understand-
ings required to assert the relevance of any
biography for the event. The heart of the
grammar is thus its rule for formulating a
type of person. It is in this sense that any
observer’s ascription of a motive serves to
formulate for some activity, a person.
descriptions of possible ways of relating to
the event, i.e., as potential courses of action.
To formulate a type of person is to formulate
a course of action on the grounds that no
matter what one predicates substantively of
persons to make their biographies relevant
to the event, such relevance is only assigned
on the assumption that the predicates depict
a typical, possible course of action. Person,
then, depicts a typical possible actor.

To say his motive in murdering his wife
was his jealousy is to explicate the circum-
stances which make him the type of jealous
person who would (could) murder his wife—
that murdering his wife is one possible
method available to him for doing jealousy.
In this way, the event is formulated as the
agent’s possible method for doing whatever
the formulation of the motive requires as a
course of action.

He killed himself because he was depressed,
or he left the party because he was bored—
both are observers’ ways of saying that kill-
ing oneself is a method of doing depression,
or that prematurely leaving the party is a
way of doing boredom. This understanding
is important because members regularly raise
the question of motive and address it as a
sensible topic only of those classes of events
which are recognizable as possible products
of actors’ methods. Questions such as “What
was your motive in spilling the ink?” (Aus-
tin, 1966), or “what was your motive in
speaking so softly?” come up in ordinary
usage when something is fishy, and when it is
sensible to ascribe to an actor some methodic
display of intention or purpose. To assign a
motive is then necessarily to assume that the
event exhibits possible methodicity.

As we have stated, at the deepest level
such methodicity is addressed in the observ-
er’s conception of the event as showing the
agent’s character as a type of person—by
the agent’s being formulable as a possible
method, as it were, to “do” whatever type
of person which he is formulated as.1® The
observer assumes, then, that the agent shows
in the event (uses the event as) one possible
method of identifying himself through his
action as a particular type of person: that
the murder of his wife identifies him as a
jealous type of person, leaving the party as
a bored person, and so forth.

When an observer formulates a member
in this sense, he is stipulating that whosoever
he is formulating has knowledge to act under
the auspices of his (the observer’s) formula-
tion of a type of person. The formulation of
a type of person (of one who has a motive)
thus requires the observer to assume that
the one so formulated is capable of “show-
ing” the type of person for which the ob-
server’s formulation provides. Therefore,
when the observer formulates a motive, he is
formulating a type of person and is required
to assume that the one so formulated is a
member in the deep sense of the term, i.e.,
as one who can generally be expected to know
what he’s doing in the possible circumstances
where he might or could be doing it, circum-
stances which include those of motive ascrip-
tion.

No matter what members conceive them-
selves to be doing when they ascribe motives,
we say they are engaged in conceiving others
(or self) to be doing whatever activities they
do because they “own” a particular collec-
tion of experiences which can be used as a
normative order for creating sensible events.
Those to whom motives are ascribed are thus
formulated under the auspices of the follow-
ing requirements: (1) That they treat such
a collection of experiences as possible grounds
of action in situations, (2) that other collec-
tions of experiences are possible alternative
grounds of action, (3) that the activity which
is done is the actor’s way of showing, to the
one who ascribes, the relevance of his own
collection of experiences (of showing himself
as a type of person), and (4) since every
kind of showing as type of person is a method
of excluding other possible persons, that the
actor as this type of person is selectively do-
ing whatever he comes to (since according
to his theoretic status in common, he could
have come to something else.) It is in these
ways that regular motive ascriptions are reg-
ularly introduced in regular social inter-
course; it is in these ways that motives
formulate actors’ methods.
In summary, we have attempted to depict
the socially organized conditions which mem-
bers tacitly accredit in their accomplishment
of motive as a sensible and observable event.
We have tried to demonstrate that motive
can be sociological by showing that motive
shares with all matters of sociological inter-
est (class, bureaucracy, suicide, etc.) a status
as a common sense formulation. Motive de-
picts for any observer a course of social ac-
tion.

Motive is a sociological procedure for
describing how organisms show themselves
as persons. To gain an identity as a person
requires that disparate activities and experi-
ence can be collected by actors under some
typification, a process which makes the ac-
tivities graspable for them through the for-
mulation of alter’s motivated identity. The
condition of membership in common makes
it possible for an observer to expect that
alter, because he knows what he’s doing and
hence is responsible, will use common rules as
a standard of orientation when he displays
his biography in situations, thus knowledg-
ably revealing his type of person.

Given (the observer’s imputation of) al-
ter’s capacity for knowing what he is reveal-
ing, together with his being a differentiable
type of person, the observer can also war-
rantably conceive alter’s future, and thus
organize not just the current biography and
event but future links between the two as
well. Motives are a procedure for organizing
an historic and regular interactional future.

Most fundamentally, then, whatever a
motivated actor does will show his methods
for affirming himself as a person. Being re-
sponsible and capable of displaying some
other collection of owned experiences, the ob-
server is permitted to note that he neverthe-
less did display the collection he displayed.
For any member to ascribe a motive is thus
to do no less than to generate a person. It is
to formulate from situated performances a
responsibly displayed and differentiated col-
lection of experience.

While each of these public and rule-guided
conditions must exist for motive ascription
to occur sensibly, they can of course be ac-
complished in a variety of substantive ways
which we have not discussed here. For ex-
ample, that there is a grammar under which
a motive ascription rule is invoked suggests
that members regularly differentiate between
activities which do and do not require the
use of that grammar; i.e., there are some ac-
tivities which needn’t be organized according
to motive criteria. In the same vein, there
are undoubtedly a varity of methods in use
by which members identify organisms as pos-
sible theoretic actors, e.g., the various ways
it is decided that a child is enough of a mem-
ber to be called a theoretical actor and so a
potential object of motive ascription.

More centrally, one pervasive feature of
social organization concerns members’ meth-
ods for tracking and formulating biographies
from a universe of possibilities, and the vari-
ous rules for deciding the relevance of par-
ticular biographies as particular types of per-
sons. The bureaucratic method, for instance,
is probably very different from the familial
one. All these are categorization problems
which members regularly resolve, methodi-
cally producing the organization of their
every day environment. To describe such
particular solutions requires other papers, the
possibility of which we can now begin to
grasp. Being interactional and rule-guided
—hbeing a social method (just as bureacracy,
social class, or institutionalization are meth-
ods)—confirms that the status of the deep
structure of motive is sociological.
ology: A proposed synthesis.” American
Sociological Review 34 (December) :922-
934.
Garfinkel, Harold
1967 Studies in Ethnomethodology. New York:
Prentice-Hall.
Gerth, H. and C. W. Mills.
1953 Character and Social Structure. New York:
Harcourt Brace and Co.
Hall, Calvin S. and Gardner Lindzey
1957. Theories of Personality. New York: Wiley.
Homans, George C.
1964 “Bringing men back in.” American Socio-
logical Review, 29 (December) :809-818.
Inkeles, Alex
1959 “Personality and social structure.” pp. 249-
276 in R. Merton, L. Broom, and L. Cot-
trell (eds.), Sociology Today. New York:
Basic Books.
Lindzey, Gardner
1958 The Assessment of Human Motives. New
York: Rinehart. Pp. 3-33.
McClelland, D. C., J. W. Atkinson, and R. A. Clark
1953 The Achievement Motive. New York: Ap-
pleton-Century-Crofts.

Melden, A. I.
1961 Free Action. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.

Peters, R. S.
1958 The Concept of Motivation. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Piaget, J.
1926 The Language and Thought of the Child.
New York: Harcourt Brace.
Schutz, Alfred
1962 Collected Papers, Vol. I. The Hague: Mar-
tinus Nijhoff.
Scott, Marvin B. and Sanford Lyman
1968 “Accounts.” American Sociological Re-
view, 33 (February) :46-62.
Shwayder, D. S.
1966 The Stratification of Behavior. New York:
Humanities Press.
Smelser, Neil and William T. Smelser
1963 “Introduction.” Pp. 1-18 in Smelser and
Smelser (eds.) Personality and Social Sys-
tems. New York: Wiley.
Weber, Max
1947. The Theory of Social and Economic Or-
ganization. Trans. Talcott Parsons. Glen-
coe, Illinois: The Free Press.
White, Robert W.
1963 “Ego and reality in psychoanalytic the-
ory.” Psychological Issues 3:71-141.
Wilson, T. P.
1970 “Conceptions of interaction and forms of
sociological explanation.” American Socio-
logical Review 35 (August):697-710.
