@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
An idealized pattern (a “‘blockmodel”) of the interaction among 107 scientists in a biomedical
research speciality is identified across networks of several distinct types of relationship. This
pattern is sustained by the data. Groups of scientists who share common “positions ” in the
multiple network structure are identified. Inferences concerning the stratification of these
groups are derived solely from a consideration of the patterns they induce on multiple net-
works. These inferences are then assessed in the light of (non-network) career attributes of
individual scientists. Substantive findings from previous studies in the sociology of science are
re-assessed in the light of blockmodel analysis.
Gaston, 1973; Griffith and Mullins, 1972;
Price, 1961), informal communication (Men-
zel, 1962; Mullins, 1968), the diffusion of in-
formation (Cole and Cole, 1973), and the ex-
change of information for recognition (Hag-
strom, 1965) are clearly aware that for many
analytical purposes the infrastructure of scien-
tific organization may usefully be conceptu-
alized in terms of “networks.” Kaplan
(1964:859) has suggested that sociologists of
science will make their distinctive contribu-
tion “by pointing to the network of social
relationships in which communication is em-
bedded and to the inadequacy of restricting
one’s attention solely to formal means of
Despite the increased attention accorded
during the past decade to the empirical study
of social networks among scientists, there has
been remarkably little concern for the possi-
bility of using network phenomenology itself
as a guide to the aggregation of nena
scientists into scientific “communities,” “i
visible colleges,” “groups sharing paradigms,”
“informal groups” and so forth. By “net-
works” I refer to matrices whose rows and
columns name scientists and whose entries re-
port connections or choices among the scien-
tists on specified types of relationship (e.g.,
contact, unawareness, influence—a separate
matrix for each relational type).

Networks are more than the list of persons
whom their rows and columns index; they
provide systematic reports on all dyadic inter-
action, for specified types of relationship.
Most sociologists of science who have studied
networks, however, have aggregated the scien-
tists (in effect, rearranged and partitioned
their rows and columns) by criteria extrinsic
to their social interaction. They have sorted
the scientists according to individual attri-
butes such as “productivity” (based on the
number of papers published “in their area”),
“commitment” (whether or not a scientist ac-
knowledged working “‘in the area” at the time
of study) and type of research group (Crane,
1972; Gaston, 1973). They have collapsed full
network structures into single vectors of row-
marginals (number of choices initiated, for
each scientist) and column-marginals (number
of received choices) and then correlated these
vectors with others such as “productivity”
and “prestige” (Cole and Cole, 1973; Griffith
et al., 1973). The studies cited above consti-
tute major contributions to the empirical
This study employs a new general ap-
proach, termed blockmodel analysis (White et
al., forthcoming; White and Breiger, 1975),
for the study of social structure from a con-
sideration of multiple networks. The two
most fundamental concepts, more fully elabo-
rated elsewhere (White et al., forthcoming;
Boorman and White, forthcoming), are struc-
tural equivalence and pattern. Structural
equivalence requires that members of a popu-
lation be partitioned into distinct sets, each
set treated homogeneously not only on the
basis of its internal relations but also on the
basis of its relations with every other set,
across all observed types of relationship. Pat-
tern emerges—with a possibly distinctive pat-
tern associated with each network—as a state-
ment of the relations among and within sets.
The nature of a network (equivalently: the
nature of a type of social relationship) is infer-
red from the pattern of incidence in a given
population of all ties of that type among in-
dividuals.

In contrast to most sociometric techniques
(e.g., Mullins, 1968; Crane, 1972), block-
model analysis does not depend on the con-
nectivity relationships among a set of in-
dividuals as much as it depends on the similar-
ity of their relations to other sets, across
several networks simultaneously. The issue of
network connections among individuals is
transformed to a search for pattern among re-
lationally-defined aggregates. Blockmodel
analysis thus avoids the problem that tie vari-
ability between any two given individuals may
introduce significant distortion into the analy-
sis. Crane (1972:45), for example, imposes
the strong assumption that any two scientists
linked by a third party are capable of mutual
influence, yet she notes that sociometric re-
ports of ties among scientists may be distorted
due to the faulty recollection of respondents
or a tendency to report only one’s contacts
with those of higher status.

The scientific specialty studied here—the
neural control of food and water intake—
illustrates another departure of blockmodel
analysis from graph-theoretic techniques.
Most “clique” studies are confined to small,
tightly-knit populations (e.g., fraternities)
which are conveniently demarcated from the
rest of the world. In contrast, researchers on
food and water intake comprise an “open”
population in several crucial respects: they of-
ten consider their primary research affiliation
to lie outside this area; most researchers are
unaware of the work of many others; the un-
derlying boundaries of the population, and
the major lines of stratification within it, are
extremely difficult to ascertain. The concepts
of structural equivalence and pattern em-
ployed here provide a framework for analysis
of open populations of this type.
1940s could researchers determine that, in the
rat, obesity is controlled by portions of the
hypothalamus, a section of the brain. In-
creased experimentation led to the develop-
ment of a general consensus that the hypo-
thalamus is the center for the regulation of
food and water intake and related processes.
During the past three decades, “investigations
of these processes have multiplied and, blessed
by the advent of electronic technology, waxed
increasingly sophisticated” (Bogdanove,
1970:52). There is little doubt that this con-
temporary research is preoccupied with the
puzzle solving characteristic of Kuhn’s “nor-
mal science.’’?

Today, research on food and water intake
cross-cuts experimental psychology, the physi-
ology of regulatory mechanisms and numer-
ous related fields. Griffith and his associates
consulted the extensive bibliographies of
Stevenson (1969) and of four review articles
in the Annual Review of Physiology devoted
to food and water regulation and drew “a ran-
dom sample” of 173 researchers who had pub-
lished in this area (Miller, 1973:25-6). Each of
the sampled researchers was sent a question-
naire which listed all 173 names; he was asked
to indicate (with a checkmark) his degree of
contact with all others, using seven categories
of contact. The response rate was 65% (112
returned questionnaires, of which 107 were
useable for analysis). The extreme categories,
“present association: continuing personal con-
tact” and “unaware of man or his work,” are
of primary interest in this paper. To under-
score the “open” nature of this research prob-
lem area, consider that if there were complete
unawareness among the respondents we would
find 11,342 (© 107 respondents x 106
choices) reports of “unwareness,” and that
Detailed discussions of blockmodel analysis
may be found elsewhere (White et al., forth-
coming; Breiger et al., 1975; Heil and White,
forthcoming). Rather than repeat these discus-
sions, I will summarize the type of result that
is obtained.

We begin with self-reports by 107 scientists
of their choices on two types of relation (as
above), hereafter abbreviated Contact and Un-
aware. Each type of relation may be repre-
sented as a separate binary matrix containing
107 rows and 107 columns.* Rows and col-
umns of each matrix exhibit the same order-
ing, which is initially arbitrary (an alpha-
betical listing by surname). The (i, j)th entry
of the Contact matrix is “1” if and only if
scientist i reports continuing personal contact
with scientist j; similarly, the (i, j)th entry of
the Unawareness matrix is “1” if and only if
scientist i reports unawareness of scientist j.
By convention, the main diagonal of each
matrix (all entries such that i = j) consists sole-
ly of zeroes.

Large matrices in this format appear as diz-
zying patchworks of 1’s and 0’s which seem to
defy orderly description and which give rise to
the spider metaphor (“webs of interaction”)
so common in network studies. In finding a
blockmodel, one discovers some permutation
(reordering) and partitioning (subdivision) of
rows and columns—the same permutation and
partition applied to rows and columns of each
matrix—which brings into focus a pattern on
each of the networks. Specifically, the aim of
this rearrangement is to seek a reordering of
the actors into sets (termed “blocks’”’) such
that a substantial number of the submatrices
formed by this subdivision consist virtually
entirely of “0” entries. Such submatrices are
termed zeroblocks. All submatrices which are
not zeroblocks are termed bonds. The data
matrices may then be represented by much
smaller matrices—termed images—which con-
tain one row and the corresponding column
for each aggregate (“‘block’’) that has been dis-
covered. The compounding of images can lead
to global statements of the interlock of types
of relationship across the population as a
whole (Boorman and White, forthcoming) but
the emphasis here is on the direct interpreta-
bility of the image patterns themselves.

The number of ways to partition 107 in-
dividuals into just two blocks is of course
quite large (approximately 10 ), so that
some efficient search procedure is necessary.
A new hierarchical clustering algorithm, CON-
COR (Breiger et al., 1975; see also Schwartz,
forthcoming), has been found to provide such
a procedure and was applied to the matrices
described above. CONCOR works “from the
top down”; that is, it begins by partitioning
all 107 individuals into exactly two non-over-
lapping, mutually exhaustive subgroups. This
partition is based on the similarity of choices
sent and received by all individuals across all
the networks.* Each of these two subgroups
may be further subdivided by a repetition of the
procedure. Two individuals are grouped to-
gether if their overall vectors of received and
initiated choices are similar, not necessarily
because they are directly or indirectly tied to
each other. When rows and columns of the
original data matrices are rearranged to con-
form with the CONCOR partition, the result-
ing submatrices tend to exhibit extreme den-
sities of network ties (e.g., in this case, sub-
matrices exhibiting a highly disproportionate
number of 1’s or 0’s).°

The resulting two-block partition con-
tained blocks of 41 and 66 scientists, respec-
tively. CONCOR was then applied to each of
these blocks in turn, and this process was re-
peated until eight blocks had been obtained.
A natural representation for this successive
refinement is a tree (Figure 1), each of whose
levels represents a successive application of
CONCOR to a smaller subset of individuals,
and each of whose nodes is labeled by the
number of members contained in a particular
block. (CONCOR leads to a complete bi-par-
tition at each level; the number of members
associated with each note is the sum of the
two numbers immediately below it.)

The final stopping point for successive re-
finement (¢.g., the eight blocks identified with
letter names in Figure 1) is arbitrary. One
chooses which blocks to split next. However,
since each split is a refinement of the one
above it, we should expect a partition at any
level of the tree to portray the network in a
manner compatible with (i.e., coarser or finer
than) those below and above it. To examine
this claim, most results will be reported for
two-block, four-block and eight-block levels. ®
(A) 0 0 0
(B) 0 0 O
(Cc) 0 0 0
() 02 0 03
(E) 02 0 05
(F) 07

(G) 13 .06 39
(H) 37 38 63.

02

03

14

10

02

0
0S
14
17

07

0
16
ll
.29

13
.06
39
10
53

37
38
63
64
66

0

0

53
66

37
64

60
69

719

64 79

 

level must be consistent with the permutation at the
level above it. Specifically: the analyst first chooses a
permutation of blocks at the two-block level (two
posssibilities); then there are four possible four-block
permutations. Given the choice of a four-block per-
mutation, the number of permutations at the eight-
block level is 16. The latter number is considerably
smaller than the number (40,320) of eight-block

permutations ignoring the tree constraint, not to
mention the number of possible permutations for
the unblocked (individual-level) data (approximately
10 raised to the 172nd power). Many results in this
paper depend on the fact that once a two-block,
four-block and eight-block permutation was chosen
(see Figure 1), it was employed consistently through-
out all tables and figures.
One Unaware

38
03
.10
02
14
56
44
23

.66
29
.28
.20
.20
59
16
22

.20
02
03
02
02
19
.06
.04

54
14
13
.08
17
41
10
18

40
35
12
.06
08
23
08
09
To reinterpret the networks using the re-
fined set of partitions shown in Figure 1, the
rows and columns of each data matrix are re-
ordered to conform with them. Reciprocated
and unreciprocated network ties are distin-
guished for analytical purposes. A new bio-
medical researcher fresh out of graduate or
medical school is aware of many leading scien-
tists in his field who have themselves never
heard of him. Dyadic relationships in which
only one party is unaware of the other may
reflect status differences, while mutual un-
awareness might exist between two research-
ers of similar status who nonetheless work in
“fields” sufficiently dissimilar to discourage
contact on a continuing basis. Reciprocated
and unreciprocated unawareness ties are there-
fore reported separately in matrices labeled
Both Unaware and One Unaware, respectively.

Concerning ties of continuing personal con-
tact, on the other hand, unreciprocated ties
are not reported, so as to preserve compara-
bility with the previous analysis of White et al.
(forthcoming).”

Table 1 reports application to these three
matrices (Mutual Contact, One Unaware, Both
Unaware) of the two-block, four-block and
eight-block CONCOR partitions. Each row
and the corresponding column of the Table 1
matrices corresponds to a block of research-
ers; letters and numbers in the left margin
name the blocks as in Figure 1. Each matrix
entry in Table 1 reports the density of net-
work ties in the intersection of a given pair of
blocks; that is, entry (i, j) in Table 1 is the
number of times the members of block i
choose the members of block j on a specified
type of relation, divided by the total number
of possible choices (the product of the two
block sizes; since by definition no one chooses
himself, the denominator for all entries (i, i) is
nj (nj -1), where nj is the size of block i).
Table 1 suggests that the blockmodel parti-
tions succeed in discriminating an underlying
A crucial motivation of blockmodel analy-
sis is that statements provided by the block-
model of the “gaps” in social relations among
and between relationally-defined aggregates of
individuals are powerful analytic tools for de-
veloping insight into the quality of social rela-
tions.

The only data initially available to us from
the biomedical research network were socio-
metric choices for the first 28 respondents
from the alphabetical listing; we possessed no
attribute data (e.g., academic status, number
of publications) of the type usually central to
empirical studies of scientists. Without the aid
of a mechanical procedure for partitioning
actors and beginning with only crude notions
that the images should reflect prestige strata,
trial-and-error findings led Joseph E. Schwartz
and me to a four-block partition and the re-
sulting blocked densities in Table 2.

On the basis of this incomplete sociometric
data alone, we published inferences concern-
ing the type of social relations obtaining
among the scientists (White and Breiger,
1975:69-71; White et al., forthcoming). I will
review those inferences in this section, show
that they extend to the full sample (n = 107)
and relate them to more general issues in the
sociology of science. In the following section,
I will examine the degree to which these infer-
ences hold up when compared against indi-
vidual attribute (non-network) data which
Professor Griffith supplied only after the
blockmodel had been constructed.®

Of the possible ideal blockmodel images
identified in White et al. (forthcoming: Figure
2), the Table 2 data on mutual contact con-
form to the “center-periphery” pattern. More
specifically, we inferred (a) that the first
block in Table 2 is the core of a stable net-
work comprising the first three blocks, in
descending order of status and (b) that the
fourth ‘block does not belong to the same
underlying population as the other three.

The symmetric relations (Mutual Contact
and Both Unaware) in Table 2 exhibit mono-
tonicity both along their rows (and, therefore,
columns) and across their main diagonals (re-
flexive entries). Thus in all ten comparisons
in each matrix no block claims more contact
with any block below it than with any above
it, and conversely for mutual lack of knowl-
edge. Since the union of these two matrices
accounts for only 37% of all pair relations (see
top panel of Table 2), the fact that they are
patterned in complementary ways is an em-
pirical finding, not a tautology.

9 The inferences published in White et al. (forth-
coming) were contained in an earlier draft dated
April, 1974, and circulated at that time. The non-
network questionnaire data were supplied in July,
1974.
An additional observation from Table 2
suggests the high-status position of the first
block. Consider all claims such that one
scientist reports unawareness of another,
while the second individual reports some
awareness of the first (i.e., the middle matrix).
The first row of One Unaware reveals that the
first block claims substantial unawareness of
the other blocks that is not reciprocated.
However, the first column of the same matrix
shows that no individual in any block claims
unreciprocated unawareness of the first block
(ie., the first column consists wholly of zero-
blocks). Thus, among the 28 scientists in
Table 2, everyone knows “‘the top” research-
ers, while members of this (first) block appear
to remain ignorant of most lesser mortals.
Asymmetric unawareness provides the pri-
mary distinction between the first and second
blocks; just below “the top” are “members of
the second-ranked block [who] appear as very
active researchers aware of one another”
(White et al., forthcoming).

As for our contention that the fourth
block doesn’t belong to the same population
as the others, observe that it has no mutual
contact ties with any other block. Moreover,
these researchers do not consciously belong to
their own population either; they have no
mutual contact among their own members.
(The third block also has no contact ties
among its members, but the third block
“hangs on” to the top two; they comprise the
periphery of the center-periphery pattern.)
Thus, “the bottom block belongs to the popu-
lation only in the cultural sense that it has no
asymmetric unawareness of the block which is
obviously the leading set of researchers”
(White et al., forthcoming).

Visual comparison of the Table 2 densities
with those of Table 1—the latter representing
all 107 scientists and blockmodeled by a
mechanical procedure (CONCOR)-—suggests
that the inferences just sketched for ths sub-
sample apply to the full sample (four-block
level) as well. For example, 19 of the 20 dis-
tinct entries in the symmetric contact and un-
awareness matrices of Table 1 are monotonic
in the same way as the Table 2 entries. Most
zeroblocks in Table 2 have only scattered ties
in Table 1. If the three 4x4 matrices in each
table are unraveled to form a single vector of
48 density values (taking care to unravel the
matrices in identical order), the correlation
between these two vectors is high (r=.87),
thus indicating the approximation of the full
sample (Table 1) to the density pattern of the
subsample (Table 2), above and beyond differ-
ences in overall network density.
(in their studies mean awareness was 10.5, and
there were 24 “‘targets” in each wave).

Cole and Cole’s findings on visibility and
awareness led, as these authors report, to a
conundrum. When“‘awareness” scores were
correlated with professional rank, age, prestige
of highest award, number of awards, rank of
current department and “quality” of work
(number of citations to it), the highest zero-
order correlation was less than .3 (Cole and
Cole, 1973: 166). These correlations, coupled
with the small variance in awareness (coeffi-
cient of variation = 35%), suggested that com-
munication, “flows evenly to all corners of
the system” (1973:165).

Cole and Cole thought, with great plausi-
bility, that “physicists who taught at top-
ranked departments would be closer to the
center of the informal communication system
of physics and thus have greater awareness,”
yet the correlation between department rank
and awareness was small (r = .17). This anom-
alous finding motivated Cole and Cole to pur-
sue their assumption: they controlled for
number of awards (partial r = .15) and
knowledge of the quality of work done by
scientists at different departments (partial r =
.14), but the correlation between awareness
and department rank was not significantly re-
duced (Cole and Cole, 1973:166-7).

Their search to account for their anoma-
lous finding next led Cole and Cole to suppose
that the correlations reported above, which
deal with ““gross awareness’ . . . of the system
as a whole,” might “cover up” a specification
of the relationship that tabular data would re-
veal. Once again, this assumption is quite rea-
sonable and indicates the care that Cole and
Cole took with their analysis. They therefore
systematically cross-tabulated the scientists’
visibility and awareness scores with background
characteristics (e.g., region, prestige rank of
respondent’s department, “quality” of respon-
dent’s publications based on the number of
citations to them). The result of this attribute
analysis, which Cole and Cole (1973:169-70)
report in italics, is that “no matter how we
classified the 120 observed physicists and the
1,308 observers, we found the same result: a
man’s visibility was equal in all segments of
the community, and there were only slight
differences in awareness of scientific re-
search,”’ Cole and Cole (1973:172) conclude
from this portion of their study that ‘“aware-
ness is not greatly influenced by physicists’
individual or contextual characteristics. It is
high in all sectors of the community and is
taken as evidence that location in the stratifi-
cation system has little effect on receipt of
this type of knowledge.”

The data of the present study suggest that
Cole and Cole’s finding—location in a stratifi-
cation system has little effect on awareness—is
a consequence of their inattention to the net-
work pattern of stratification and their em-
phasis instead on the marginals of the inter-
actional matrices. As discussed above (Table
1, four-block level), the monotonicity of the
mutual contact and unawareness relations sug-
gests that a scientist’s block membership
strongly determines his ability to know and be
known by others.

With loss of information, we can apply
Cole and Cole’s measure of awareness to the
data of Table 1. The Table 1 densities can be
converted into raw numbers of ties using the
Figure 1 information on block sizes. Let us
now impose the assumption that the absence
of an unawareness choice from one scientist
to another (regardless of whether or not it is
reciprocated) indicates that the first scientist
has some awareness of the second—either
some personal awareness or some knowledge
of his work. This definition is slightly more
encompassing than the one employed by Cole
and Cole.'® The One Unaware and Both Un-
aware blockmodels may thus be added, and
the awareness score of a block defined as the
mean awareness of its members (the average
number of respondents known to each) di-
vided by the sample size (n = 107)."

For the 107 scientists taken as a whole, the
mean awareness score (48%; coefficient of
variation = 42%) is very close to Cole and
Cole’s (44%; coefficient of variation = 35%).
With respect to their analogously defined
“visibility” score (Cole and Cole, 1973:100),
defined on column-sums (received choices)
rather than row-sums, Cole and Cole’s average
target was visible to 43% of the respondents
(coefficient of variation = 68%). The compar-
able visibility score for the 107 scientists
studied here (48%; coefficient of variation =
49%) is by definition equal to the awareness
mean, as the population of “respondents” is
equivalent to the population of “targets.”

Now let us look beyond the global aver-
ages and determine the mean awareness and
visibility scores for each block at the four-
block level (Figure 2)'? Figure 2 indicates
that both awareness and visibility vary greatly
between blocks. Moreover, visibility decreases
as we move from the core to the peripheral
blocks, while awareness exhibits a curvilinear
relationship.

Using admittedly post hoc reasoning, we
may speculate on why it is that visibility and
awareness are found to have such distinctive
curves (compare the discussion of individual
differences in communication patterns in
Hagstrom, 1965:42-7). A scientist whose con-
tributions are widely acknowledged, especially
if he is an “elder statesman,” is perhaps freed
from the burden of keeping abreast of the
emerging contributions of younger men and
women, who may be pursuing different prob-
lems with newer methods. This might account
for high visibility and relatively lower aware-
ness among “elder statesmen.” At the next
remove are men and women who have made
real contributions but who are still thoroughly
active researchers. These “activists” occupy
network positions which allow them access to
new ideas, new techniques, new colleagues
and new students; their awareness is high and
must remain so if they are to increase their
already-substantial visibility. At a further re-
move from the top are the youngest research-
ers and other new arrivals to the field. These
“newcomers” are far more aware of the con-
tributions of those who have already arrived
than they are visible to them. Finally, the
“outsiders” to a field—those whose affiliations
or interests lie beyond the orbit of most
scientists working on a given problem—would
have low visibility and low awareness within
said orbit, although their prominence among
other scientists pursuing unrelated problems
may vary much more considerably.

This fourfold table (high and low visibility
crossed with high and low awareness) may
Findings from an exploratory study
(Menzel, 1962) lend empirical support to the
contention that the informal structure of sci-
entific organization cross-cuts the conven-
tional attributes and categories. The acquisi-
tion of pertinent information by the biochem-
ists, chemists and zoologists whom Menzel in-
terviewed seemed frequently to occur “by ac-
cident’? through chance interpersonal
contacts. One kind of information flow
Menzel (1962:429-30) identified consisted of
inquiries addressed to other scientists who, al-
though qualified to answer, were not the out-
standing experts on the subject at issue. They
were, however, previously known to the in-
quiring scientists; for example, they were indi-
viduals “who had worked with me here for a
year,” “who were known to me from previous
conferences,” “who had been my fellow-
students,” “with whom I had worked in the
same lab previously,” and the like. It is the
network of one’s own career history, rather
than a linear combination of one’s attributes
and achievements which often determines ac-
cessibility (see also Granovetter, 1974, for a
similar conclusion from a study of job search-
ers). Further, “the set of persons with whom
most communication is maintained will prob-
ably have the greatest influence on the scien-
tist’s own perspective” (Hagstrom, 1965:43).

Menzel (1962:424) observed that “the ap-
parently accidental obtaining of pertinent in-
formation plays a large role in the work of the
interviewed researchers. Examples of it come
up again and again in our interview proto-
cols.” Moreover, in a provocative section en-
titled “Individual Accident—Aggregate Regu-
larity?” Menzel (1962:425) suggests that
“what is little better than an accident from
the point of view of the individual may well
emerge as an expected occurrence from a larg-
er point of view.” By searching for aggregate
regularities among a large number of individu-
al network ties, blockmodel analysis takes the
“anomaly” of interpersonal social relations as
the central data of study; it is the articulation
of attributes and categories to this relational
structure which is explicitly left as a problem-
atic endeavor, rather than the other way
around.
those in other spheres of society.

In this regard, it is important to note that
the blockmodel image identified above is not
compatible with the image we claim “cap-
tures ... the structure of a hierarchy as usual-
ly idealized, [namely:] ties of deference ex-
tended within each block to one’s immediate
superiors .. . observed from the lower to the
higher blocks in the hierarchy” (White et al.,
forthcoming). This hierarchical image has
been found to obtain in a monastery, where
three tightly-knit groups were arrayed such
that each was subordinate to those above it on
specified relations (White and Breiger,
1975:73). In contrast, among the 107 scien-
tists studied here we find a tightly-knit group
of “leaders” and increasingly looser groups of
“followers” arrayed about them. This center-
periphery pattern of social relations seems in
accord with Kuhn’s (1970) concept of con-
sensus around a stable (‘normal’) paradigm.

An important motivation for blockmodel
analysis is the hope that, with the analysis of
many case studies, distinctive patterns of
social relations can be identified for particular
institutions. While the present study is of very
limited generality, a growing and largely
speculative literature may be seen to support
the claim that a center-periphery pattern
(rather than a strict hierarchical form) is a dis-
tinctive matrix for scientific organization.
Thus, Blissett (1972:114) hypothesizes that
“at the core of each discipline is a group of
scientists who, in Polanyi’s terminology, are
the ‘chief Influentials’—those men likely to in-
fluence the direction of fundamental research
by controlling appointments, promotions,
publications, and the distribution of special
subsidies and awards.” Blissett further
speculates that most scientists are situated
around this “core” as if in a series of con-
centric circles (defined with reference to the
individual differences in communication prac-
tices discussed by Hagstrom, 1965:42-7), rath-
er than in knots or clusters or cliques.

Cole and Cole (1973:162) suggest a similar
phenomenon with their metaphor that the
scientific community may be viewed asa city
with a variety of neighborhoods and with
public facilities located in different sections,
but most of them concentrated in a “down-
town” area.

Data from a different domain, multiple
authorships among scientific papers, also sug-
gest a center-periphery organization. Price and
Beaver (1966:1011) found that a very few re-
searchers in a specialized field (oxidative
phosphorylation studies) had their names on a
large proportion of all papers, while the names
of a much larger number of researchers ap-
peared only a few times. “The natural infer-
ence from this is that there exists a core of
extremely active researchers and around them
is a large floating population of people who
appear to collaborate with them in one or two
multiple-authorship papers and then disappear
not to be heard from again.”

Crane’s (1972:42) empirical study of net-
works in two scientific areas (agricultural in-
novation and the algebra of finite groups) also
uncovered a center-periphery pattern. Having
first ascertained the productivity of each
respondent, Crane was then able to determine
that, in both specialties, over two-thirds of all
respondents were linked to one of the most
productive scientists by not more than one
intermediary. Her finding that communication
is most intense around some of the most pro-
ductive scientists raises the question of how
productive scientists who don’t belong to
“invisible colleges” fit into the relational pat-
tern. In this section, where we examined con-
tact and awareness chocies rather than attrib-
utes (such as productivity), we suggested that
“outsiders” to any given research area (blocks
F,G,H) may vary considerably on individual
attributes, yet remain marginal to scientists
who comprise the “core” of those working
within it. Further, the emphasis of block-
model analysis on multiple networks leads to
the finding (Table 1; Table 2) that a center-
periphery pattern for contact relations is not
incompatible with aloofness of the “top” re-
searchers toward all others as a pattern for
asymmetric unawareness.
section had been written, the questionnaires
returned by Griffith’s 107 respondents were
obtained (see footnote 9). These question-
naires report a variety of career attribute data
for each respondent. This additional informa-
tion provides a chance to examine whether
the blocks, which cohere in a relational struc-
ture, also cohere on the basis of shared indi-
vidual attributes.

None of the questionnaire items directly
taps what is perhaps the most important com-
ponent of scientific prestige: an evaluation by
other professionals of the quality of a scien-
tist’s publications. Some sociologists of sci-
ence (notably Cole and Cole, 1973) have used
the number of citations to a scientist’s papers
as a measure of the quality of his work. I will
briefly report a much more intuitive test;
however, while suggestive, the reliability of
the findings has not been established.

Mayer and Thomas (1967) wrote a short
review article on research devoted to the regu-
lation of food intake and obesity, emphasizing
only the most important experimental results
and theories as seen by two professionals
active in the field. The names cited in their
references include 12% of the 107 scientists
studied in this paper. The fraction of each
block which comprises this 12%, at the four+
block level with blocks ordered as in Table 1,
is .47, .15, .05 and .02. Despite the fact that
some personal idiosyncracies must surely en-
ter into the composition of any list of im-
portant scientific contributors, the degree of
discrimination among the blocks is remark-
able. This crude test suggests that block I does
indeed consist disproportionately of eminent
researchers. This suggestion can be further
pinned down by a systematic examination of
the questionnaire items.
Two-block level. At the coarse two-block
level (Table 3), most differences between
blocks on these standard attributes are not
large and/or not significant. “‘Ist Degree” is
the mean year in which block members were
awarded the earlier of their Ph.D. or M.D.
‘degrees (14% of the respondents had earned
both), a measure of the professional age of the
respondents. “Pubs” is the mean number of
journal articles, book chapters and technical
reports written per block member. “Produc-
tivity” is the mean number of publications
written per scientist per year since earliest de-
gree (defined as the mean of p/(1974-d),
where p is “pubs” and d is “Ist degree”).
None of the differences between blocks on
these variables is significant at the two-block
level.

Now turn to another characteristic. Each
respondent was asked to “please specify
whether you are presently working predom-
inantly in the field of Neural Control of Food
and Water Intake” by checking “yes” or
“no.” For all respondents taken together,
only 41% indicated food and water intake as
their major interest; given the permeable and
elusive nature of boundaries between scien-
tific “fields,” it is not surprising that many
scientists who have published on this topic
consider their primary research allegiance to
lie elsewhere. Two-thirds (68%) of block | re-
ported that they are primarily working in this
field, while only one-fourth (24%) of the
members of block 2 so reported.

The respondents were asked to list the de-
partment in which they were currently work-
ing and their positions. In cases where more
than one department or position was listed, I
have coded only the first. Members of the top
block (1) were more likely to hold full profes-
sorships, and members of block 2 more likely
to hold assistant professorships, than was the
sample as a whole (Table 3). Approximately
one-fifth (21%) of the sample listed non-
teaching positions as their primary affilia-
tion;'? the distribution of these respondents
is discussed below.

Departmental subject affiliations were ini-
tially coded in 27 categories including such
diverse areas as biology, pharmacology,
psychiatry, surgery and zoology. Two major
groupings, physiology (including also neuro-
physiology and clinical neurophysiology) and
psychology (including also psychiatry), ac-
counted for 63 of the 107 respondents; for
purposes of tabular presentation, the remain-
ing respondents are all coded “other.” An ex-
ploratory study (Breiger, 1974) of the at-
tribute breakdowns for the first 28 respond-
ents and the Table 2 blockmodel determined
that the results are robust under various
alternate coding schemes: for example, includ-
ing the seven members of psychiatry depart-
ments in “Other” rather than “Psychology.”
At the two-block level (Table 3), physiologists
are not clearly associated with either block;
however, psychologists are disproportionately
area.

Four-block level. When we next consider
the four-block level, we confront a most strik-
ing finding. Table 4 reports the mean for each
block on each of the eight attributes in turn.
All eight columns are monotone for rows I to
3, and there is a severe discontinuity between
rows 3 and 4. The change to row 4 reverses
the monotonic decline except in what emerges
as the key attribute which splits the popula-
tion, namely, whether an individual’s profes-
sional orientation is primarily to “the field.”
Earliest degree date for the first three blocks
increases from 1948 to 1959 to 1964, then
decreases to 1954 for the fourth block. The
proportion of block members who hold full
professorships decreases from .85 to .40 to
.15 for the first three blocks, then jumps to
46 for the fourth block. The proportion of
block members who are physiologists de-
creases from .38 to .21 to .05 for the first
three blocks, then jumps to .27 for the fourth
block, and so on for the other columns.

The exception, the key to this analysis, is the
proportion of block members who report
working predominantly “in the field” (Compare
Mullins, 1968), which decreases from .71 to
.65 to .48 for the first three blocks, and then
shoots down to .13 for the fourth block
(Table 4).

A clear picture emerges from Table 4. As
concerns the first three blocks, block I holds
the highest status, whether measured by mean
number of publications, mean number of
publications per year since degree, the
proportion of full professors or professional
age. Recall in this regard, too, the suggestion
presented at the beginning of this section that
block I is disproportionately composed of
scientists who have performed critical
experiments on food and water regulation.
They are the stars in the field.

On most variables, block IV does not differ
greatly from the mean of the other three
blocks; they are average rather than low on
status measures. The key differences,
however, are the proportion who report they
work predominantly “in the field” (.13 for
the fourth block, compared to .61 for the
other three) and the proportion who affiliate
with departments other than psychology or
physiology (.64 compared to .19). A related
finding, not reported in Table 4, is that 13%
of the members of the first three blocks
report affiliation with non-teaching
departments (see footnote 13 for examples),
while 33% of block IV reports non-teaching
affiliations.

The picture to be drawn from Table 4,
then, is that block IV does not greatly differ
from the other three in status, but rather in
professional orientation. Block IV consists
largely of scientists who, although they
publish in “‘the field,” consider their primary
allegiance to lie outside of it and who tend to
have departmental affilliations which
distinguish them from the others.

Eight-block level. Turning finally to the
eight-block level (Table 5), we still find that
five of the eight columns are monotone for
rows I to 5 (corresponding to blocks A to E),
and there is a severe discontinuity between
rows 5 and 6 (between blocks E and F). For
each of the first five variables, the range of
means for blocks F, G and H is roughly as
great as the range of means for the first five
blocks. However, the highest proportion
working “‘in the field” for the last three
blocks is .23, while the lowest proportion for
the first five blocks is .43. The clear
suggestions from these findings are (1) that
the first five blocks comprise a status
ordering, as do the last three blocks; (2) the
range of mean status attributes is substantial
within each of these sets of blocks, but fairly
negligible between them; (3) the last three
blocks, are distinguished from the first five in
that they contain disporportionately more
members whose primary research interest is
not the neural control of food and water
intake and disproportionately fewer members
whose departmental affiliation is psychology.
So far this section has studied the
differences in block means and proportions on
various attributes. There is a more appealing
technique for studying such cohesiveness,
although it is confined to metric attributes.
Consider two such variables: date of earliest
degree and number of articles published. A
matrix, X, was formed with 99 rows—one for
each respondent for whom data were available
on both variables—and two columns, one for
each attribute. The rows were partitioned so
that the first 37 scientists were those
belonging to block 1 and the remaining 62
scientists were those belonging to block 2
(two-block level).

Columns of the X matrix were converted
to standard form, so as to eliminate bias in
favor of the variable with the largest variance.
X was partitioned into two submatrices of size
37 x 2 and 62 x 2, and the average attributes
of each block represented by two vectors (x,
and x, ) of column means.

Now treat these vectors as independent,
exogenous norms for two populations and
consider afresh how best to assign individuals.
For each individual’s row in X, it may be
asked whether this row is closer to x, or to
Xp, and each individual may. be independently
assigned to the subgroup whose mean
attributes are closest to his own.
Substantively, we ask, in each comparison,
whether the average block attributes sustain a
partition equivalent to the CONCOR result,
which was derived independently of any
attribute data. (Each individual, of course,
contributes to his block’s mean attributes. But
since block assignments were made without
recourse to attributes we may well ask, for
each individual, whether his attributes are
closer to those of his blockmates or to those
of the memberships of other blocks.)

We may employ Pythagorean distance to
find the relative proximity of any row x; to
xX, and x, ; however, Van de Geer (1971)
shows that Pythagorean distance does not
maximally discriminate between the
subgroups if there are correlations among the
variables. It can be shown, however (Van de
Geer, 1971), that generalized Mahalanobis dis-
tance forces such maximal discrimination and,
in fact, is fully comparable to the procedure
used in discriminant analysis. Mahalanobis dis-
tance was thus employed in the work reported
below.

In the present application, if relations are
just surrogates for attribute similarity, we
would predict that the first 37 rows, all those
whose members belong to the block 1 (two-
block level), will be closer tox, than tox, ,
and conversely far the remaining 62 rows. In
reality, we believe that networks are only
loosely correlated with attributes, and so pre-
dict only a weak effect. It is found in fact that
29 of the first 37 rows are closer tox, ,and 27
of the remaining 62 rows are closer to x, .
Tables 6 and 7 report the application of
this same procedure to all pairs of blocks at
the four-block and eight-block levels. We can
expect to locate where the mismatches of net-
work and attribute structures are concen-
trated. The proportion of agreement between
the CONCOR partition and the attribute par-
tition is reported above the diagonal of Tables
6 and 7, and the probability of at least this
much agreement (see footnote 14) is reported
below the diagonal. At the four-block level,
Blockmodel analysis provides a general ap-
proach for the study of social structures
through a consideration of multiple networks.
This paper has stressed the identification of
highly idealized patterns of interaction from
the complex interweaving of thousands of pair
relationships.

Within the sociology of science, block-
model analysis may be viewed as a means for
extending and giving an operational meaning
to the qualitative insight of Menzel (1962)
that interactions which often seem to occur
“by chance” on the micro level cumulate into
aggregate regularities. The scientists studied
here were seen to maintain a stable structure
of contact and unawareness choices. By ex-
amining a block’s “status” as a position in a
pattern among the positions rather than as a
rank attribute,’® the identification of a strati-
the mismatch is concentrated in block III with
respect to block IV. At the eight-block level,
agreement is better than 90% for 15 of the 28
comparisons; correspondingly, the mismatch
is severe in five of the 28. The discrimination
among a trio of blocks (C, D and H) is poor
(less than 50% in each case). The main conclu-
sion is that an attribute analysis would differ
from the network analysis in grouping the
“outsiders” (H) with the other two blocks,
which are themselves grouped together in the
four-block and two-block CONCOR splits. At
the same time, the block memberships, which
cohere in a relational structure, are also seen
to cohere by the similarity of their attributes:
20 of the 28 comparisons are significant at the
.001 level (Table 7), indicating that block
members are usually more similar internally
(on the two metric attributes) than they are
to members of a given other block.
Catton, William R., Jr.

1964 “The development of sociological thought.”
Pp. 912-50 in R.E.L. Faris (ed.), Handbook
of Modern Sociology. Chicago: Rand Mc-
Nally.

Cole, Jonathan R. and Stephen Cole

1973 Social Stratification in Science. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.
Cole, Stephen and Jonathan R. Cole

1968 “Visibility and the structural bases of aware-
ness of scientific research.” American
Sociological Review 33:397-413.

Crane, Diana

1972 Invisible Colleges: Diffusion of Knowledge
in Scientific Communities. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Friedmann, Harriet .

1974 “Are distributions really structures? A cri-
tique of the methodology of Max Weber.”
University of Toronto, Centre for Urban
and Community Studies, Research Paper
No. 63 (July).

Gaston, Jerry

1973 Originality and Competition in Science: A
Study of the British High Energy Physics
Community. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Granovetter, Mark S.

1974 Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and
Careers. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

Griffith, Belver C., Virginia L. Maier and A. James
Miller

1973 ‘‘Describing communication networks
through the use of matrix-based measures.”
Mimeo. Philadelphia: Drexel University,
Graduate School of Library Science.

Griffith, Belver C. and Nicholas C. Mullins

1972 ‘‘Coherent social groups in scientific

change.” Science 177:959-64.
Hagstrom, Warren O.

1965 The Scientific Community. New York:
Basic Books.

Heil, Gregory H. and Harrison C. White

Forth- “An algorithm for finding simultaneous

coming homorphic correspondence between graphs
and their image graphs.” Behavioral Science
21.

Homans, George C.

1950 The Human Group. New York: Harcourt,

Brace and World.
Kaplan, Norman

1964 “The sociology of science.” Pp. 852-81 in
Robert E. L. Faris (ed.), Handbook of
Modern Sociology. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Kuhn, Thomas S.

1970 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,
Second ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Linton, Ralph

1936 The Study of Man. New York: Appleton-

Century-Crofts.
MacRae, Duncan

1960 “Direct factor analysis of sociometric data.”

Sociometry 23:360-71.
Mayer, Jean and Donald W. Thomas

1967 “Regulation of food intake and obesity.”

Science 156:328-37.
Menzel, Herbert

1962 “Planned and unplanned scientific com-
munication.” Pp. 417-41 in Bernard Barber
and Walter Hirsch (eds.), The Sociology of
Science. New York: Free Press.

Miller, A. James

1973 The Informal Communication Structure of
Two Biomedical Specialties. Unpublished
MS. thesis. Philadelphia: Drexel University,
Graduate School of Library Science.

Mullins, Nicholas C.

1968 “The distribution of social and cultural
properties in informal communication net-
works among biological scientists.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 33:786-97.

Price, Derek J. de S.

1961 Science Since Babylon. New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Price, Derek J. de Solla and Donald de B. Beaver

1966 “Collaboration in an invisible college.”
American Psychologist 21:1011-8.

Schwartz, Joseph E.
Forth- “An examination of iterative blocking
coming algorithms for sociometry.” in David R.
Heise (ed.), Sociological Methodology. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Stevenson, J. A. F.

1969 “Neural control of food and water intake.”
Pp. 524-621 in Webb Haymaker, Evelyn
Anderson and Walle J. H. Nauta (eds.), The
Hypothalamus. Springfield, I1.: Thomas.

Van de Geer, John P.

1971 Introduction to Multivariate Analysis for
the Social Sciences. San Francisco:
Freeman.

White Harrison C.

1974 “Null probabilities for blockmodels of social
networks.” Unpublished paper. Harvard
University, Department of Sociology.

White, Harrison C. and Ronald L. Breiger

1975 ‘‘Patterns across networks.” Society

12:68-73.
White, Harrison C., Scott A. Boorman and Ronald L.
Breiger
Forth- “Social structure from multiple networks: I.
coming Blockmodels of roles and positions.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 81.
Ziman, John M.

1968 Public Knowledge: The Social Dimension of
Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
