http://www.jstor.org/stable/30038978?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
The relationship between race, ethnicity, and illegal business enterprise is addressed
through an analysis of black and white involvement in illegal numbers gambling in a
large eastern state. The authors outline a cultural assets and social capital theoretical
framework for analyzing ethnicity and criminal enterprise that draws from recent work
on “ethnic economies” in legal enterprise. The analysis covers the period 1970-2000
and is based on information drawn from a variety of sources, including key individuals
who were or had been participants in the illegal numbers industry. The findings show
that black bankers historically were key players in the Eaststate numbers industry, but
that they have steadily lost ground. Currently, white, particularly Italian American,
organized crime-connected enterprises are dominant. The major arguments are that
numbers gambling is not simply economic activity and not simply produced by
socioeconomic disadvantage; cultural assets and social capital are necessary for
profitability and longevity in numbers gambling, aside from any role that disadvantage
may play in producing illegal enterprise, motives, and opportunities; ethnic groups differ
in conventional and criminal social capital for success in numbers gambling; and ethnic
succession theories cannot explain trends in the dominance of numbers gambling.
mainly with the work of Francis Ianni (1975).
Ianni’s usage, in turn, parallels the case for eth-
nic succession made by the early Chicago
School sociologists to explain, for example,
generational changes in ethnic groups’ involve-
ment in small business ownership (Maines et al.
1996; Park and Burgess 1921) and delinquen-
cy (Shaw and McKay 1942).

Our second goal is to go beyond the ethnic
succession issue and advance our understand-
ing of the relationship between race, ethnicity,
and organized or enterprise crime by drawing
on recent theoretical and empirical writings on
immigrant and ethnic entrepreneurship in the
legal economy. By doing so, we also hope to
contribute to a sociological understanding of
business enterprise in general, whether legal or
illegal. To do this, we outline a cultural assets
and social capital (CASC) framework of illegal
enterprise that views organized crime as a sys-
tem of business in the illicit segment of
American economic life, but that also empha-
sizes racial and ethnic groups’ history, structural
situation, and culture, as well as the interrela-
tionships between these three factors.

Numbers gambling is an old and prominent
form of illegal enterprise in which blacks have
been active as bettors or players, and as both
low- and mid-level operatives, as well as high-
level operatives or bankers, who provide the
operating capital and make critical decisions
for the illegal business, in some localities (for
a history of numbers gambling, see Light
1977b). Numbers betting is very similar to the
daily lottery drawings held in many states, in
which bettors wager relatively small sums of
money on a three-digit number between 000
and 999. The customer places a bet with a “num-
bers writer” (the traditional route) or at a “lead-
house,” receiving a receipt and the amount
written on the bet. A leadhouse is a “store”
where the typically older patrons of numbers
gambling place bets, and can drink coffee, read
newspapers, and perhaps socialize. Leadhouses
are the most popular and important mode for
retailing numbers today. As we explain later, the
trend away from writers and runners to lead-
houses as the major mode for retailing numbers
has had significant consequences for black ver-
sus white control of the Eaststate numbers indus-
try.

Winning bettors are paid a fixed multiple of
the bet amount, based on payoff odds that take
into account the chances of winning, and vari-
ations of the game are common. The winning
numbers are commonly obtained from the
results of a predetermined horse race or from
Eaststate’s legal lottery. Illegal numbers betting
continues to thrive in many localities despite the
proliferation of state-run lotteries in recent
decades. The attractions of playing illegal num-
bers versus the legal state lottery are as fol-
lows: payoff odds are higher (state daily
numbers pay off at 500:1 for a straight bet,
whereas many illegal operations pay off at
600:1, 700:1, or even 800:1); illegal lottery
winnings need not be reported as income
because the chance of discovery is minimal;
and numbers games have woven their way into
the fabric of urban life and culture among some
groups (e.g., blacks, blue-collar workers).
nicity is Francis Ianni’s Black Mafia (1975),
published nearly three decades ago. Key themes
of Black Mafia are that black criminal entre-
preneurs are increasingly taking over areas of
illegal enterprise (e.g., numbers betting) for-
merly controlled by Italian racketeers, and that
this black takeover is just the latest development
in an ever-changing ethnic panorama of organ-
ized crime involvement in American society.
Tanni concluded that both developments (Italians
moving out of organized crime, with blacks
moving in) confirm the basic tenets of an “eth-
nic succession theory” that organized crime is
a response to structural disadvantage, or what
Bell (1960:127) labeled a “queer ladder of social
mobility” along which Irish, Jews, and subse-
quently Italians have moved in sequence.

Ianni and Bell’s usage paralleled the case for
ethnic succession made previously by early
Chicago sociologists. For example, Park and
Burgess (1921) discussed transitions in the
informal legal economy and labor market. They
suggested that as groups upgrade their occupa-
tions and hence abandon realms of previous
occupational or business concentration, these
positions are taken up by less-advantaged groups
in a process called ethnic succession (see also
Shaw and McKay [1942]). This idea is said to
explain the spectrum of ethnic and racial minori-
ties in America who have engaged in syndicat-
ed crime at one time or another. “Ethnic groups
move in and out of organized crime,” wrote
Ianni (1974:14), “and their time in control
comes and goes.”

By Ianni’s reasoning, therefore, the next phase
in this ongoing ethnic succession was apparently
the late 20th century (1970s—1990s). During
this period, Italians would leave or be pushed out
of organized crime by the next wave of migrants
to the city. Blacks would move in and take over.
Tanni (1974:112) wrote:
The strongest evidence for this transition, Ianni
observed, involves illegal numbers betting, in
which, “at present, the numbers game is the
major organized crime sector coming into obvi-
ous and immediate control of blacks” (Ianni
1974:314, our emphasis).

Intuitively appealing, we are not aware of
any systematic empirical assessments of Ianni’s
core ideas in Black Mafia, particularly the
received wisdom position that blacks are gain-
ing control and replacing Italians in the illegal
numbers industry. Beyond the virtual absence
of empirical testing, there are also other reasons
for skepticism about Black Mafia s conclusions.
First, some contend that Ianni’s conclusions are
tempered because the evidence he uses is large-
ly confined to observations at the street level,
as collected and reported to Ianni by eight paid
informants over a 12- to 18-month period (see
Valentine’s [1978] critique of Ianni’s method-
ology). Relying primarily on street-level inform-
ants perhaps may provide useful information
about the activities and roles of street or lower-
level operatives and networks. However, it may
not produce much useful information about
matters involving the control or emerging con-
trol of criminal enterprises such as numbers
betting, which entail multiple layers of involve-
ment (e.g., writers and pickup men versus
bankers and other behind-the-scenes operatives;
Valentine 1978).

Second, some question the empirical viabil-
ity of the ethnic succession thesis more gener-
ally (Light 1977a; Lupsha 1995; Schatzberg
and Kelly 1996; Steffensmeier and Martens
2002). On the one hand, they note the histori-
cal dominance and durability of Italian or mafia
organized crime networks despite their long
period of assimilation into American society
(Rueter 1994; Schatzberg and Kelly 1996). On
the other hand, they point to the emergence in
recent decades of organized crime syndicates
among ethnic groups that do not appear to expe-
rience high levels of poverty or structural dis-
advantage, such as Cubans, Colombians,
Chinese, Russians, and white outlaw motorcy-
cle organizations (Lupsha 1995; Steffensmeier
1995).

Third, others view the ethnic succession the-
sis as having some validity, but argue that it is
limited as a general explanation of the connec-
tion between ethnicity and organized crime.
They point to the historical context in which the
ethnic succession argument emerged that led its
proponents to exaggerate its generality. The eth-
nic succession view emerged as a reaction
against the older “alien conspiracy” view of
organized crime and its accompanying negative
stereotypes of ethnic groups such as Jews and
Italians (Light 1977a).

Fourth, on grounds that illegal enterprise is
really a mode of business enterprise that has
many parallels with legal enterprise (Haller
1990), the findings from the growing research
on ethnic economies and enterprise raise addi-
tional doubts about the simple disadvantage
hypothesis (which expects disadvantage in the
labor market to lead to illegal enterprise inde-
pendently of the resources available to those
disadvantaged) underlying the ethnic succes-
sion view. Instead, the findings show that eth-
nicity confers more entrepreneurial advantages
for some minority groups than for others (see
reviews in Farkas 2003; Light and Gold 2000).
Light and Gold (2000:11) said: “We find that
some ethnoracial groups have turned heavily to
entrepreneurship, others have made average use
of it, and still others have made below-average
use.”

We do not wish to overstate our critique of
Black Mafia. Ianni was careful to qualify his eth-
nic succession propositions by recognizing that
past trends may not be repeated in the future.
Furthermore, he recognized that blacks may
not benefit from the ability to corrupt political
elites and law enforcement the way white groups
have traditionally done, and thus may not gain
similar privilege and protection. Thus, Ianni
recognized potential structural barriers to eth-
nic succession. Still, he did not argue, as we do
later, that different ethnic groups may have dif-
ferent cultural and social capital that may pro-
vide advantages in illegal enterprises such as
numbers gambling. Furthermore, secondary
treatments of the ethnic succession idea have
largely ignored Ianni’s caveats.
within social groups and the propensity of group
members toward various sorts of habitual or
reflective conduct” (Camic 1986:1062). The
notion that ethnic culture matters in illegal enter-
prise is not surprising in light of Max Weber’s
(1948) demonstration of the complex interre-
lationships between cultural and economic activ-
ity (e.g., the religious beliefs of Protestant
sectarians helped to channel the energies of the
faithful into business enterprise; see also Westby
1991:396—403). Moreover, although he empha-
sized cultural influences, Weber also implicit-
ly recognized the likely significance of labor
force disadvantage in contributing to entrepre-
neurship: Sectarian Protestants turned to entre-
preneurship because they were subjected to
religious discrimination (tests of religious con-
formity excluded them from the civil service and
the armed forces; see review in Light and Gold
2000: 195-96).

A second departure point is Edwin
Sutherland’s (1947:8—9) observation that crime
is structurally rooted in normative conflict with-
in a society—what he called “differential social
organization.” Different groups of all kinds
exhibit cultural or subcultural norms, values,
meanings, survival strategies, skills, and defi-
nitions favorable to particular types of crime, or
crime in general. Sutherland (1947:125) was
clear that culture, including ethnic group culture,
is a potential aspect of differential social organ-
ization.

The third point of departure involves recent
writings on cultural and social capital in soci-
ology more generally (Bourdieu 1977; Farkas
2003), but particularly in the work of Ivan Light
and associates as these concepts have been
applied toward an understanding of the rela-
tionship between ethnicity and success in legit-
imate business enterprise (Light and Gold
2000:91-100). As used in this discussion, cul-
tural capital refers to stocks of relevant knowl-
edge, skills, attitudes, values, and competencies
that can serve as a “tool kit” for social action in
a field (Farkas 2003; Swidler 1986). Thus, any
“culturally shaped skills, habits, and outlooks”
(Farkas 2003:545) that favor success in numbers
gambling are forms of cultural capital favorable
to success in numbers gambling enterprise. For
example, as we describe later, traditional Italian
American organized crime groups draw on
group-specific stocks of knowledge that provide
organizing templates and business strategies
that facilitate success in illegal enterprise.

Social capital has been defined as “the
arrangement of human resources to improve
flows of future income” (Ostrom 1994:227; see
also Portes [1998] and Woolcock [1998] for
reviews of the definition and conceptualization
of social capital). In its simplest form, social
capital refers to resources that actors may access
through a network or networks of both strong
and weak social ties. One can draw on these ties
to mobilize resources (financial and human),
favors, and further contacts. Light and Gold
(2000:95) noted that social capital strongly
resembles the Chinese folk concept of guanxi,
or the “ability to build useful social relation-
ships, to stockpile these relationships, and then
to call on them for business help.” The social
relationships of guanxi are a type of social cap-
ital said to advantage Chinese Americans in
business enterprise, and the knowledge to make
guanxi is a type of cultural capital that is simi-
larly advantageous (Light and Gold 2000:96).
Thus, ethnic groups may differ in the types of
cultural and social capital they foster among
members, and the degree to which these types
of cultural and social capital are advantageous
to business enterprise, whether legal or illegal.

Together, these three points of departure lead
us to five propositions for our CASC frame-
work.
same principles of enterprise (profit motive and
forces of supply and demand) that govern legit-
imate business.

Concepts used to investigate the conventional
world also can be used to provide insight into
its criminal counterpart, and vice versa. Whether
in criminal or legitimate roles, all persons are
subject to the influences and shaping of various
work-related factors and contingencies. As is the
case in criminal subcultures, a considerable
amount of risk-taking is built into convention-
al business culture. Tastes for risk and risk-tak-
ing are highly valued orientations of both the
business and the criminal culture. The success
or incomes of both legal and illicit entrepreneurs
depend on the scope of operations and the oper-
ator’s skill at marketing. Both need people who
can be trusted, remain loyal, keep secrets (or be
discreet about what they say), be on time, and
display good work habits (Steffensmeier 1986).
So, too, reputation and network structure
enhance opportunities in illicit enterprise as
they do in legitimate entrepreneurial settings.
Why should this be so? The answer, in many
respects, is found in the classic sociological
view of entrepreneurship in business as reflect-
ed, for example, in Weber’s notion of cultural
affinities as well as in contemporary treatments
of social and cultural capital (Hagan 1991,
1994).

We see criminal enterprise as a “field” of
mutually recognized goals and organized striv-
ing, to paraphrase Pierre Bourdieu (1977;
Steffensmeier and Ulmer 2005). Within this
field, forms of criminal social and cultural cap-
ital (Uggen and Thompson 2003) are attributes
that participants differentially possess, acquire,
and draw on while striving for success in the
field of criminal enterprise. Cultural capital in
criminal enterprise might include stocks of
knowledge, organizing schemas, attitudes, and
skills relevant to criminal business. Skills are,
in turn, an important element of having or
acquiring criminal social capital, or the net-
work relationships through which resources and
favors can be mobilized.

In treatments of organized crime, most of
the emphasis is on the structural or market
dimensions of enterprise (Reuter 1985; Scarpitti
1999). However, we argue that the concept of
criminal entrepreneurship further implies that
some groups are better endowed to exploit
opportunities for illegal gain, whereas other
groups may be weakly positioned to do so.
Thus, although it surely is the case that illegal
entrepreneurs can sell only what customers will
buy, this does not preclude the possibility that
the manner and success with which providers
respond to consumer demand for illicit servic-
es or products depend on criminal social and
cultural capital closely linked to ethnicity.
American organized crime (of which Cosa
Nostra is the archetype) has achieved broader
dominance over a wider range of criminal activ-
ities than that of any other ethnic group, and for
a longer period (Schatzberg and Kelly 1996).
The social capital advantages of Italian
American organized crime include (Schatzberg
and Kelly 1996; Steffensmeier 1995) substan-
tial networks of illegal and legal business ties
(including real and fictitious kinship networks),
not least in the area of gambling; enforceable
trust, or the ability to exert quality control and
enforce business deals; and networks of under-
ground credit (loan-sharking, “shylock loans”).
The cultural capital of Italian American organ-
ized crime is said to include the knowledge and
skills of networking in the underworld and
upperworld; skills of money management; cul-
tural schemas for organizing enterprise and
business activity, such as those defining dis-
tinctive patron—client relationships, authority
and reciprocal obligations, membership, and
tules; and the ability simultaneously to benefit
and profitably exploit clients and communities.
In short, one might say that traditional Italian
American organized crime displays social and
cultural capital quite similar to what the Chinese
call “guanxi.”
Eaststate is a strategic research site for address-
ing Ianni’s predictions because substantial infor-
mation, archival and otherwise, is accessible
for documenting past practices and recent devel-
opments, and black-run numbers businesses
have been historically prominent in some local-
ities of the state but virtually nonexistent in
others. Thus, we are able to examine alternate-
ly whether black racketeers have emerged as
major organized crime players (i.e., numbers
operators or “bankers”), have gained ground
on white racketeers, or have lost ground to white
racketeers.

Our analysis is based on information from a
variety of key informants and sources, includ-
ing interviews with key observers and individ-
uals who in different capacities were or had
been participants in the illegal numbers indus-
try (bettors, street bookies, and bankers), inter-
views with law enforcement officials charged
with monitoring and prosecuting illegal numbers
operatives, newspaper articles and historical
accounts of numbers gambling, and archives
and data from a state commission that tracked
and gathered intelligence about organized crime
and illegal gambling for more than 30 years.
We gained access to the archives and records
on numbers gambling of the Eaststate Crime
Commission (or the “Commission’”). Since its
inception in the late 1960s, the Commission’s
purpose was to investigate organized crime and
public corruption within the state and to issue
public reports on its findings. The
Commission’s agents and analysts developed
contacts and conducted interviews, while also
gathering and organizing information from state
and federal law enforcement agencies. Then,
in the mid-1990s, the state legislature voted to
discontinue funding of the Commission as fall-
out from the Commission’s investigations of
links between public officials and organized
crime. Commission investigative efforts, as one
writer put it, used to “provide a treasure trove
of data related to criminal enterprises, political
corruption, and the social relationships ... which
characterize organized crime” (Liddick
1999:50).

The Commission gathered considerable infor-
mation not only on Italian crime networks, but
also on other ethnic networks operating in
Eaststate, such as Hispanic, Asian, and African
American networks. Indeed, because of the
scarcity of research on African American organ-
ized crime, the Commission targeted black-run
drug and numbers gambling operations for
information gathering. We gained access to
Commission data, in part, by serving as ad hoc
advisors for it on matters pertaining to the col-
lection and interpretation of intelligence infor-
mation. Moreover, we have continued to track
numbers gambling in the state, and the senior
author has interviewed many key informants
multiple times over the past decade. Altogether,
the senior author has conducted more than 200
formal and informal interviews with numbers
gambling participants, bankers, and law enforce-
ment agents over the past 12 to 15 years. It is
difficult to state exactly the number of inter-
views involved because the senior author’s con-
tacts with informants often were informal and
conversational in nature (e.g., calling or stopping
by to see how the informant was doing or the
business was faring). Additionally, the infor-
mation contained in Commission files is based
on an even larger number of interviews and
observations conducted by Commission agents.

Two additional factors expedited the collec-
tion of data on black numbers gambling. First,
numbers betting is a fairly public activity. A
numbers operation, especially a moderately
sized or large one, is quite visible to those who
want to find out about it (if it is kept secret, it
will not attract bettors). Second, numbers gam-
bling, as well as most forms of gambling, is
viewed generally as a “benign” crime by the
public and even by many in law enforcement.
The penalties for numbers betting and book-
making are relatively minor, and being a “book-
ie” is not a highly stigmatizing identity.
Consequently, more than many underworld
activities, securing information about the size
and scope of major numbers operations in black
localities is a manageable, although still
demanding, undertaking. Of course, the will-
ingness of operatives to be forthcoming has
depended on the information sought. For exam-
ple, they were skittish about discussing whether
they were involved in other types of criminal
activity (e.g., drug dealing), but would report on
others’ criminal activity, and some were skittish
about discussing traditional organized crime
operatives.

Our analysis targets the mid-sized to large
bankers because these have been identified
either by Commission or by gambling operatives
(see later discussion on “types of bankers”), In
general terms and using 1990 as the benchmark
for the estimates, a large numbers business
grossed $7 million or more, whereas a mid-
sized business grossed $2 to $7 million. Notably,
we do not include in our analysis the many very
small operations that gross less than $1 million
annually, many of whom apparently gross
somewhere in the $100,000 to $200,000 range
or less (net profits typically range from 5 to 10
percent of gross).

We believe our access to data and the infor-
mation we have compiled go considerably
beyond any published analysis of numbers gam-
bling. Nonetheless, we note some important
caveats to our discussion. Besides issues of con-
fidentiality that limit or prevent us from using
some kinds of information, it is notoriously dif-
ficult to collect valid data on most kinds of
organized criminal activity in the “underworld”
(Reuter 1983; Steffensmeier 1986). The world
of organized crime is a fluid, organizationally
messy, and continuously changing one that often
is ambiguous to outside observers. Any assess-
ment of the illegal numbers industry banking,
for example, is hampered by the ongoing
dynamic of this or that major bookmaker “retir-
ing” from the business and of new entrants hop-
ing to establish a niche in the business (see later
discussion of “in-and-outers”).

In referring to Italian American, mafia-style
organized crime, we use the term “traditional
organized crime” (TOC), but interchange it
occasionally with the terms mafia, mob, crime
family, Italian networks, and Cosa Nostra, or
“Parkside,” our pseudonym for a popular ref-
erence to the East City mafia network. Also,
when using informant statements for docu-
mentation, we frequently attribute them to
generic identifiers such as “a veteran black
bookkeeper” or “one police source.” We rely
heavily on quotes from some informants who
were less concerned about anonymity, while
also noting that there is considerable consis-
tency across informants and other sources of
information in their depictions. Finally, we label
numbers bankers in the tables as B-B1 or W-B1
(black or white banker 1), B-B2, and so forth.
Because some bankers and locations are par-
ticularly noteworthy for understanding num-
bers banking trends, we also designate them
with pseudonyms (e.g., all the names appearing
in this analysis). In our discussion, we some-
times change some incidental but unimportant
facts that could be used to identify some of
these individuals. These pseudonyms are as fol-
lows:
“Parkside” is a popular reference to the East City
mafia network used by residents of East City.

°“Grady Giles” (B-B1) refers to very large black
banker who died in the mid-1990s.

*“Ollie Johnston” (B-B2) currently is the largest
black banker (circa 2000).

*“Vinnie Maestri” (W-B1a) is an Italian TOC asso-
ciate who owns the largest numbers banking oper-
ation in East City. His cousin “Sal” (W-B1b) also
runs a large numbers business. Although distinct, the
two operations frequently pool information and
resources.

“Lefty” (W-B7) refers to a non-Italian TOC asso-
ciate and major all-around gambling figure who
died in the late 1990s.

“Woody Lucas” (W-B8), a non-Italian, currently is
the largest “independent” white banker in Eaststate.

*“Sammy Loprelli” (W-B9), an Italian independent
of TOC, ran a very large numbers operation in the
greater West City area until his incarceration in the
1980s, after which TOC (i.e., associates of the West
City mafia) took over his gambling enterprises.
2. In-and-outers may run successful operations of
varying size for a short time, but then go out of
business. Many times, such bankers get hit with
a large bet on a winning number and cannot pay
off the winner. Other times, such bankers or their
personnel are arrested, and their business does not
survive the disruption and depletion of cash used
to pay bail, fines, lawyer fees, and temporary loss
of wagering income. Employee theft from banks
also is not uncommon, and unstable banking oper-
ations often cannot recover from large thefts.

3. Medium- to large-size bankers are those whose
operations are relatively long-lived, and who have
multiple writers or subbankers forwarding the
betting action to them, or who own either a siz-
able number of leadhouses or a few high-volume
leadhouses. These bankers are few in number,
but they receive a substantial percentage of the
total betting action. It is on these bankers that we
focus our attention in this analysis. As one key
informant characterizes the business and its large
operators:
1. A writer recruits bettors, accepts and collects
bets from the public, and then turns in the bets to
a bookmaker (or a subbanker). Writers usually are
people with ready access to the public such as
waitresses, bartenders, newspaper vendors, and
shopkeepers. However, it is important to note that
due to the rise of leadhouses (discussed later), the
role of “writer” (and that of “runner” and “col-
lector”) no longer occupies much of a place, if any,
in many of the larger numbers organizations.

2. Subbanks are large writers of a larger numbers
operation or, increasingly today, they are nonown-
ership partners in a leadhouse operation.
Subbankers receive betting action from a set of
smaller writers or leadhouses and forward the
action to the bookmaker. In the parlance of the
numbers world, a subbank is a “bookie without
money.” “Typically, he’s a guy that works 50/50
with the banker ’cause he don’t have the capital
to cover the hits and the expenses—like the rent,
the utilities, the office help, any pinches (arrests),
paying the nut (payoff to police). Work on 50
percent of the win. Say, the guy turns in $5,000
worth of numbers and gets hit for $7,000; now he’s
$2,000 down and the banker puts up the money.
The next week if the guy wins $5,000, the banker’s
got to get his $2,000 back and then there’s $3,000
left, leaving a split of $1,500 apiece minus what-
ever other expenses there are.” (Veteran TOC-
connected bookmaker)

3. The bank staff is another important element of a
numbers organization. It consists mainly of
salaried clerical and telephone workers, many of
whom are women or relatives of other organiza-
tional members.
The illegal numbers betting process involves
three prototypical routes for betting action both
historically and currently (empirically, there are
many possible variations and combinations of
these prototypical routes). Bets are recorded on
betting slips, and at regular intervals the wager-
ing information and the money are passed on to
the “banker” or “owner” who actually runs the
numbers business. The betting slips, money, or
both may be delivered by writers or runners to
“headquarters,” telephoned to an “office phone
lady,” who in turn at regular intervals, tele-
phones the betting action to the banker or his
headquarters, or the bets may be faxed to head-
quarters. At payoff, the money simply follows
the reverse route. Payment on winning bets usu-
ally is made the next day.

Route 1: Betting through a writer. A bettor
places a bet in person with a writer or directly
with the bookmaker. Larger writers may
“employ” runners, or collectors, who collect
money and wagering information from a vari-
ety of locations and then turn in their work to
the writer. This traditional route has increas-
ingly declined as a major avenue for wagering
numbers bets.

Route 2: Betting by telephone. A bettor uses
a telephone to place a bet to an “office,” a place
where bookmakers or writers may work. The
office includes a number of telephones and
staffing for accepting bets, typically women
who are homemakers, divorced or separated,
who often are relatives.

Route 3: Betting through leadhouses. This
route combines elements of the other two, and
has quickly become the dominant mode of num-
bers gambling, particularly in East City. Using
this route, the bettor goes to a store, or lead-
house, and places a bet with a window clerk or
cashier (typically a middle-aged or elderly black
female) who works there, who then telephones
or faxes wagering information to headquarters
(or, less directly, phones the information to a
“phone lady,” who in turn phones the informa-
tion to headquarters). As we explain later, the
rise of leadhouses as the dominant form of num-
bers retailing has tended to advantage white
bankers over black bankers.

Veteran bookmaker Woody Lucas describes
leadhouses as follows:
Tables 1 and 2 as well as the Appendix display
key features of the major numbers enterprises
that did business in black neighborhoods of
Eaststate over the 1970-2000 period. The
Appendix and tables also depict ownership
trends and highlight a key difference in black
ownership between East City and other locali-
ties in the state. Black-run numbers businesses
have long existed in East City. In West City and
smaller cities throughout Eaststate, however,
white bankers have always controlled numbers
gambling, and blacks have served as subbankers
(“bookies without money”) for these white-run
numbers operations. Perhaps the most note-
worthy development in these localities occurred
in West City during the mid-1980s, when inde-
pendent banker Sammy Loprelli, who ran the
largest numbers operation in the area, was incar-
cerated (see Appendix). Two high-level gam-
bling associates of TOC (i.e., the West City
mafia family), already quite active in numbers
gambling but on a smaller scale than Loprelli,
quickly moved to take over his territory, and
have since dominated the numbers industry in
the greater West City area.

The bulk of our discussion focuses on East
City because it is only there that a tradition of
independent black-banked numbers operations
has ever existed. Table 1 shows the major black-
run numbers operations in East City, whereas
Table 2 shows the white-run operations.

Each table displays the age (column 1),
whether the numbers enterprise is limited to
“syoked adie] A19A dousy pue sjoq dre] SurApoau sity SuruutM wo Aed 0} AyI[IqQvut s,uoneIsdo

94} JO osned9q JO (JUSUAA[OAUT SNIP Jo asnedaq “3'a) diysiapeg] s.uonessdo oy} SuNoBse} VOIR jUaWOOIOJUA Me] JO INSOI B se A[dnage ssoursnq Jo no BuIoT ApeostdAy “(omy 10 1eak
8 ueY} sso] poyse] ““3") PoAt|-yJOYs axe SuoHeIado asoy ‘SJo[vop Bnup sfeur Youlq AfjeordAy ‘s}aq oBse] JoFeM 0} SuuLM sioXejd 0} porayeo Ajjensn Aoyy ‘:pediows uonesodo sxoquinu
UNI-YOeIQ odIe]-A]IVIOPOUT [BIOAIS SQGG] OY} PUL SOYGHT SIE] OY} INoYSnosyy ‘o[durexo 10,4 “(eBre] Ajsrey awU0I9q May &) OZIS SuTAIBA Jo suoHeIodo POAL]-LOYS 0} SI9JOI = S1OINC 79 U] 5
“AY-ISeY Ul oyURQ YorIQ yore] Oy (1007 *B9) MOU SI aH ‘UOTeIJodo UMO

sy UNI 0} Yo Suryoursg Ajjenjuaaa pue seon] Apoony IM SuLoUysed sry Aq Joye] sIWOA May v I SULIOWUS-aI ‘sE9.36] PIU dy} UI SsaUTSNg soquinU oy) Portxo = (7q-) UOIsuYOL TIO q
“TEM Pur “(oruut,) Ta-A\ Aq ‘A[quiou ‘sroyuRG QOL Aq paquosge sem yng oy} Inq APoony pue

woysuYoL ay] S1oxuRQ [e1oAoS SuoUTE possodstp UONe BuIjAq sIY Jo Jed “Yeap STy SULMOTIOJ “S066 PILE 01 SOYGT Woy seoIpUAs sJoquinu UNI-yDeIq 1s9BIe] = (1 gG—A) S2TID Apey »
“OUILIO poziueSio [eUOIIPeH = OOL -aj0n

 

 

V/N [Tews ‘Aroytsuesy, VIN VIN (OND) ITV 28101NO 79 U]
DOL PozIs plus 0} [Jews ‘aAHoY porouyed AT]enJUDAd ‘sary aso[D) ON (ON) IV (S09) 71€-€
seon’] Apoom pure DOL 0} Apsour ‘paroyeog POozIs PIU 0} [[eWIs ‘“sANOY pasoujred AT;enyUadd ‘sory dsO[D Sox (ON) ITV (sos) 11a-
seon’] Apooay puk DOL 0 Apsour ‘pasoneos [RIAL yng “eanow juapuodapuy oN (OND ITV (so9) Old-a
DOL Pezis prur o} [JeUIs ng ‘aanoW porouyed AjyeNjuaAe ‘sory asO[D ON (OND ITV (sos) 6-4
ZAM PUP DOL O} SSOT Trews yng ‘aanoy quspusdepuy ON (ON) IV (sos) 8a-€
SOL (80661) peseaseq, son sop SOK (ON) IV (S09) La-€
ZAM PUR DOL O} SSO] oUIOg Aa]]eus yonu ing ‘sAnoV quopuodopuy ON (ON) IV (S09) 9€-€
SOL (s0861) paseeoaq porouyred Aqjenquana ‘sayy aso] SOR (ON) IV (soz) sa-a
(poxepeos) soft Aperp Jo Kem q ‘DOL (SO861) pomney juopuedopuy SOX (OND IIV (so9) pad-a
(poroneos) SOL (S0661) peseooaq juapuadapuy oN (oN) IIV (soL) €€-€
diysioumo surequreyy adie] “OANOYy juopusdapuy ON (OND ITV 4(S0s) ZA-A UOIsUYor aT11O
(pasoneos) DOL (80661) pasessaq] quapuodapuy Sox (ON) ITV e(S09) La-€ 81D Aperp
(s1oy9q JO snd0]) Joyueg jo snjeisg OWL poztuesiQ {sisquinyy sopisog ({seare youlq (S861 Ul Be)
asuidiaquq Jeuontpery 0} diysuonejey = Surjquiey JoO apisino puedxa) Joyueg
Jo drysioumo 0007 UI JUOWIOA[OAUT slonog Yorlg 01

poulyuoD uoneisdg

 

 

0007-0461 ‘1D 1seq ur suonesrody sioquinn yor[g JOfeW “1 a1qBI,

“OUILID PozIURBIO [eUOTIPR = DOL -210N

 

 

JPS (e31e7]) ssouisng Jo yon uy suoS/pamoy juopuodapuy ON (sag) sopy == (SQQ) UeTTeI]-UON (8a—M) seony Apoom,
DOL (ed1eT) poseaooq aqeroossy SOK (sox) wpe, —_(SQ9) UerTeI]-UON, (La-M) AyoT
SPS (umrpey)) eanoy Jeajouy) SOA (Sox) wunIpay (sos) werent 9E-M
SOL (uunipsy) eanoy aye1oossy SOA (Sax) ISO (sos) uereny sa-M
OOL (81k) posesooq Toquioul ope SOA (Sox) unIpo (SOL) uereay va-M
SOL (wanipey) pesess9q ayeloossy Sq (Sax) SOW (sog) uereay €a-m
DOL (281e]) ssoutsng uny suog aye1oossy Sox (sax) ISO (sos) uerypeay TE-M
SOL (ed1e7T) oanoy ayeloossy SOK (sax) wunipayl (soe) uereNT = (QI @-M) Hsoey{ cr0yeAes
OOL (edeT) oanoy aqeloossy SoA (sox) eunIpoyA (sos) uereay (21g-A) Lasoeyy oruUTA,
asudsojuq Jo (astidioqus Jo azis) sw gsioquinn, (gseore (S861 ul o8e) doyueg ‘|
dryssoumg *L Joyueg Jo snes °9 poezuesig sopisog Sutjquiey yor]q optsino Ayorayig “7
yeuoniperl JayIO UI puedxe) sionog

0} diysuoneyoy “¢

JUOWIAA[OAU] “py YORE 0} poutjuog

uoneledg *¢

 

 

0002-0261 ‘AiID iseq ul suoneedO sroqunN ony Ole °Z a1qeL,
gambling business in black neighborhoods only
or whether it has expanded into white neighbor-
hoods (column 2), whether the banker is involved
in other types of gambling besides numbers (col-
umn 3), whether the numbers organization has
had ties with TOC (column 4), the current sta-
tus of the banker, for example, whether active or
retired (column 5), and the current ownership of
the numbers enterprise (column 6). Similar infor-
mation is provided in the Appendix to describe
numbers operations in West City and other local-
ities in the state where numbers betting in black
neighborhoods has been prevalent.

The first important finding concerns divergent
patterns of racial ownership of numbers syndi-
cates in East City, as compared with the rest of
the state. By at least the 1960s, East City exhib-
ited a distinct pattern of black ownership of
major numbers operations. Both black- and
white-run numbers syndicates have thrived for
many decades in East City. In West City and the
rest of the state’s smaller urban centers, howev-
er, white-run organizations have bankrolled and
maintained control of numbers gambling in black
neighborhoods.

The second remarkable finding is unambigu-
ously at odds with Ianni’s “ethnic succession”
forecast that black operatives would increasing-
ly control numbers wagering in black neighbor-
hoods and also would expand their gambling
enterprises beyond the ghetto to serve white bet-
tors or bettors of other ethnic groups (Table 1,
column 2). There is not a single instance of a
black-run numbers syndicate expanding into
white areas or garnering a larger share of white
betting action.

The third finding of note in Tables 1 and 2
(columns 4 and 6) and in the Appendix centers
around the role of TOC in the illegal numbers
industry. Most notable is the overwhelming pres-
ence of Italian Americans among the group of
white numbers bankers. Equally significant, the
white non-Italian bookmakers are typically con-
nected to TOC and can hardly be described strict-
ly as independent operatives. Indeed, as we
discuss later, among the white-run organizations,
only Lucas’s can be viewed as an independent
operation, although it also practices an accom-
modative relationship with TOC. Other impor-
tant trends over time to note in Tables 1 and 2 (see
also Appendix) are that ownership of numbers
enterprises has increasingly moved to TOC, that
TOC control (direct or indirect) of numbers oper-
ations has expanded, and that black influence
has declined.

Except for the East City area, the statewide
pattern, both historically and currently, is for
blacks to function essentially as writers (or low-
level employees) or as subbankers who accept
wagers from black numbers writers and collec-
tors. Subsequently, their betting action is turned
over to white-owned banks. These banks typi-
cally are TOC connected or controlled (see
Appendix). All these patterns, along with the
aforementioned finding that blacks’ numbers
enterprises have not expanded into white areas
or encompassed significant numbers of white
bettors, are consistent with our CASC frame-
work predicting the important role of ethnicity
in shaping illicit enterprise.
(column 3), on trends in the organization’s mar-
ket share of numbers wagering (column 5), on
the banker’s relationship with TOC (columns 6
and 7), and on the 2000 status of the enterprise,
including the eventual locus of each syndicate’s
betting clientele (i.e., whether the black bettors
gravitated toward white-run enterprises) (col-
umn 8).

We draw a number of conclusions from Table
3. First, black numbers bankers were typically
middle-aged or older when they initially became
prominent numbers bankers, although they typ-
ically had a long-standing prior involvement in
the numbers industry as runners, writers, sub-
bankers, or small bankers. In this sense, most
black numbers bankers have long-established
careers in bookmaking.

Second, most black-run numbers organiza-
tions traditionally have involved an extended
family network as well as kin acquired through
common-law relationships. These networks have
included siblings (usually brothers), other close
kin and in-laws (sons, aunts, uncles, nephews),
and wives or girlfriends (Table 3, column 3). In
fact, the prototypical traditional black numbers
organization has resembled a “mom and pop”
operation, with a dominant male (or pair of
brothers) at the head. Examples include the
Ollie Johnston B-B4, B-B6, B-B5, B-B3, B-B8,
B-B10, and B-B7 organizations.

Third, the banking or ownership of an illegal
numbers syndicate in black neighborhoods is an
industry to which there have been few, if any,
lasting new entrants over the past one or two
decades. Many “in-and-outer” bankers or “fly-
by-night” operations have come and gone,
exhibiting little longevity or stability. However,
not a single new black numbers banker emerged
during the period from the late 1980s through
the 1990s to establish a significant and lasting
numbers business. A partial exception is Ollie
Johnston, who retired from the numbers busi-
ness after his arrest in the mid-1980s for gam-
bling violations, but subsequently reentered in
the early 1990s (see discussion of Johnston
later). Another partial exception involves sev-
eral “in-and-outer” black bankers who estab-
lished large numbers operations that catered to
black drug dealers wanting to wager large
amounts (e.g., $20, $50, $100 bets), and that also
sometimes provided layoff for other black
bankers. These operations typically had a short
life, as Woody observes:
(a80d Jxau uo panuyuo2)
Joyod/so1p ‘sueoy Suryieysueoy pue
‘snip oI] SOWLIO “Buryoryen 3nzp
Joyo ul Surpuayyo UT JUSUIOA[OAUT
-09 SuIpnpoul “OOL Aavay ‘S0661 Pru (pasessap)
SOL 0} $91} BSO]9 “SoA Aprendoy 0}. SOBHT_- UT YMOIH SO86I Ade-Ul-UOS/UDy S066I-SOP61 La-d
S0661
seon] Apoom, pue Ul OUTTOEP ‘SORT
DOL 0} Ssoy a31e7J yuopuadapul ‘oN, Ajjeuoised0Q «= pUk SOL6T UI YIMOID, SO861 suos/sioyjo1g 0007-S0S61 9d-a
(Sa-M
2% ya-m ‘Ayurew)
DOL WIM Joued
syueusynal] ‘S0L61
uoneziuesio aye] Ur ysoqe Joye
Sa-d Jo sjueuutor SONIAIOB [UTUILIO «SOL, ‘80661
yim diysiouyred qayjo Ul DOL/M 29 SOS6I Ul Apeays smey]-UL (paseasop)
UL ‘pay]onuos DOL S06-SO86I ‘SOA S9N ASOJD ‘Apre[NSoy — ‘sayjueAas UT YIMOIH SOL6L oHsoWop “Ury S086I-SOV6T sd-a
. Andnzyueg,,
29 UMOPYoRIO
sarod ‘sogeT pra (painer)
SOL 0} UdUp “S2TID OL quopuadeput ‘oN, Alfeuorses0Q «OF. SOL6T UI YIMOIH S086I-SOL61 UPY/STOIOIG 8086I-S0S6I ya-d
S0661 % SO86I
UT BUT[OAP “SOL6T

ul Apeoys ‘SQ96T (paseasap)
youngod quopuodaput ‘ON AljeuorseooQ, pure sQg Ul YMoILy S096I-SOS6I Soyeloosse 2 UT S066I-SOE6T cd-d
S0661

ul Suryueg soumnsor
‘sQ86] Pru ul yuoUT

 

-omjar Areroduisy
29 UMOPYORIO
aorod ‘sogé6l SMP]-Ul
diysioumo sureyureyy quopuodaput ‘oN Ajjeuotses9Q, Ajzea UL YyMOIH $0661 —- 2HSaWOp ‘uos/ury 000Z-S096I (Zq-€) Uorsuyor
(uieep [HUN) sQ66T sopeut yorlq (posesoap)
paTforu0s DOL quopuadoput ‘oN Apre[nBay_ PUR SERGI UL HIMOID —S66T ATIB9-SO86T /soyeloossy S066I-S0S6I (IA) STD
asudioyuq {juepuedapur skempy sueoy / yoke] puall sreyg yoyseyy Joyueg: Soll (soymrouuns & asuidiajuq
josmeis 000Z + LOOL/M diysiouyieg SV PpOllog yeog + yAOMION ostIdajuq se Aquo Surpnjour)

queurwopelg Joored jo uedg

 

 

(euNZ9 poztueSi0 ;euoMIpen/m diysuonejay) OOOZ-OL6I ‘AD ase ur sastdioyug sioquinn poyxueg-yoetg Jo snyeyg pue sissey *¢ BIQUL
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 19:44:59 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
Ca-M/M SO86T

uMmMopypoeIo sarod
~sod sog6y ae] ut
Sour[9ap ‘sog6T Pru

(QOL
WM porouzred A]

 

DOL Fe] ur posounzed ‘sax Ayrendoy 01. SOG] UT MOI SO86I PIU 01 SQL sayeloossy -JU91IN9) (00Z-S0S6I ZIg-a
uMOpyseIO oo1[od
ysod sog6] oe] Ur (SOL
€a-AV/M SO86T SOUT[OOP ‘SQ86T Pr ui pozsuyred A]
DOL 9] UE porouyred ‘sax ApenBoy OF SQLGT UL yIMOID SO86I PIUt 01 SOL SMEI-UL/SBUTIGIS -1U91IND) 0OOZ-S096T I1a-@
uone99
~IBOUI JoLIq/ soe
seon] SUIMOTIOS
Apooay “(set SO86I Ul sour[Sop (qyeus A1oA
era Apued) DOL quopuodoput ‘on, Ajeuorses0Q ~— {SarjUOAes UT YIMOID SOL6I  SMeI-UL/sSUNqIs/ury —-ynq) Uasard—sQQg6 | old-a
sysole SULMO]
“TOF SOS6T O12] UL (OL
SOL SOUITOOP *SQ86T PIU (puctyys3) im posouyred Ay
Pe]oNU0D DOL YM porouysed ‘sax Ajre[nBay_ 0} SoUOAIS UI YIMOID SO86I AlIB9-SOL61 SMPJ-UI SSAWOG -JU9IIND) OOOZ—-SOS6I 6d-d
uMmopypoeio sorjod
BULMOT[OF $0861 S066 Ul cATOR
seon’] plu Joye sourpoop ang [yews “(SOL61
Apooy puke DOL ‘sonysie piu (pusiyyi3) ul Ssaursnq s,royyey
$10}}9q JO SSO] o9Ie'] juapuadapul ‘on Al[euolsesdQ 0} SatjUaAaS UT YLMOID SO86I AjJB2-SQL6] SMP[-UI-ONSWOP/Ury — STy 19A0 YOO}) SOPET sa-a
asudioyuq {juopuodoput shempy sueoy / yoke]  puary areys yoxrepy Joyueg sory (aayMjJouuns & asudiayuq
Josmes 0007 +=LOOL/M diysiouyreg SY POllog yeag + YIOMJON 9sUdI9}Uq se Aue 3urpnyout)
yueulwmopelg Joareg jo uedg

 

 

(panuyuoa) *€ 1481.
“UILIO poztuRdIO [eUOTIPEN = DOL -a/on
Fourth, black numbers syndicates typically had
at least some connections or links with TOC,
either for layoff or shylock loans. Some also had
long-standing ties with TOC that extended
beyond numbers gambling to entail, at least
occasionally, mutual involvement in other types
of gambling activities (e.g., dice, video poker,
slot machines) as well as drug trafficking and
fencing of stolen goods (e.g., B-B5, B-B7, B-
B12). One typical pattern emerged whereby
these and several other black organizations (e.g.,
B-B9, B-B11) eventually partnered with TOC,
meaning the numbers business became a large
subbank within an expanding white-run num-
bers enterprise “owned” by TOC. Another out-
come was less direct, but involved the eventual
migration of betting action to TOC by way of
Giles (B-B1). Giles emerged during the 1980s
as the largest black banker in the area, and
absorbed black bettors from the several other
black-run organizations that were downsizing or
going out of business (e.g., the B-B3 and the B-
B4 operations). When Giles died, TOC-con-
nected banks absorbed his betting action.

The expanding significance of TOC’s involve-
ment and that of independent white banker
Woody Lucas is shown further when the fate of
black bankers and their betting clientele is con-
sidered (see columns 2 and 5 to 8). First, the
majority of black bookmakers identified as
major bankers in the 1970s and 1980s are
deceased, retired, or partnered with TOC.
Second, a large portion of the betting clientele
who once patronized the deceased or retired
black bankers shifted to TOC organizations or,
less so, to the white-run Lucas organization
(see column 8). Only two black-run organiza-
tions from the 1980s continue to be viable num-
bers enterprises. One is the B-B6 organization,
The other black-run organization still thriving
is the Ollie Johnston operation, and it is a
notable exception to the general pattern of
decline in black-run numbers banks. As men-
tioned earlier, Johnston was a major independ-
ent banker until his arrest on gambling charges
in the mid-1980s. He returned to East City and
numbers gambling about 4 years after the arrest,
first partnering with Woody Lucas and then
branching off on his own. He has been the most
successful of the current black bankers, and
maintains a reputation for paying winners, sav-
ing money, and running a financially sound
business. He has found a niche catering to large
bettors, especially black drug dealers and other
illicit “high rollers.” He runs only a few lead-
houses, but they are quite profitable. Johnston
is bringing his son into the business to succeed
him, but Johnston is in poor health, and the fate
of his enterprise in the long term is ambiguous.
A veteran TOC-connected black bookmaker
We turn next to the “white” side of the numbers
industry serving black customers in Greater
East City (i.e., the syndicates operated by white
bankers, especially by TOC-affiliated bankers).
Their key characteristics and trends are sum-
marized in Tables 1 and 4, which provide more
detail on white bankers in East City.

We draw several conclusions from Table 4.
First, like their black counterparts, white num-
bers bankers typically have long-established
careers in numbers gambling, as well as other
types of gambling.

Second, these white-run operations rank as
the largest numbers banks in the black neigh-
borhoods of the East City area. Johnston’s is the
only black-banked syndicate that approaches
these white-banked businesses in gross rev-
enues, and his operation is smaller than the
largest white-run operations (e.g., those of
Vinnie Maestri, Lefty, and Woody Lucas).

Third, most white-run operations experienced
moderate to substantial growth in black betting
action during the 1980s and through the 1990s,
a time when overall numbers betting action
appears to have declined somewhat. Notably,
their share of the numbers market in black
neighborhoods has steadily increased even as
black-run operations’ shares have decreased.

Fourth, some of the white-run numbers estab-
lishments involve an extended family network,
as do the majority of black-run operations.
However, non-kin ties are also important in
more than half of the large white-run organiza-
tions.

Fifth, virtually all the larger white-run num-
bers operations have been affiliated historical-
ly with TOC, and that affiliation continues
(W-B6’s ties to TOC are unclear; although he has
done business with them, there is no clear-cut
evidence of a “partnership” or that he has asso-
ciate status in TOC). Lucas is the only large
white numbers banker who remains independ-
ent of TOC. Although he has used TOC for lay-
off or shylock loans in past decades (mainly
the 1950s and early 1980s), by the 1990s Lucas
had stopped doing so. However, he was spo-
radically “shaken down” by TOC operatives
during the 1990s, and especially during the
1980s.

Sixth, in contrast to black-run operations,
whose betting clientele does not extend beyond
black communities, many of the white organi-
zations also handle numbers, sports, or video
poker wagering by white and/or Hispanic bet-
tors. In some cases, such as the Lucas organi-
zation, the bulk of the banker’s betting action is
confined to black neighborhoods, but with a
small portion involving Hispanic bettors. In
other cases, such as the Maestri, Lefty (W-B7),
and W-B2 operations, a sizable portion of the
organization’s numbers action involves both
white and Hispanic bettors. Also, as shown from
Table 1 earlier, white-run numbers bankers are
typically involved in other types of gambling
besides numbers. Some are also “all-around
racketeers” involved in a wide variety of legal
and illegal business activity such as loan-shark-
ing, extortion, and racketeering.

Finally, Table 4 documents both TOC’s long-
standing involvement in the numbers betting
industry in black neighborhoods of the greater
East City area and its growing dominance of that
industry in the 1990s. The last column in Table
4 shows that by 2000, TOC owned all but two
of the major white numbers banking operations.
(OL) san0v sayeloossy pure sOg6T Ul YIMoIH 0002-S0661 ury 000Z-S0961 Lysaeyy arr,

 

(astdioyug DOL 01 diysuonejoy Pus] BeYS oy = Joyue_ se pollad Yeo SOLL IOMION Joyueg sIoquInN: astidroqug
jo diysiaumo) asuidiajugq JueUTWOpelg se 19072 jo uedg
smeig Joyueg

 

 

0002-SOL6I ‘AND iseq Ul sostidioyug sioquNN payxURg-a1yAA Jo SNIBIS ue SIDZ9IED  “p aIGUL
“OUILIO poziuei0 [eUOIpPe = DOL :a/0N

 

(suos WuIM
J]a8) sanoe Inq pomnsy

(QOL) pasessaq
Ges) eanoy
(DOL) eanov

(DOL) pesesseq

(QOL) pasesseq
(QOL) suos/pemer
TWIOS Jng SAQHIY
(DOL) eanov

(OL) eanoy

quopuedepuy

ayeloossy

(sueo] “yoxey) parenegy
ayeloossy

Joquiowr opeyy

ayelsossy
aqeroossy
soyeloossy

sayeloossy

S0661

01 SO861 Ul YIMoIH
S0661

OF SQL6T Ul YIMOIH
80661

ue sQg6] Ul Apearg
SO66I UT

Apeays ‘sog6] Ur yIMoID
S06/SO86I Ut

Apeays ‘SQ/6] Ul YIMOID
quow
-uostidunt Surmoyjoy
SO66T UF SUTPSep

‘SO861 Ul yMoID
SO66I UI

Apeays ‘sQg6] UT YMOID
S0661

pue sOg6T Ul YMoIH
S0661

PUe SOZ6T UT YMOID

000Z-S0661

S066I-S086I

S086I-SOL6I

SO86I

SO86I

SO86I

S066

0007-S0661

0007-S0661

suos/ury
soye1oossy
saqyeloossy
soyeloosse/Ulyy

soyeloosse
ayy pue YOR|Q/UTY

sayelsosse

oqya pue xorg,

suos/ury

ur

ury

000Z-SOL61 (8A—M) SeON] Apoom

S0661-S0961

0002-S0L61

000Z-SO0L6I

S0661-S0961

S0661-S0961

quasald-S0861

0002-SOL61

0007-S0961

(La-mM) 4yeT
9g-M
Sa-M

va-M

ca
TEM
Usaeyy a10yeATes

Lysaeyy aTuUrA,
As noted, many black numbers banks in East
City were essentially independent of TOC,
although they occasionally may have used TOC
for layoff or a shylock loan. What happened to
their operations when their banker died or
retired? In most cases, the banker’s death or
retirement provided an open market of compe-
tition for their betting clientele. This competi-
tion typically was won by a few of the larger
numbers organizations, especially the black-
run Giles operation (before his death), the
Woody Lucas organization, and several TOC
enterprises. The fate of the organizations for-
merly headed by bankers B-B10 and B-B3 are
examples of this scenario. Most of their num-
bers business migrated to established TOC oper-
ations.

Of particular significance in this analysis is
what happened to the Giles (B-B1) numbers
organization, which at the time of his death in
the mid-1990s was by far the largest black-run
numbers enterprise and one of the largest num-
bers businesses in East City’s black neighbor-
hoods. A veteran gambling investigator who
for years had tracked the Giles operation
describes the turn of events by which his betting
clientele shifted to TOC bankers:
and nephews, who have been unable to sustain
the operation. Johnston is doing well, but as
we described earlier, his health is declining,
and the long-term prospects of his operation
are uncertain.

Another marker concerns the aftermath from
the death or retirement of a rival (i.e., inde-
pendent) white numbers banker. The only per-
tinent instance involves what happened in West
City to Sammy Loprelli’s numbers business
after his incarceration in the mid-1980s (see
Appendix, top rows). As we mentioned earlier,
the dominant numbers operation by far was
headed by Loprelli, who maintained reciprocal
or cooperative relations with TOC but remained
independent of it. After his incarceration, how-
ever, TOC-affiliated gambling operatives
promptly took over the bulk of his numbers
organization. This transition in ownership pro-
vided TOC with a virtual monopoly over num-
bers banking in the region, while also
strengthening its grip over other illegal gambling
activities in the greater West City area.

Turning next to what happens after the death
or retirement of a TOC-affiliated banker, we
find that TOC has consistently maintained con-
trol of their existing operations, and has gained
control of others in the aftermath of the exit of
white or black bankers.
They came to me to run part of it (Lefty’s [W-B7]
business), be a partner with them. In reality, be a
“bookie without money” the same way I do with
people in my operation. Or work out some other
arrangement where we both put up money and
share in the costs, the profits, and that. Wanted me
*cause my name is good and they didn’t want any
concern if it got out that Lefty had died and some-
body different is running the place (e.g., a lead-
house). I didn’t want to get involved with them that
way, ‘cause then they(ll push for you to bring in
the slot machines. I told them I appreciated what
they’re offering but our table was full. Vinnie
(Maestri) was already lined up to take up part of
the slack, so they just brought in other people
from Parkside (TOC) who already had been work-
ing some with Lefty. They got so many to bring in,
you wouldn’t believe.
of organizational provisions for leadership suc-
cession, coupled with TOC’s more effective
recruitment and leadership succession; (2) the
rise of leadhouses as the primary numbers gam-
bling venue; (3) financial stresses brought on by
police raids and law enforcement initiatives,
which TOC has withstood better than black net-
works; (4) the role of the legal state lottery as
well as the contraction and then the expansion
of the numbers industry; and (5) the impact of
growing social disorganization on East City’s
inner-city neighborhoods and the deleterious
effects of the growth in the drug trade. These
major developments also were augmented by
durable TOC resource advantages including
enforceable trust and quality control, expertise
in the gambling enterprise, and financial capi-
tal that better situated TOC to adapt and capi-
talize on the changes taking place both within
and outside the numbers industry.

The significance of these factors is better
appreciated in view of the historical context
from which the numbers industry emerged as an
important economic institution and an
entrenched part of the urban black cultural scene
in many large U.S. cities (Light 1977b). Several
aspects of this context can be noted. First,
although many blacks, particularly religious
leaders, viewed numbers gambling as a vice
that sapped the energy and moral fiber of black
ghetto residents, already by the mid-1930s,
numbers operations constituted one of the
largest sources of employment for urban black
youths. Being a runner, a writer, or a “bookie”
was seen as way out of poverty, a way of mak-
ing an “honest living.”

Second, a consistent theme emerging from
our data sources and interviews is that traditional
black numbers operators felt strong bonds to and
cultivated symbiotic relations with their com-
munities. They generally avoided more preda-
tory activities such as dealing in narcotics, were
known to have helped people with food, rent,
burial expenses, or other emergency needs, and
perceived themselves as providing a popular
service and contributing to their communities
(see also Liddick 1999; Light 1977a).

Third, many leaders of the older, traditional
black-run numbers organizations were born and
raised in the South, bringing with them a strong
sense of kinship based on reciprocal obliga-
tions (Martens 1990; Schatzberg and Kelly
1996). Emerging from the common experiences
By the mid-1980s, or earlier, many of the estab-
lished black bankers were at or nearing retire-
ment age, with few younger operatives in place
to succeed them. The death, retirement, or
retrenchment of these veteran bankers over the
past couple of decades and their lack of
replacement has reduced the number of reli-
able black bankers (i.e., those who faithfully and
promptly pay off on winning bets), paving the
way for further incursions by white-run opera-
tions with a reputation for paying off winning
bettors.

The “aging” factor entails more than merely
the loss of able leaders to head black-run num-
bers enterprises. It also involves the reduction
of reliable subbankers, writers, and office help.
It has become increasingly difficult for black
numbers organizations to find rank-and-file
replacements who are dependable and trust-
worthy. The retirement or death of many veter-
an black writers and bookmakers also has
weakened the symbiotic relationship that many
of the traditional numbers operators had with
community residents. Perhaps even more con-
sequential, the loss of “old head” black entre-
preneurs and the transformation of the inner
city more generally have diminished the will-
ingness of Italian or white gambling networks
to hire or do business with black operatives,
with the networks preferring instead to partner
with white subbankers and to staff their opera-
tions with kin or white employees. Another rea-
son for declining black control of numbers
organizations related to the “aging out” of old
black bankers is said to be that their sons typi-
cally are not attracted to the numbers business,
and that they are not as reliable at paying win-
ning bettors, although they may be attracted to
other illegal enterprises such as drug traffick-
ing.

By contrast, TOC bankers have extensive
access to networks for recruiting both rank-
and-file operatives and leadership personnel.
These networks involve extensive contacts with-
in the black community (as noted earlier) as
well as access to their own kin networks (which
typically supply inner circle operatives) and to
TOC-based networks. These networks, com-
bined with the overall tolerance and expertise
for gambling within the Italian community, pro-
vide a large pool of people for staffing, part-
nering, and leadership succession. Furthermore,
TOC also has the financial capital to buy human
capital, not only rank-and-file operatives, but
also support persons such as lawyers and finan-
cial advisors.

In addition, leadership and ownership suc-
cession by inheritance is an important mecha-
nism of social capital favoring TOC in the
numbers industry. On one hand, TOC has been
able to maintain ownership of its numbers syn-
dicates when a TOC-affiliated banker dies or
retires (i.e., the operation is “inherited” by anoth-
er TOC operative such as the banker’s son or a
mob associate). On the other hand, black-banked
numbers operations generally have lacked this
sort of inherited succession. Instead, TOC has
frequently been able to move in and negotiate
influence when a black banker has died or
retired, or in the case of Loprelli in West City,
when an independent white banker has been
incarcerated (see earlier discussion). Vacancies
brought about by the deaths or imprisonment of
established numbers bankers over the past 20 to
30 years generally have been filled by mob-
affiliated operatives.
mately benefiting white operatives more than
blacks. Under the older “runner” system, a sig-
nificant numbers operation would need a small
army of lower-level workers (e.g., runners, writ-
ers, bookies without money). For example,
Sammy Loprelli of West City involved more
than 3,000 people at the height of his more tra-
ditional runner- and writer-based operation.
Large traditional runner system operations in
East City involved similar numbers of workers.

Leadhouses introduced a classic case of
economies of scale. A few leadhouses, because
they require only two or three workers each at
most, can handle the betting volume previous-
ly handled by hundreds of runners and writers.
Leadhouses also reduced the need for white
bankers to hire significant numbers of black
workers. This large reduction in the workforce
necessary to run a leadhouse-based numbers
operation gave such bankers an additional
advantage over more traditional runner- and
writer-based operations. Because of their lower
overhead, leadhouses could attract more cus-
tomers by offering higher betting odds, and
therefore greater potential winnings.

Leadhouses also advantage those with more
business management experience and skills.
Setting up and managing leadhouses that are
efficient and profitable, yet comfortable and
attractive to mostly middle-aged and elderly
numbers clientele is a significant business chal-
lenge. Would-be successful bankers also must
be careful not to overextend themselves by
opening more leadhouses than can be easily
and efficiently managed. As Woody says:
subbankers, cashiers, and “phone ladies.” In
other words, white bankers have increasingly
relied on white employees and have not recruit-
ed blacks. Thus, white-run numbers organiza-
tions are increasingly composed of white
personnel. For example, the only blacks hired
by Lucas are for cashier positions in the lead-
houses. His subbankers, phone ladies, and main
office staff all are white. The Maestris’ sub-
bankers are about “half white and half black,”
and they employ black leadhouse cashiers.
However, all their main office staff are white
(they don’t use phone ladies because betting
information is faxed daily to headquarters by
subbankers or cashiers). Furthermore, the inner
circles of the white networks (e.g., the key lieu-
tenants) are exclusively white. Thus, white-run
banks reflect persistent racial segregation at the
upper levels of the organization, although there
is sometimes a more diverse mixture at the
lower levels. On the other hand, key white oper-
atives (mostly TOC) are sometimes represent-
ed in the inner circles of smaller black-run
networks.

Leadhouses also allow white bankers to be
less enmeshed in black neighborhood life and
activities, although they still must maintain their
contacts in these neighborhoods. White bankers
are able to manage their leadhouses from a dis-
tance, and hire largely white management. Most
of the white bankers seem to prefer having lit-
tle to do with the black community, except when
necessary. In interviews, white bankers and
operatives typically displayed negative stereo-
types of blacks as incompetent, unreliable, and
violent prone, and they typically used well-
known racial slurs when referring to blacks.
One exception to this, however, is WB-3, whose
black common-law wife helped to run the num-
bers business.

In an interview with the senior author, one
long-time Cosa Nostra member and layoff
banker described how he avoided dealing with
blacks in criminal business activities if he could,
but used numbers as an “avenue” into other
illicit enterprises in black neighborhoods:
The retrenchment of veteran black bankers was
further exacerbated by police raids and other law
enforcement initiatives targeting gambling oper-
atives suspected of paying protection money to
corrupt officers. Many of the major black num-
bers enterprises were hit by the raids, as were
white-run organizations. However, the resulting
arrests and confiscation of monies from the
raids contributed to financial instability and
staffing shortages for the black numbers oper-
ations much more so than for parallel white
organizations, which apparently had deeper
financial pockets and network resources for
weathering the adversity.

Notably, the disruption and financial hardship
brought on by the raids contributed to several
black bankers essentially retiring from the indus-
try, to several others downsizing or temporari-
ly “closing down,” and to still others drifting into
drug trafficking. Although some black num-
bers bankers had formerly been involved in
other illegal activities such as loan-sharking
and fencing of stolen goods, their financial
reversals in the 1980s encouraged their expan-
sion into drug trafficking to increase their prof-
its. This, in turn, created additional risks from
law enforcement and also jeopardized the long-
standing symbiotic ties with the black commu-
Numbers betting in the black neighborhoods
of East City declined steadily in the 1980s
before leveling off and then rebounding in the
mid-1990s. The decline was attributable partly
to the growing attraction of the government-
sponsored state lottery system, which reduced
the number of illegal bettors, especially among
younger people. With fewer blacks playing the
illegal numbers, competition for this declining
pool of bettors increased and advantaged those
organizations able to adapt to the changing mar-
ket forces.

These trends were exacerbated by a report-
ed lack of loyalty of black bettors to black-
owned numbers banks, a matter probably made
worse by the aging and attrition of reliable black
bankers and the rise in less reliable “in-and-
outers.” Thus, similar to what exists in the legit-
imate realm (Lee 1999, 2002), in which black
customers may display little loyalty to patron-
izing black-owned businesses, black-owned
numbers businesses do not have a favored posi-
tion among black clientele.

The moderate rebound of numbers in the
1990s was attributed to a variety of factors,
including an increase in the number of middle-
aged and elderly bettors (numbers gambling’s
Exacerbating the developments with black-run
numbers businesses described so far were the
ongoing social and economic transformations of
the larger society that were taking their toll on
inner-city life, including that life in East City.
These transformations also combined with the
expanding illegal drug economy to militate
against black control of numbers gambling.
The disproportionate impact on inner-city
black neighborhoods of the decline in American
industry, the departure from the ghetto of the
middle-class blacks who gave the ghetto both
structure and stability, and ongoing racial dis-
crimination characterize a complex set of “dis-
articulation” processes. These processes
contribute to an underclass subculture that
undermines traditional norms regarding mar-
riage, educational attainment, and employment
on the one hand, while fostering violent and
drug-using behavior on the other hand
(Anderson 1999; Massey and Denton 1993;
Shihadeh and Flynn 1996). The social and insti-
tutional transformation of the inner city has had
several effects on black numbers syndicates.
One effect is that the rise in violence and preda-
tory activities within many black neighborhoods
discouraged prospective numbers operatives
with fear of theft or assault. Most crucially,
white bankers and subbankers, already prone to
racial prejudices, have become even more reluc-
tant to hire blacks.

Also, familial ties have historically been a
main source of cohesion for many black crime
groups. However, differences in degree and
types of kinship ties exist in comparison with
kin-based crime networks among some ethnic
groups such as Italian Americans. First, black
crime networks have been based more on strict-
ly domestic or household ties, including com-
mon-law relationships, and familial bonds tend
to be limited to the first or second generation
(Martens 1990). Second, black kinship ties
(including “personal kindred”; see Stack
1974:44) are oriented more generally toward
“caring and sharing”—providing shelter, food,
and child care—rather than toward providing
business help or investment in sustained busi-
ness enterprise or long-term business ventures
(Miller 1986). In contrast, Italian kin networks,
and some other ethnic groups as well, are more
oriented toward assisting one another in busi-
ness or entrepreneurial matters and in the stock-
piling of social capital (e.g. favors, exchange
relationships, patronage) to those ends. As
Schatzberg and Kelly’s (1996:223) study of
African American organized crime states:
“There does not appear to be a cultural ethos
coupled with a kinship system among African
Americans that could produce a high degree of
organizational development in criminal syndi-
cates characteristic of Italians.” Thus, kinship
seems to provide more of a source for social cap-
ital among Italian entrepreneurs than among
black-run crime organizations for supporting
successful numbers banking, for lining up suc-
cessors to inherit numbers banks, and for fill-
ing rank-and-file vacancies with reliable
personnel. Instead, conditions of black life in
urban America over the past couple of decades
appear to have weakened the viability of famil-
ial ties as a basis for cohesion among black
crime groups (Light 1977b; Schatzberg and
Kelly 1996).

Another reason for the decline of black banks
may have been the expansion of the inner-city
drug economy, especially the sale of crack
cocaine and heroin, in black neighborhoods
over the past 25 years. This drug economy has
had a number of possible impacts on black num-
bers betting, especially in terms of the available
“talent pool” for rank-and-file numbers opera-
tion personnel and leadership positions.
According to both white and black bankers and
upper-level operatives interviewed, one impor-
tant effect is that widespread drug use among
the potential neighborhood “workforce” avail-
able to black numbers operations translates into
workers and managers who may be less depend-
able and trustworthy. This reduction in the qual-
ity of the neighborhood labor pool in turn
apparently leads to a breakdown in leadership
succession: “old school” black bankers are less
able to find young, trustworthy, dependable
underlings (even sometimes from among their
own male kin) to whom they can turn over their
operations. Another alternative effect is that
younger black would-be criminal entrepreneurs
have opted out of the numbers industry in favor
of the lucrative drug trade.

An additional factor shrinking the pool of
would-be replacements may be the attraction
that certain kinds of expanded opportunities
have in the legal labor market, such as govern-
ment jobs and certain types of industrial jobs,
a trend noted by Light and Gold (2000:22).
Also, the long-term overall movement of mid-
dle-class blacks from inner-city neighborhoods,
noted by Wilson (1996), may have decreased the
number of people left behind who would be
likely to have the requisite work habits and
money management skills for long-term success
in numbers banking. In other words, greater
opportunities in the drug trade, greater oppor-
tunities in legal employment such as in the pub-
lic sector, and the movement of middle-class
blacks out of the ghetto all may have siphoned
off entrepreneurially inclined workers who
would otherwise have started or taken over num-
bers businesses.
TOC’S ENFORCEABLE TRUST AND QUALITY
CONTROL. Running a numbers bank, especially
a good-sized one, relies on trust and accounta-
bility. The basis of the trust may not necessar-
ily entail faith in the integrity and rectitude of
others, but may rest as much or more on the con-
viction that others would not dare to violate
understandings for very practical reasons, such
as loss of reputation or retaliation (i.e., “enforce-
able” trust). As Albert Cohen (1966:5) observed
long ago, successful business enterprise—
whether legal or illegal—depends on effective
organization and cooperation, which in turn
depend on trust and accountability. Because
TOC bankers benefit from the mafia reputation
for violence and organizational power (and also
kinship obligations), they profit from a milieu
of enforceable trust that deters malfeasance
(e.g., cheating, snitching) by operatives within
the network and also discourages rival opera-
tions from moving into mob-served neighbor-
hoods (see Chubb’s 1989 description of mafia
organizations as “vendors of trust”).

Enforceable trust contributes to TOC suc-
cess in two main ways. First, it advances qual-
ity control by helping to curtail cheating by
writers, office staff, subbankers, and others.
Enforceable trust helps to enforce norms for
fair dealings among the involved parties, and to
uphold the norm of paying winning bettors.
These together reduce costs for the enterprise,
while also fostering and sustaining its reputation
as “someone good to do business with” among
bettors, rank-and-file operatives, and partners.
It is more difficult for individual independent
bankers to do this. For example, independent
black-run operations have found it increasing-
ly difficult and expensive to recruit or force
others to carry out their wishes.

Second, intimidation or the threat of strong-
arm methods as a key element of enforced trust
has enabled TOC numbers enterprises to fend
off competition better in the sense that com-
petitors have shied away from expanding into
neighborhoods where mob-connected opera-
tions exist, and rival operations already estab-
lished in a neighborhood have been less likely
to contest the expansion of a mob-connected
leadhouse or numbers book into another book-
ie’s territory.

However, although it remains an important
TOC resource, intimidation is largely implicit,
and its significance is easily exaggerated.
Indeed, there is very little evidence to suggest
that TOC aggressively sought to limit the num-
ber of bookmakers or deny newcomers entry
into the numbers business, which is virtually
impossible to do anyway because almost any-
body can accept bets or “book” for a small
clientele of bettors. Rather, TOC has discour-
aged the entry of new leadhouses into areas
where a TOC numbers business already exist-
ed, and has prevented rival numbers banks from
garnering the betting clientele of TOC-con-
nected bankers at their death or retirement. By
way of illustration, we note that Woody devel-
oped an accommodative, cautiously deferen-
tial relationship with TOC (and note also TOC’s
recent expansion at Woody’s expense):
ITALIAN CULTURAL ACCEPTANCE AND ENTREPRE-
NEURIAL COMPETENCY FOR GAMBLING. Rome
University sociologist Franco Ferrarotti has
noted: “Gambling is deeply rooted in all strata
of Italian society.” Cultural acceptance and tol-
erance for gambling both ensures steady recruits
and expertise into a numbers or gambling busi-
ness for Italian bookmakers and also lessens the
potentially stigmatizing effects of law violation
for the many “conventional” persons (e.g.,
wives, daughters, cousins) who staff low-level
positions. This contrasts with the considerable
moral ambivalence within the black communi-
ty historically toward numbers gambling
(Haberman 1990). The durability particularly of
Italian racketeers and mafia networks in dom-
inating the illegal gambling arena (and some-
times the legal gambling arena as well) has been
noted by many observers (Cressey 1967; Reuter
1983; Steffensmeier 1995). Insiders within both
law enforcement and the underworld are skep-
tical that this has changed or will change, as this
non-Italian mafia associate and major Eaststate
gambling figure attested in an interview with the
senior author:
Running a numbers business is centrally about
money, saving, and credit. Mismanaging one’s
money, not saving one’s money, and not enjoy-
ing access to business credit or short-term loans
create financial shortfalls, if they did not already
exist, and can exacerbate financial insolvency
if it already exists. Significant upfront cash
(either on hand or quickly obtainable) is need-
ed to cover start-up and running expenses, pay
out to winners, weather the storm of periodic law
enforcement pressure, survive predation by
street criminals (e.g., losses from robberies of
leadhouses) and internal theft by employees
(e.g., family insider, leadhouse cashier), and
expand one’s business by opening or taking
over leadhouses.

We have at various places in our analysis
pointed out the importance of financial
resources for banking a numbers enterprise,
including the advantages held by TOC opera-
tives because of their “deeper pockets.” The
financial capital that TOC possesses for gam-
bling enterprises is formidable, although it also
is leveraged by their cultural and social capital.
First, TOC-connected bankers tend to be estab-
lished gambling entrepreneurs who run finan-
cially solvent operations with strong cash
reserves. Second, TOC already has in place lay-
off banks that maintain sizable sums of cash to
pay winning bettors in skewed wagering situa-
tions. Third, TOC can draw on monies from a
larger criminal portfolio, including other and
probably more lucrative forms of gambling such
as sports betting and video poker. Fourth, TOC
has access to short-term loans from some legit-
imate sources (including banks), as well as easy
access to financial assistance and loans from
both kin and TOC-connected associates. (Note:
TOC is known to be the largest loan-shark oper-
ation in the area.) These resources have enabled
TOC to cope better, particularly with the varied
developments occurring inside and outside the
numbers industry such as the shift to leadhouses
as the main retailing outlet for wagering and the
“ebb and flow” of heightened law enforcement
directed at numbers operations over the past
decade or so.

Although obviously an important part of the
explanation, financial capital alone is not the
sole explanation of black-white differences in
the ownership of numbers banks. As noted ear-
lier, for example, numbers bookmaking in East
City is an open, not a closed, market. Moreover,
there has been at least a small, continuous pool
of potential black entrepreneurs with sufficient
personal savings or wealth to start up a numbers
banking operation or expand a smaller one. The
pool has comprised (1) kin of established black
bankers, (2) small-time bankers or bookies who
run profitable “mom and pop” operations while
also having the business knowledge and some
customer base for expanding their market share,
(3) subbankers in a large numbers operation
who garner sufficient personal savings and also
have the business knowledge and potential cus-
tomer base for possibly establishing their own
operation, and (4) hustlers and drug dealers
who acquire substantial income by way of drug
distribution or other hustling activities.

First, our earlier finding should be recalled —
that at the death or retirement of a black banker
running a sizable numbers business, his kin nei-
ther took over nor started up their own numbers
operation although well-positioned financially
to do so. This stands in marked contrast to what
happens in the case of small numbers operations
that depend less on savings and credit, which
often are passed along to kin. According to
Woody, “the mom and pop operations, yes, their
kids or cousins might keep that business going.
But that hasn’t happened with the bigger oper-
ations, where you can lose your shirt a lot eas-
ier.”

Second, any number of the prospective entre-
preneurs identified in aforementioned pool pos-
sibilities 2 through 4 have, in fact, attempted to
establish numbers enterprises. Informants typ-
ically refer to them as “in-and-outers,” meaning
they eventually go out of business or they down-
size, reverting to a small “mom and pop” oper-
ation. The most visible and singled-out group of
in-and-outers has involved former drug dealers
who, hoping to parlay their ill-gotten wealth
It’s a business. But you have to be on your toes even
more than in a regular business. A lotta hard work
and six days a week. Start around 9:00, finish up
the books around 7:00. Saturday, it’s all day until
11:00 or 11:30 that night. The old timers were
willing to put in the time and effort, knew the
business, but their kids don’t and don’t wanna
work that hard. It’s the same thing as far as pay-
ing. Years ago, you had quite a few of the black
bankers that were good at paying. The young guys,
the new guys that took over, they don’t last. Spend
the money they take in and when they have to pay
on bigger hits, just close up. Some weeks you
might win a lot of money, the next week lose it all.
Two months ago we lost $137,000 in one week. If
you don’t have the money and don’t pay the peo-
ple? You’re out of business now because you got
a bad name. A big reason the white bankers got big-
ger in the black areas, is they pay.
urban ghetto increased, young black males con-
cluded that the moral lessons of the “old heads”
about work ethics, punctuality, and honesty did
not fit their own circumstances. Second, simi-
lar to Wacquant’s (1998) hustling informants
from poor or ghetto origins, the drug dealers in
East City who tried their hand at numbers bank-
ing came into considerable wealth without also
acquiring the knowledge of how to husband it.
They squandered their money and within a year
or so were out of the numbers business.

We interpret all these observations as illus-
trating two basic points: (1) that the financial
problems of prospective black bankers are both
cultural and structural, and (2) that this is like-
ly to reflect, in many respects, their class posi-
tion. Attenuated or missing is an important
component of the cultural capital of the middle
class to which poor people are not routinely
exposed: acquisition of the basic knowledge,
skills, and attitudes that people effectively use
to manage their finances (see Light and Gold
2000:97-98, for a parallel argument in reference
to variable minority-group business ownership
in the legitimate economy). Moreover, worsen-
ing structural disadvantage may further alter
cultural capital for a numbers gambling enter-
prise in the ghetto, which in turn can hinder the
accumulation, saving, and reinvestment of
financial capital necessary for longevity in such
an enterprise.

Indeed, financial capital tends to be closely
linked to social and cultural capital. Diverse
network ties, along with business skills and
diligence, can be leveraged into financial cap-
ital. Italian operatives can more easily go to kin
or associates for personal loans, credit, and
other cooperative endeavors, all of which rely
on reputation and enduring relationships as col-
lateral because they are in cultures whose norms
strongly endorse lending within families or net-
works. By comparison, and perhaps more so in
recent times, blacks in the ghetto apparently
have only slender access to the financial and
social capital necessary for starting up their
own numbers business or for expanding an
existing one. Thus, relative to black entrepre-
neurs, TOC operatives have benefited from all
three forms of capital for gambling entrepre-
neurship, and apparently more so currently than
previously.
A numbers gambling enterprise is not simply
economic activity, and not simply produced by
socioeconomic disadvantage.

Social and cultural capital, and specifically crim-
inal social and cultural capital, is necessary for
success, durability, and longevity in numbers
gambling. Aspects of social capital resources
(e.g., the ability to mobilize superior financial
capital through network ties) may of course over-
lap with the notion of social disadvantage.
Ethnic groups differ in conventional and criminal
social and cultural capital for success in numbers
gambling. More broadly, perhaps some groups are
advantaged for particular kinds of illegal enter-
prise, whereas others are not or perhaps are advan-
taged for other kinds of illegal enterprise. For
example, our data show that TOC enjoys consid-
erable advantages in illegal gambling, whereas
African Americans do not. The findings show
that TOC advantages involve a combination of cul-
tural, social, and financial capital resources. We
have emphasized TOC’s cultural and social cap-
ital, but obviously, financial capital played a key
role in its dominance of numbers gambling enter-
prises. However, the financial capital of TOC was
interrelated with its cultural and social capital.
Future research should investigate whether and
how different types of criminal capital may over-
lap and mutually contribute to one another.
Finally, if the preceding arguments are true, then
ethnic succession theories are insufficient as
explanations for differential ethnic control of
numbers gambling enterprises. Furthermore, sim-
ple disadvantage and/or assimilation approaches
are not sufficient to explain success and longevi-
ty in such gambling enterprises. Disadvantage
does not automatically translate into involvement
and success in entrepreneurial or organized crime.
Nor does assimilation of an ethnic group guar-
antee a movement out of organized crime.
Whether the business is legal or illegal, ethnic her-
itages often confer economic advantages that go
beyond financial capital or material resources.
As Light and Gold (2000) and others (Fischer
and Massey 2000; Harrison 1992; Light and
Bonacich 1988; Min 1984; Portes and Rumbart
1990; Sowell 1994) have argued concerning legal
enterprise, some groups apparently have cultur-
al traditions and social capital resources more
favorable to criminal enterprise and to the exploit-
ing of particular opportunities around them.
Furthermore, Aldrich and Waldinger (1990:130)
emphasized the interactive nature of ethnic group
characteristics and contexts of opportunity, say-
ing that “ethnic entrepreneurs adapt to the
resources available to them, building on the char-
acteristics of their groups” (see also Light and
Gold 2000:16). We agree with this interactive
view, and call for future research to examine the
interrelationship of ethnic cultural and social cap-
ital with contexts of legal and illegal opportuni-
ty.

Our findings and those from the ethnic economies
research are at odds with the simple disadvantage
hypothesis, which predicts that disadvantage in the
labor market will encourage and produce alter-
native entrepreneurship independent of the
resources or sociocultural characteristics of those
disadvantaged. But even the disadvantaged may
require resources and social and/or cultural cap-
ital to undertake self-employment or business
ownership, whether in the legal or illegal econo-
my.

Similar to what exists in the legitimate realm,
where black customers may display little loyalty
to patronizing black-owned businesses (Lee
2002), black illegal entrepreneurs do not have a
favored position among would-be black clien-
tele. Certainly, the black bettor community in our
study seems to have displayed no particular loy-
alty to black-owned numbers banks, and were
quite willing to patronize white-owned banks.
By comparison, immigrant business owners
(Koreans and Dominicans) typically can expect
patronage from within their own ethnic group, can
hire from within their family or ethnic group,
and often send monies from their business prof-
its to the homeland rather than invest them local-
ly in the black-clientele neighborhoods. This again
suggests the importance of social capital for legal
or illegal business enterprise in that social ties
(including ethnic ties) productive of customer
loyalty are an important ingredient in ethnic busi-
my.

First, there is an obvious need for inquiry
that extends the cultural assets/social capital
framework we have applied in the study of num-
bers gambling to other arenas of illegal enter-
prise. Systematic research is hard to come by,
but what evidence does exist suggests, for exam-
ple, that some ethnic groups such as
Dominicans, Colombians, Nigerians, and
Jamaicans have fared better than other groups
in mid- to upper-level drug distribution net-
works (New Jersey State Commission of
Investigation, 1990; U.S. Drug Enforcement
2004). These four groups are particularly active
on the East Coast, including Eaststate, where
they—especially Dominican criminal groups—
dominate wholesale and mid-level drug distri-
bution (e.g., cocaine, heroin), including its
distribution in black neighborhoods (Maher
1997; New Jersey State Commission of
Investigation 2004; Steffensmeier 1995).
Consistent with the cultural assets and social
capital framework, the success of Dominican
groups has been attributed to a set of cultural tra-
ditions and organizing principles supportive of
organized crime and adaptable to the United
States (see Steffensmeier and Martens 2002;
Williams 1989). Key features of Dominicans’
cultural assets and social capital resources are
said to include strong in-group ties with other
Dominican groups; networks with Hispanic,
Asian, and Italian (TOC) suppliers; imaginative
marketing and money management; a reputation
for dependability and cooperation with other
crime groups; and mixing of the drug trade
with legitimate businesses (e.g., groceries, tav-
erns) in Hispanic and black neighborhoods.
Second, future research should distinguish
between lesser and more organized forms of
illegality. For example, it appears plausible that
criminals pursuing less organized or street-level
forms of illegal enterprise will need less social
capital (e.g., kinship ties) but more street-rele-
vant human or personal capital (e.g., conning
ability, “larceny sense,” ingenuity, violence),
whereas entrepreneurs involved in illegalities
that entail greater organization and longevity
will have to rely more heavily on cultural and
social capital resources (Steffensmeier and
Ulmer 2005). Also, it seems likely that the lack
of resources and legitimate employment oppor-
tunities is a key cause of involvement in organ-
ized criminal activity at the lower levels of its
stratification. However, a similar etiology may
not explain criminal entrepreneurs at or near the
top of the organized crime stratification system,
nor the criminal entrepreneurial logic of activ-
ities conducted by the organization as a whole
(see Ruggerio 2000). It appears that illegal
industries such as gambling and upper-level
drug distribution require social and cultural
capital, and that those with more such capital are
more likely to succeed in organized crime.
Third, at least some illegal enterprises appear
to be sufficiently lucrative in terms of their abil-
ity to attract the involvement of “newcomer”
groups not experiencing much in the way of
structural blockages (e.g., Chinese,
Colombians), and to perpetuate the involve-
ment of those groups with an established niche
in the syndication of an illegal industry, such as
characterizes Colombian drug networks in the
cocaine trade, outlaw biker groups (e.g. Hells
Angels, Pagans) in the methamphetamine trade,
and as we describe in this article, Italian crime
networks in the illegal gambling arena. Italians
at one time faced labor market disadvantage
but had other resources (social and cultural cap-
ital) to establish niches or dominance in the
underground economy, particularly gambling.
Now, in light of the profitability from gambling
enterprises, the Italian presence remains strong
in this niche, notwithstanding their assimila-
tion into mainstream American society.
Similarly, the literature on ethnicity and niches
in legal business suggests that the “groups most
successful in developing such niches are char-
acterized by a combination of resource disad-
vantage and other assets, including soft or hard
skills and strong ethnic networks” (Light and
Gold 2000:212). The notion that relative advan-
tages attributable to ethnic social and cultural
capital, particularly in niches of legal or illegal
enterprise, may be as important as relative dis-
advantage deserves greater theoretical and
empirical consideration.

The recent revival of interest in ethnic entre-
preneurship in the legal economy recognizes
cultural influences and social capital as well as
labor market disadvantage. Our reading of this
literature convinces us that there is a general
consensus concerning the inadequacy of pure-
ly cultural explanations on the one hand and of
purely structural disadvantage explanations on
the other, a position that vindicates the heritage
of Max Weber in the analysis of economic life.
By contrast, theory and research on organized
crime and illegal enterprise largely ignore social
and cultural resources, advancing disadvantage
as the whole explanation.

Our main finding of black losses and white
(Italian) gains in illegal numbers banking ques-
tions the generality of the ethnic succession
model of illegal enterprise, and relatedly, the
simple disadvantage hypothesis. It also sup-
ports our call for a cultural assets and social cap-
Darrell Steffensmeier is Professor of Sociology and
Crime, Law and Justice at Penn State University.

His current research and theoretical agenda focus on

(i) social change, gender, girls’ and women’s
crime/delinquency, and the intersection of these top-
ics with race and ethnicity; (ii) on criminal careers
and illegal enterprise; and (iii) on triangulation of
research methods and data sources. His recent book
(with Jeffery T. Ulmer), Confessions of a Dying Thief:

Understanding Criminal Careers and Illegal
Enterprise, published by Transaction Aldine (2005),

offers a nuanced portrayal of the social organization
of offending, the complexity of criminal careers, and
the broad landscape comprising the entity called
“crime.”
‘quawuostdunt sty SUIMOT[OJ SUID pozrtuRBIO JeuOTIpeN Aq JOAO Udyey o10M SUOIeIado sioquuNU S,1]]9I1dOT »
“QOL YIM suoyejer oSueyoxa oqeinp Aen
-u9j0d jnq ‘TeULIOJ sso] sUIEJUTEW = poyEITLYJY {,Joquious je1oyduod,, e pasoprsuod aq ued ‘OO] YIM SUONLIOI oBuLYOXe [eULIOJ pue o]qeINp APOANLIOI SUTEUIEU = dJBIOOSSY -a/ONy

 

 

paengy (sad) unIpeyAl SOK 9184s IsBayINOS (sos) uereay €d-ds
povellgy (soA) [reug Sq aqeys JsBayINOG (S09 ‘sos) weryer]-uoN/uereay (drysioused) 7gq—gS pue [g-aS
ayeloossy (sod) [Tews sox 9]8]S JSPOYIION (sg) uerery 7Td-AN
PoeLV (sad) [Tews SOK 918]S ISCOYLION, (sos) weryer] 1d-aN
porelLyVv (sod) Jews SOK ayeys peUSD (sO¢ ‘sop) werTer]-UoN/ueTer] (diysioused) 7gq-D pue 1d-D
Pare V (so4) [reurg SOR OYRIS ISOMYLION (sos) werpes{-uoN/ueryey] (dryssoused) 7G—A\N Pur TE-MWN
PorenLgy (so4) [reurg SOK 918]S ISOMYINOS (sos) weryery Ta-MS
ayeloossy (sox) wuntpayy SOK AND ISOM, (sos) eter] €d-OM
aeloossy (so4) unripe Sq AND ISOM, (sos) ueryery 7E-OM
yluapuadapuy (sof) UNIps|y Sox AMID ISOM. (sol) uereiy (1d-OM) t]e1do7T Auureg
SUIS pazruesio (gseore Yoe[q aprsyno sAtae) {sioquinu sapisaq uone00'T (Sg6] ul o8e) Ayoruy Joyueg

Teuonipen
0} diysuoneoy

$10}}9q YoeIQ 0} poulzuos
o1jojyiod siaquinu jo uonI0g

Surjquies Joyjo ul
JUOUWISATOAUT

 

 

0002-0261 ‘a1eISISeq UI SONID JO]TeUIg pue AUD ISaM\ UI SUONRIAEdO SIAquINN JOA “TV a1qeL
Aldrich, Howard and Roger Waldinger. 1990.
“Ethnicity and Entreprenuership.” Annual
Review of Sociology 16:111-35.

Anderson, Elijah. 1999. Code of the Street:
Decency, Violence, and the Moral Inner Life
of the Inner City. New York: Norton.

Bates, Timothy. 1997. Race, Self-Employment,
and Upward Mobility: An Illusive American
Dream. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

Bell, Daniel. 1960. The End of Ideology. New
York: Free Press.

Block, Alan. 1991. The Business of Crime.
Boulder: Westview Press.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977. Outline of a Theory of
Practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

Camic, Charles. 1986. “The Matter of Habit.”
American Journal of Sociology 91:1039-87.

Chubb, Judith. 1989. “The Mafia and Politics:
The Italian State Under Siege.” Western
Societies Program Paper Series, Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University.

Cohen, Albert. 1966. Deviance and Control.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Cressey, Donald. 1967. Theft ofa Nation. New
York: Harper and Row.

Crime Commission [Eaststate]. 1991.
Organized Crime in Eaststate.

Decker, Scott, Tim Bynum, and Deborah
Weisel. 1998. “A Tale of Two Cities: Gangs
as Organized Crime Groups.” Justice
Quarterly 15:395-425.

Farkas, George. 2003. “Cognitive Skills and
Noncognitive Behaviors in Stratification
Processes.” Annual Review of Sociology
29:541-61.

Fischer, Mary and Douglas Massey. 2000.
“Residential Segregation and Ethnic
Enterprise in U.S. Metropolitan Areas.”
Social Problems 47:408-24.

Haberman, Clyde. 1990. “The Die Is Still Cast,
and Italy Is Still Betting on It” New York
Times, February 13, p. Al4.

Hagan, John. 1991. “Destiny and Drift: The
Risks and Rewards of Youth.” American
Sociological Review 56:567-82.

1994. Crime and Disrepute.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.

Haller, Mark. 1990. “Illegal Enterprise: A
Theoretical and Historical Interpretation.”
Criminology 28:207-35.

Harrison, Lawrence. 1992. Who Prospers?
How Cultural Values Shape Economic and
Political Success. New York: Basic Books.

Hu, Winnie. 2003. “Gambling Ring with Mob
Ties Is Shut Down, Prosecutors Say.” New York
Times, January 29, p. B16.

Tanni, Francis. 1974. “New Mafia: Black, Hispanic,
and Italian Styles.” Society 35:115-29.

1975. Black Mafia: Ethnic Succession in
Organized Crime. New York: Pocket Books.

Lee, Jennifer. 1999. “Retail Niche Domination among
African American, Jewish, and Korean
Entrepreneurs.” American Behavioral Scientist
42:1398-416.

. 2002. “From Civil Relations to Racial
Conflict: Merchant-Customer Interactions in
Urban America.” American Sociological Review
67:77-98.

Liddick, Don. 1999. The Mob’s Daily Number:
Organized Crime and the Numbers Gambling
Industry. New York: Academic Press.

Light, Ivan. 1977a. “The Ethnic Vice Industry,
1880-1944.” American Sociological Review
42:464-79.

1977b. “Numbers Gambling among
Blacks: A Financial Institution.” American
Sociological Review 42:892-904.

Light, Ivan and Edna Bonacich. 1988. Jmmigrant
Entrepreneurs: Koreans in Los Angeles,
1965-1982. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.

Light, Ivan and Steven J. Gold. 2000. Ethnic
Economies. New York: Academic Press.

Lombardo, Robert. 2002. “The Black Mafia: African
American Organized Crime in Chicago
1890-1960.” Crime, Law and Social Change
38:33-65.

Lupsha, Peter. 1995. “Organized Crime.” Pp. 493-7
in The Encyclopedia of Police Science, edited by
William Bailey. New York: Garland.

Maher, Lisa. 1997. Sexed Work: Gender, Race, and
Resistance in a Brooklyn Drug Market. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.

Maines, David R., Jeffrey Bridger, and Jeffery T.
Ulmer. “Mythic Facts and Park’s Pragmatism: On
Predecessor Selection and Theorizing in Human
Ecology.” The Sociological Quarterly 37:1001-29.

Martens, Frederick. 1990. “African American
Organized Crime, an Ignored Phenomenon.”
Federal Probation 22:43-50.

Massey, Douglas and Nancy Denton. 1993. American
Apartheid, Segregation, and the Making of the
Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Miller, Eleanor. 1986. Street Woman. Philadelphia,
PA: Temple University Press.

Min, Pyong Gap. 1984. “From White-Collar
Occupations to Small Business: Korean
Immigrants’ Occupational Adjustment.” The
Sociological Quarterly 25:333-52.

New Jersey State Commission of Investigation. 1990.
1989 Annual Report. Trenton, NJ.

New Jersey State Commission of Investigation. 2004.
The Changing Face of Organized Crime in New
Jersey: A Status Report. Trenton, NJ.

Ostrom, Elinor. 1994. “Constituting Social Capital
and Collective Action.” Journal of Theoretical
Politics 6:526-43.

Park, Robert and Ernest Burgess. 1921. Introduction
to the Science of Society. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Portes, Alejandro. 1998. “Social Capital: Its Origins
and Applications in Modern Society.” Annual
Review of Sociology 24:1-24.

Portes, Alejandro and Ruben Rumbart. 1990.
Immigrant America: A Portrait. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Portes, Alejandro and Julia Sensenbrenner. 1993.
“Embeddedness and Immigration: Notes on the
Social Determinants of Economic Action.”
American Journal of Sociology 98:1320-S0.

Reuter, Peter. 1983. Disorganized Crime: The
Economics of the Invisible Hand. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

1985. The Organization of Illegal Markets:

An Economic Analysis. Washington, DC: U.S.

Government Printing Office.

1994. “Research on American Organized
Crime.” in Handbook of Organized Crime in the
United States, edited by R. Kelly, R. Schatzberg,
and K. Chin. Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Ruggiero, Vincenzo. 2000. Crime and Markets.
London: Oxford University Press.

Scarpitti, Frank. 1999. “Organized Crime.” pp. 414-
23 in Crime and Criminals: Contemporary and
Classic Readings in Criminology, edited by F.
Scarpitti and N. Nielsen. Los Angeles, CA:
Roxbury.

Schatzberg, Rufus and Robert Kelly. 1996. African
American Organized Crime: A Social History.
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Schelling, Thomas. 1967. “Economic Analysis of
Organized Crime.” Pp. 162-8 in Task Force
Report: Organized Crime. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.

Shaw, Clifford and Henry McKay. 1942. Juvenile
Delinquency and Urban Areas. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.

Shihadeh, Edward and Nicole Flynn. 1996.
“Segregation and Crime: The Effect of Black
Isolation on the Rates of Black Urban Violence.”
Social Forces 74:1325-52.

Smelser, Neil. 1976. The Sociology of Economic
Life. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Smith, Dwight. 1980. “Paragons, Pariahs, and Pirates:
A Spectrum-Based Theory of Enterprise.” Crime
and Delinquency 26:358-86.

Sowell, Thomas. 1994. Race and Culture: A World
View. New York: Basic Books.

Stack, Carol. 1974. All Our Kin: Strategies for
Survival in a Black Community. New York: Harper
Colophon Books.
Steffensmeier, Darrell. 1986. The Fence: In The
Shadow of Two Worlds. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and
Littlefield.

1995. “A Public Policy Agenda for
Combatting Organized Crime.” Pp. 269-96 in
Crime and Public Policy, edited by H. Barlow.
Westview Press.

Steffensmeier, Darrell and Fred Martens. 2002.
“Organized Crime.” Pp. 2928-34 in International
Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral
Sciences, Volume 3.15 Article 33, edited by N.
Smelser and PB. Baltas. Oxford, UK: Elsevier
Sciences.

Steffensmeier, Darrell and Jeffery T. Ulmer. 2005.
Confessions of a Dying Thief: Understanding
Criminal Careers and Criminal Enterprise. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction-Aldine.

Sutherland, Edwin H. 1947. Principles of
Criminology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott.

Swidler, Ann. 1986. “Culture in Action: Symbols
and Strategies.” American Sociological Review
51:273-286.

Uggen, Christopher and Melissa Thompson. 2003.
“The Socioeconomic Determinants of III-Gotten
Gains: Within-Person Changes in Drug Use and
Illegal Earnings.” American Journal of Sociology
109:146-85.

US. Drug Enforcement. 2004. Drug Trafficking in the
United States. Washington, DC: Department of
Justice.

Valentine, Bettylou. 1978. Hustling and Other Hard
Work. New York: The Free Press.

Wacquant, Loic. “Inside the Zone: The Social Art of
the Hustler in the Black American Ghetto.” Theory,
Culture, and Society 15:22-38.

Weber, Max. [1905] 1948. The Protestant Ethic and
the Spirit of Capitalism. London: Allan and Unwin.

Westby, David. 1991. The Growth of Sociological
Theory: Human Nature, Knowledge, and Social
Change. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Williams, Terry. 1989. The Cocaine Kids. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.

Wilson, William Julius. 1996. When Work
Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor.
New York: Knopf.

Woolcock, M. 1998. “Social Capital and Economic
Development: Towards a Theoretical Synthesis
and Policy Framework.” Theory and Society
27:151-208.
