http://www.jstor.org/stable/209051 4?seq=1 &cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
ogy of knowledge will long since have

noted some intriguing features of the
rapidly expanding research area called “med-
ical sociology.” One of the most intriguing of
these features is the rarity of studies which
directly involve the physician. We are learn-
ing a great deal, it seems, about the attitudes
of patients, the role conceptions of nurses,
and the socialization of students in medical
school, but comparable learnings about the
central figure in the medical world are rela-
tively rare.

This paper seeks to redress some of the
imbalance. It examines the performance of
a group of internes. The question that is
asked about their performance is eminently
sociological in character; namely, what dif-
ferences in medical practice are associated
with different degrees of stratification on
hospital wards to which the internes are as-
signed? Though the status aspect of hos-
pitals and of medical practice has been a
dominant sociological interest (with con-
siderable attention being given to social class
membership) ,1 it is not possible to say that

T HOSE who are interested in the sociol-
the imputed importance of social organiza-
tion within medical institutions has been
convincingly demonstrated. The bulk of the
work on the status system in medical organ-
izations has been anecdotal in character, or
has avoided altogether the measurement of
medically relevant consequences. We sought
to determine whether there are such medi-
cally relevant consequences in performance

probably has been employed more frequently than
any other sociological variable in mental illness re-
search, as well as in other medical fields.” (H. E.
Freeman and O. G. Simmons, “Social Class and
Post-Hospital Performance Levels,” American So-
ciological Review, 24 (June, 1959), p. 345).

2 Tllustrations of the “anecdotal” type would in-
clude the discussion of power in Stanton and
Schwartz’s work on mental hospitals, and Coser’s
report on the social structure of medical and sur-
gical wards in a general hospital (see A. H. Stanton,
and M. S. Schwartz, The Mental Hospital, New
York: Basic Books, Inc., 1954, and R. L. Coser, “Au-
thority and Decision-Making in a Hospital: A Com-
parative Analysis,” American Sociological Review,
23 (February, 1958) pp. 56-63). On the matter of
specifically medical consequences, we refer to the
fact that many of the studies in medical sociology
are either straightforward attitude surveys, or they
deal with dependent variables that are themselves
social structural in character; cf., for example, the
study of E. G. Mishler and A. Tropp, (“Status
Interaction in a Psychiatric Hospital,” Human Rela-
tions, 9 (Summer, 1956) pp. 187-205) which de-
scribes the social interaction among personnel oc-
cupying various positions in the status hierarchy.
One of the outstanding exceptions on this matter is
the study by H. Menzel and E. Katz, which shows
that the social relations among physicians influence
their drug prescription (“Social Relations and Inno-
vation in the Medical Profession: The Epidemiology
of a New Drug,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 19
(Winter 1955-56), pp. 337-352).
which flow from differences in the social or-
ganization of medical care units. The present
paper deals with the interne’s report on his
own (and the ward’s) performance, and
with the evaluation of the interne’s perform-
ance by his medical superiors.

A general theoretical word is in order be-
fore we turn to our methods and results. Our
papers are intended for the field of sociology
as a whole and not simply for those inter-
ested in “medical sociology.” Two matters
are crucial here. First, our papers argue,
both explicitly and implicitly, that sociolo-
gists have not effectively demonstrated the
cardinal proposition that organizational
stratification makes a difference in unit per-
formance. The evidence on such a proposi-
tion is both limited and highly informal. In
these terms, the fact that we deal with the
medical field is a matter of secondary inter-
est, since the industrial sociologist, the crim-
inologist, and others are necessarily involved
in testing the validity and the limits of such
a proposition.

In addition, our papers argue that socio-
logical theory has been excessively concerned
with stratification in the community and too
little concerned with organizational stratifi-
cation. Thus, it will be plain in what follows
that we have had to employ a rough-and-
ready “theory” as a basis for prediction and
interpretation. The central themes in this
theory may be summarized in the ideas of
“generalization” and “rigidification.” Staff
members with an orientation toward high
stratification will generalize their attitudes
to include the patient—e.g., the patient’s
feelings, like the opinions of subordinate staff
members, will be treated as being unimpor-
tant, hence spending time with him, under-
standing his psychological state, or the like,
will not be encouraged. At the same time,
the notion of rigidification implies that there
is an optimum level of stratification, but that
beyond this point the stratification of the
unit becomes an accretion, something ad-
hered to not for its functional value but for
its own sake. As the latter becomes true, the
unit presumably gets into communication
difficulties as the result of status barriers, or
comes to be used for status ends (e.g., comes
to be used not for teaching medical skills to
internes but for the pursuit of status in one
of its many forms). We are fully aware that
8 The themes of generalization and rigidification
are hardly new: they are part of the common coin
of sociological writings on authority and bureauc-
racy since Max Weber. The generalization theme
has been identified as the basic element in Merton’s
model of bureaucracy. Thus, J. G. March and H. A.
Simon write, “Merton is concerned with dysfunc-
tional organizational learning: organization members
generalize a response from situations where the re-
sponse is appropriate to similar situations where it
results in consequences unanticipated and undesired
by the organization” (Organizations, N. Y.: Wiley,
1958, pp. 37-38). With regard to rigidification,
Blau, Selznick, and others (including the more psy-
chological small-groups investigators) reflect the
general view that status rigidities—often interpreted
as the conversion of a required ranking system into
an end in its own right—are dysfunctional (cf., for
example, P. M. Blau, Bureaucracy in Modern So-
ciety, N. Y.: Random House, 1956; esp. pp. 69-
83). An excellent, and rare, systematic discussion of
both the contributions and disruptive tendencies of
status systems can be found in C. I. Barnard, “Func-
tions and Pathology of Status Systems in Formal
Organizations,” in W. F. Whyte, editor, Industry
and Society, N. Y.: McGraw-Hill, 1946, pp. 46-83.
In short, though the notions of generalization and
rigidification stem from an extensive literature, it is
nonetheless true that, on the theoretical side, we
are very far indeed from anything approximating a
theory of intra-organizational stratification. On the
empirical side, it is still possible to agree heartily
with Peter Rossi’s succinct remark: “. . . the study
of social organization is disgracefully neglected in
sociology” (see his “Comment” on O. D. Duncan
and L. F. Schnore, “Cultural, Behavioral, and Eco-
logical Perspectives in the Study of Social Organiza-
tion,” American Journal of Sociology, 65 (Septem-
ber, 1959), p. 149).
comparable in their basic features—e.g., in
physical design and in patient load—but
they were not comparable with respect to
two important variables; namely, they in-
volved both surgical and medical services
(eight wards were surgical, and six were
medical); and they differed in their concen-
tration of clinical (non-paying) as against
private patients. These differences have been
taken into account in the subsequent
analysis.*

Four basic measures were required for our
present purposes: we were interested in de-
termining the relevance of stratification
(both as a social form on the ward, and as
an attitude on the part of the interne) for
medical performance (as subjectively seen
by the interne and reputationally seen by his
superiors). Each of these measures is briefly
described below.

Ward stratification. An instrument was
developed consisting of ten items which are
descriptive of status behavior on the ward.
Nurses were individually interviewed con-
cerning the behavior of the attending physi-
cian in charge. The interview consisted of
asking nurses to place each item appropri-
ately, on a prepared numerical scale, so as
to describe how the physician in question
managed the unit. The ten items that com-
prise the stratification measure are given
below:
5 We cannot attempt to discuss here the sense in
which our measure of the status order on the ward
is, as we take it to be, a measure of “stratification.”
The question involves some fundamental issues in
sociological work—e.g., the distinction between
structure and behavior, and the relation of role to
stratification. These problems are discussed in some
detail elsewhere; cf. M. Seeman, J. W. Evans, and
L. E. Rogers, “The Measurement of Stratification in
Formal Organizations,’ Human Organization, 19
(Summer, 1960), pp. 90-96. For the present, it
matters little whether one uses the language of status
relations, authoritarianism, or stratification.

Our procedure was based on the magnetic board
described in S. Rettig et al., “The Magnetic Rating
Board Technique,” Journal of Psychology, 45 (April,
1958), pp. 201-206. In the typical case, three reg-
istered nurses per ward provided the descriptions of
the status order. Extensive analysis of the data,
based on a sample of 55 nurses, indicated that (1)
there was a relatively high level of agreement
among the multiple describers on a given ward,
along with successful discrimination among wards
(as demonstrated by the analysis of variance), (2)
the scale yielded satisfactory reliabilities, and (3)
the status descriptions were objective in the sense
that they were not correlated with the nurses’ satis-
faction with their jobs or their personal attitudes
about stratification.
The total score on this scale is taken as an
index of the individual’s preference for a sit-
uation in which power, prestige and social
distance differentials are maximized (or mini-
mized) in the daily activity of the nursing
ward. This scale yielded a corrected split-
half reliability of .67 and a re-test correlation
(over one year) of .71.

The interne’s report. This index of per-
formance was a series of self-reports by the
internes regarding their behavior on the
various wards over a four-month period of
rotation. These reports were obtained in
private interviews that were scheduled within
the last three days of an interne’s month of
work on a given ward. At that time, the in-
terne was asked to describe his own medical
performance, as well as the performance of
the ward as a unit, by sorting a group of
items which dealt with medical care pro-
cedures. The interne’s task was to place each
item in an appropriate frequency category
(on a six-point scale from “Never” to “Quite
Often”) depending on how frequently the
particular behavior had occurred during his
month on the given ward.

Of the 62 items that were sorted in each
interview, 35 were descriptive of the in-
terne’s own performance, and the remaining
27 items were descriptive of the quality of
patient care on the ward. By way of illustra-
tion, we present below five items from these
two sections of the performance instrument.
Each item was typed on a separate card and
prefaced with the question, “How often dur-
ing the past month has it happened that
you:”
6 Both in the present paper, and in its sequel deal-
ing with objective measures, we were fundamentally
interested in performance differences, but the ques-
tion of quality is necessarily involved. Clearly, the
judgment of quality cannot be made with equal
clarity for each of the items or aspects of perform-
ance. Nonetheless, the matter of quality can not be
avoided: both the interne and his superiors are
being asked in our instruments to concern them-
selves with the quality of performance; and some
of the objective criteria in our second paper have a
prima facie implication about quality (e.g., the oc-
currence of errors in giving medications). The sum
of the matter is that we were forced to approach
the quality problem as “intelligent laymen.” That
is, we make cautious judgments where we can, sus-
pend judgment where we must, and make provision
for the evaluations of those in the profession. Some
of the questions involved (e.g., the precise implica-
tion about quality involved in such a measure as
“length of hospital stay”) are problems for the
medical profession itself. But these difficulties do
not dictate agnosticism about quality; they dictate
care in interpretation.
close of the interne’s month of service on a
given ward, such ratings being completed
in the usual case by both the chief resident
on the unit and the senior-staff physician.
The form calls for ratings on four aspects
of interne performance: clinical judgment;
initiative; relationship and attitude toward
patients; relationship and attitude toward
medical staff. For each of these four com-
petencies, a four-step rating scale is pro-
vided (superior, good, fair, poor), these being
converted for our purposes into a numerical
scale (scored 4 to 1). As one might guess,
the ratings at the low end of the scale are
used sparingly; and the correlation among
the four ratings is high.’ We gathered these
ratings for a six-month period of interne
rotation, basically the same period as that
involved for the interne’s report on his own
performance.

In sum, then, we have described a design
that simulated an experimental situation in
which repeated measurements are taken on
the same subjects performing under varying
conditions, with each subject serving as his
own control. Since we dealt, however, with
an operating organization—and a ccrisis-
involved one at that—deviations from opti-
mum design were inevitable. Given the
relatively large group of internes, and given
the random character of their ward assign-
ments, we assumed in our analysis that the
effects of these deviations from precise
experimental control would be randomized.®
These three questions are treated in turn.

Ward stratification and the interne’s
report. To ask whether the status organiza-
tion of the ward is related to medical differ-
ences among these units is to assume that
the wards actually differ in the care they
provide. Our first task was to determine
whether, stratification aside, the internes
report that their performance differed on the
14 wards. For this purpose, we conducted 62
analyses of variance—an analysis for each
of the interne-report items—to determine
whether performance varied among the
wards. We found that for 21 of the 62 items
the obtained F ratio was significant at the
.05 level or approximated such significance.
The specific character of these items is
indicated in the subsequent discussion; for
the moment, the conclusion of importance
is that the wards apparently do differ signif-
icantly among themselves in medically
relevant ways.

But are these differences in any way
related to the social system on the ward? To
answer this question, the 14 wards were
Taste 1. MEAN FREQUENCY OF REPORTED OCCURRENCE oF VaRIoUS MepicaL BEHAviors ON WARDS
C1assiFiep By DEGREE OF STRATIFICATION (HicH vs. Low) AND TyPE oF SERVICE (MEDICAL vs. SURGICAL)

 

 

Significance Level
Item Stratification

 

Strati- Serv- Inter-
Service High Low fication ice action
Ward Quality
10. Had patients held over in the hospital

11.

longer than you thought was necessary, i.e.,
patients you would have discharged sooner
if you were in charge

Felt that the work assigned to you this
month wasn’t really up to the level of your
training
These data suggest that stratification is
indeed relevant for medical performance.
Seven of the nine interne performance items
and five of the twelve ward quality items
implicate stratification in some way (either
directly as a main effect in the analysis of
variance, or in the significance of the inter-
action term). Taken together, the data of
Table 1 appear to argue that two major
hospital functions are significantly affected
by stratification: communication and teach-
ing. Where staff stratification is low, the
communication to and about the patient ap-
pears to be, relatively speaking, full and
clear (items 2, 6, 8, 12; and to some extent
items 7 and 9); and the teaching function is
said to be well performed (items 11, 15, 20).
The reverse, of course, holds on the high
stratification wards.

It was noted earlier that there is, in our
design, some confounding of stratification
with the clinical-private distinction (as well
as with the medical-surgical distinction). We
have attempted to deal with the latter in the
analyses presented above, where medicine
and surgery are handled as one of the main
effects in the analysis of variance. The con-
founding of the clinical-private variable with
stratification is indicated by the fact that
the seven high stratification wards had a
higher concentration of private patients (69
per cent were private patients during the
four month period under study), while on
the low stratification wards the private pa-
tients were in the minority (48 per cent).
The question is, are our results strictly a
function of this concentration of clinical
(non-paying) patients on the low stratifica-
tion units?

Though it is difficult to disengage these
two variables (concentration of clinical pa-
tients and low stratification), we have some
evidence on the question whether the re-
moval of the clinical feature removes the
significance of stratification. We contrasted
two surgery wards, both of which were
predominantly clinical (77 per cent of the
patients on both wards were clinical), but
one was high in stratification while the other
was low. The question is: does the com-
parison of these two clinical surgery wards
that differ fundamentally only in their
stratification scores follow the pattern pre-
sented in Table 1, or do the medical differ-
ences revealed in that table disappear when
the clinical character of the wards is held
constant?

The answer is that the differences do not
disappear: the two clinical wards differ in
the same direction as our earlier results
would lead us to predict. On items that are
concerned with teaching, the highly stratified
ward gets considerably poorer ratings than
the ward that is low in stratification; and on
the items in Table 1 that deal with the
interne’s performance, the pattern is also
preserved: i.e., in substantially the same
degree as is shown in Table 1, communica-
tion troubles are found on the high stratifica-
tion ward. Our results clearly argue that the
differences in Table 1 are not an artifact of
the clinical-private disproportion.®

Status commitment and the interne’s
report. When we ask whether the status
system of the hospital is relevant for medical
practice, we wish not only to examine the
consequences of the person’s situation—his
involvement in differing social systems on
various wards—but also to discover whether
the individual’s attitude about stratification
has medical implications. Since the internes
were randomly rotated through the various
wards, it was possible for us to ask whether
a group of similarly assigned internes, differ-
ing in their status commitments but pre-
sumably not in the objective character of
their tasks, describe their own medical per-
formance or the ward’s performance in
different terms.

To answer this question we divided the
internes into high and low status commitment
groups, and then sought to determine
whether these two groups reported their own
and the ward’s performance differently over
the four-month rotation period. The results
are presented in Table 2. It should be re-
called that those who are high in status com-
mitment are those who express a personal
preference for a situation in which power,
prestige and social distance differentials are
maximized among staff members.

Five of the 35 interne performance items
show significant differences between the two
attitude groups, and the differences are
rather consistently in the expected direction
(with four additional starred items being
significant by a one-tailed test). Internes
who were low in their commitment to status
report that they: spend more time with pa-
tients (items 1 and 8); transmit more
information to patients (items 2 and 7);
extend themselves in psychological support
of the patient (items 1 and 2); and tend to
be somewhat less critical of the patient
(items 4 and 9). Table 2 also shows that
only two of the 27 “ward quality” items are
associated with the attitude measures—i.e.,
as one might expect, the interne’s personal
commitment to status is more closely related
to his description of his own performance
than to his description of the ward. In the
two items on ward quality where there is a
relationship, the tendency is for internes
low in status commitment to be less critical
of ward procedures.

One noteworthy point is that the items of
medical behavior which are shown to be
significantly related to the interne’s attitude
about status are basically a different set of
items from those which were associated with
the stratification of the ward. It remains to
be seen, of course, whether this pattern of
association is maintained in further studies.
For the present, however, it seems fair to
conclude that there are two rather distinct
sets of medical outcomes associated with the
status features of the hospital: one set is
attributable to the social structure under
which the interne works; and another set
is related to a relatively stable personal
attribute of the interne—his commitment to
the value of a stratified order—which he
carries with him from situation to situation.
With due regard for the hazards of over-
simplification, we might say that the first set
involves chiefly problems of medical teach-
ing and the coordination of communications;
while the second set are behaviors that re-
flect different images of appropriate patient-
physician relations.

Ward stratification and performance
reputation. As with the data from the
interne’s report, our evidence indicates that
the performance ratings given to internes by
their medical superiors are related to the
stratification system. The results are gen-
erally consistent with the implications of
the previous findings: in a word, low
stratification and high reputed performance
tend to go together. Our problem in what
follows is to see in what sense and in what
degree this is so.

We begin with a presentation based on
total scores—the summed scores for the four
aspects of performance that were rated
(clinical judgment, initiative, patient and
staff relations). We deal here exclusively
with the wards which have a majority of
private (fee-paying) patients. These wards
are controlled by a senior member of the
medical faculty—the key person whose
behavior determined the stratification score.
In the analysis of these ratings, we have
maintained the independence of the “strat-
ification” variable and the “performance”
variable by using as our primary data the
ratings given to the interne by physicians
other than the physician-in-charge (these
“independent” ratings usually being made
by the chief resident). The ratings provided
by the “men-in-charge” are not ignored,
10The four heavily-clinical wards are omitted
here since they presented a different rating situation.
On these wards, the chief resident was the physician
who determined the stratification score, so that the
usable ratings of the interne were those provided by
a senior-faculty person (whereas in Table 3 the rat-
ings are predominantly those made by the chief
resident). We decided, accordingly, that these differ-
ent rating situations should not be combined, and
that the more numerous heavily-private wards pro-
vided the clearest test of the hypothesis. However,
as in our earlier effort to control for the clinical-
private problem, we compared the results obtained
on our two heavily-clinical “control” wards. The
results are consistent with the data in Table 3: the
mean quality of performance on the highly stratified
ward was 2.58; on the “low” ward the score was
3.31. Again, the two “control” wards reveal trends
which support the conclusion that the obtained re-
lationship between stratification and medical per-
formance is not an artifact of organizational condi-
tions that tend to go with low stratification (chiefly,
supervision by residents or concentration of clinical
patients).
elements or competencies comprising this
total score, it was our guess, both in the light
of our general view of the stratification
system and in light of the interne report data,
that one of the key ratings would be the
item which deals with the interne’s relation-
ship with patients. Indeed, one might argue
that a greater sensitivity to the patient as a
person (for example, a readiness to bring
the patient more fully into the treatment
process) is simply an extension of the idea
of low stratification to include the patient
as well as the ward staff in an over-all order
that, relatively speaking, minimizes hier-
archy.

Following the model of Table 3, we com-
pared the high and low stratification wards
on an item basis, seeking to determine the
consistency of the differences on each of the
four medical competencies. Table 4 presents
the results of this analysis. The notable
features of Table 4 are, first, the fact that
the four items consistently show that higher
quality goes with low stratification; and,
second, the fact that the most striking differ-
ence between high and low stratification
occurs in the rating of the interne’s “patient
relations.” As noted in Table 4, the differ-
ence between high and low stratification is
statistically significant only for the rating of
“patient relations.” 11

These findings seem clear and consistent,
not only within themselves but also in rela-
tion to the previously reported findings
(where, for example, we found the internes
themselves reporting greater psychological
support of the patient under low stratifica-
tion). But an important complication is en-
countered when we compare the results
presented above—which are based upon the
TaBLe 4. Mean Quatity oF INTERNE PERFORMANCE ON Four MepicaL COMPETENCIES, FOR TEN NuRSING

Warps, CLASSIFIED BY STRATIFICATION (HicH vs. Low) AND SERVICE (MEDICINE

vs. SURGERY)

 

 

 

 

Clinical Judgment Initiative Patient Relations Staff Relations
High Low High Low High Low High Low
Strati-  Strati- Strati-  Strati- Strati-  Strati- Strati-  Strati-
Service fication fication fication fication fication fication fication fication
Surgery 3.00 3.25 2.93 3.25 3.20 3.42 3.23 3.42
Medicine 3.06 3.14 2.94 3.00 3.28 3.57 3.11 3.36
Total 3.02 3.19 2.94 3.12 3.23 3.50 3.19 3.38
Difference (Between
High and Low +.17 +.18 +.27 +.19

Stratification)

 

The number of monthly ratings involved for each of these item comparisons is the same as those given
in Table 3. Analyses of variance, by item, yielded a significant F ratio for stratification in one of the four
instances; namely, for patient relations (F=4.09, significant at the .05 level). In no case was the service
distinction significant. Positive signs indicate that higher quality is consistently found on wards that were

low in stratification.
TasLe 5. MEAN QUALITY OF INTERNE PERFORMANCE, AS RATED BY “INDEPENDENT” AND “INVOLVED” PHysI-
cians on Ten Nursinc Warps, CLASSIFIED BY STRATIFICATION (HicH vs. Low)

 

 

 

 

Independent Rater Involved Rater

High Low High Low

Score Stratification Stratification Stratification Stratification
Clinical judgment 3.02 3.19 3.03 2.96
Initiative 2.94 3.12 3.24 2.96
Patient relations 3.23 3.50 3.31 3.13
Staff relations 3.19 3.38 3.34 3.35
Total 3.09 3.30 3.23 3.10

 

The number of descriptions for the high and low stratification groups in the case of the independent
rater are the same as those indicated in Table 3 (48 and 26 respectively); for the involved rater, the N’s
were smaller (29 and 23 respectively). The “involved” rater is the physician whose behavior provided the
basis for the designation of the ward as being high or low in stratification.
but difficult to interpret. It is plain that
these data offer further support for our
notion that the stratification system is
implicated in the images of medical reputa-
tion that are current in the hospital.
Stratification is, to say the least, not ir-
relevant to the process of assigning reputa-
tions, whether one chooses to focus upon the
superiority of low stratification as the
independent raters see it, or upon the dis-
agreement between the two types of raters in
their judgment of the high and low stratifica-
tion units.

Why these differences occur as they do is
the problem. The most likely interpretation
may lie in the very fact of “involvement”:
for it seems reasonable to argue that under
high stratification the involved rater (whose
concentration of power and prestige in his
own hands is what produces the high
stratification score) is more personally
identified with the medical outcomes on his
unit—in one sense, he is the unit—and he
therefore tends to “rate high.” Obviously,
such a view is one among several alternatives.
In any event, we have shown that the
stratification of the ward is not independent
of the reputed quality of interne perform-
ance.”

12 The interpretive problem is whether to take
the “independent” or the “involved” rater’s view
literally—if, indeed, one takes either of them to be
making valid judgments about actual performance.
Thus, an alternative interpretation of our reputa-
tional data can be offered: the “independent” raters
do not like the senior physicians who control the
highly stratified wards, and as a symptom of this
dislike they “rate down” the performance of the
internes under high stratification. Such an interpre-
tation is tenable, to be sure, but three points may
be made regarding it. First, if it is so, the general
conclusion still holds that stratification is a relevant
feature in the system: residents dislike high strati-
fication and distort their judgments of medical
quality in light of their reaction to the status order.
Second, it is entirely likely that the resident’s dis-
like (a dislike that we must presume the interne
shares) has its consequences in the performance of
tasks on the ward. Finally, the “pure dislike” inter-
pretation must accommodate congruences, among
our three types of performance data, that tend in
our view to argue against it. For example, it is on
the wards that are low in stratification that we
find: (1) the internes reporting that they spend
more time in psychological support of the patient;
(2) more extensive use of psychiatric consultations
(see the subsequent paper on objective criteria) ;
and (3) high reputations on “patient relations” as-
signed by the independent rater. In light of this
This paper has examined a proposition
that is commonly asserted but rarely demon-
strated; namely, that the stratification sys-
tem of the hospital makes a difference in
medical care. Capitalizing on the quasi-
experimental character of the interne rotation
program in the hospital under study, we
obtained reports on medical performance
from 42 internes as they served successively
on nursing wards which varied in their degree
of stratification. At the same time, we
obtained reports from the internes’ medical
superiors regarding the character of their
performance.

Taken together, our results suggest that
stratification is, indeed, a medically relevant
feature of hospital organization. With regard
to the interne’s report, more than one-third
of the 62 items that constituted the descrip-
tion of medical performance showed signif-
icant association with the status measures.
These performance differences are bound up
with the status system in two ways. First, as
a social form—a system of organization that
the key medical person maintains on his unit
—stratification apparently has something to
do with the way in which the patient’s hos-
pital program is carried out and with the
hospital’s performance of its teaching func-
tion. Thus, more widely shared and better
coordinated information about the patient
tends to be found where there is low stratifi-
cation; and it is uniformly the case that
poor teaching, as the internes see it, is found
where there is high stratification. Second, as
an attitude—a personal commitment about
stratification on the part of the interne—
stratification appears to relate to perform-
ance: e.g., those internes who prefer highly
stratified staff relations say that they spend
less time in psychological support of the
patient. Whether one takes the interne’s
report literally or not—i.e., as a measure of
actual differences in behavior—it is clear, at
the very least, that what the interne thinks
about the status system is not independent
of what he thinks about patients themselves.
Thus, ideologies about patient care are bound
up with ideologies about the stratification
system of the hospital.

The reputational data, too, bear out the
conclusion that the stratification system
makes a difference in performance. To be
sure, we are not obliged to take literally the
“Gndependent” rater’s judgment that the
same internes rotating from high to low
stratification perform better under the latter
condition; nor can we ignore the fact that
the “involved” rater disagrees with that
judgment. But the significant point is that
these reputational ratings are not independ-
ent of the stratification variable and that the
independent rater’s judgment seems quite
congruent with the interne’s report.

If it is fair, however, to view our data as
constituting presumptive evidence that
stratification has medical consequences, it is
equally fair to ask why the relationship is
not more striking than it is. Though we have
shown relationships that involve stratifica-
tion both as a social form and as an attitude,
and that involve both subjective and reputa-
tional performance, it is nonetheless true that
the differences are not overwhelming. Though
much of the sociological literature seems to
take the fact of stratification consequences
for granted, our data hardly provide war-
rant for such a ready assumption.

Two points need to be kept in mind, how-
ever, in assessing the significance of these
minimal differences. First, we are not deal-
ing here with intra-person relationships
where impressive correlations are easier to
come by (i.e., relations between two scores
obtained from the same individual, usually
at one time in a given questionnaire), but
with relationships between independent
events—for example, the relation between
stratification as described by nurses on the
ward and reputations assigned to internes by
their medical superiors. Second, we are deal-
ing with an operating system with many
sources of variance of which stratification is
only one.

For ourselves, the most telling trouble in
this work is not the extent of the differences
found (especially when we include the objec-
tive data to be presented in the subsequent
paper). The key trouble is that an adequate
theory of stratification that is directly rel-
evant to organizational functioning is not
available, and thus the difficult task remains
of providing a well-grounded rationale for
the differences (and the lack of difference
on so many aspects of behavior) that we
have found. It is certainly important, for
example, to be wary of an equalitarian bias
that would lead to the prediction of exclu-
sively negative consequences under condi-
tions of high stratification. Though one may
predict on the whole that high stratification
will be associated with lower quality care—
following roughly our “generalization” and
“rigidification” view—it is not to be assumed
that all aspects of performance will be so
influenced. Low stratification may well gen-
erate its own brand of difficulty—e.g.,
looseness in routine procedures.1%
set forth a detailed account of our

efforts, in a social psychological study
of aging, to operationalize two of Talcott
Parsons’ five pattern variables. We will not
describe the Kansas City Study of Adult
Life, except to indicate the relevance of the
pattern variables to our general conceptual

O: primary intent in this report is to

* This report is based on data from The Kansas
City Study of Adult Life, a project financed by
Grant 3M-9082 from the National Institute of
Mental Health to the Committee on Human Devel-
opment of the University of Chicago. It is under
the supervision of William E. Henry (Principal
Investigator), Robert J. Havighurst, and Bernice
L. Neugarten. The Study Director has been Elaine
Cumming, and the Field Director, Lois R. Dean.
Some of the material contained in this paper ap-
peared previously in “Interaction Style and Success
in Aging,” a report prepared by the author, while
a member of the field research staff, for the Fifty-
third Annual Meeting of the American Sociological
Association, Seattle, Washington, August, 1958.
framework. We will report only the most
rudimentary findings, in order merely to
illustrate some uses to which we are putting
the operations we have developed. And
finally, we will assume on the reader’s part
a general familiarity with the Parsonian
action scheme, although we will of course
report the refinements and modifications in
Parson’s own definitions of the pattern
variables that the empirical tasks have im-
posed on us.

In short, our purpose here is principally
to relate the means by which we have
attacked the following problem: How does
one go about asking, for example, a middle-
aged, Midwestern, lower middle class house-
wife, with rural origins, average intelligence,
and an eighth grade education, whether her
orientations to interaction with others are
primarily affective or affectively neutral, and
whether her role behavior tends on the whole
