American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
scribed himself as “a maker and tester

of limited propositions that seem of
some significance to sociology and _ social
psychology and as a contributor to the im-
provement of the tools needed in the test-
ing.” ? Among his many achievements were
the formulation in mathematical terms and
subjection to empirical test of a theory of
“intervening opportunities.” “In terms of
time and labor invested,” notes Lazarsfeld,
“this was probably the largest effort he made
in the later part of his life’? Not only
did Stouffer maintain over the years a per-
sonal interest in this theory—his initial
paper published in 1940 was supplemented
by a major reformulation published in 1960

Ge before his death, Stouffer de-
—but other sociologists have reported a
variety of alternative tests of the general
propositions. The study of intervening
opportunities is thus one of the all-too-rare
examples in sociology of repeated attempts
at replication and refinement of a carefully
stated testable theory. Our study is an effort
to perpetuate this tradition by undertaking
as exact a replication as is feasible of Stouf-
fer’s second study, substituting migration
data from the 1960 census for the 1940 cen-
sus data he utilized.

Although Stouffer argued that a general
theory of intervening opportunities could

8 Both papers are reprinted in Social Research
to Test Ideas, op. cit., chap. 4, pp. 68-112. For
examples of the work of others, see Margaret
Bright and Dorothy S. Thomas, “Interstate Migra-
tion and Intervening Opportunities,” American
Sociological Review, 6 (December, 1941), pp.
773-783; Eleanor C. Isbell, “Internal Migration in
Sweden and Intervening Opportunities,” American
Sociological Review, 9 (December, 1944), pp. 627-
639; Fred Strodtbeck, “Equal Opportunity Inter-
vals: A Contribution to the Method of Intervening
Opportunity Analysis,” American Sociological Re-
view, 14 (August, 1949), pp. 490-497; Fred Strodt-
beck, “Population, Distance, and Migration from
Kentucky,” Sociometry, 13 (May, 1950), pp. 123-
130; Theodore R. Anderson, “Intermetropolitan
Migration: A Comparison of the Hypotheses of
Zipf and Stouffer,” Avzerican Sociological Review,
20 (June, 1955), pp. 287-291.
be useful in accounting for “such phenomena
as spatial propinquity to the selection of
marriage mates, relationship between certain
types of crime and the residence of criminals,
the choice of colleges, and the utilization of
leisure and vacation time,” * in both of his
papers the operational formulation of the
theory and the empirical data pertained to
residential mobility. In his final formula-
tion, the model is an attempt to express for
a specified time interval the number of
migrants from City 1 to City 2 (Y) as a
direct function of the number of opportuni-
ties in City 2 (Xz) and an inverse function
of the number of opportunities intervening
between City 1 and City 2 (Xx) and the
number of other migrants competing for the
opportunities in City 2 (Xo). The basic
formulation is thus:
From empirical data on migration streams
between pairs of cities, a set of values of Y
can be ascertained (the actual number of
migrants in each stream), and observed
measures of Xy, Xp, and Xo (size effect,
intervening opportunities, and competing mi-
grants) may be calculated according to
Stouffer’s operational definitions. Express-
ing all variables in log form, multiple
linear regression techniques may be used to
determine values for the parameters A, B,
C, and log K. The multiple correlation co-
efficient and standard error of estimate serve
as measures of the goodness of fit of the
model.

Stouffer’s test of model (4) utilized data
on 116 arbitrarily selected migration
streams, representing migration in both di-
rections between 16 large cities and Los
Angeles, Denver, Chicago, and New York.®
In calculating the measures of intervening
opportunities and competing migrants, how-
ever, account is taken of net migration to
and from all places within some relevant
Xz (Intervening Opportunities) :

1.On a map, connect City 1 and City 2
with a straight line, and extend this line
75 miles beyond the center of each city.

2. Draw a circle with this line as a diameter.

3. Compile a list of all cities of 100,000 or
over lying within this circle. Include City
1 but exclude City 2.

4. Determine for each city on the list the
total number of in-migrants 1935-40
from other cities of 100,000 and over.

5. The sum of the numbers in Step 4 is de-
fined as the number of intervening op-
portunities for migrants from City 1 to
City 2.
over within a single metropolitan area.)
Thus Stouffer’s migration field pertains to
US. cities of 100,000 and over for 1935-40;
ours pertains to U.S. metropolitan areas of
250,000 and over for 1955-60.1° Aside from
the switch from cities to metropolitan areas,
which altered the migration field used for
calculating the measures, we followed Stouf-
fer’s procedures exactly, utilizing data for
the same 116 migration streams.

Before obtaining the results, we antici-
pated significant changes in the fit of the
model because of the quite different time
periods. The earlier period was a time of
severe economic depression, with limited eco-
nomic opportunities throughout the nation,
a slow rate of national and urban population
growth, and a relatively low rate of inter-
city migration. The later period, by con-
trast, followed a period of rapid economic
growth, and despite recurrent recessions,
times were generally quite good. Metropoli-
tan population was increasing at a rapid
pace, and the volume of long-distance mi-
gration was much greater 1955-60 than
1935-40. In the more highly developed
economy of the later period, it is probable
that the economic integration of the nation
as a whole was higher, at least with respect
to the system of interchange of goods and
services among major metropolitan areas.
Transportation and communication were
much improved. We anticipated that the
explanatory power of Stouffer’s migration
model, which is in a sense based on “social
distance,” would be at least as great for
1955-60 as for 1935-40, but that the power
of a migration model based on spatial dis-
tance would be less. We thought that use
of data for metropolitan areas would also
help improve the fit of the model by better
representing the functioning nodal units in
a national network of interdependent areas.

10 Twelve of the cities of 100,000 and over in
1940 are not among the metropolitan areas of
250,000 and over in 1960; central cities of 22 of
the metropolitan areas were less than 100,000 in
population in 1940. For each period, however, the
migration field used for defining Xs and Xc per-
tains to the total interchange of migrants among
the largest population centers in the country. The
1955-60 data are from U.S. Bureau of the Census,
US. Census of Population: 1960, Subject Reports,
Mobility for Metropolitan Areas, Final Report
PC(2)-2C, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1963.
The basic results of the correlation and
regression analysis of the intervening oppor-
tunities—competing migrants model with
1955-60 migration data are shown in the
top panel of Table 1, together with cor-
responding figures from Stouffer’s applica-
tion of the model to 1935-40 data. The
multiple correlation coefficient for the 1955-
60 data is high (0.95). Stouffer’s model
once again is shown to be extremely power-
ful—explanation of more than 90 per cent
of the variance in a set of empirical data is
rarely attained in the social sciences. The
partial correlation coefficients indicate that
the measures of intervening opportunities
and competing migrants make independent
and roughly equal contributions to the pre-
dictive utility of the model. The exponents
B and C are much less than unity, confirm-
ing Stouffer’s suspicion that the exponents
should be treated as variables.

Stouffer’s model was formulated initially
as an alternative to a migration model of
the P,P2/D type, where P; and P2 represent
the populations of Cities 1 and 2, and D
represents distance (in miles).11 For pre-
dicting migration from City 1 to City 2, it
is easy to justify the substitution of total
out-migrants from City 1 and P; and of
total in-migrants to City 2 for P2. The
numerator in the distance model then be-
comes simply Xo X1==Xy. Inserting a pro-
portionality constant and allowing exponents
to vary from unity, the basic distance model
can be written:
B. Distance Model

Multiple Correlation Coefficient

(Ry.xsxp) 893 +933
Standard Error of Estimate +226 -230
Partial Correlation Coefficient

(Ry.xp.xu) —.59  —.72

Regression Constants for
Equation (6):

Log K’ 1.60 2.39
A’ -96 1.20
D 42 -62

 

* Operational definitions are given in the text
for Y (observed number of migrants), Xu (size
effect), Xs (intervening opportunities), Xc (com-
peting migrants), and Xp (distance). The logarithm
of each variable was used in evaluation of the
models.

** For the multiple partial correlation coefficient
we shifted from the formula given by Stouffer to
that given in Frederick E. Croxton and Dudley J.
Cowden, Applied General Statistics, 2nd ed., Engle-
wood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1955, p. 551. The
figure for 1935-40 is our computation based on the
raw data presented by Stouffer. Recomputation of
other results for 1935-40 indicated that errors of
rounding and misprinting in the published data are
minor.

Source: Figures for 1935-40, with the exception
mentioned in note b, are from Social Research to
Test Ideas, op. cit. Figures for 1955-60 are our
computations from the 1960 census report cited in
footnote 10.
(0.14 vs. 0.23). The results for 1955-60
indicate equally clearly the improvement in
prediction offered by Stouffer’s model over
the distance model (multiple correlation
0.95 for Stouffer’s model, 0.89 for the dis-
tance model; error of estimate 0.15 vs. 0.23).
For both time periods, the multiple partial
correlation of Y with Xy and X¢, holding
constant Xy, is greater than the partial cor-
relation of Y with Xp, holding constant Xs.

Stouffer wasn’t content with these correla-
tional comparisons; he argued that it was
also necessary to demonstrate that errors of
prediction from his model were less system-
atic than those from the distance model. On
this test, too, the distance model is inferior
in both time periods. Rather than repeat
Stouffer’s lengthy demonstration, his analy-
sis and ours are summarized in Table 2. The
distance model is a consistently worse pre-
dictor of the size of migration streams.
Errors with the distance model are more
systematic in obvious ways—for example,
in 1955-60, underpredicting migration to
Los Angeles, Denver, and Chicago from
cities west of Chicago. This reflects, of
course, the obvious difficulty in relying on
distance alone to account both for the large
volume of migration interchanges over the
slight distances separating the many metrop-
olises in the Northeast and for the large
Our expectation that the model would fit
more closely the 1955-60 than the 1935-40
migration data is not borne out. Although the
differences between the results for 1955-60
and 1935-40 are small, they consistently in-
dicate a closer fit for 1935-40. The multiple
correlation coefficient and the several partials
are larger for the earlier period and the
standard error of estimate is less (Table 1).

For further insight into changes over time
in the dynamics of the national system of
intercity exchange of migrants, the values
of the dependent and independent variables
for 1935-40 may be compared with cor-
responding values for 1955-60 (Table 3).
Inspection of the correlation coefficients
(bottom row) suggests a remarkable sta-
bility in the system. Knowing only the
amount of migration (Y) in each of the
116 intercity migration streams in 1935-40,
one can explain 86 per cent (the square of
0.93) of the variance in intermetropolitan
migration 1955-60. Similarly high correla-
tions over time hold for size effect (Xs)
and intervening opportunities (Xg), and a
correlation only somewhat less high for com-
peting migrants (Xq). These high correla-
tions obtain despite a great increase in total
migration in the system, as indicated by the
much higher means for each variable in
1955-60 than in 1935-40. The high correla-
tions are evidence of relative stability (not
of stability in absolute size) in the volume
of each migration stream.

Despite the relative stability over time
for each of the variables entering into the
Stouffer model, there were notable changes
in their relationships with each other. Not
only has the predictive power of distance
lessened, but so has the predictive power
of each of the measures of social distance.
Zero-order correlations of log Y with log Xz,
log Xo, and log Xp are all smaller for
1955-60 than for 1935-40 (Table 4), just
as the corresponding partial correlations
shown in Table 1 are smaller for the later
period. At each time period, however, each
of the social distance measures was moder-
ately highly correlated with spatial distance
(last two columns, Table 4).

These findings confirm our anticipation
that distance alone is a less effective pre-
dictor of migration 1955-60 than 1935-40.
Our earlier argument that this should result
from a reduction in the “friction of space”
as it affects migration cannot be documented
directly, but reductions in some barriers to
intercity migration can be documented. In
1935, there were 177 automobiles per 1,000
population in the United States, as com-
pared with 314 per 1,000 in 1955.1 There
were many more miles of highway in 1955
than in 1935, and the percentage of all-
weather surfaced highways had jumped from
35 to 73.14 Much higher levels of prosperity,
which greatly increased accessibility to the
means of transportation, served along with
improved technology to reduce the friction
of space in the later time period.

The high and relatively constant correla-
tions between spatial and social distance help
account for the failure of our anticipation
of increased predictive power for the social
distance measures. Perhaps, however, the
increasing accessibility and efficiency of mass
media and other communication channels
operated to overcome “frictions of social
space” in a manner similar to the effect of
increasing technological and economic inte-
gration on the friction of physical space.
That is, marginal differences in the oppor-
tunities and costs of moving to City 3 rather
than City 2 may have been reduced, so that
the explanatory significance of intervening
opportunities and competing migrants is
reduced.

The measure of size effect, Xy., is the most
powerful single predictor of migration in
both time periods (Table 4). Both Stouffer
and Lazarsfeld have pointed out that the
task performed by the migration models is
to fill in the interior cells of a contingency
table of migration between each pair of
cities, knowing only the marginal totals of
in- and out-migration for each city. The
term Xy represents the product of the mar-
ginal frequencies and thus the traditional
expected frequency term for contingency
tables on the hypothesis of independence.1®
Perhaps the major reason this measure of
expected frequency is so powerful a pre-
dictor is the extremely wide range in the
size of the various migration streams.

Utilizing only the marginal products, Xu,
we can explain by linear regression 73 per
cent of the variance in intercity migration
for 1935-40 and 69 per cent for 1955-60
(obtained by squaring the zero-order cor-
relation coefficient between log Y and log
Xm in Table 4). With the complete inter-
vening opportunities—competing migrants
model, we can explain 95 per cent of the
variance for 1935-40 and 91 per cent for
1955-60. An alternative and perhaps more
illuminating way of expressing these results
is to assert that for 1935-40, Stouffer’s
model accounts for 81 per cent (22/27) of
the variance in intercity migration not ac-
counted for by variation in the size of the
marginals, and for 1955-60 the correspond-
ing figure is 71 per cent (22/31). By con-
trast, the distance model accounts for 52
per cent (14/27) of the unexplained vari-
ance for 1935-40, and 35 per cent (11/31)
for 1955-60.1° Expressing the results in this
manner more clearly indicates the superior-
ity of Stouffer’s model over the distance
model than does examination of the multiple
correlation coefficients, since both models
incorporate a size effect. In terms of ability
to explain the variance not due to the size-
variable, Xi, the distance model is definitely
a poor second.
pletely irrelevant to psychological formula-
tions about migrant behavior, since any
psychological model which yields aggregate
behavior patterns contrary to those predicted
by Stouffer can be eliminated. Nevertheless,
Stouffer’s point stands—the system can be
largely explained without any specific set
of psychological assumptions.

Stouffer’s own critique of the intervening
opportunities—competing migrants model
pertained not to its rationale, but to
methodological weaknesses. On the one
hand, the operational definitions of the basic
measures were admitted to be cumbersome.
On the other, the concepts themselves were
viewed as “imperfect reflections of some
other more effective concepts yet to be dis-
covered.” 1® Stouffer uses migration data to
define opportunities and competition, thereby
raising the question of circularity.2° The
individual migrant stream to be predicted,
however, in each case is omitted in calculat-
ing Xp and Xc. It does appear in Xy, but
as a very small part of the whole, and its
exclusion would obviously have no signifi-
cant effect on the results of the predictive
model. A somewhat related problem is that
of the definition of area to be included in the
circles defining intervening opportunities and
competing migrants. Stouffer perhaps over-
did his empiricism in looking at some of his
data in order to revise Xp to improve the
fit of the model. To be sure, the adjusted Xp
using the smaller circle works better on the
1935-40 migration data than does the origi-
nal measure of intervening opportunities
used in his first study (of residential mobility
in Cleveland). The revised Xx continues to
work well with the 1955-60 migration data,
but it is hard to see how this modification
has a defensible rationale in terms of the
general concept of intervening opportunities.
The operational definitions are very spe-
cifically designed for the task at hand, and
no indication is offered as to means for
adapting them to fit migration data for
units other than cities (SMSA’s) or for other
countries, or even more seriously, to fit other
types of phenomena (such as mate-selection
or crime and residence). Rather Stouffer’s
modification of his original measure of in-
tervening opportunities is an ingenious but
limited effort to bring migration rates to the
West Coast into line with migration rates
for the rest of the United States. It would
seem more appropriate in the operational
definitions for the circles defining X, and
Xo to be of the same size. If one assumes
a “random walk” model for migration be-
havior, the opportunity circle (Xp) should
have its center at the city of origin, not
halfway between that city and the city of
destination. Direction of move could be
taken into account, if desired, by introduc-
ing a separate term.

It is possible that the predictive power of
Stouffer’s model could be improved some-
what by careful examination of errors in
prediction, and by tinkering with the opera-
tional definitions. If opportunities could be
defined in terms of labor force vacancies (or
similar direct measures) and time-cost to
reach such opportunities, the appearance of
circularity and the clumsiness of operation-
alization might be lessened. Efforts to modify
or improve the opportunity concept should,
however, be made without falling into the
assumption that a psychologically plausible
definition is either necessary or relevant. An
alternative for the measure of competing
migrants might be a measure of population
accessibility such as population potential.
In any case, measures which do not depend
so heavily on arbitrary rules about location
of circles and size of radii would be desirable.

Another avenue of exploration is the gen-
erality of Stouffer’s model. The power of
the model for inter-state or inter-county
migration streams is untested. Since the re-
sults obviously depend to some extent on
the choice of areal unit, examination of mi-
grant streams between all State Economic
Areas, including smaller metropolitan and
non-metropolitan areas might prove en-
lightening.

These suggestions should not, however,
detract from one of the main findings of
this study. With respect to intermetropoli-
tan migration, Stouffer’s model is an ex-
tremely effective one, and the empirical
payoff from tinkering with the operational
definitions seems unlikely to be very large;
the measures of intervening opportunities
and competing migrants are already quite
successful in accounting for the variance
not explained by the size effect.?? With any
model there will be some unexplained vari-
ance. Rather than quibble over the model’s
minor shortcomings, we believe it more
profitable to devote attention to another
task in the theory of migration—that of
predicting the amount of movement within
the intermetropolitan system, and the size
of the gross flow into and out of each metro-
politan area. Given these marginals, the
Stouffer model performs quite well at spe-
cifying the distribution among specific mi-
gration streams.

The volume and patterning of intermetro-
politan migration appear to be related to
the state of the national economy, its rate of
growth, and the particular industrial sectors
which are growing and declining. The vari-
ous metropolitan areas of the country per-
form differing tasks within the economy, and
have distinctive patterns of exchange with
other components of the system of cities.2?
If one could predict (or explain) the trends
and differentials in rates of growth in indi-
vidual industrial sectors, one might be aided
in predicting the approximate volume of in-
and out-migration during specified time in-
tervals and the differential rates of growth
of metropolitan areas.

Another problem in migration theory is
that of disaggregation. In Stouffer’s model,
as in currently available census data on
specific migration streams, a migrant is a
migrant. But the paths of redistribution of
blue-collar workers within the nation obvi-
ously differ from the paths of retired per-
sons, students, military personnel, executives,
and so forth. And once migrants were dis-
aggregated into appropriate categories, it
would be profitable to experiment with cate-
gorizing metropolitan areas according to
their functions and site features, rather than
solely by their locations relative to one an-
other in social or physical space. Stouffer’s
ingenuity and success in improving our
knowledge of a limited aspect of migration
theory stand as an encouragement to con-
tinued patient endeavor.

 

borough, Metropolis and Region, Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins Press, 1960.
