@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Racial differences in wealth have often been thought to underlie racial differences in
residential segregation and neighborhood attainment, but research supporting this claim
is limited. The authors of this article use data from the 1989-2001 waves of the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), in conjunction with tract-level decennial census data,
to examine the effects of household and parental wealth on the migration of black and
non-Hispanic white families between neighborhoods comprised of varying percentages
of Anglos (i.e., non-Hispanic whites). They find generally modest effects of wealth on
these patterns of inter-neighborhood migration. Consistent with one version of the place-
stratification model of locational attainment, the effects of both household and parental
wealth are stronger among blacks than among non-Hispanic whites, with the sharpest
racial difference emerging among renters. Racial differences in household and parental
wealth, however, can account for only a trivial portion of the pronounced racial
difference in migration into neighborhoods containing larger percentages of Anglo
residents. The authors conclude that explanations for the racially stratified inter-
neighborhood migration streams that underlie and reinforce black-Anglo residential
segregation will need to look beyond the influence of wealth and other socioeconomic
Charles 2003). One explanation stresses the
desire of blacks and whites to share neighbor-
hoods with members of their own race; racial
differences in these residential preferences lead
naturally to racial differences in neighborhood
location (Clark 1988; Emerson, Yancey, and
Chai 2001). A second explanation emphasizes
barriers to the migration of blacks into racially
mixed and predominantly white neighborhoods
(Galster 1988); such barriers include housing
market discrimination perpetrated by real estate
agents, landlords, and lending institutions, as
well as hostility and aggression on the part of
potential white neighbors (Massey and Denton
1993; Yinger 1995). A third explanation focus-
es on racial differences in economic resources.
Higher housing costs in white neighborhoods,
combined with blacks’ lower incomes, leave
many blacks unable to afford homes in pre-
dominantly white communities (Clark 1986).
Most studies find that racial differences in
economic resources can explain only a small
fraction of racial residential segregation levels
(Alba, Logan, and Stults 2000; Massey and
Fischer 1999). As several observers have noted
(e.g., Clark 1986; Quillian 2002; Thernstrom
and Thernstrom 1997), however, research exam-
ining the contribution of racial economic dif-
ferences to residential segregation has been
severely hampered by the inability to consider
the independent role of wealth. Not only is
wealth thought to enhance migration into more
advantaged (and thus “whiter”) neighborhoods
(Shapiro 2004), but also the substantially larg-
er racial difference in wealth than in income
(Oliver and Shapiro 1995) raises the possibili-
ty that high levels of residential segregation are
attributable in large measure to blacks’ restrict-
ed access to financial assets—both their own
and those of their parents. As Thernstrom and
Thernstrom (1997:224) speculate, “wealth, the
size of a family’s nest egg—a variable ignored
in the studies to date—may influence residen-
tial patterns more than income does.”
Importantly, while Thernstrom and Thernstrom,
and several other authors, have documented
large racial differences in levels of wealth, no
one has directly examined the effects of these
differences on racial differences in residential
outcomes.

In this study we use longitudinal data from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), in
conjunction with tract-level decennial census
data, to examine the effects of household and
parental wealth on the migration of black and
non-Hispanic white families between neigh-
borhoods of varying racial composition. Our
longitudinal analysis of race-specific migra-
tion propensities overcomes a critical limita-
tion of cross-sectional designs that attempt to
address this issue (e.g., Freeman 2000), name-
ly, that wealth accumulation (especially through
homeownership) is a consequence, as well as a
determinant, of neighborhood racial composi-
tion (Flippen 2004). We explore the possible
impact of both household wealth and the wealth
of the parents of these householders to answer
three questions. First, net of the effects of other
factors (including income), do family and
parental wealth facilitate migration into neigh-
borhoods that are inhabited by a larger per-
centage of non-Hispanic whites? Second, do
the effects of household and parental wealth on
Research into the determinants of minority loca-
tional attainment is frequently guided by the
model of spatial assimilation, which holds
(among other things) that members of racial
and ethnic minority groups seek to convert
human capital and financial endowments into
greater proximity with the ethnic majority
(Massey 1985). Given the correlation between
neighborhood racial composition, on the one
hand, and neighborhood housing values, on the
other, advanced levels of human and financial
capital are often prerequisites for purchasing res-
idences in predominantly Anglo communities
(Logan, Alba, McNulty, and Fisher 1996). High
levels of socioeconomic attainment are also
thought to provide minority group members
with the incentive to interact with the majority,
interactions that are facilitated by physical prox-
imity (Alba and Nee 2003).

To date, most applications of spatial assimi-
lation theory have failed to consider wealth as
an independent determinant of residential loca-
tion despite a number of reasons to believe that,
over and above the effects of other socioeco-
nomic resources such as income and education,
wealth is likely to increase the likelihood that
African American (as well as white) families
will locate in “whiter” neighborhoods. For cur-
rent or prospective homeowners, these financial
assets can be used for the outright purchase of
homes or, more frequently, down payments on
the purchase of homes (Charles and Hurst
2002). Because higher down payments reduce
mortgage payments, even among families with
the same income those with greater wealth will
be able to buy and maintain homes in more
expensive neighborhoods.

More generally, wealth provides a “safety
net” that cushions families against temporary
financial setbacks that might drive them into
poor (and hence largely nonwhite) neighbor-
hoods (Shapiro 2004). While these emergency
reserves may be important for homeowners,
access to such funds may be especially salient
for renters, among whom residential moves are
more frequent (Lee, Oropesa, and Kanan 1994).
In this context, residential location can be
ephemeral, and even a short-term economic
setback may result in a move—likely to cheap-
er housing in a less prosperous neighborhood—
unless some accumulated financial resources are
available to avoid making such a move.
Shapiro’s (2004) arguments regarding the lib-
erating effects of wealth suggest that even a
small nest egg might provide the sense of secu-
rity needed for a family to dedicate a larger
share of its income to rent housing in a wealth-
ier, whiter neighborhood.

The emerging research on wealth highlights
not only the importance of a family’s own assets
but those of their parents as well (Conley 1999).
Parental wealth is likely to facilitate a family’s
neighborhood attainment in a variety of ways,
but its impact on the ability to purchase homes
in more expensive areas is particularly impor-
tant. Oliver and Shapiro (1995) find that a fam-
ily’s first home purchase triggers the second
largest transfer of assets between generations,
trailing only inheritances following parental
death. The families interviewed by Oliver and
Shapiro (1995) and Shapiro (2004) describe
numerous other ways that parental assets are
used to facilitate moves into higher-socioeco-
nomic status (SES) neighborhoods, including
paying down payments, mortgage closing costs,
and points. While these arguments have focused
on the importance of parental wealth for home-
owners, these assets are likely to enhance
prospects for moving into predominantly white
neighborhoods for renters as well, although per-
haps somewhat less directly than for home-
owners. In addition to subsidizing the costs of
a move, parental assets may be used for other
obligations (e.g., child care and transportation
costs) that enable families to pay higher rents.
tially less likely than whites to receive financial
help from their parents for down payments and
other forms of assistance (Jayakody 1998), a fact
that contributes to significant racial differences
in the transition to home ownership (Charles and
Hurst 2002). Racial differences in lifetime inher-
itances also appear to be contributing to a grow-
ing racial disparity in wealth (Avery and Rendall
2002).

These racial differences in wealth raise the
possibility that differences in the locational
attainments of blacks and whites—in particular,
differences in the racial composition of their
neighborhoods—may be attributable largely, if
not entirely, to black-white differences in fam-
ily or parental financial assets (e.g., Clark 1986).
According to spatial assimilation theory, for
both black and white householders, family and
parental wealth will be positively associated
with migration into neighborhoods inhabited
by larger percentages of non-Hispanic whites,
and controlling for racial differences in wealth
(as well as other socioeconomic characteris-
tics) will attenuate black-white differences in the
racial composition of destination neighbor-
hoods. Such evidence would support arguments
made by Clark (1986) and Thernstrom and
Thernstrom (1997) and suggest that explana-
tions for racial residential segregation empha-
sizing contemporaneous housing discrimination
against blacks (Yinger 1995) or the preferences
of blacks and whites for neighborhoods of a
particular racial composition (Bobo and
Zubrinsky 1996; Clark 1992) may be unneed-
ed. On the other hand, a sizable residual racial
difference in these migration behaviors even
after controlling for racial differences in wealth
would imply the need to supplement class-based
explanations of racial residential segregation
with additional mechanisms.

An alternative to the spatial assimilation
model of minority locational attainment is the
place-stratification model (Logan and Alba
1993; Charles 2003). This model draws atten-
tion to the barriers to residential mobility faced
by black residents, especially in the form of
housing discrimination. The discriminatory
practices of real estate agents (Pearce 1979;
Yinger 1995), local governments (Shlay and
Rossi 1981), and mortgage lenders (Squires
and Kim 1995) are assumed to create a racial-
ly segmented housing market that obstructs the
mobility aspirations of African Americans, espe-
cially of those wishing to move to racially inte-
grated neighborhoods. White stereotyping of,
and hostility toward, black residents may also
impede blacks’ migration into racially mixed
or predominantly white neighborhoods (Harris
2001; Krysan and Farley 2002). The place-
stratification model also highlights the unwill-
ingness of majority groups to share
neighborhoods with minority residents and
how whites in particular seek to vacate racial-
ly mixed areas (Crowder 2000; Krysan 2002).

Although the place stratification perspective
acknowledges that socioeconomic resources
such as wealth might significantly influence
minorities’ access to whiter neighborhoods,
this perspective also implies that racial differ-
ences in the racial composition of destination
neighborhoods will persist even after control-
ling for racial differences in household and
parental wealth, with black households mov-
ing to neighborhoods with fewer Anglos com-
pared to whites with similar levels of wealth.
In contrast to the spatial assimilation per-
spective, the place-stratification model of
minority locational attainment also anticipates
racial differences in the effect of wealth on
migration into “more Anglo” neighborhoods.
In Logan and Alba’s (1993) “weak version” of
the place-stratification model, blacks receive
greater locational returns to their socioeco-
nomic resources than do whites, but even the
most economically advantaged blacks have
poorer locational attainments than the least
advantaged whites. African Americans require
enhanced levels of financial and human capi-
tal to attain residence in predominantly Anglo
neighborhoods, but these neighborhoods
remain open to whites largely regardless of
their socioeconomic resources. This version
of the place-stratification model thus implies
that the impact of wealth on migration into
neighborhoods containing larger percentages
of whites will be stronger for blacks than for
whites.

Logan and Alba (1993) also propose a
“strong version” of the place-stratification
model, in which the effects of economic
resources on locational attainments are weak-
er for minority groups than for majority
groups. In this model, housing discrimination
reduces the locational return that minority
group members (especially African Americans)
receive for their human and financial capital.
Prior research into the causes of racial resi-
dential segregation has generally been unable
to explore the degree to which racial differ-
ences in either household or parental wealth
contribute to the disparate neighborhood loca-
tions of blacks and whites. Some studies have
shown that levels of residential segregation in
cities or metropolitan areas are positively asso-
ciated with levels of racial income inequality
in the area (e.g., Logan, Stults, and Farley
2004), and others have demonstrated that met-
ropolitan-area levels of segregation are high
even within socioeconomic groups (Iceland,
Sharpe, and Steinmetz 2005; Massey and
Fischer 1999; St. John and Clymer 2000).
Because these studies, however, rely on U.S.
census data, and because the decennial census
does not collect data on family or household
wealth, these studies cannot assess the degree
to which racial differences in wealth might
explain racial segregation patterns. The same
problem plagues studies that utilize census
data to examine the associations between indi-
vidual-level characteristics and the racial, eth-
nic, and socioeconomic composition of
neighborhoods (c.f., Alba et al. 2000; Logan,
Alba, McNulty, and Fischer 1996). Indeed, it
has become almost perfunctory for studies of
racial residential segregation (e.g., Fischer
2003) and race-specific migration patterns
(Quillian 2002; South and Deane 1993) to con-
clude with the proviso that black-white dif-
ferences in neighborhood attainment may stem
from the operation of unobserved racially neu-
tral market forces, particularly wealth.

Using non-census sources, two recent stud-
ies have examined the association between
wealth and neighborhood racial composition,
while controlling for other possible determi-
nants, including income. Freeman (2000),
using cross-sectional data from the Multi-City
Study of Urban Inequality (MCSUI), finds
that African Americans’ proximity to whites
increases slightly with their net worth (even
controlling for income). Similarly, Woldoff
(2003), using cross-sectional data from the
National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY),
finds that higher levels of wealth increase
blacks’ residential proximity to whites and,
moreover, that this ostensible effect among
blacks is stronger than the effect among whites.

Nonetheless, the ability of these studies to
shed light on the causal role of wealth is lim-
ited in several ways. First, despite pronounced
racial differences in parental wealth and the
potentially important role of parents’ financial
resources in determining adult children’s res-
idential options, neither Freeman (2000) nor
Woldoff (2003) consider how parental wealth
might influence racial differences in residen-
tial attainment. Second, these past studies fail
to examine the extent to which the effects of
wealth vary by housing status. The combina-
tion of persistent racial differences in housing
tenure (e.g., Gyourko and Linneman 1996),
strong links between home ownership and
wealth (Hurst, Luoh, and Stafford 1998; Oliver
and Shapiro 1995), and the positive effect of
home ownership on the likelihood of gaining
access to whiter neighborhoods (South and
Crowder 1998b) highlights the importance of
examining how the effects of wealth might
differ for renters and homeowners. Finally, the
cross-sectional design employed by both
Freeman (2000) and Woldoff (2003) leaves
these studies open to criticisms related to the
fact that wealth accumulation may be endoge-
nous to residential location. Given that hous-
ing values—and thus home equity—are
strongly affected by the racial composition of
the neighborhood (Denton 2001; Flippen 2004;
Harris 1999) and because home equity is a
key component of family wealth (Oliver and
Shapiro 1995), it is possible that the observed
association between wealth and residential
proximity to whites reflects not an impact of
wealth on locational attainment, but rather
higher levels of wealth accumulation in pre-
dominantly white neighborhoods. !

To redress the endogenity problems affect-
ing both aggregate and individual-level cross-
sectional analyses, a number of studies have
utilized longitudinal data to examine racial dif-
ferences in mobility patterns (Massey, Gross,
and Shibuya 1994; Quillian 2002; South and
Crowder 1998b). This research indicates that
higher socioeconomic status (e.g., education or
income) generally increases the likelihood of
African Americans moving to a whiter neigh-
borhood, but the substantial racial difference
in residential attainment persists even among
householders with similar sociodemographic
and economic characteristics. These panel stud-
ies, however, have yet to consider the extent to
which these racial disparities are attributable
to group differences in wealth. Our use of lon-
gitudinal data that incorporate measures of both
household and parental wealth, and our focus on
the differential dynamics among homeowners
and renters, allow us to overcome the short-
comings of past research to assess more fully the
theoretical explanations for the racially dis-
parate migration patterns that sustain high lev-
els of racial residential segregation.
families have been added to the sample as chil-
dren leave home to form new households (Hill
1992). The PSID has been an extraordinarily
rich source of data for analyzing patterns of
inter-neighborhood migration (e.g., Massey et
al. 1994; Quillian 1999). What makes the PSID
uniquely suited for the study of migration
between neighborhoods of varying racial and
ethnic composition are the PSID-Geocode
Match Files that link the addresses of the PSID
respondents to the corresponding census codes
for tracts and other geographic areas. We use
census tracts to represent neighborhoods. While
census tracts are imperfect operationalizations
of neighborhoods, they likely come the closest
of any commonly available spatial entity in
approximating the usual conception of a neigh-
borhood (Jargowsky 1997; White 1987), and
their use in this capacity is widespread in soci-
ological and demographic research. Attaching
census data on the racial composition of census
tracts at each annual interview allows us to
track prospectively which PSID households
move between neighborhoods made up of vary-
ing percentages of non-Hispanic whites.
DEPENDENT VARIABLES. We follow prior work
by treating inter-neighborhood residential
mobility as a two-stage process involving, first,
the decision to move and, second, the choice of
destination (Massey et al. 1994). Accordingly,
the first dependent variable in our analysis is a
dichotomous variable indicating whether the
respondent moved out of the census tract of ori-
gin between PSID interviews. The second (and
more theoretically important) dependent vari-
able is the percentage of the population in the
census tract of destination that is non-Hispanic
white (i.e., Anglo). Tract-level census data are
drawn from the Neighborhood Change Database
(NCDB) in which census tract boundaries have
been matched across the 1980, 1990, and 2000
censuses (GeoLytics 2003). The consistency of
tract boundaries in the NCDB allows us to
employ linear interpolation based on data from
these censuses to describe the racial and ethnic
composition of PSID respondents’ census tracts
and metropolitan areas of residence during inter-
censal years. Our sample includes individuals
making intra-metropolitan as well as those mak-
ing inter-metropolitan moves.
sources of wealth data (Juster, Smith, and
Stafford 1999). We use total household wealth
in 1989 to predict inter-neighborhood biennial
migration between the 1989 and 1995 inter-
views, total household wealth in 1994 to predict
inter-neighborhood migration between the 1995
and 1999 interviews, and total household wealth
in 1999 to predict inter-neighborhood migration
between the 1999 and 2001 interviews.> All
household wealth figures are measured in thou-
sands of constant year 2000 dollars.

In 1988 only, the PSID also collected data
from respondents on the non-pension wealth
(net worth) of the living parents of household
heads and their spouses. Respondents were
asked, “Suppose your (and your spouse’s) par-
ents were to sell off all their major possessions,
including their home, turn their investments
and all their other assets into cash and pay off
all of their debts. Would they have money left
over, break even, or be in debt? If they have
money left over, how much would it be?” For
respondents who could not estimate an actual
total, bracketed response categories were sug-
gested. For these relatively rare cases, we used
the midpoints of bracketed categories and
assumed a value of $250,000 for the top cate-
gory ($100,000 or more). We use the sum of the
head’s and (if present) spouse’s estimated
parental wealth, measured in thousands of con-
stant year 2000 dollars.

Other independent variables include demo-
graphic, life-cycle, socioeconomic, and geo-
graphic characteristics. Race is captured by a
dummy variable distinguishing black from
Anglo respondents. Respondents’ education is
measured by years of school completed. Family
income refers to the total taxable income of
husband and wife, measured in thousands of
constant year 2000 dollars. Age is measured in
years, and its squared value is included to cap-
ture nonlinear effects on the propensity to
migrate. The sex of the household head is cap-
tured by a dummy variable. Marital status is a
dummy variable distinguishing respondents who
are married or are long-term cohabitors from the
unmarried at the beginning of the migration
interval. The presence of children is measured
by the total number of children in the household
at the beginning of the migration interval. Home
ownership is a dummy variable distinguishing
owners from renters. Residents of public hous-
ing are distinguished from residents of private-
sector housing by a separate dummy variable.
Household crowding is measured by the num-
ber of persons per room. Duration of residence
is measured by a dummy variable scored 1 for
respondents who have resided in their current
residence for three or more years. We also con-
trol for the percentage of the population that is
non-Hispanic white in both the tract of origin
and in the metropolitan area of origin and des-
tination. All of these variables except for respon-
dents’ sex and race are measured biennially at
the beginning of each migration interval and
treated as time-varying covariates.°
Hispanic white householders contribute 13,743
person-periods.

We use logistic regression to examine the
effects of the explanatory variables on the like-
lihood that respondents will move out of their
origin tract between PSID interviews. Then, we
estimate linear regression models in which the
dependent variable is the percentage of the pop-
ulation in the tract of destination that is Anglo.”
Given that this variable is unobserved for non-
movers, we estimate these models using a maxi-
mum-likelihood Heckman procedure (Heckman
1979). In our application of the Heckman pro-
cedure, the “selection” equation includes all of
the regressors described earlier, while the “sub-
stantive” equation (percentage Anglo in the des-
tination tract) omits the socio-demographic
predictors (age, sex, marital status, children,
public housing, duration of residence, and
household crowding), because their influence is
restricted largely to the likelihood of moving out
of the origin tract. Our application of a two-stage
modeling approach thus provides a dynamic
perspective to the cross-sectional studies of
locational attainment that provide part of the
empirical foundation for our study.®

Because the same PSID respondent can con-
tribute more than one person-period to the analy-
sis, and because inter-neighborhood mobility is
a repeatable event, the usual assumption of the
stochastic independence of error terms under-
lying tests of statistical significance is violated
(Bye and Riley 1989). We correct for this non-
independence of observations using the cluster
procedure available in Stata to compute robust
standard errors (StataCorp 2005).
homeowners (Panel B). For the sake of com-
parison, origin and destination neighborhoods
are categorized using criteria paralleling those
employed in past mobility research (e.g., South
and Crowder 1998b).° The table reveals pro-
nounced and now well-known differences in
destinations for black and white movers (e.g.,
Massey et al. 1994; Quillian 2002; South and
Crowder 1998b). Among those black renters
who move to a different tract during the mobil-
ity interval, very few move into predominantly
Anglo neighborhoods. For example, among
black renters originating in racially mixed
neighborhoods, only 2.9 percent move to a pre-
dominantly Anglo neighborhood. In contrast,
almost 28 percent of Anglo renters originating
in a racially mixed tract end up in an Anglo-
dominated tract. Among respondents who own
their own home, a very similar pattern emerges.
Nearly one-third (31.2 percent) of mobile Anglo
homeowners originating in racially mixed neigh-
borhoods move to a predominantly Anglo tract.
This is true for only 5.5 percent of mobile black
homeowners originating in mixed tracts, for
whom mobility into a predominantly non-Anglo
tract is about three times more likely (16.3 per-
cent). Among both blacks and Anglos, renters
tend to be less likely than homeowners to move
to “more Anglo” neighborhoods. For example,
42.1 percent (41.1 + 1.0) of mobile black renters
originating in a predominantly non-Anglo tract
move to a racially mixed or predominantly
Anglo tract; the corresponding probability
among mobile black homeowners is 47.7 per-
cent. Among mobile Anglo renters originating
in a racially mixed tract, 27.6 percent move to
a predominantly Anglo tract, compared to 31.2
percent of mobile Anglo homeowners.
Overall, the figures in Table 1 indicate that,
regardless of the racial composition of the ori-
gin neighborhood, blacks are much less likely
than Anglos to move to neighborhoods that are
predominantly Anglo. While home-ownership
status appears to play an important role in deter-
mining the destinations of black movers, with
black renters less likely than black homeown-
ers to move into a predominantly Anglo or
racially mixed tract, there are sharp racial dif-
ferences in destination outcomes even among
Anglo and black householders with the same
ownership status. The remainder of the analy-
sis focuses on the extent to which these racial-
ly differentiated mobility patterns can be
explained by racial differences in household
and family wealth.
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for all
variables used in the analysis, separately for
blacks and non-Hispanic whites. Blacks are
more likely than Anglos to move out of their
neighborhood of origin. Over the typical two-
year migration interval, approximately 40 per-
cent of black householders, but only 32 percent
of Anglo householders, move to a different cen-
sus tract. Perhaps more importantly, differences
between black and Anglo inter-neighborhood
movers in the racial composition of their new
neighborhoods are pronounced. Conditional
upon moving out of their origin tract, black
householders move to tracts whose population
Os LI 76°78 bl oe LVvEe AAHU SI LY} JV UOTeUNsap ut UoE[Ndod Jo o% 9}08]] UOLRUNSEp UI O[BUY %
or we 60" ov’ (soX = [) T+) pur 3 UsaMjoq 19eI) UIZLIO Jo NO poaoul Y JOOY A yoryy posueyo
so[qelie, juopuodaq

 

ds ues, ds ueo uondussog

 

ojsuy yor

 

 

1007-6861 ‘sormeukg] suoou Jo Apnyg joueg :soey Aq ‘UONRIBI] JORIL-J9IU] JO siskyeuy ay} UI Pasy] sarqeIIeA JO} sonsHeIg oANdUOSEq °Z aIquL,
HU SI Jey) UONeUNSap Jo WS Ul UONE[Ndod Jo %
MHU ST VY} UISLIO JO WS Ul UOHEINdod Jo %

AAU ST yeY} 19k) UISLIO ul UONEjNdod jo %

(soX = |) s1B0K +¢ JO} 3 OWN) Je BuT[JOMp JOLIN UT paptsol sey Y
(sok = [)1 9u “BuIsnoy o1gnd ut saat] Y

} ow ‘BuryJaMp s,yY Ul WoO Jod suosiog

(Sof = ]) 1 UI Je OUIOY sUMO Y

} OUT) ‘Pjoyssnoy Ss, y UI UoIpP]IYo Jo JoquInNy

(sak = 1) } OWN ye pole si yy

(sak = [) opeuray sty

1 OUIN) ye ‘sIVOA UT ‘ABE SY

q} 9uy ‘osnods pure y Jo sutooUT a[qexe],

} OU] “BuTPOOY ds Jo s1v9k pojo[dusoo sy

98861 Ul sjuored ZurAt] Jo yyTeaM UOIsuaduoU JON

96661 40 “p66I “6861 UI UNTeOM Pjoyssnoy [eo],
is on average about 34 percent non-Hispanic
white. In sharp contrast, mobile Anglo house-
holders relocate to tracts that on average are
comprised of 83 percent Anglos.

Racial differences in both household and
parental wealth are also pronounced. At the
beginning of the typical two-year period defin-
ing the migration intervals, the mean black
householders’ net worth is approximately
$30,000, compared to over $185,000 for Anglo
householders. The racial difference in household
wealth observed here is reasonably similar to
that reported by Kennickell (2003), using data
from the Survey of Consumer Finances. For
1995 (the approximate midpoint of our obser-
vation period), Kennickell (2003) reports a ratio
of mean non-Hispanic white-to-black wealth
of 5.7; our estimate of the non-Hispanic white
to black ratio, pooled over the PSID survey
years, is 6.1.!° The racial difference in parental
wealth is even larger. On average, black house-
holders report the net worth of their parents to
be about $36,000, while Anglo householders
estimate the net worth of their parents to be
slightly over $247,000—a white-to-black ratio
of 6.8.

Black disadvantage in other dimensions of
socioeconomic status is also apparent. Black
householders report on average completing 12.1
years of school, versus 13.6 years for Anglo
householders. The mean family income of black
householders (about $27,000) is about half that
of the Anglo householders (about $59,000).
Consistent with prior studies, then, the racial dif-
ference in income pales in comparison to racial
differences in wealth.

Table 2 also presents descriptive statistics
for the conventional sociodemographic and
socioeconomic predictors of inter-neighbor-
hood migration and neighborhood attainment.
Although black and Anglo householders tend to
be of roughly the same age (mean for blacks =
36.1, mean for Anglos = 38.0), a much larger
percentage of black than Anglo householders are
female (47 percent for blacks, 19 percent for
Anglos), and a much smaller percentage of
black than Anglo householders are married or
more years.

Finally, blacks and non-Hispanic whites dif-
fer substantially in the racial composition of
their origin tracts and, to a lesser extent, their
metropolitan areas of residence. Black house-
holders (including both inter-tract movers and
non-movers) begin the typical migration inter-
val in a tract comprised of 31 percent Anglos,
while Anglo householders begin the typical
migration interval in a tract comprised of 85
percent Anglos. While black householders live
in metropolitan areas with an average racial
composition that is 68 percent Anglo, Anglo
householders live in metropolitan areas with
an average racial composition that is 77 percent
Anglo.

The regression models in Table 3 examine
how these factors are related to the likelihood
that black and Anglo householders will move out
of their tract of origin over a two-year span.
This model is also the basis for the adjustment
for potential selection sample bias incurred by
the inability to observe the racial/ethnic com-
position of destination tracts for non-movers.
Model | of Table 3 shows the coefficients from
the additive, multivariate equation, and tells a
generally familiar story regarding the socio-
demographic and life-cycle determinants of
geographic mobility. The odds of moving from
the tract of origin decline significantly with
age, but at a decreasing rate. Married house-
holders are significantly less likely than unmar-
ried householders to move, and number of
children in the household is inversely related to
Table 3. Coefficients for Logistic Regression Analysis of Migration Out of Origin Census Tract: Panel Study of

Income Dynamics, 1989-2001

 

 

 

Model 1 Model 2
Black —.074 —.894***
(.056) (.133)
Household Wealth? —.008* —.008*
(.004) (.004)
Parental Wealth* -.000 -000
(.004) (004)
Education .022** .020*
(.008) (.008)
Family Income .001** .001**
(.000) (.000)
Age —.159*** —.160***
(.013) (.013)
Age? .001*** .001***
(.000) (.000)
Female .091 .088
(.049) (.049)
Married —.237*** —.247***
(.048) (.048)
Children —.078*** —.070***
(.018) (018)
Homeowner -.956*** —.954***
(.041) (.041)
Crowding .317*** 312***
(.060) (.060)
Public Housing —.337*** —.319***
(.066) (.067)
Duration of Residence —.329*** —.327***
(.036) (.036)
% Anglo in Origin Tract .000 —.008***
(.001) (.002)
% Anglo in Origin MSA —.006*** -.003*
(.001) (.001)
Black < household wealth? .047

(.029)
Black X parental wealth? .001
(.026)
Black X % Anglo in origin tract 012***
(.002)
Constant 3.834*** 4.387***
Likelihood Ratio x? 2,558.29 2,570.45
N of Person-periods 22,375 22,375
N of Persons 7,234 7,234

 

Note: Entries are logistic regression coefficients with robust standard errors in parentheses. MSA = metropolitan
statistical area; N = number.

® Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100.

* p< .05; ** p <.01; *** p <.001 (two-tailed).
the metropolitan area population that is Anglo
is inversely associated with the odds of leav-
ing the tract of origin.

As shown in Model 1, the effects of the
socioeconomic explanatory variables are some-
what mixed. Education and family income are
both significantly and positively associated
with out-migration from the neighborhood,
but the coefficient for parental wealth is non-
significant. The coefficient for household
wealth is significantly negative, but fairly
weak. To illustrate, a difference of $100,000 in
household wealth reduces the (net) odds of
moving out of the origin neighborhood by only
about 1 percent [.99 = e8)]. This deterrent
effect of household wealth on inter-neighbor-
hood geographic mobility might reflect the
difficulties in selling (and buying) more expen-
sive housing units.

The results in Table 3 also provide little evi-
dence that racial differences in wealth can
account for racial differences in inter-tract
mobility. When the other predictors of neigh-
borhood out-migration are controlled, the racial
difference in inter-tract mobility observed in
Table 2 completely disappears; the coefficient
for black householders in Model | of Table 3
is negative but small and statistically non-
significant. (The bivariate racial difference,
shown in Table 2, is statistically significant.)
There is no evidence, however, that this atten-
uation of the effect of race reflects the effect
of wealth. In supplementary analyses, we
explored the reasons for the sharp diminution
in the racial difference in inter-tract migration
when other predictor variables are controlled
(results available from the authors). By far the
most important variable accounting for the
higher gross rate of migration among blacks
than among Anglos is home ownership. Blacks
are substantially less likely than Anglos to own
their homes, and homeowners are substantial-
ly more likely than renters to move. Controlling
only for home ownership (equation not shown)
causes the coefficient for black race to become
negative and statistically significant. Thus,
blacks are significantly less likely than non-
Hispanic whites of similar housing status to
move, a finding consistent with claims that
black households face greater barriers than
white households to residential mobility
(Crowder 2001; South and Deane 1993). In
contrast, racial differences in household and
parental wealth do little to explain racial dif-
ferences in inter-neighborhood migration; con-
trolling only for these variables, either singly
or in combination, leaves the coefficient for
black positive, quite strong, and statistically
significant (equations not shown).

Model 2 of Table 3 allows the effects on
inter-neighborhood migration of three explana-
tory variables—household wealth, parental
wealth, and tract-of-origin racial composition
(percentage Anglo)—to vary between black
and Anglo householders by adding to Model 1
the appropriate product terms. As indicated
by the nonsignificant coefficients for the inter-
action terms involving the two wealth vari-
ables, we cannot reject the null hypotheses
that the slopes for blacks and Anglos are equal.
Thus, it appears that the effects of both parental
and household wealth on the likelihood of
moving are roughly similar for black and Anglo
householders. In contrast, the coefficient for
the product term representing the interaction
between race and the percentage of the popu-
lation in the tract of origin that is Anglo is
significant, and suggests markedly different
effects of neighborhood racial composition on
the likelihood of moving out of the origin tract
between blacks and Anglos. Specifically, the
negative coefficient for the tract percent Anglo
suggests that among non-Hispanic white
householders a 10-point difference in the per-
centage of the tract population that is Anglo
decreases the predicted odds of out-migration
by 8 percent [-.08 = e908) _ 1]. In contrast,
the negative coefficient for the tract percent
Anglo and the larger positive interaction term
suggests that among black householders a 10-
percentage point difference in the percentage
Anglo in the tract of origin increases the pre-
dicted odds of leaving the tract by just over 4
percent [.04 = e(-08+.012)(10) _ 1], Race-specific
models (not shown) confirm that these diver-
gent effects for black and Anglo householders
are both statistically significant. Thus, net of
the effects of other established predictors of
inter-neighborhood migration, black house-
holds tend to move out of neighborhoods made
up of relatively large Anglo populations, while
Anglos tend to remain in these types of neigh-
borhoods.
Constant 64.138*** = 3.118 3.167 4.001 —35.396*** — 18.567***

Wald x? 3716.38 13479.63 13498.35 13559.09 1351.77 1304.52
N of Uncensored observations 7,806 7,806 7,806 7,806 3,447 4,359
N of Censored observations 14,569 14,569 14,569 14,569 5,185 9,384
N of Person-periods 22,375 22,375 22,375 22,375 8,632 13,743
N of Persons 7,234 7,234 7,234 7,234 2,943 4,291

 

Note: Entries are regression coefficients with robust standard errors in parentheses. HW = household wealth; PW
= parental wealth; MSA = metropolitan statistical area; N = number.

® Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100.

* p< .05; ** p< .01; *** p <.001 (two-tailed).
than with patterns of neighborhood out-migra-
tion per se. Accordingly, Table 4 presents the
results of a series of linear regression models
examining the determinants of the percentage
of the destination tract population that is Anglo.
As noted earlier, because the racial composi-
tion of the destination tract is unobserved for
non-movers, these regression models apply a
Heckman correction in which all of the inde-
pendent variables shown in Table 3 are used in
the selection equation, but only the key demo-
graphic, socioeconomic, and geographic vari-
ables (race, household wealth, parental wealth,
education, family income, home ownership,
and the percent Anglo in the tract and metro-
politan area) are included in the substantive
equation predicting the racial composition of
the neighborhood of destination.!!

Model 1 of Table 4 includes only house-
holder’s race as a predictor variable. The very
strong, negative, and statistically significant
coefficient for black race indicates that on aver-
age black householders move to neighborhoods
with Anglo population percentages approxi-
mately 47 points below that of the neighbor-
hoods that non-Hispanic white householders
move to. The positive and statistically signifi-
cant coefficient for the sample selection term (\)
indicates that householders with a higher latent
probability of moving out of their origin neigh-
borhood move to tracts with larger percentages
of Anglo residents.

Model 2 adds to Model 1 the conventional
socioeconomic determinants of locational
attainment (education and family income), the
indicator of home ownership, and the two meas-
ures of geographic context (percent Anglo in the
tract of origin and the percent Anglo in the met-
ropolitan area of destination). As anticipated
by classical theories of spatial assimilation,
migration into “more Anglo” neighborhoods is
positively associated with education, family
income, and home ownership, although only
the net effect of education achieves statistical
significance. The percentage of the origin tract
population that is Anglo is strongly and posi-
tively related to the percentage of the destina-
tion tract population that is Anglo, thus
indicating considerable similarity in the racial
composition of householders’ old and new
neighborhoods. The percentage of the popula-
tion in the destination metropolitan area is also
strongly and positively associated with the per-
centage of the destination tract population that
is Anglo, likely reflecting the fact that, by def-
inition, predominantly Anglo metropolitan areas
are comprised of predominantly Anglo neigh-
borhoods, thus constraining movers to relocate
to tracts with relatively large percentages of
Anglos.

Controlling for these additional predictors
of destination-tract racial composition sharply
reduces the racial difference in the percentage
of the population that is Anglo in the destina-
tion tract. When these explanatory variables are
considered, the coefficient for black drops
almost in half—from —47.252 in Model | to
—24.595 in Model 2. In supplementary analyses
we explored which of the added explanatory
variables most accounted for this racial differ-
ence by adding them singly to Model 1. By far
the most important explanation for the bivari-
ate racial difference observed in Model | is the
black-Anglo difference in the racial composition
of the origin tract. Controlling solely for the per-
centage Anglo in the tract of origin reduces the
racial difference in the percentage Anglo in the
tract of destination by about half (equation not
shown). In contrast, net of the effects of the
racial composition of the origin tract and other
predictors, black-Anglo differences in house-
holders’ education attainment, family income,
home ownership, and the racial composition of
the metropolitan area do little to explain the
difference in the racial composition of the neigh-
borhoods that blacks and Anglos move to. Thus,
a large but by no means complete part of the rea-
son why blacks move to neighborhoods that are
substantially less Anglo than the neighborhoods
that non-Hispanic whites move to is that blacks
originate in neighborhoods that are substan-
tially less Anglo than the neighborhoods that
non-Hispanic whites originate in.

There are several possible explanations for
this result. One possibility is that the racial
composition of the origin tract is capturing the
racial composition of adjacent or otherwise
nearby tracts that are most likely to serve as the
destinations for movers. Under this “geogra-
phy of opportunity” explanation, blacks are less
likely than Anglos to move to “more Anglo”
neighborhoods because the neighborhoods that
blacks reside in are more likely to be surrounded
by neighborhoods with relatively few Anglos.
Given that most moves are short-distance moves,
this ecological patterning would lead blacks to
move to tracts that contain fewer Anglos than the
tracts to which Anglos move. An alternative
explanation is that neighborhood-of-origin racial
composition is at least partially capturing the
residential preferences of blacks and Anglos,
with members of both groups tending to reside
in neighborhoods of their preferred racial com-
position. This explanation implies that blacks are
less likely than Anglos to move to “more Anglo”
neighborhoods because blacks have a stronger
preference than Anglos for racially mixed or pre-
dominantly black neighborhoods. Future
research incorporating measures of the racial
composition of spatially proximate neighbor-
hoods and individual preferences for neighbor-
hoods of a given racial composition might help
adjudicate among these (and other) explana-
tions. Importantly for our purposes, however,
even after adjusting for the racial composition
of the origin tract and the effects of the other pre-
dictors, blacks move to neighborhoods that on
average contain 25 percentage points fewer
Anglos than do the neighborhoods to which
Anglos move (Table 4, Model 2)—a large and
statistically significant difference.

The results of Model 3 speak directly to the
role of wealth in the locational attainment
process by adding to Model 2 the measures of
household wealth and parental wealth. Although
the coefficients for both variables are, as hypoth-
esized, positive, neither coefficient attains sta-
tistical significance. Not surprisingly, then,
controlling for these measures of wealth does
virtually nothing to explain the net black-Anglo
difference in the racial composition of the des-
tination tract: the coefficient for black declines
only negligibly from Model 2 (b = —24.595) to
Model 3 (b = —24.537) and remains statistical-
ly significant.

As noted earlier, the place-stratification
model of locational attainment argues that the
impact of socioeconomic resources on neigh-
borhood racial composition varies by race. The
strong version of this model proposes that blacks
are less able than non-Hispanic whites to con-
vert socioeconomic resources into spatial prox-
imity with Anglos, while the weak version posits
the reverse. Model 4 of Table 4 tests these expec-
tations by adding to Model 3 the product terms
representing the interactions between house-
holders’ race, on the one hand, and household
and parental wealth, on the other. Consistent
with the weak version of the place-stratification
model, the coefficients for both product terms
are positive and statistically significant. The
facilitative impact of both household wealth
and parental wealth on migration into more
Anglo tracts is significantly stronger among
blacks than among non-Hispanic whites.

To show these effects more clearly, Models
5 and 6 of Table 4 estimate the additive model
(Model 3) separately for black and Anglo house-
holders, respectively. Among blacks, the coef-
ficients for both household wealth and parental
wealth are positive and statistically significant,
but fairly modest in size. A $100,000 difference
in either household or parental wealth (equal-
ing about .8 of a standard deviation in house-
hold wealth and about | standard deviation in
parental wealth) translates into a predicted dif-
ference of only about 1 to 1'/, points in the per-
centage of the destination tract that is Anglo.
Among Anglo householders, the coefficient for
parental wealth just barely fails to attain sig-
nificance (p = .054), but it is even weaker than
the corresponding coefficient for blacks. Among
Anglos, a difference of $100,000 in parental
wealth translates into a predicted difference of
only .039 points in the percentage of the desti-
nation-tract population that is Anglo. The effect
of household wealth among Anglos is slightly
larger (b = .056) but does not approach statis-
tical significance (p = .152).

Despite its weak net effect on the racial com-
position of the destination neighborhood, home
ownership is implicated in arguments linking
wealth to the process of residential attainment.
The sharp racial differences in housing status
and the effects of home ownership on the like-
lihood of moving (Table 3) recommend exam-
ining the extent to which the effects of wealth
on neighborhood destinations, and racial dif-
ferences therein, differ for renters and home-
owners. Accordingly, Table 5 presents a series
of linear regression models predicting the per-
centage Anglo in the destination tract separate-
ly for black and Anglo homeowners and renters.

Model 1 of Table 5 shows that, among black
renters, the effects of both parental and house-
hold wealth on the destination percentage Anglo
are positive and statistically significant. That
these effects mirror those among all blacks
(Table 4, Model 5) is not surprising given that
a large majority of the black householders in the
sample are renters (see Table 2). In contrast,
among black homeowners (Table 5, Model 2)
the effects of both household and parental
wealth are statistically nonsignificant, likely
owing in large part to the relatively small num-
ber of cases in this category. Among Anglo
householders, the contrast between homeown-
ers and renters is more pronounced. Among
Anglo renters (Model 3), the percentage Anglo
in the tract of destination increases modestly, but
statistically significantly, as a function of
parental wealth, but household wealth appears
to have no significant net effect. In contrast, for
Anglo homeowners (Model 4) it is household
wealth that appears to affect destination choic-
es, although modestly, with wealthier home-
owners settling in more Anglo-dominated
neighborhoods, while parental wealth has no
significant effect. For both racial groups, then,
the impact of parental wealth appears to be lim-
ited to renters.

More theoretically important are the differ-
ences in the effects of wealth between black
and Anglo householders who share the same
housing status. Here it is important to note that
only among renters are the black-Anglo differ-
ences in the effect of wealth on the composition
of destination tracts statistically significant; and
that household and parental wealth have larger
positive impacts on access to whiter neighbor-
hoods for black renters than for Anglo renters,
but similar differences between black and Anglo
homeowners are not statistically significant
(again, partly reflecting the small number of
black homeowners). Thus, the results in Table
5 suggest that the difference in the effects of
wealth between blacks and Anglos is more pro-
nounced among renters than among homeown-
ers, and that these differences among renters
drive much of the overall racial difference in the
effects of wealth on access to Anglo neighbor-
hoods revealed in Table 4.!2
Despite this complexity, the overarching
implication of these findings is that both
parental wealth and household wealth play a
stronger role in determining the destinations of
black householders than those of Anglo house-
holders, although the magnitude of this dif-
ference differs slightly depending on home
ownership. The implications of this racial dif-
ference in the effects of wealth are illustrated
in Table 6, which presents predicted values of
the percentage Anglo in the destination tract by
levels of household and parental wealth, sep-
arately for black and Anglo renters (Panel A)
and homeowners (Panel B). These predicted
values are based on the results of regression
Models | through 4 in Table 5 and hold con-
stant all other explanatory variables at their
race- and ownership-specific means.

The results in Table 6 show that among both
renters and homeowners, Anglo householders
move to tracts with substantially more Anglo
representation than do black householders with
the same level of wealth. For example, black
renters with no household wealth are predict-
ed to enter neighborhoods in which just over
30 percent of the population is Anglo, where-
as Anglo renters with no wealth enter areas in
which about 82 percent of the tract population
is Anglo. Similar destination gaps exist
between black and white renters with access to
no parental wealth, and for homeowners with
no household or parental wealth. For both
renters and homeowners, the racial disparity in
destination outcomes tends to decline slight-
ly as wealth increases, reflecting the general-
ly more pronounced impact of wealth on the
mobility destinations of black versus Anglo
householders. '? Even at high levels of house-
hold and parental wealth, however, blacks enter
tracts in which the Anglo percentage is about
forty to fifty points lower than in those areas
entered by Anglos of the same home-ownership
status and with similar levels of wealth. In
fact, even the wealthiest of mobile black house-
holds move to areas with substantially fewer
Anglo neighbors than those entered by the
least wealthy Anglos. For example, Anglo
homeowners with no net household wealth are
predicted to enter tracts in which about 82 per-
cent of the population is Anglo compared to a
tract composition of only 44.6 percent Anglo
for black homeowners with almost $900,000
in household wealth (one standard deviation
above the mean for homeowners). This racial
stratification holds for both renters and home-
owners and for both parental and household
wealth. These findings are consistent with a
central tenet of the “weak version” of the place-
stratification model: enhanced levels of finan-
cial capital are needed for African Americans
to begin to attain spatial proximity with Anglos,
but even the wealthiest blacks remain more
segregated from Anglos than do the least
wealthy non-Hispanic whites. Moreover, in
contrast to the situation among blacks, high
levels of wealth are not a prerequisite for
Anglos to move into largely Anglo neighbor-
hoods.!5
High levels of residential segregation between
blacks and non-Hispanic whites remain a defin-
ing feature of the American urban landscape,
and the racial differences in inter-neighborhood
migration that underlie and reinforce these pat-
terns of segregation are pronounced. Although
it has frequently been suggested that racial dif-
ferences in wealth may account wholly or in part
for the concentration of blacks and Anglos in
neighborhoods dominated numerically by same-
race residents (e.g., Clark 1986; Thernstrom
and Thernstrom 1997), the limitations of prior
studies have prohibited a compelling assess-
ment of this claim. We address this issue here
through a longitudinal analysis of black and
non-Hispanic white households’ migration
propensities between neighborhoods containing
varying representations of non-Hispanic whites
(i.e., Anglos). At the broadest level, then, our
study bridges the longstanding research tradi-
tions on racial residential segregation, spatial
assimilation, and neighborhood attainment with
a rapidly growing concern with wealth as a key
dimension of social stratification—and of racial
stratification in particular. Two main conclu-
sions emerge from our analysis.
First, we find that among A frican Americans,
and especially among those who rent their
homes, greater household and parental wealth
are associated with migration into neighbor-
hoods that contain a comparatively large per-
centage of Anglo residents. These effects of
wealth obtain even after controlling for con-
ventional socioeconomic predictors of neigh-
borhood attainment, such as education and
income. While these effects are statistically sig-
nificant, the magnitude of wealth’s impact
among blacks is generally modest; indeed, these
effects are not even statistically significant
among black homeowners. Furthermore, we
find that greater wealth has even weaker and
uneven net effects on the migration of non-
Hispanic whites into neighborhoods inhabited
by greater percentages of Anglos; parental
wealth has a small effect on the destination
neighborhood racial composition of Anglo
renters, and household wealth has a similar
effect among homeowners. In general, the
effects of household and parental wealth on
inter-neighborhood migration patterns are
stronger for blacks than for Anglos, a finding
consistent with what has been termed the “weak
version” of the place-stratification model
(Logan and Alba 1993).
Second, and perhaps more importantly, we
find very little evidence that racial differences
in the levels of household or parental wealth can
explain the markedly lower rate of black than
Anglo migration into neighborhoods with siz-
able Anglo populations. Controlling for racial
differences in household and parental wealth
reduces only negligibly the black-Anglo differ-
ence in these migration propensities, and even
those blacks with the highest level of household
and parental wealth tend to move into areas
with substantially fewer Anglo residents than do
even the least wealthy non-Hispanic whites. In
short, while household and parental wealth do
encourage the migration of black families into
neighborhoods containing a comparatively large
share of Anglo residents, racial differences in
wealth cannot explain the pronounced difference
between blacks and non-Hispanic whites in their
residential proximity to Anglos. Racial differ-
ences in wealth can apparently account for
black-Anglo differences in some markers of
success and well-being (Conley 1999; Huie et
al. 2003), but neighborhood attainment, at least
as measured here, is not one of them.

Wealth, of course, is a difficult concept to
measure. Survey respondents are likely to have
particular difficulty estimating the net worth
of their parents, making our finding of a sig-
nificant (albeit modest) association between
parental wealth and migration into neighbor-
hoods comprising a relatively large percentage
of Anglo residents all the more remarkable.
Under most circumstances measurement error
will bias downward the estimated parameter
estimates, and so we cannot dismiss the possi-
bility that the true effects of wealth—especial-
ly parental wealth—are larger than we report
here. It seems unlikely, however, that measure-
ment error could explain the inability of racial
differences in wealth to account for racial dif-
ferences in migration into “more Anglo” neigh-
borhoods, since there is little reason to expect
that the extent of measurement error in the esti-
mates of household and parental wealth would
vary by race. Nevertheless, confidence in our
findings would be enhanced by their replication
through alternative datasets that offer different
approaches to the measurement of wealth.!®

Future research might also explore the effect
of wealth on the spatial assimilation of other
minority groups, particularly Latinos and
Asians. Although our analysis suggests that
black-Anglo differences in wealth cannot
explain black-Anglo differences in the inter-
neighborhood migration patterns that sustain
segregation between these groups, wealth could
play a larger role in explaining segregation
between Latinos and Asians vis-a-vis Anglos.
The greater levels of household wealth among
Hispanics and Asians compared to blacks
(Campbell and Kaufman 2000) could conceiv-
ably help to explain the former groups’ lower
levels of segregation from Anglos relative to
blacks.

In light of these findings, efforts to explain
racial residential segregation and the inter-neigh-
borhood migration dynamics that sustain it
would be advised to look beyond racial differ-
ences in socioeconomic resources, including
wealth. Future research might profit by contin-
ued efforts to quantify the impact of housing
market discrimination on black (and Anglo)
geographic mobility into neighborhoods of vary-
ing racial and ethnic composition (e.g., South
and Crowder 1998a), as well as to quantify the
impact of race-specific residential preferences
(Farley et al. 1994; Krysan and Farley 2002) and
racial differences in the housing-search process
(Farley 1996). Our results show clearly that the
migratory responses of blacks and non-Hispanic
whites to the racial composition of their neigh-
borhoods are quite different, with blacks tend-
ing to move out of neighborhoods with large
Anglo populations and Anglos tending to remain
in such areas (see also Crowder 2000; Quillian
2002). Like the pronounced difference in the
racial composition of the neighborhoods that
blacks and Anglos move to, this differential
response to the racial composition of the neigh-
borhood of origin is not attributable to racial dif-
ferences in wealth or other socioeconomic
resources. Given that black tolerance for white
neighbors exceeds white tolerance for black
neighbors (Farley et al. 1994), white avoidance
of neighborhoods with substantial non-Anglo
(especially black) populations deserves
increased attention as an explanation for per-
sistently high levels of racial residential segre-
gation. Despite frequent claims to the contrary
(e.g., Clark 1986; Thernstrom and Thernstrom
1997), the racial difference in wealth, while
admittedly pronounced, appears incapable of
explaining the disparate neighborhood loca-
tions of black and Anglo families.

The causes of, and remedies for, the disparate
locational attainments of blacks and whites are
interwoven with public policy decisions (Massey
and Denton 1993; Squires and Kubrin 2005).
Some recent initiatives have focused on improv-
ing the financial assets of the poor, and espe-
cially poor minorities (Edin 2001; Sherraden
2001), particularly through home ownership
(Denton 2001). Although such a strategy may
well serve to enhance the well-being of African
Americans, our findings suggest that policies to
equalize the distribution of wealth between
blacks and whites are unlikely to reduce sub-
stantially levels of racial residential segrega-
tion. Rather, our results point to the need for
policies that target white avoidance of black
neighbors and the discriminatory barriers faced
by blacks to entry into predominantly Anglo
neighborhoods. Policies designed to reduce lev-
els of racial residential segregation will also
need to attend to the dynamic interplay between
black in-migration and white out-migration
from urban neighborhoods.
Alba, Richard D., John R. Logan, and Brian J. Stults.
2000. “How Segregated Are Middle-Class African
Americans?” Social Problems 47:543-58.

Alba, Richard D. and Victor Nee. 2003. Remaking the
American Mainstream: Assimilation and
Contemporary Immigration. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Avery, Robert B. and Michael S. Rendall. 2002.
“Lifetime Inheritances of Three Generations of
Whites and Blacks.” American Journal of
Sociology 107:1300-1346.

Becketti, Sean, William Gould, Lee Lillard, and Finis
Welch. 1988. “The Panel Study of Income
Dynamics after Fourteen Years: An Evaluation.”
Journal of Labor Economics 6:472-92.

Bobo, Lawrence and Camille L. Zubrinsky. 1996.
“Attitudes on Residential Integration: Perceived
Status Differences, Mere In-Group Preferences, or
Racial Prejudice.” Social Forces 74:883-909.

Bye, Barry V. and Gerald F. Riley. 1989. “Model
Estimation When Observations Are Not
Independent: Application of Liang and Zeger’s
Methodology to Linear and Logistic Regression
Analysis.” Sociological Methods and Research
17: 353-75.

Campbell, Lori A. and Robert L. Kaufman. 2000.
“Racial Differences in Household Wealth: Beyond
Black and White.” Presented at the annual meet-
ing of the American Sociological Association,
August 12-16, Washington, DC.

Charles, Camille Zubrinsky. 2003. “The Dynamics
of Racial Residential Segregation.” Annual Review
of Sociology 29:167-207.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Erik Hurst. 2002. “The
Transition to Home Ownership and the Black-
White Wealth Gap.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 84:281—-97.

Clark, William A. V. 1986. “Residential Segregation
in American Cities: A Review and Interpretation.”
Population Research and Policy Review 5:95-127.

1988. “Understanding Residential

Segregation in American Cities: Interpreting the

Evidence.” Population Research and Policy Review

7:113-21.

1992. “Residential Preferences and

Residential Choices in a Multiethnic Context.”

Demography 29:451-65.
Conley, Dalton. 1999. Being Black, Living in the
Red: Race, Wealth, and Social Policy in America.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Crowder, Kyle. 2000. “The Racial Context of White
Mobility: An Individual-Level Assessment of the
White Flight Hypothesis.” Social Science Research
29:223-57.

. 2001. “Racial Stratification in the
Actuation of Mobility Expectations: Microlevel
Impacts of Racially Restrictive Housing Markets.”
Social Forces 79:1377-96.

Denton, Nancy. 2001. “Housing as a Means of Asset
Accumulation: A Good Strategy for the Poor?” Pp.
232-66 in Assets for the Poor: The Benefits of
Spreading Asset Ownership, edited by Thomas
Shapiro and Edward Wolff. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.

Edin, Kathryn. 2001. “More Than Money: The Role
of Assets in the Survival Strategies and Material
Well-Being of the Poor.” Pp. 206-31 in Assets for
the Poor: The Benefits of Spreading Asset
Ownership, edited by Thomas Shapiro and Edward
Wolff. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Emerson, Michael O., George Yancey, and Karen J.
Chai. 2001. “Does Race Matter in Residential
Segregation? Exploring the Preferences of White
Americans.” American Sociological Review
66:922-35.

Farley, Reynolds. 1996. “Racial Differences in the
Search for Housing: Do Whites and Blacks Use the
Same Techniques to Find Housing?” Housing
Policy Debate 7:367-85.

Farley, Reynolds, Charlotte Steeh, Maria Krysan,
Tara Jackson, and Keith Reeves. 1994.
“Stereotypes and Segregation: Neighborhoods in
the Detroit Area.” American Journal of Sociology
100:750-80.

Fischer, Mary J. 2003. “The Relative Importance of
Income and Race in Determining Residential
Outcomes in U.S. Urban Areas.” Urban Affairs
Review 38:669-96.

Fitzgerald, John, Peter Gottschalk, and Robert
Moffitt. 1998. “An Analysis of Sample Attrition on
the Second Generation of Respondents in the
Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics.”
Journal of Human Resources 33:300-344.

Flippen, Chenoa. 2004. “Unequal Returns to Housing
Investments? A Study of Real Housing
Appreciation among Black, White, and Hispanic
Households.” Social Forces 82:1523-51.

Freeman, Lance. 2000. “Minority Housing
Segregation: A Test of Three Perspectives.” Journal
of Urban Affairs 22: 15-35.

Galster, George. 1988. “Residential Segregation in
American Cities: A Contrary Review.” Population
Research and Policy Review 7:93-112.

GeoLytics. 2003. CensusCD Neighborhood Change
Database 1970-2000 Tract Data. Retrieved
February 1, 2004 (http://www.geolytics.com/
USCensus,Neighborhood-Change-Database-1970-
2000,Products.asp).

Gyourko, Joseph and Peter Linneman. 1996.
“Analysis of the Changing Influences on
Traditional Households’ Ownership Patterns.”
Journal of Urban Economics 39:318-41.

Harris, David R. 1999. “ ‘Property Values Drop
When Blacks Move in Because. . . ’: Racial and
Socioeconomic Determinants of Neighborhood
Desirability.” American Sociological Review
64:461-79.

. 2001. “Why Are Whites and Blacks Averse
to Black Neighbors?” Social Science Research
30:100-116.

Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as
a Specification Error.” Econometrica 47:153-61.

Hill, Martha S. 1992. The Panel Study of Income
Dynamics: A User's Guide. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.

Huie, Stephanie A. Bond, Patrick M. Krueger,
Richard G. Rogers, and Robert A. Hummer. 2003.
“Wealth, Race, and Mortality.” Social Science
Quarterly 84:667-84.

Hurst, Erik, Ming Ching Luoh, and Frank P. Stafford.
1998. “The Wealth Dynamics of American
Families, 1984-1994,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1: 267-337.

Iceland, John, Cicely Sharpe, and Erika Steinmetz.
2005. “Class Differences in African American
Residential Patterns in U.S. Metropolitan Areas.”
Social Science Research 34:252-66.

Jargowsky, Paul A. 1997. Poverty and Place: Ghettos,
Barrios, and the American City. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.

Jayakody, Rukmalie. 1998. “Race Differences in
Intergenerational Financial Assistance: The Needs
of Children and the Resources of Parents.” Journal
of Family Issues 19:508-33.

Juster, F Thomas, James P. Smith, and Frank Stafford.
1999. “The Measurement and Structure of
Household Wealth.” Labour Economics 6:253-75.

Keister, Lisa A. 2000. Wealth in America: Trends in
Wealth Inequality. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Kennickell, Arthur B. 2003. “A Rolling Tide: Changes
in the Distribution of Wealth in the U.S.,
1989-2001.” Washington, DC: Federal Reserve
Board.

Krivo, Lauren J. and Robert L. Kaufman. 2004.
“Housing and Wealth Inequality: Racial-Ethnic
Differences in Home Equity in the United States.”
Demography 41:585-605.

Krysan, Maria. 2002. “Whites Who Say They'd Flee:
Who Are They, and Why Would They Leave?”
Demography 39:675-96.

Krysan, Maria and Reynolds Farley. 2002. “The
Residential Preferences of Blacks: Do They
Explain Persistent Segregation?” Social Forces
80:937-80.
Lee, Barrett A., R. S. Oropesa, and James W. Kanan.
1994. “Neighborhood Context and Residential
Mobility.” Demography 31:249-70.

Logan, John R. and Richard D. Alba. 1993.
“Locational Returns to Human Capital: Minority
Access to Suburban Community Resources.”
Demography 30:243-68.

Logan, John R., Richard D, Alba, and Shu-Yin Leung.
1996. “Minority Access to White Suburbs: A
Multiregional Comparison.” Social Forces
74:851-81.

Logan, John R., Richard D. Alba, Tom McNulty, and
Brian Fisher. 1996. “Making a Place in the
Metropolis: Locational Attainment in Cities and
Suburbs.” Demography 33:443-53.

Logan, John R., Brian J. Stults, and Reynolds Farley.
2004. “Segregation of Minorities in the Metropolis:
Two Decades of Change.” Demography 41:1-22.

Massey, Douglas S. 1985. “Ethnic Residential
Segregation: A Theoretical Synthesis and
Empirical Review.” Sociology and Social Research
69:315-50.

Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton. 1993.
American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making
of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Massey, Douglas S. and Mary J. Fischer. 1999. “Does
Rising Income Bring Integration? New Results
for Blacks, Hispanics, and Asians in 1990.” Social
Science Research 28:316-26.

Massey, Douglas S., Andrew B. Gross, and Kumiko
Shibuya. 1994. “Migration, Segregation, and the
Geographic Concentration of Poverty.” American
Sociological Review 59:425-45.

Oliver, Melvin and Thomas M. Shapiro. 1995. Black
Wealth/White Wealth: A New Perspective on Racial
Inequality. New York: Routledge.

Pearce, Diana M. 1979. “Gatekeepers and
Homeseekers: Institutional Patterns in Racial
Steering.” Social Problems 3:325-42.

Quillian, Lincoln. 1999. “Migration Patterns and the
Growth of High-Poverty Neighborhoods,
1970-1990.” American Journal of Sociology
105:1-37.

. 2002. “Why Is Black-White Residential
Segregation So Persistent? Evidence on Three
Theories from Migration Data.” Social Science
Research 31:197-229.

Shapiro, Thomas M. 2004. The Hidden Cost of Being
African American: How Wealth Perpetuates
Inequality. New York: Oxford University Press.

Sherraden, Michael. 2001. “Asset-Building Policy
and Programs for the Poor.” Pp. 302-23 in Assets

for the Poor: The Benefits of Spreading Asset
Ownership, edited by Thomas M. Shapiro and
Edward N. Wolff. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.

Shlay, Anne B. and Peter H. Rossi. 1981. “Keeping
Up the Neighborhood: Estimating Net Effects of
Zoning.” American Sociological Review
46:703-19.

South, Scott J. and Kyle D. Crowder. 1997. “Escaping
Distressed Neighborhoods: Individual,
Community, and Metropolitan Influences.”
American Journal of Sociology 102:1040-84.

1998a. “Housing Discrimination and
Residential Mobility: Impacts for Blacks and
Whites.” Population Research and Policy Review

17:369-87.

——. 1998b. “Leaving the ‘Hood’: Residential
Mobility between Black, White, and Integrated
Neighborhoods.” American Sociological Review
63:17-26.

South, Scott J. and Glenn D. Deane. 1993. “Race and
Residential Mobility: Individual Determinants and
Structural Constraints.” Social Forces 72:147-67.

Squires, Gregory D. and Sunwoong Kim. 1995.
“Does Anybody Who Works Here Look Like Me:
Mortgage Lending, Race, and Lender
Employment.” Social Science Quarterly
76:823-38.

Squires, Gregory D. and Charis E. Kubrin. 2005.
“Privileged Places: Race, Uneven Development
and the Geography of Opportunity in Urban
America.” Urban Studies 42:47-68.

St. John, Craig and Robert Clymer. 2000. “Racial
Residential Segregation by Level of
Socioeconomic Status.” Social Science Quarterly
81:701-15.

StataCorp. 2005. Stata Multivariate Statistics:
Reference Manual Release 9.0. College Station,
TX: Stata Corporation.

Stolzenberg, Ross M. and Daniel A. Relles. 1997.
“Tools for Intuition about Sample Selection Bias
and Its Correction.” American Sociological Review
62:494-507.

Thernstrom, Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom. 1997.
America in Black and White: One Nation,
Indivisible. New York: Simon and Schuster.

White, Michael J. 1987. American Neighborhoods
and Residential Differentiation. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.

White, Michael J. and Zai Liang. 1998. “The Effect
of Immigration on the Internal Migration of the
Native-Born Population, 1981-1990.” Population
Research and Policy Review 17:141-66

Winship, Christopher and Robert Mare. 1992.
“Models for Sample Selection Bias.” Annual
Review of Sociology 18:327-50.

Woldoff, Rachael A. 2003. “What We Have and
Where We Live: Race, Wealth, and Neighborhood
Locational Attainment.” Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Sociology, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH.

Yinger, John. 1995. Closed Doors, Opportunities
Lost: The Continuing Costs of Housing
Discrimination. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
