American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
to assume that much of human behavior

is affected by and oriented to spatial
features of the physical environment. Ecolo-
gists and regional scientists have studied the
macro-features of space for entire communi-
ties and regions, but very little research at-
tention has been given to the patterning
effects of space in small areas, especially
within the household. The present paper dis-
cusses the effects that high density and other
features of the dwelling unit (the micro-
environment) have for the emotional health
and family role relations of people living un-
der widely divergent housing conditions in
urban Hong Kong, the city that has probably
the highest residential densities ever known
in the world.

Although there is a social science literature
on housing and habitation (Van Den Broek,
1964), very little attention has been given
to the design features of housing. As Som-
mers (1969) noted, even studies of small
groups typically fail to note that the spatial
dimensions of experiments are potentially
significant variables that must be systemati-
cally considered in the design of experiments.

S INCE man occupies space, it is reasonable

* This paper is based on research conducted for
the Urban Family Life Survey, a joint project of
the Department of Social Welfare and the Council
of Social Services, both of Hong Kong. Acknowledg-
ment is also given for the assistance provided by
the Program Area Committee on Housing and
Health of the American Public Health Association,
the Environmental Control Administration of the
United States Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare; the Institute for International Studies and
the Survey Research Center of the University of
California, Berkeley; The Chinese University of
Hong Kong; and my fellow participants in the
United Nations Ad Hoc Meeting of Experts on the
Social Aspects of Housing in Urban Areas.
There have been very few well designed
studies concerning the personal and family
effects attributable to housing in general and
the physical features of housing in particular,
especially densities. For example, Loring
(1956, 1964, 1967) has suggested that “over
density” is the only housing and neighbor-
hood feature that is associated with his mea-
sures of social disorganization. In an ecologi-
cal analysis of elderly patients in mental
hospitals, Gruenberg (1954) found that cen-
ter-city high density areas account for a dis-
proportionate number of first admissions for
psychoses. One French study argued that the
habitable space per person in a dwelling unit
has a strong effect on levels of tension among
the members of the family in the dwelling
unit (P. and M. Chombard de Lauwe, 1959).
According to Madge (1968), “the current ex-
pert consensus in European countries is that
the lower limit of mental health is 170 square
feet of floor space per person,” although the
American Public Health Association (1950)
set the desirable standard at twice this figure
in 1950.
Several studies have shown the significance
of space and density for the desire to move
(Lansing, 1966; Lansing e¢ al., 1969), al-
though neither this desire nor its frustration
has been shown to adversely affect family
functioning and emotional health. Studies of
language behavior are also suggestive in this
regard, for Bernstein (1968) has suggested
that levels of congestion within the house-
hold affect children’s language behavior and
their perceptions of their environment. In so
far as language behavior and these percep-
tions reflect and affect communications chan-
nels and communication disorders, conges-
tion could possibly have an indirect effect
on emotional health and family functioning.
Other indirect evidence regarding the poten-
tially negative effects of high densities is
suggested by Calhoun (1962a, 1962b, 1963)
in his experimental studies of rats, as well as
by other studies of high density animal pop-
ulations (cf. Hall, 1966:15-22). The re-
search studies of Hall (1966) and Sommers
(1969) regarding proximics and personal
space are also highly suggestive of the poten-
tial significance of density.

To date, most of the negative findings per-
taining to the family and personal signifi-
cance of high density have been produced by
public health researchers, especially those
who are concerned with infectious diseases.
These diseases involve host-parasite relation-
ships, and it is reasonable to assume that
these relationships will most likely develop
in small undivided rooms housing large num-
bers of people. However, there have been a
number of studies that have questioned the
independent significance of housing and den-
sity for the development of infectious dis-
eases. Brownlee (de Groot et al., 1970), for
example, has noted that there is a relation-
ship between density and mortality but that
the strength of this relationship has been
declining over the years. Similarly, Martin
(1967; n.d.) has suggested that direct at-
tacks on either partner to the host-parasite
relationship is more likely than giving atten-
tion to densities to affect rates of infectious
diseases.

A number of studies have also indicated
that high density is associated with many
other deprivations and stresses (Mitchell,
1969a, 1969b), and that both infectious and
noninfectious diseases tend to cluster to-
gether. Various diseases and maladies, in-
cluding psychoneurosis, were found to be
clustered together in Baltimore rather than
to be evenly distributed throughout the pop-
ulation (Downs and Simon, 1954), and sim-
ilar findings have been found elsewhere—for
example, in St. Paul (Buell, 1952; Lemkau,
1970). Schmitt’s (1966) ecological analysis
of census tracts in Honolulu found that over-
crowding had no impact on various measures
of morbidity and illness, once education and
income were statistically controlled. Sim-
larly, Guerrin and Borgatta (1965) found
that illiteracy is the best predictor of mor-
bidity.

Other studies concerned more directly with
personal and family functioning have argued
against the independent significance that
might be attached to high density and poor
housing. Wilmer e¢ al.’s (1962) multiwave
panel study of new residents in a Baltimore
public housing project raises serious ques-
tions about the benefits of improved housing,
although this study did not touch directly on
densities and physical design. Foote e¢ al.
(1960) found that people are willing to
trade off less space in order to add or main-
tain mechanical equipment in the household,
and the rapid growth of the mobile home
industry suggests that people are willing to
sacrifice space for apparent savings in hous-
ing costs.

These ambiguous findings regarding the
personal, family, and social significance of
housing have begun to arouse the concern
of public health personnel and urban plan-
ners. Even back in 1943, one expert (Ander-
son, 1943) noted that “of the many newer
aspects of environmental sanitation, the
standards of housing seem to rest on an es-
pecially insecure epidemiological founda-
tion.” Both the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the American Public Health
Association (APHA) have encouraged re-
search on the health implications of high
density housing (WHO, 1964a, 1964b, 1966,
1968). Health is broadly defined by WHO’s
constitution in 1946 to be “a state of com-
plete physical, mental and social well-being
and not merely the absence of disease or
infirmity.” Health includes the adequate
functioning of families, however “adequacy”
is defined.

These more general social concerns were
covered in a number of position papers re-
cently prepared for the APHA. In one, Lem-
kau (1970) reported that his review of the
existing research indicates that “estimates of
the power of emotional factors in influencing
the healthfulness of housing are so rarely
based on sound data, or any data at all, that
the relationship of them to health is possible
only in the most extreme conditions.”’ Wilner
and Baer (1970) arrive at a similar conclu-
sion: “There is no body of convincing evi-
dence that crowding in a dwelling unit con-
tributes materially to mental disorder or to
emotional instability. Nor is there evidence
as yet that crowding (or other housing def-
icits) interferes with a promotive style of
life; that because of crowding, family roles
and rituals cannot satisfactorily be carried
out; or that the development of infants and
children is severely impaired.” Similar con-
clusions were reached by de Groot et al.
(1970) as well as by Mitchell (1970a).*
Various suggestions have been given re-
garding possible reasons why density does
not have its anticipated effects. In compar-
ing rat and human responses to density,
Mitchell (1971a) has distinguished density
from congestion (or intensity). Congestion
refers to the simultaneous demands for the
use of very limited resources. Wilner and
Baer (1970) make a similar distinction in-
volving measures of space, people, and time.
Loring (1967) has suggested “that a lot of
health problems stem not from mere physical
crowding, but from activity overcrowding,
role over-density, and possible subsequent
withdrawal into psychosocial isolation.”
Research to date suggests several lines of
development for future studies. (1) More
attention should be given to clarifying the
meaning of density and the physical features
of housing in order to specify what stimuli
in the housing situation are noxious and
stressful. (2) Past studies may not have
given adequate attention to the effects of
density because there was not a sufficiently
wide variation in the density situations con-
sidered. Extremely high densities, such as
those existing in Hong Kong, must be con-
sidered. (3) Since high densities and poor
housing tend to be highly associated with

1 These papers were prepared for the First Invi-
tational Conference on Health Research in Housing
and Its Environment.
The information referred to here is drawn
from three large-scale sample surveys con-
ducted in Hong Kong, as well as the pre-
listing operations conducted in preparation
for two of these samples.2 One of these
studies was based on a sample consisting of
3,966 people from the urban areas of the
Colony. Individuals 18 years of age and over
were the ultimate sampling units in this
multistage sampling plan. In contrast, the
second study was concerned with families in
the same urban areas. Of these families, 561
husband-wife pairs were interviewed, in addi-
tion to 2,631 other people who were married
and living with their spouse, but whose
spouse was not interviewed. University stu-
dents conducted these interviews during the
summer and early fall of 1967.

A split-interview schedule was used in
both of these studies, although two-thirds of
the questions were asked of both halves of
the sample. Some of the information that is
reported here refers to only one-half of each
sample.

The third study consists of a 10% sample
of all Forms 3 and 5 pupils in the Colony.
Self-administered questionnaires were used
to obtain information for this project.

2Information on housing also was collected by
the author in large-scale sample surveys conducted
in Bangkok, Taipei, Singapore, and the six major
cities in Western Malaysia. For comparative infor-
mation on housing situations in these different
countries, see Mitchell (1969b, 1970).
As noted earlier, American studies have
shown that people are aware of and respond
to a perceived lack of space (Lansing, 1966;
Lansing e¢ al., 1969; Foote et al., 1960;
Rossi, 1955), although no satisfactory con-
nection has been made between these atti-
tudes and other more disturbing features of
personal and family functioning. People in
Hong Kong are similarly responsive to a lack
of space.

Six different attitudinal items relating to
housing were measured, but only two will be
mentioned here. Both were asked only of the
sample of married people.

First, to tap the dissatisfaction about the
amount of space people have, the married
people were asked: “How do you feel about
the amount of space you have? Twenty-nine
percent responded that they have “somewhat
less space” than they need, and another 13%

3 Urban net residential densities vary from 415
to 466 people per acre. This density is equivalent
to between 265,000 and 298,000 people per square
mile. According to information provided by the
Colonial Outline Planning Team in 1969, densities
in the Shek Kip Mei Resettlement Estates were
4,100 per acre (Mitchell 1970).
A large number of indicators of positive
emotional health were developed for this
study. (The study was concerned generally
with the sources of emotional strain created
by the processes of urbanization and indus-
trialization in Southeast Asian cities.) Three
general types of emotional strain were devel-

4These questions were preceded by the general
query: “Now I would like to know how often you
are troubled by the following: Is it many times,
sometimes, hardly ever, or never?” In answering the
question: “Do you have to hide or avoid other people
whenever you want to do something in private,”
17% said “sometimes” or “many times”; 16% gave
the same answer in response to the question: “Do
you feel that you cannot discuss anything with your
spouse without others listening?”; and 13% gave
one of these two responses to the question: “Do you
feel that you cannot avoid seeing certain persons
no matter how hard you try because you live so
close to them.”

5 For example, 68% of those bothered many
times or sometimes about not being able to discuss
things privately with their spouse also complained
to the same extent about not being able to avoid
certain persons, no matter how hard they try. In
contrast, among those who were never bothered
by a lack of privacy with regard to their spouse,
only 5% were bothered by not being able to avoid
those who lived close to them.

6A score of two is assigned to the answer cate-
gories “many times” and “sometimes”; a score of
one is assigned to “hardly ever”; and a score of
zero is assigned to “never,”
7 The eleven symptoms used were: You feel short-
ness of breath when you are not exercising or work-
ing hard; you feel your heart beating hard; you
feel spells of dizziness; you have nightmares; you
tend to lose weight when you have something im-
portant bothering you; your hands sweat so that
you feel damp and clammy; some days, even for
several weeks or several months, you cannot take
care of things because you cannot “get going”; you
have trouble getting to sleep or staying asleep;
you are troubled by headaches; you are bothered
by feeling nervous, fidgety, and tense; you lose
your appetite.

In constructing the index, a score of 1 was as-
signed to each symptom that occurred “many
times” or “sometimes.” Other definite answers were
scored zero. Those not providing information were
excluded from the index. People with a score of
4 or more were considered to score high on emo-
tional strain.

8 The six symptoms were: Some people make
you dislike them so that whatever they want you
to do, you just want to do the opposite; your
siderable detail in the forthcoming publica-
tions of the Urban Family Life Survey.
Third, two separate indices of role or behav-
ioral impairment and withdrawal were devel-
oped. One refers to withdrawal from family
roles, and the other refers to withdrawal from
work roles, Since densities and other physical
features of housing do not affect these mea-
sures of behavioral impairment, these two
indices will not be considered in the present
paper.

Both measures of superficial strain respond
to high density. However, since low-income
and lowly educated people have the highest
levels of unhappiness and worry, and since
these poor people are most likely to live in
high-density dwelling units, these confound-
ing influences must be statistically con-
trolled. When this is done for the general
population of individuals, densities affect
these superficial strains for only people in
low-income families (Table 2).

Given the conditional significance of den-
sity for these superficial levels of strain, it is
not surprising that the more severe levels of
emotional strain do not respond to high
densities.

Although density does not have an inde-
pendent effect on severe forms of strain or, as
noted earlier, on role impairment, it is pos-
sible that some individual components enter-
ing into the definition of density have a po-
tentially significant influence on emotional
strain. To test this possibility, separate tabu-
lations were run involving the number of
square feet in the dwelling unit, the number
of people living in it, the number of square
feet per person, and the number of people
per bed. All of these were tabulated against
the several forms of emotional strain intro-
duced earlier. Partial correlations also were
prepared, but these indicate that these indi-
vidual components are insignificant. When
considered together in a multiple correlation,
they account for less than 5% of the varia-

 

stomach is full of fire, but you don’t let others
know about it; you are bothered by easily losing
your temper; you feel that if you don’t try your
best to control yourself, you may say or do some-
thing harmful to others; you feel that you are
going to explode; you find some people so unrea-
sonable that it is hard to talk to them.

The same weighting scheme is used for this in-
dex as for the index of emotional strain. Those who
score 2 or more on the index are considered to be
high on hostility.
tion in any of the strain variables in Hong
Kong.

Density and crowding are sometimes mea-
sured by the number of people per room
rather than by feet per person (UN, 1962).
This definition suggests a concern for a lack
of privacy, and for the multiple if not com-
peting uses of the same limited space. How-
ever, the number of rooms in a dwelling unit,
even when considered together with the
earlier density measures, has no impact on
levels of emotional strain.

In addition to these multiple and partial
correlations, tabulations were prepared to
ascertain whether densities affect levels of
strain among occupants of particular kinds
of housing. But again the results are nega-
tive. Only the superficial indicators of un-
happiness and general worry respond to den-
sities, and, as seen above, these differences
are considerably reduced when family income
is considered together with densities.

High densities can be architecturally ar-
ranged in several different ways. In this re-
gard, the number of rooms in a dwelling unit
was considered together with densities, but
no impact on levels of emotional strain was
found in Hong Kong.

In addition to the amount and organiza-
tion of space, the impact of housing ameni-
ties on levels of strain was determined. To
show this, an index of amenities was created.
A score of one was assigned to the presence
of each of the following: tap water, flush
toilet, and cross ventilation. This index was
then used together with densities, number of
rooms, and family income to determine the
In contrast to the physical features of
housing, some of the social features seem to
adversely affect individuals, but these several
features are significant only when they are
found in certain physical surroundings.
These surroundings determine whether po-
tentially destructive social environments will
in fact create stresses that result in high
levels of strain.

Two characteristics of the social environ-
ment are especially significant: the number
of households® sharing the same dwelling
unit and, related to this, the number of peo-
ple in that unit. Only one feature of the
physical housing environment is significant:
the floor level of the dwelling unit.

These housing features are singled out for
special consideration because of their rele-
vance to sustained social relations or social
densities. It is assumed that sustained social
relations among nonrelatives are more likely
to produce interpersonal conflict and stress
than are sustained social relationships among
relatives. We rely on information concerning
the number of households in the dwelling
unit in order to distinguish intradwelling-
unit social relations that are limited to kins-
men from those involving kinsmen and non-
kinsmen living together.

Floor levels are significant in Hong Kong
simply because it is more difficult for resi-
dents in the upper stories of multistory build-
ings to move about and to get away from
their homes. Consequently, they are forced
into close social relationships with the other
members of their dwelling unit.

If close, forced social relationships are a
potential source of stress, then stress should
be higher when there are more people in the
dwelling unit, when these people include non-
family members, and when they live in
upper-floor areas.1°

These assumptions are supported by the
Hong Kong data. First, when the number of
households occupying a single dwelling unit
is statistically controlled, floor level is seen
to affect emotional illness for multiple family
dwelling units only. Forced interaction ap-
parently does not affect levels of emotional
illness if this interaction is with one’s own
kinsmen, but it does if this interaction is
with nonkinsmen. The number of families
sharing a dwelling unit, however, does not
increase the levels of emotional illness for

10 As a counter-hypothesis, it seems likely that
people living on the lower floors of multistory
buildings would be exposed to much higher and
longer periods of noise and that this noise would
be emotionally upsetting. There are some studies
that suggest that if certain home noises continue
for a long period, they might be destructive to
hearing (Farr, 1967). Other studies have also sug-
gested that home noises can be severely disturbing
(APHA, 1948; Council of Europe, 1964; WHO,
1968; Eisenberg, 1969). However, Lemkau (1970)
has noted that, although there is evidence relating
physiological disturbances to noise, it has not been
adequately demonstrated that there is a relationship
between this disturbance and psychological disorder.
The present findings from Hong Kong lend support
to Lemkau’s position.
those who live on the ground floor, perhaps
because these people are able to move out
into the street for additional social space.
Only when the individual’s movement is re-
stricted is he affected by the presence of
other families (Table 3).

Second, a somewhat similar pattern exists
for levels of hostility. Floor level, however, is
clearly most significant for this dimension
of strain (Table 4). Furthermore, these
strains are affected by the number of house-
holds living in a dwelling unit, not the num-
ber of people living there. It is also clear that
—when considered individually—fioor level,
number of households in a dwelling unit, and
number of people in the unit have no inde-
pendent effect on levels of strain.“

The effect of architectural features on in-
dividuals is indirect in that individuals do
not respond directly to housing. Instead,
housing affects patterns of social relation-
ships, and individuals respond to the system
of social relationships that housing condi-
tions have helped to create.

Given the significance of housing for social
relationships, we might expect that family
relationships also would respond to different
housing conditions.
the physical boundaries of social action in
the home would have clear effects on inter-
personal relationships among family mem-
bers. If this is so, then the wide variations
in physical housing arrangements in Hong
Kong should reflect themselves clearly in the
measures of family relationships to be pre-
sented here. Three measures will be con-
sidered: the frequency of husband-wife
communications, tension in husband-wife re-
lations, and marital happiness.

Husband-wife communications are consid-
ered because verbal communication is no
doubt the most common form of interaction
between people. As a form of interaction, it
is the basis on which positive feelings of
husbands and wives toward each other are
created and sustained. Furthermore, the fre-
quency of interaction is a determinant and
indicator of the degree to which the husband-
wife relationship is “group-like”; that is,
communications represent a dimension of
family integration.

Three questions were used to construct an
index of husband-wife communication.

12 Two of these questions were preceded by a
general query: “Some couples discuss more things
than other couples. In general, how often do you
and your spouse discuss the following topics:

Amusing or interesting incidents that happen to
you?

Things you have talked about with friends and
others?”

The third question was: “Some people talk with
their spouse when they have problems and worries.
Some would hide them in their heart when they
have worries. How many of your worries and prob-
lems do you talk over with your spouse?” For the
first two questions, the answer categories “many
times” or “sometimes” are given a score of 2. The
answer category “seldom” is scored 1, and the
answer category “never” is scored zero. For the
Whereas the index of husband-wife commu-
nications measures the integrative features of
marriage, our measures of tension reflect de-
structive and distintegrative features. Again,
three items enter into the index of tension.1*
Finally, a rather general question was asked
to tap overall marital satisfaction.1*

These various dimensions of husband-wife
relationships are highly associated with each
other, and they are each strongly influenced
by conditions found outside the family and
its housing (Mitchell, 1969a). Therefore, our
attention to housing is at best superficial in
the present context.

With these qualifications in mind, the tab-
ulations suggest that high densities appear to
affect husband-wife communications and
marital happiness, but not quarrels. That is,
compressing the arena for family interaction
apparently affects husband-wife relation-
ships, especially levels of communication.
However, our other studies found that the
educational level of spouses has an important
influence on levels of family cohesion; there-
fore, the educational level must be statis-
tically controlled in assessing the significance
of density for cohesion. When this is done,
the effects of density on cohesion are entirely
eliminated.

To see whether the division of space within
a dwelling unit affects family cohesion, we
introduced along with densities several other
In addition to information on husband-
wife relationships, a number of questions
were asked about parent-child relationships.
Note is made here only of the degree to which
high densities force children out of the home
and away from the control of their parents.
The simple question used for this purpose
was: “How often do... your children...
play outside the house and you do not know
where they are?” This was asked only of
parents with a child 18 years of age or
younger living at home.

High densities appear to affect the amount
of surveillance that parents have over their
children. For the higher the density, the
higher is the proportion of parents who say
that they don’t know where their children
are playing.

Since lower-class families are less likely
to exercise close control over their children,
and since lower-class families are the most
likely to live in high-density housing, sta-
tistical controls must be applied with regard
to the family’s class position. Even when
family income or the education of the parents
is considered, however, high densities still
facilitate low control over children (Table 5).
Furthermore, densities have this predominant
effect even when floor level, which indicates
the potential ease of parental surveillance, is
statistically controlled.

Similar perspectives on problems of space
are reported for secondary school pupils with
regard to the difficulty they have in finding
a place to study. They are more likely to
have this difficulty if they live in one of the
following types of high-density housing: a
resettlement estate, a room other than a
flat, a bed space, a cottage, or a squatter hut.
Except for those who live in a “whole house,”
an absence of a place to study becomes more
serious as the size of the pupil’s family in-
creases. No doubt some of these young people
have to study outside their homes, since
studying at a crowded home may be annoying
and disturbing to them, thereby adversely
affecting their educational development.

Therefore, it seems likely that high densi-
ties create uncomfortable situations for mem-
bers of a family in which there are children.
To reduce the consequences arising from
high density, children are given greater free-
dom to leave the home, thereby reducing the
density. But this response tends to weaken
the surveillance that parents have over their
children, and this weakened supervision may
in turn facilitate the development of many
of the social problems of youth assumed to be
characteristic of high-density slum commu-
nities around the world.
Therefore, some of the major effects of
housing pertain to the fabric of social life
and social control in neighborhoods. Resi-
dents in upper floors in multistory buildings
are no doubt encouraged to leave their dwel-
ling unit if they share the unit with other
households. If they do not leave, they tend
to develop higher levels of emotional illness
and hostility. Residents on the ground floor
are able to avoid this situation because it is
easier for them to use the street as an adjunct
to their home. (This pattern of effects is
much less common in public housing because
the Hong Kong government’s regulations dis-
courage these sharing arrangements.)

Children who live in high-density housing,
regardless of their floor level, also are pushed
out of the house, a pattern that tends to re-
duce parental control over the children. And
with very little home-visiting among neigh-
bors who live in high-density dwelling units,
the potential for friendly relationships among
basic levels of emotional strain and hos-
tility.

. Although high densities and other physical
features of housing do not affect deeper
levels of strain, the social features of hous-
ing have an important impact on these
strains. Most importantly, the doubling-up
of nonrelated households tends to create
stressful situations, especially if it is dif-
ficult for the household members to easily
escape each other by retreating outdoors.
It is more difficult to retreat in this way
when the dwelling unit is on an upper floor
of a multistory building. Therefore, multi-
story buildings, when combined with shar-
ing arrangements, can have negative effects
on the emotional health of individuals.
These effects, it is conjectured, probably
arise from forced interaction among non-
relatives, not from high densities or large
numbers of fellow kinsmen. Large numbers
of people in high density housing can be
tolerated more easily if these people are
one’s kinsmen.

. Although the various housing conditions
have no apparent effect on patterns of hus-
band-wife interaction, densities have a
clear impact on parent-child relationships.
Parents in high-density housing evidently
do not discourage their children from leav-
ing the house, thereby temporarily relieving
the high densities. But this solution to high
densities tends to reduce the parents’ knowl-
edge of and control over their children.

. High density housing also discourages inter-
action and friendship practices among
neighbors and friends.
American Public Health Association, Committee on

Hygiene of Housing

1948 Planning the Neighborhood. Chicago: Pub-
lic Administration Service.

1950 Planning the Home for Occupancy. Chi-
cago: Public Administration Service.

Anderson, G. W.

1943 “The present epidemiological basis of en-
vironmental sanitation.” American Journal
of Public Health 133.

Bernstein, B.

1968 “Some sociological determinants of percep-
tion, an inquiry into sub-cultural differ-
ences.” Pp. 223-239 in Joshua A. Fishman
(ed.), Readings in the Sociology of Lan-
guage. The Hague: Mouton.

Buell, B.

1952 Community Planning for Human Services.

New York: Columbia University Press.
Calhoun, John B.

1962a “A behavioral sink.” Chapter 22 in Eugene
L. Bliss (ed.) Roots of Behavior. New
York: Harper & Brothers.

1962b “Population density and social pathology.”
Scientific American 32 (No. 206) :139-146.

1963 The Ecology and Sociology of the Norway
Rat. Publication No. 1008. Washington:
US. Public Health Service.

Chombart de Lauwe, P. H.

1955 “Le logement, le menage et l’espace fa-
milial.” Informations Sociales 9:956-980.

1961 “The sociology of housing methods and
prospects of research.” International Jour-
nal of Comparative Sociology 2 (March).

Chombard de Lauwe, P. and M. Chombard de

Lauwe

1959 Famille et Habitation. Paris: Centre Na-
tional de la Recherche Scientifique.

Council of Europe, Expert Committee on Public

Health

1964 Noise Abatement: A Public Health Prob-
lem. Strasbourg: Council of Europe.

de Groot, Ido, R. L. Carroll and R. M. Whitman

1970 “Human health and the spatial environ-
ment.” Mimeo., prepared for Environmen-
tal Control Administration of the Depart-
ment of Health, Education, and Welfare
and the American Public Health Associa-
tion.

Downs, J. and K. Simon

1954 “Characteristics of psychoneurotic patients
and their families as revealed in a general
mortality study.” Milbank Memorial Fund
Quarterly 22:42-46.

Eisenberg, R. E.
1969 “Auditory behavior in the human neonate:
Functional properties of sound and their
ontogenetic implications.” Audiology 3:34-
35.

Farr, L. E.

1967 “Medical consequences of environmental
home noises.” Journal of the American
Medical Association 202:99-102.

Foote, N. N., J. Abu-Lughod, M. M. Foley, and L.

Winnick

1960 Housing Choices and Housing Constraints.
New York: McGraw-Hill.

Goldsmith, J. R. and E. Jonsson

1970 “Effects of noise on health in the residential
and urban environment.” Mimeo., prepared
for Environmental Control Administration
of the Department of Heath, Education,
and Welfare and the American Public
Health Association.

Gruenberg, E. M.

1954 “Community conditions and psychoses of
the elderly.” American Journal of Psychia-
try 110 (June):88-903.

Guerrin, R. F. and E. F. Borgatta

1965 “Socio-economic and demographic corre-
lates of tuberculosis incidence.” Milbank
Memorial Quarterly 43 (July):269-290.

Hall, Edward T.

1966 The Hidden Dimension. Garden City:

Doubleday.
Lansing, John B.

1966 Residential Location and Urban Mobility:
The Second Wave of Interviews. Ann
Arbor: Survey Research Center, Institute
for Social Research, University of Mich-
igan.

Lansing, J. B., C. W. Clifton, and J. N. Morgan

1969 New Homes and Poor People. Ann Arbor:
Survey Research Center, Institute for So-
cial Research, University of Michigan.

Lemkau, Paul V.

1970 “Position paper on mental health and
housing.” Mimeo., prepared for Environ-
mental Control Administration of the De-
partment of Health, Education, and Wel-
fare and the American Public Health
Association.

Loring, William C.

1956 “Housing characteristics and social dis-
organization.” Journal of Social Problems
3 (January) :160-168.

1964 “Residential environment: Nexus of per-
sonal interactions and healthful develop-
ment.” Journal of Health and Human
Behavior 5 (Winter):166-169.

1967 “Comments on Dyckman.” Pp. 53-56 in
William Ewald (ed.), Environment for
Man: The Next Fifty Years. Bloomington,
Ind.: Indiana University Press.

Madge, John

1968 “Housing, social aspects.” International
Enclyclopedia of the Social Sciences., 6:
516-521. Macmillan and Free Press.

Martin, A. E.

n.d. Environment, Housing and Health, World
Health Organization, mimeo., WHO/Env.
San.:66-144, Geneva.
MANUSCRIPTS FOR THE
ASA ROSE SOCIOLOGY SERIES

Fellows and Active and Student members of the Association

may submit manuscripts of 100 to 300 typed pages for
publication in the ASA Arnold and Caroline Rose Mono-
graph Series in Sociology to the Series Editor, Sheldon
Stryker, Department of Sociology, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana 47401.
MANUSCRIPTS FOR THE
ASA ROSE SOCIOLOGY SERIES

Fellows and Active and Student members of the Association
may submit manuscripts of 100 to 300 typed pages for
publication in the ASA Arnold and Caroline Rose Mono-
graph Series in Sociology to the Series Editor, Sheldon
Stryker, Department of Sociology, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana 47401.
