@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089333?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
begun to explore the adaptation of the
Guttman scalogram method to many
varied research problems. There are indica-
tions that scale analysis represents a meth-
odological advancement, going far beyond its
original application to attitude data.
During the past three years the writer has
been investigating the use of aerial photog-
raphy as a data collection source for urban
sociological and ecological research.? In this
connection, the scale analysis technique has
been found to provide a convenient and pre-
cise method for defining ecological interre-
lationships between elements of physical
structure (photographic data) and _ social
structure within an urban complex. Further-
more, this approach appears to be promising
because of its implications regarding ecologi-

I recent years, American sociologists have
cal theory and the understanding of struc-
ture-function relationships in urban organi-
zation. The purpose of this paper is to report
the results of a study in Birmingham, Ala-
bama in which census data of the type ob-
tainable by aerial photographic interpretation
were correlated with a series of social data
to produce a scalogram model of the city
considered as a socio-physical system.

The rationale within which the study was
undertaken recognized that physical and so-
cial aspects of the city are plurally interre-
lated. The urban social system exists in a
physical environment and is housed in and
characterized by material-cultural features.
Such physical units of the system are socio-
logically significant in that they limit, facili-
tate, or condition social interaction. Thus,
certain aerial photographic information about
the city should be meaningful for social sci-
ence research because of the nexus between
ecological or physical structure and social
structure.

These relationships are not of a one-to-one,
cause-effect nature, but, rather, are charac-
terized by multiple associations and inter-
dependencies. They are generally elusive to
systematic description, and, as Quinn has
stated, “To the extent that significant simi-
larities do characterize a variety of spatially
distributed data, they constitute recurrent
regularities that offer a challenge to the sci-
entist.” 8
ferring generally to the social stratification
system of the city, would also be scalable.
This scale could be called a continuum of
socio-economic status. Thirdly, it was hy-
pothesized that there would be a high positive
correlation between the scale types on each
continuum. This relationship would define
certain linkages between the social and physi-
cal structure of the city. It would also pro-
vide a precise definition of the commonalities
among several spatial distributions. By the
same token, the correlation between the
residential desirability scale and the con-
tinuum of socio-economic status would pro-
vide an estimate of the predictive value of
aerial photographic data relative to the social
ecology of the city.

Twenty-eight census tracts, comprising
about 50 per cent of the city area, were
chosen as a representation of the fifty-eight
such areal units in Birmingham. By referring
to the census tract map of the city it was
possible to select generally equal propor-
tionate numbers of tracts at varying dis-
tances from the central business district
within a rough outline of four major sectors.
Four “physical” data items were con-
structed in the development of and test for
a scale of residential desirability. These were
all assumed to be related to residential status
location, having response categories which
appeared to define desirable, neutral and un-
desirable characteristics. As indicated in
Table 1, three of the items were trichotomous
in form and the fourth was dichotomous.
Each tract was observed for category
classification on each of the four items.
Information for item one, zonal location, was
derived from a broad breakdown of the city
complex, as shown on the census tract map,
into three roughly concentric circular zones.
Tasre 2. ScALE OF RESIDENTIAL DEsIRABILITY FOR TweNntTy-E1cHt Census TRACTS IN BIRMINGHAM,
ALABAMA, 1950 (COEFFICIENT OF REPRODUCIBILITY=.93)

 

 

Item Number and Response Categor;
Scale Tract E oa Scale

Type No. Cc B A Score
3 2 1 4 3 2 1 4 3 2 1
VIII 44 x

 

xX xX x 0
VIII 26 xX x x x 0
VIII 27 xX 4 x x 0
VIII 28 x xX x xX 0
Vu 43 xX xX xX X 0
VIII 45 x x x x 0
VII 46 x x x x 0
Frequency 5 9 11 16 12 11 10 12 11 8 7 (112)
Errors 2 2 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 ( 8)
scale of socio-economic status rankings for
the same sample of twenty-eight census
tracts. Information for four of these was
obtained from 1950 U. S. Census reports.
Data for the fifth, pertaining to social dis-
organization, were procured from a Birming-
ham research agency.!® The five items and
their category definitions, selected as being
generally relevant to the socio-economic
status structure of the areal units under
study, are listed in Table 3.

Each tract was observed for category
classification on each of the five items. As
indicated in Table 3, the rank position oc-
cupied by a tract on any one of the items

10 Social Breakdown in Birmingham and Jeffer-
son County During 1950, Birmingham: Research
Division of the Coordinating Council of Social
Forces in Cooperation with the Community Chest
of Birmingham and Jefferson County, Alabama,
1951.
the ecological patterning of these social char-
acteristics.

For these particular areal units, the special
cumulative order of “difficulty” (1-3-4-2-5)
of the items indicates that high rank in
income is the first prerequisite for a top rank
(Type I) in socio-economic status. Accord-
ing to this arrangement, tracts in Scale Type
II respond “favorably” to all except Item 1,
Income, where they are in the neutral cate-
gory. Thus, because of this particular order-
ing of the items and categories, there is an
internally consistent meaning to the scale
variable. Each residential area is defined
according to specific spatial pattern combina-
tions. The scale scores account for the joint
relationships among the fifteen social at-
tribute categories. Consequently, they rep-
resent a meaningful continuum of socio-
economic status.
Therefore, as a substantive, mathematical
model, this scale defines common ecological
relationships underlying the social stratifica-
tion system of Birmingham. In this respect,
the scale analysis method provides for a
more precise and systematic description of
commonalities among social data distribu-
tions, and becomes an empirical tool for
revealing the social ecology of the city.
as concentric circular zones or sector pat-
terns. Several other possible research appli-
cations are also suggested. Because of their
quantitative nature and mathematical prop-
erties the scale types have a statistical
validity not afforded by looser constructs of
“natural area,” “slums,” or “prestige loca-
tion.” For this reason they may provide a
basis for more dynamic analyses of urban
sirability scale and the continuum of socio-
economic status, not only reveals certain
linkages between the physical and social
order, but also provides an estimate of the
predictive value of aerial photographic data
for delimiting the social areas of the city.
This relationship, testing the third under-
lying hypothesis of the study, was deter-
mined by the product moment correlation
between the census tract scores on the two
scale continua. The coefficient was found to
be +.88, representing a high positive rela-
tionship significant at less than the .001 level
of confidence. This means that for the city
of Birmingham 78-per cent of the variation
in socio-economic status distributions is ac-
counted for by the variation in residential
desirability as defined herein.12 The nature

11The term “high” is used in describing the
degree of association because of the absolute size
of the coefficient and because of its relative size in
comparison with social data and ecological corre-
lations in general. Moreover, although the absolute
size of the sample N of 28 is small, it represents
50 per cent of the city “universe” of such units
and is, therefore, substantially high. The Fisher
“Z” transformation was used to determine the
significance of the coefficient. The 95-per cent con-
fidence limits employing “t” distribution revealed
a reliability of r= +.95 to +.75.

12Tt should be noted that the residential de-
sirability scale, by the nature of its content, places
most emphasis on “economic ecology” or the ability
to pay for preferred residential sites. A study of
deviant cases, represented by the “errors” on the
scale permits the interpretation that ecological
variables of lesser magnitude such as “sentiment
and symbolism” constitute locational forces ac-
URBAN STRUCTURE AND SOCIAL PARTICIPATION 13

» and the continuum of socio-
us, not only reveals certain
een the physical and social
0 provides an estimate of the
1e of aerial photographic data
the social areas of the city.

nship, testing the third under-
sis of the study, was deter-
: product moment correlation
ensus tract scores on the two
. The coefficient was found to
resenting a high positive rela-
icant at less than the .001 level
'1 This means that for the city
n 78-per cent of the variation
mic status distributions is ac-
yy the variation in residential
; defined herein. The nature

“high” is used in describing the
ation because of the absolute size
t and because of its relative size in
1 social data and ecological corre-
il. Moreover, although the absolute
ple N of 28 is small, it represents
the city “universe” of such units
re, substantially high. The Fisher
tion was used to determine the
he coefficient. The 95-per cent con-
mploying “t” distribution revealed
= +.95 to +.75.

be noted that the residential de-
by the nature of its content, places
n' “economic ecology” or the ability
ferred residential sites. A study of
epresented by the “errors” on the

of the association between the two patterns
is more precisely described by the regression
equation, Yo==2.8027+-1.20883(X).

It is quite clear that the residential de-
sirability scale, comprising the type of data
obtainable by aerial photographic interpre-
tation, has an important predictive power for
determining the ecological basis of the urban
social stratification system. The content of
the two scales is such that the variable Y,
socio-economic status rank, combines a series
of social characteristics associated with X,
which in turn reflects the joint relationships
of many physical structural features of the
city. For this reason the regression equation
may be described as a mathematical model
of this city considered as a complex socio-
physical system.

In summary, these findings, related to
both theory and method in urban sociology,
indicate that aerial photographic information
may be profitably utilized to supplement and
substitute for other data collection sources.
Furthermore, it is clearly indicated that the
Guttman scalogram method provides an ex-
cellent analytical model for research in urban
structure. Finally, there appears to be some
promise that further investigation of tech-
niques and relationships suggested herein
may help clarify and elaborate contemporary
theory in urban ecology within a more com-
prehensive structure-function system frame-
work.
