@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
today is presented by the feasibility

of great wars and great internal socio-
economic crises. This challenge must still be
considered imminent even after the joint
military-economic victory, until it has been
demonstrated that the precipitant conditions
are altered. Social scientists are profes-
sional students of the human and cultural
materials from which the crises arise. Most
social scientists are university professors
whose minimum responsibility is to lecture
to youth. American sociologists are not a
monastic group, and yet when measured by
the stature of the present challenge it seems
accurate to observe that there still exists an
academic bias which prevents the fullest
development of scientific sociology. It is
taken as axiomatic that a mature scientific
sociology would contain principles and data
whose relevance to current and imminent hu-
man affairs was patent.

Sociologists as scholars need not be criti-
cized for academic bias, but there is an im-
portant difference between a scholar and a
scientist. Scholars could be described as
people who think and read, while scientists
think and read and investigate. A university
may be a good place to think, and is one of
the best places in which to read. With ac-
cessible laboratories either on the campus or

Te BASIC Challenge facing all peoples

*This paper was designed in the form of a
persuasive hypothesis, to stir up imaginative con-
sideration of both the obvious and the subtle
aspects of the question of social engineering and a
change in emphasis of academic sociology. Pos-
sibly such a challenge is not necessary, since the
activities of several score sociologists have already
signalled the change in emphasis, and this paper
is less a challenge than a symptom. It is felt, how-
ever, that the emerging developments can be more
quickly clarified and appropriate action within the
realm of scientific sociology can be better charted
if the issues are brought into high visibility. Re-
joinder and supplement by other observers would
contribute to this process,
reasonably near it, a university may be one
of the better places for investigation.

But to a social scientist, and particularly
to a sociologist, universities have their limita-
tions as the ideal or sole locus of professional
activity, chiefly because of their handicaps
as laboratories. Those sociologists who prefer
being scientists to being scholars, and by
verbal standards this is an almost unanimous
desire, can compromise by making forays
into the field for data, Lost in this procedure
of research is the sense of relevance which
is reflected in the selection of the fields of
study, in the emphases within fields and in
the relative superficiality of the data as
compared to what the alert businessman,
labor leader, politician, and soldier know
about similar phenomena. In a strictly sci-
entific sense, there is even question of the
validity of social data acquired in these
forays by people who have spent all their
professional lives on the campus and expect
to use the material in their classrooms or
print it for use in other classrooms.

The lack of occupational circulation by
sociologists may be both a result and a
cause of the mutual suspicion between them
and non-academic people engaged in active
affairs. Rationalization about the superiority
of university employment for the advance-
ment of science is making a virtue of what
is presumed to be necessity. It is now time
to make a necessity of a different virtue if
sociologists expect to be competent scientists
of the present dynamic society. Life on a
university campus is a polite and comfort-
able existence, but the scientific phases of the
great sociological issues of today are not so
accessible from the ivy tower as could be
desired.

This is no shallow plea for “applied” sci-
ence, but a fundamental challenge that cur-
rent sociology must derive its problems and
its data from, and test its findings in the
affairs and activities of the operating world
before they can be fully accredited as re-
levant or possibly even valid.*

Validity is tested by determining whether
a finding means what it is claimed or in-
tended it mean, The validity of sociological
findings must be tested against the tangible
circumstances of a functioning demonstra-
tion, The crucial test of whether a crimi-
nologist, family sociologist, race specialist or
other sociological scholar possesses anything
but a few well-knit harmless platitudes is
whether his data have a demonstrable in-
fluence upon situations in these fields. If
physicists and chemists or their apprentices
had never built great structures or performed
industrial magic with substances, these fields
would not today bear very close relation as
sciences to what we presently observe.? But

+ There is another view, represented by Merton
in “Role of the Intellectual in Public Bureauc-
racy,” Social Forces 23:405-15, 1945, and by
Znaniecki in The Social Role of the Man of
Knowledge (New York, 1940), which sharply
distinguishes between the independent intellectual
or pure scientist and the operating intellectual or
sage. The two roles are seen as incompatible and
the latter is viewed by Znaniecki as less worthy.
The view presented here is that the two roles are
more compatible than American sociologists now
recognize and that the benefits of closer liaison are
definitely mutual, although there are some dangers.
The pure scientist may be pure but he is less of a
scientist than he realizes if his data and prin-
ciples are far removed from the phenomena of
similar classification (such as class or race) with
which the operating man deals. Howard Becker
refers to the scientist’s preference for the control
aspects of the phenomenal world in his article
“Supreme Values and the Sociologist,” American
Sociological Review 6:155-72, 1941. The implica-
tions of Wissenssozziologie are that all roles are
culturally conditioned, which presumably covers
both the role outlined here and the role assumed
by a pure scientist.

? Lancelot Hogben illustrates the relationship
between science and the community in his book
Science for the Citizen (New York, 1938). Note
a paragraph from the opening pages of the book:

“Whether we choose to call it pure or applied,
the story of science is not something apart from
the common life of mankind. What we call pure
science only thrives when the contemporary social
structure is capable of making full use of its teach-
ing, furnishing it with new problems for solution
and equipping it with new instruments for solving
sociology, if handicapped by its inability
so far to emerge with sensational generaliza-
tions, has an important advantage over the
physical sciences in its presumed knowledge
of social mechanics, which is the process by
which leadership gets its chance.

Lundberg wrote recently that scientists in
wartime should “go about their business
as scientists,”? by which he implied that
sociologists should not capitalize on the com-
munity’s unrest by entering the active arena
where they can as scientists both test more
pointedly their present formulations and
develop further propositions of more basic
importance to the science of sociology. If
the two billion dollar plan for atomic bomb
development could be duplicated with social
sciences personnel and problems, it is safe
to assume great scientific progress could be
made.

The citizen-conservative may object to the
activities of the sociologist on the grounds
that he is not making himself useful in the
current work of the world. The citizen-liberal
certainly objects that the sociological sci-
entist is not doing enough for progress, as
Lynd has objected eloquently in Knowledge
for What. It is not necessary whether or not
it is desirable to enter this conflict between
conservative and liberal. The scientist strip-
ped of academic bias must admit that a
contemporary American sociologist cannot

 

them. Without printing there would have been
little demand for spectacles; without spectacles
neither telescope nor microscope; without these the
finite velocity of light, the annual parallax of the
stars and the microorganisms of fermentation
processes and disease would never have been known
to science. Without the pendulum clock and the
projectile there would have been no dynamics nor
theory of sound. Without the dynamics of the
pendulum and projectile, no Principia. Without
deep-shaft mining in the sixteenth century, when
abundant slave labour was no longer to hand,
there would have been no social urge to study air
pressure, ventilation, and explosion. Balloons
would not have been invented, chemistry would
have barely surpassed the level reached in the third
millennium B.C., and the conditions for discover-
ing the electric current would have been lacking.”
Pp. 3.

*In the article “Scientists in Wartime,” Scien-
tific Monthly 58:85-95, 1944.
sanctify himself against active affairs and
expect to be an effective scientist. If he
does enter active fields, it is of course a
basic premise that he must take the greatest
care to remain objective.

Unless he wishes to be simply a scholar
who reads in a library, he must as a mini-
mum journey to the active fields for his data.
Preferably he should participate in those
areas in order to be assured that his data
and his problems are accurate and, more
important, relevant. Beyond this he should
participate sufficiently to get an operating
test of validity. Tactically he should par-
ticipate more than he does at present in order
to gain the confidence of the people of active
affairs and thereby get access to data and
opportunity for verification.

The extent of participation can be checked
briefly by reference to the professional lives
of sociologists. The last twenty-five presi-
dents of the American Sociological Society
from 1921 through 1944 as described by
themselves in Who’s Who in America had
completely unbroken academic careers from
the time they espoused sociology, and in all
cases but seven, from the time they began
to earn a living. The fourteen candidates for
offices of the Society in the 1945 elections
showed wider experience. Five had unbroken
academic careers, seven listed such functions
as consultant and the remaining two were
responsible officials in the federal govern-
ment. News notes in the journals in the last
few years indicate increasing use of soci-
ologists by government agencies, but none of
the twenty-five presidents or fourteen can-
didates listed any experience with private
industry or business.

The irrelevance and academic bias of soci-
ologists is nowhere more conspicuous and
more ominous than in the area of modern
industrialism. It is taken as axiomatic that
modern society is not only basically in-
dustrial, but that the great crises of our
time, including those stated in terms such
as communism, fascism, capitalism, war and
individual freedom, are all in very intimate
ways restatements of the central crisis of
industrialism, Can modern man learn to live
with the machine and with other men with
whom the machine throws him in such close
contact?

Peter Drucker has diagnosed this crisis
in The Future of Industrial Man as a search
for appropriate social forms in order to
achieve an industrial society. He writes: “If
the corporation is the representative social
institution and if management is the decisive
social power, mass production is the repre-
sentative social form of our society” (p.
101).

Other problems than large-scale industry
have caused crises in other societies, and
furthermore it may be that it is not the
machine itself but the speed of the forced
readjustments to the machine which is caus-
ing us trouble. Such a distinction, however,
makes little difference since the problem is
posed by industrialism regardless of time
urgencies.

It is difficult to avoid the impression that
sociologists simply fail to recognize the cen-
tral problem in our society (probably be-
cause of historic biases) or that they are
as scientists feebly impotent before it (be-
cause of an academic bias). Admittedly, the
literature of current sociology is heavily
colored with “recognition of the importance
of” industrial forces. But that literature and
the research behind it are the decorative
furnishings of a relevant sociology rather
than the structure itself. There are numerous
and excellent studies of urban society, but
they are slanted to the diverse effects of
urbanization rather than centered on the
city’s industrial and commercial dynamics.
There are shelves of monographs on the un-
employed, but “the employed” as a sociologi-
cal concept is blank. The scholarly literature
of social work deals voluminously with
people who have fallen temporarily by the
wayside, but it knows of the stream of on-
going traffic only by indirection, Thanks to
the recent prophetic innovations of Suther-
land, criminology has stumbled upon a seg-
ment of the central forces of our society
long after these forces should have been
identified directly.

If sociologists had been more interested
in implementable research on the most basic
forces and institutions in our society, they
would have made by now much more prog-
ress in becoming functioning scientists in
the fields of industry, government, inter-
national war, and international peace. In-
stead, only a handful are so engaged and
undergraduate sociology is mostly just an-
other version of the humanities rather than
a necessary technical subject for adequate
performance in industry and direction of
national and international affairs. Graduate
sociology is mostly a way of preparing to
teach undergraduate sociology. Instead of
a tactical plan to correct these biases, we
have in Lundberg’s 1943 presidential ad-
dress a contentment to “wait for the social
sciences to develop.” And we have the vague
and faintly hopeful method of writing trea-
tises and talking to adolescents.

A direct and frank interest in the manage-
ment class, the dynamics of present-day
industrial (social) power, and the sociology
of personal and group relations within the
plant constitute not only the most-neglected
field of a really relevant American sociology
but are also a vital immediate challenge if
we as scientists and citizens would avoid the
threat which the current issues contain.> The
threat to the scientist, both social and physi-
cal, is that for failure to help make this
central area operate successfully, he will be
defined as irrelevant and scientifically in-
valid by the verdict of history. He spent his
time becoming a specialist on the vermiform
appendix while the heart and lungs failed
and then even the appendix disappeared.
Certainly many things learned on the ap-
pendix have unanticipated uses elsewhere,
but cannot also the knowledge of the heart
be put to other uses?

Consider the testimony of the industrialist
and those writing about him. Fortune Maga-
zine editorial writers printed in 1940° “more
and more it is becoming difficult to pin an
occupational label on first class top manage-
ment, Neither selling skill nor knowledge
or mass production is essential, It is essential
primarily that the modern manager should
be a good personnel man—able to under-
stand and manage people.” An official of
the Proctor and Gamble Company wrote:
“Since every business concern must also
adjust itself to labor conditions, to consumer
demands, and to public opinion, we regard
it as an important function to try to under-
stand and interpret social attitudes, and to
aid the managers of the company to keep
business policies in harmony with the social
changes which are always occurring.” This
is the statement of a man who was hired for
his professional abilities as an economist.
One of the most eminent consulting engineers
wrote that “management is the direction of
an enterprise, through the planning, organiz-
ing, co-ordinating and controlling of its hu-
man and material resources, toward the
achievement of a predetermined objective.’”®
An official of the Socony Vacuum Oil Com-
pany wrote that “Management is the respon-
sibility for accomplishing results through
the efforts of other people” (p.8), and
“Management is not the direction of things,
it is the development of people” (p. 9).° The
authors of the book Modern Psychology,
after referring to a study of the famous
Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric
Company, summarized: “The major con-

*In an article entitled “The 30,000 Managers,”
21 :58-63ff.

™Nathaniel R. Whitney, “The Economist as
Adviser,” Harvard Business Review, 20:379-380,
1942.

*Harry Arthur Hopf, Office Management: Its
Development and Future, New York, 1942.

*Tawrence A. Appley, “The Human Element in
Personnel Management,” Society for Personnel Ad-
ministration Pamphlet No. 4, Washington, D.C.,
1941.
clusion from this study is that the true
motivating factor in industrial production
is the social situation.”!° Another engineer
wrote that “‘After all, managements engineer-
ing is rooted in the social as well as the
physical sciences, . . .”!! The importance of
sociological understanding among industri-
alists is pungently made in Burnham’s chal-
lenging book The Managerial Revolution:
“no one who comes in contact with managers
will fail to have noticed a very considerable
assurance in their whole bearing. They know
that they are indispensable in modern so-
ciety. Whether or not they have thought it
out, they grasp the fact that they have noth-
ing to fear from the immense social changes
speeding forward over the whole world.
When they begin to think, they get ready to
welcome these changes, and often to help
them along.”??

On the folk level, the sayings of business-
men and industrialists are replete with refer-
ences to “the human element.” Despite the
almost utter lack of professional assistance
from sociologists, although some has been
forthcoming from psychologists, the impres-
sion is gained that American management
is acquiring by unordered methods some
sociology which is above the folk level. In
the face of the diffidence of sociologists, this
information is not generally recognized as
professional in character and the sociologists
themselves have if anything a negative stand-
ing among industrialists. The mutual sus-
picion is probably mutual loss. Industrialists
must either proceed on the level of common-
sense (folklore) or individual moral prefer-
ence, while sociologists avoid the central

* Charles S. Myers, Frank N. Freeman and
Morris S. Viteles, Modern Psychology. Philadelphia,
1941. See also Roethlisberger’s two books, Man-
agement and Morale, Harvard Unviersity Press,
1942, and (with Dickson) Management and the
Worker, Harvard University Press, 1938; and Elton
Mayo, The Human Problems of an Industrial
Civilization, New York, 1933, for discussions of the
Hawthorne studies.

Nathaniel W. Barnes, “Management Engi-
neering,” Vocational and Professional Monographs
No, 40, Boston, 1941,

* Published in New York, 1941, p. 281.
core of the society they mean to study and
fail to test the soundness of their data in
the most dynamic arena of current activity.

The suggestion here is more than the
nomination of industrial sociology as one
more item in the list of accredited fields.
Henry Pratt Fairchild and Dwight Sander-
son in their presidential addresses (1936 and
1942) and Conrad Arensburg in an article
in 1942 in the American Journal of Sociology
have made the nomination. Ogburn, Suther-
land, Lynd, the urban sociologists and others
have cultivated the neighboring fields. What
is needed now is action and directed effort.

Actual employment in industrial manage-
ment and labor organizations of trained
sociologists is overdue for the mutual im-
provement of sociology and industry. The
sociology curriculum needs revision to pro-
vide undergraduate courses for the technical
Preparation of prospective executives.*® Soci-
ologists should be participating in the edu-
cation of engineers and business administra-
tion students. Economists are being forced
to do the sociologists’ job in many of the
institutes of industrial relations recently es-
tablished. Graduate specialization should be
provided, with a balanced course of study
and mandatory in-service. To effect these
changes it will be necessary to retrain some
of the faculty and recruit faculty from in-
dustry for permanent or briefer service,
among such men as C. I, Barnard of New
Jersey Bell Telephone,

The available literature should be as-
sembled from scattered sources in trade and
professional journals and many other places,
and systematized. Theoreticians in both soci-
ology and management should systematically
enlarge the bridgehead between the two
fields. Committees in the American Sociologi-
cal Society, the Social Science Research
Council, the American Management Associa-

A statement on a practical level of imme-
diately feasible steps which can be taken to train
sociological students for vocations in industry
(chiefly in labor relations, personnel, and training)
is made by Delbert C. Miller in the February, 1945,
issue of the American Sociological Review, pp.
83-89.
tion and the Society for the Advancement
of Management should focus attention on
the problem. Seminars and forums should
develop the field. Above all, there should be
an active effort to advance the scientific as-
pects of the field by research of the kind
which current sociologists could not do with-
out increased participation. There should be
much greater circulation between industry
and departments of sociology similar to the
exchange which accelerated after 1932 be-
tween government and universities. Joint
committees of sociologists and of professional
managers should sketch concrete details of
courses of action.

A greater emphasis upon industrialism as
the dynamic core of our society would help to
reorient and integrate much of the scientific
materials of social pathology, criminology,
employment, class, social power, folklore and
personality, and would revitalize the roles
sociologists play. It would encourage a
heartier interest among sociologists in par-
ticipation in the work of the world, which
is so largely industrial and commercial in
our society, The risk of loss of objectivity
could and should be protected by close fra-
ternity between the detached and the par-
ticipating sociologists, and by circulation
between the two roles. The current frustra-
tion easily observable among sociologists
that they are not being consulted about
matters they have spent their lives studying
would respound to this therapy. A scientific
understanding of relevant human affairs, and
the citizen’s ability to cope with the great
current issues may both be increased, and
less disasterous results than have been evi-
dent in recent decades may be expected to
follow.

Perhaps, a little later, sociologists and
other social scientists may have added
enough to their own professional stature
and to the public’s estimate of that stature
that they may be entrusted with a role in
such great affairs as the relations between
states, where quite patently the course of
history is made by the visible acts of men
or more often by the failure to act.
