@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089337 ?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
OCIOLOGICALLY, a distinction is
S customarily made between urbanism

as a physical, ecological phenomenon
and urbanism as a social-psychological state
—in Wirth’s classic phrase a “way of life.”
The physical aspects have been measured
by population size, density, heterogeneity,
land values, and other data relating to the
environment; the social-psychological as-
pects have been measured less often and
less precisely by scales of “neighboring,”
extent of rationality, impersonality, etc.
Both rural and urban residence location
(ie., ecological ruralism or urbanism) are
believed to be generally, but not inevitably,
associated with the rural and urban social-
psychological patterns—their “ways of life.”
This paper poses two questions: (1) whe-
ther suburbanism as an ecological phenome-
non is also accompanied by suburbanism as
a social-psychological state, that is, by
suburbanism as a distinct way of life; and
(2) what conceptual approaches are likely

* Revised version of a paper read at a meeting
of the Eastern Sociological Society, April, 1955.
neighborhood contains relatively more men
who belong to no formal associations, who
never attend meetings if they do belong,
and who do not hold office than does the
high family status neighborhood. No such
relationship appears when comparing the
two low economic status neighborhoods.
4. Within each of the neighborhoods per-
sons of higher economic status, as indicated
by their own individual educational level,
income, and occupation, generally have a
greater amount of associational participation
than do individuals of lower economic status,
However, holding individual economic status
constant, persons living in the high economic
status neighborhoods still have more asso-
ciational participation than those living in
the low economic status neighborhoods.
Thus the economic characteristics of the
neighborhood population as a unit may be
an important indicator of the economic
reference group for those living in the neigh-
accelerated. It has been suggested that the
suburbs may be serving as a “second
melting pot,” where many new members of
the middle class take on appropriate behav-
ior patterns and values.?

Third, certain physical qualities of resi-
dential suburbs, namely the predominance
of private homes, low population density,
and availability of open space, also differ-
entiate the suburb from the city.

What then are the social-psychological
accompaniments of the ecological traits of
suburbs just described? There are no
grounds for doubting that suburbanism is
a “way of life’ as well as an ecological
phenomenon. However, the characteristics
of suburbanism as a “way of life” are not
definitely established, since comparative
data on suburban social-psychological at-
tributes are generally impressionistic and
scarce. From the point of view of urban
sociology the most interesting observation
on the suburban way of life is that resi-
dential suburbs are said to have a high
degree of neighboring and other informal
primary-type group contacts. A pilot study
which my students and I are now conduc-
ting among residents living outside the
New York City limits but within com-
muting distance seems to bear out this
point. The suburb’s characteristics are thus
contrasted with the traditionally conceived
anonymity and non-neighboring of cities,
and the suburb is likened to the integra-
ted primary-group neighborhoods thought
to be characteristic of ideal-typical rural
assert that social-psychological selectivity
may also be important in producing this
characteristic of the suburban way of life.
However, such treatment as has been given
in the sociological literature has rested on
the assumption that suburbanism as a way
of life is merely the social-psychological
reflection of the ecological traits of suburbs.
Thus, the allegedly higher neighboring in
suburbs is customarily treated as an inci-
dental result of the economic, demographic
and physical features of suburbs. Values,
attitudes, and the practices which express
them are, in other words, conceived of as
the dependent variable, and ecological char-
acteristics as the independent, dominant
variable. This point of view has been shown
to be an oversimplification insofar as purely
urban data are concerned, yet it is still
being applied to data on suburbs. To illus-
trate the recognized oversimplification in
the urban field: the internal structure of
the city cannot be adequately explained
solely by the economics of time and cost;
“sentiment and symbolism,” as Firey so
aptly called them, also have to be included
as causal factors.

Therefore, the hypothesis advanced here
is that social-psychological selectivity is
important in suburban migration, and that
suburbanism as a way of life cannot be
regarded simply as a corollary of the eco-
logical aspects. Rather, that way of life
should be seen as arising, at least in part,
from independent causes. It appears that
this hypothesis can be tested by examining
the origin and attitudes of suburban resi-
dents, as contrasted with those of central-
city residents.

Before assuming however, that the hypo-
thesis is in fact researchable, three assump-
tions contained in it must be examined.
We cannot expect suburbs to attract high
proportions of individuals who are socially
rural in such traits as neighboring: (1)
unless neighboring can be viewed at least
partially as a result of social-psychological
factors; (2) unless it can be shown that
suburbs offer greater opportunity for neigh-
boring than do cities; and (3) unless
rurality can be associated with neighboring.

Turning to assumption (1), the relevance
of social-psychological factors to neighbor-
ing is indicated by two studies in which
the practice of neighboring falls into forma-
tions suggesting psychological types. The
studies are not conclusive for the present
purpose, because they provide no basis for
differentiating social-psychological factors
from individual personality, but they sup-
port the general approach being advanced.?
Other types of behavior of local-metropol-
itan choice, such as shopping, leadership,
and newspaper reading, also show a social-
psychological dimension and a division into
local and non-local types. The case for
neighboring as a social-psychological trait
is further strengthened by the fact that,
above a certain number of years, length of
residence shows no relationship with the
practice of neighboring.® This seems to indi-
cate that those who were psychologically
oriented toward neighboring, engaged in
neighboring soon after establishing resi-
dence, while those who were not so oriented,
never took up neighboring despite the num-
ber of years of residence.

The second assumption, that neighboring
is easier to practice in suburban areas than
in city areas, may readily be granted on the
basis of the ecological analysis previously
made. However, it should be noted that this
assumption is accepted on the basis of
inference. With the exception of the study
underway by the author the writer knows
of no direct studies of city-vs.-suburban
contrasts in neighboring or other kinds of
jnformal social participation. This is a
fundamental gap in our knowledge of

8 J. Bernard, “An Instrument for the Measure-
ment of Neighborhood with Experimental Applica-
tion,” Southwestern Political Science Quarterly, 18
(September, 1937), p. 147; D. Foley, Neighbors or
Urbanites? Rochester, New York: Department of
Sociology, University of Rochester, 1952, p. 56.

4C. Jonassen, Downtown Versus Suburban Shop-
ping, Columbus: Ohio State University, Bureau of
Business Research, 1953, esp. p. 45; G. Stone, “City
Shopping and Urban Identification: Observations on
the Social Psychology of City Life,” American
Journal of Sociology, 60 (July, 1954), pp. 36-45;
R. Merton, “Patterns of Interpersonal Influence
and Communications Behavior in a Local Com-
munity,” Communications Research, 1948-1949, (P.
Lazarsfeld and F. Stanton, eds.), New York:
Harper and Bros., 1949, pp. 182-183 and passim.;
M. Janowitz, The Community Press in an Urban
Setting, Glencoe, Illinois: The Free Press, 1952,
esp. pp. 140-141.

5T. Caplow and B. Forman, “Neighborhood In-
teraction in a Homogeneous Community,” American
Sociological Review, 15 (June, 1950), p. 360; Ber-
nard, op. cit., p. 149.
suburbs, and is a further indication of the
conceptual and research emphasis on the
ecological aspects of suburbs.

The impressionistic studies of Henderson
in Levittown and similar suburbs, and of
W. H. Whyte in Park Forest, Illinois,* led
both of them to posit a high degree of
informal association as an outstanding trait
of suburban living. Dewey’s study of Mil-
waukee’s periphery concluded: “. . . nearly
80 per cent of fringe dwellers found in the
subdivision more of a neighborly and com-
munity spirit than in the city, and many
of the others found the subdivision at least
equal to the city areas in this respect.
. .. Particularly in the smaller subdivisions
there appeared to exist a genuine neighbor-
hood primary group which had not been
known in the urban areas.” 7? Gist’s examina-
tion of the urban-occupied population living
in the open country outside Columbia, Mis-
souri, gives what appear to be rather high
rates of unorganized and informal social
participation, including visiting and mutual
assistance, although no comparative data
are presented.§

The third assumption on which our hypo-
thesis rests is the linkage between rurality
and neighboring. This assumption is so
fundamental in rural and urban theory that
if, for example, no relationship were found
between suburban neighboring and the
degree of ruralism, it would raise questions
about our whole traditional view of the
rural way of life. Actually, the evidence that
exists supports the assumption. A study by
William Key found a statistically signifi-
cant decline in neighboring scores as size
of community increased, although the coef-
ficient of correlation was not high.® How-
ever, there are few studies pertaining to
the differential prevalence of neighboring,

6H. Henderson, “The Mass-Produced Suburbs,”
Harper’s Magazine, 207 (November, 1953), p. 28,
pp. 31-37; Whyte, op. cit., passim.

TR. Dewey, “Peripheral Expansion in Milwaukee
County,” American Journal of Sociology, 54
«September, 1948), pp. 122-123.

8 N. Gist, “Ecological Decentralization and Rural-
Urban Relationships,” Rural Sociology, 17 (Decem-
ber, 1952), pp. 331 ff. A study of a San Francisco
suburb showed similar results; see C. Bolton, “Fac-
tors Associated with Neighborliness in a Suburban
Community,” Stanford University, unpublished
Master’s thesis, August 1948, pp. 21-39, p. 49.

®W. Key, “Rural-Urban Differences in Social
Participation,” Washington University, St. Louis,
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, June, 1953, p. 28 ff.
and this constitutes a weakness in the
assumption. Key’s study is the only one
based on direct comparisons among a range
of communities.

Upon reviewing these three assumptions
as a whole, it seems reasonable to accept
the hypothesis that suburban residents are
a selected social-psychological type, oriented
toward neighboring and other rural values
and practices. The crucial test of the hypoth-
esis is whether suburban residents actually
do display a positive psychological orien-
tation toward neighboring and manifest a
high degree of neighboring which can be
linked to ruralism—either of the ecological
or social-psychological variety.

Insofar as previous data are available,
they seem to support the hypothesis, al-
though no available studies have permitted
a definite test. Rodehaver found a high
proportion—60 per cent—of the family
heads who had moved from Milwaukee to
its fringe were originally from rural areas.
Pappenfort’s examination of the population
of Hickman Hills, a suburb of Kansas City,
also found most of the families who moved
there from Kansas City to be former resi-
dents of small communities.1! Gist found
that, of the urban-employed residents of
the Columbia, Missouri fringe who had
moved there from Columbia, 66 per cent
were originally from rural areas.!? A linkage
between the attraction of former rural resi-
dents to suburban areas, and social-psycho-
logical selectivity, is made probable by
Martin’s study of the Springfield, Oregon
fringe. His relevant conclusions were that:
(1) there is some indication that being
satisfied with living in the suburban fringe
in related to having rural values, and
(2) satisfaction with living in the fringe
is also correlated with having once lived
in rural areas.78

At present the following hypothesis is

10M. Rodehaver, “Fringe Settlement as a Two
Directional Movement,” Rural Sociology, 12 (March,
1947), pp. 49-50.

11D. Pappenfort, “Metropolitan Dominance and
Suburban Social Structure,” University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri, unpublished Master’s thesis,
1951, cited by N. Gist, “Developing Patterns of
Urban Decentralization,” Social Forces, 30 (March,
1952), p. 261.

12 Gist, “Developing Patterns . . .,” op. cit., p.
ath
being tested by the author: high neighbor-
ing is more charactistic of suburbanism than
urbanism and is due to the presence in
suburbs of selected demographic and socio-
economic groups, siting arrangements and
other ecological characteristics; but it is
also due to the selective migration to the
suburbs of people predisposed to neighbor-
ing.

The project involves interviewing a sam-
ple of central city and suburban residents,
each operationally defined, and obtaining
ecological data as well as responses on two
questionnaires. Wallin’s neighboring scale,
which has been validated in previous studies,
is employed to measure informal associa-
tion and contacts with geographic neigh-
bors.15 Thus, neighboring is defined opera-
tionally as the practice of certain folkways.
The second questionnaire measures the
social-psychological aspect of ruralism, de-
termined from responses to a modified
version of the short form of Anderson’s
Rural Living Opinion Scale.1® Here atti-
tudes toward farm life and those interests
which are more easily attained in a non-
urban setting, such as desire for home
ownership, outdoor activities, etc., are
examined. The aim of the study outlined
is to shed light on the following questions:

1. Can the “rural” characteristics of sub-
urbs be measured on an objective scale to
further substantiate present impressions?

2. Can the suburban “way of life” be as-
cribed to specific processes of social-psycho-
logical selection operating in suburban migra-
tion?

 

Oregon: The University Press, 1953, pp. 60-68; W.
Martin, “Some Social-Psychological Aspects of Ad-
justment to Residence Location in the Rural-Urban
Fringe,” American Sociological Review, 18 (June,
1953), pp. 250-253.

14 “Suburbs,” as the term is used in this paper,
refers particularly to the residential or dormitory
variety, characterized by dependence on the city
occupationally and for various specialized types of
shopping and recreation. A working definition would
comprise the area outside the legal city limits but
within commuting distance.

15 P. Wallin, “A Guttman Scale for Measuring
Women’s Neighborliness,” American Journal of
Sociology, 59 (November, 1953), pp. 243-246,

16 W. A. Anderson, “Rural Living Opinion Scale
(Short Form),” Part IV of, “A Study of the Values
in Rural Living,” Cornell University Agricultural
Experiment Station, Ithaca, New York: Department
of Rural Sociology, Rural Sociology Publication 22,
September, 1949.
