@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2087970?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
I regard it as an honor to be asked to
comment on a paper by Professor Bogardus
and on his Ethnic Distance Scale. Not only
was Dr. Bogardus a pioneer in formulating
a measuring device in the social sciences,
but his scale has stood the test of time,
while hundreds of scales developed since
1925 have been long forgotten. There have
been three revisions of the original social
distance scale, but the basic ideas behind
it have remained substantially the same.

Let me point out some of these basic ideas
and indicate why they are such valuable
principles in scale construction. First, the
Bogardus Scale, while it elicits expression
of verbal opinions, tries to make these opin-
ions as realistic, as simple, and as close to
actual behavior as possible. People are asked
such questions as, “Are you willing to send
your children to the same school with
children of this ethnic group?” “Would you
be willing to marry a member of this ethnic
group?” Notice how concrete and close to
realistic social action such questions are.
Much of the controversy! over whether
verbal opinions reflect overt behavior ten-
dencies becomes dissipated when questions
take this form.

Second, the Bogardus Scale assumes real-
istically that a person’s behavior is not a
monolithic “for” or “against” a social object,
but a function of the social situation in
which the favorable or unfavorable behavior
is to be expressed. Bogardus assumes that
attitudes regarding a social object form a
scale containing differing degrees, rather than
a block which divides persons into only two
categories. It is unfortunate that so many
attitude test constructors after Bogardus
adopted the technique of “item analysis,”
by which questions were retained or dis-

1See, for example, Ellsworth Faris, The Nature
of Human Nature, New York: McGraw-Hill Book
Company, 1937, pp. 144-154.
carded depending on whether or not answers
to them correlated well or poorly with the
total score. It is to be noted that attitude
scale construction has come back to Bo-
gardus’s principle in the work of Louis
Guttman,’ who provides a far more sophis-
ticated rationale of attitude measurement
than did those who worked on this problem
during the 1930's.

A third advantage of the Bogardus scale
is still not fully appreciated today, and
consequently there may be some controversy
over my evaluation. It is apparent that Bo-
gardus had a rather thorough “intimate”
acquaintance with the area of ethnic behavior
and attitudes before he constructed his scale.
From this, he could set the reasonable outer
limits of favorable and unfavorable attitudes.
This involves the clear specification of value
premises, even though Bogardus did not
give them that name. Note, for example,
that in this paper, Bogardus defines a scale
score of 1.00 as the most favorable score ob-
tainable, and this is the point at which a
person may be said to have an “unpreju-
diced” attitude. He did not, as Thurstone
did,’ choose his items from the literature at
random, but he had knowledge and a point
of view in selecting them. Some of Thurs-
tone’s items, despite the tests for ambiguity
and irrelevancy he applied to them, are
still confusing, they have become out-of-
date, and his scale as a whole has no clear
reference to extremes of attitude. Bogardus
does not allow himself to fall into the as-
sumption, which is value-loaded but not
clearly specified as to its value premises,
made by Guttman and Suchman.* This as-
sumption is that a favorable attitude is to be
distinguished from an unfavorable one by
the point at which those with the least
intense attitudes happen to fall. One of the
more obvious dangers of the latter approach
is that what is defined as a strongly favorable
attitude at one time may, a few years later,
be defined as a strongly unfavorable attitude.
The U-shape of the intensity function may
well be limited to Western culture, and is
probably not uniform even in that culture.
The Bogardus approach has no such limita-
tions.

Thus in this year of 1950, some twenty-
five after the birth of the Bogardus scale,
we are able to listen to a research paper
making perfectly adequate scientific use of
that scale. This specific study has some de-
fects of which Professor Bogardus is aware.

First, the experimental cases are selective:
Even if not significantly more initially prej-
udiced than the control cases, they are more
interested in better ethnic relations and
presumably therefore more consciously open
to change in their attitudes.

Second, while the change in attitudes pro-
duced in the experimental cases by the
Workshop course is statistically significant,
not enough consideration is given to the
question of whether the change is intrinsi-
cally significant in terms of attitude change.
In view of the fact that statistical signifi-
cance is achieved with only 32 cases, and
that the average score for something ap-
proaching a representative sample of the
whole country is only 48 points above that
of the experimental group, I judge that the
change of attitudes produced by the Work-
shop was intrinsically significant. In the
follow-up, it might have been useful to in-
quire if the person actually did not have
more contact with minorities after the Work-
shop, and in what other ways the person
changed his behavior.

Third, the follow-up nine months after
the Workshop missed four cases out of the
32 tested earlier. The loss of these four
cases may have biased the comparison with
the earlier periods. To avoid this, the average
scores of the remaining 28 cases in the
before-and after-Workshop administrations
could have been recalculated.

Finally, the question may be raised as to
what exactly the experimental stimulus was.
What, among all the diverse experiences of
the six weeks’ Workshop, were the effective
stimuli that produced the change in attitude?
The personal interviews tried to get at this
matter but apparently did not do an ade-
quate job. It is assumed, for example, that
personality differences among the Workshop
members were the cause of differential
changes in attitudes. Might it not be that
different experiences among the 32 members
during the six weeks were the cause of dif-
ferential changes? Also, was the entire six-
weeks’ Workshop necessary to produce the
changes, or were a few experiences that oc-
curred on, say, two or three days, the effec-
tive stimulus? These questions are very
difficult to answer, and it may well be that
to perform a thorough scientific test of this
one Workshop does not justify the effort. It
might be preferable to experiment with
smaller and more controllable stimuli. If one
is to study adequately the effects of a broad
Workshop experience, the researcher would
have to have a day-by-day interview with
each experimental participant in order con-
stantly to observe the restructuring of atti-
tudes and conceptions of the inter-ethnic
situation.

For its purpose of measuring the over-all
changes of attitude accompanying a lengthy
educational experience, Professor Bogardus’s
study—both in its design and measuring de-
vice—is as complete and adequate as any I
have ever read.
