@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
E conomic opportunity plays a prominent role
in explanations of nuptiality. Scholars con-
cerned with both historic and contemporary peri-
ods have proposed that marriage occurs earlier
and is more prevalent where economic opportu-
nity is relatively abundant (e.g., Habakkuk 1971;
Hermalin and van de Walle 1977; Malthus [1826]
1986; Wilson and Neckerman 1987; Wrigley and
Schofield 1981).' Studies linking economic con-
ditions to marriage are generally based on ag-
gregate data and assume that local economic
conditions affect all young adults in an area in
the same way. However, when society is sharply
segmented by class or caste there is reason to
doubt the validity of this assumption. In such
cases, applying the opportunity thesis of nuptiality
requires consideration of group differences in
access to positions and rewards.

* Direct correspondence to Nancy S. Landale, Pop-
ulation Issues Research Center, 22 Burrowes Build-
ing, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802. This research was partially support-
ed by a grant from the American Sociological Associ-
ation’s Problems of the Discipline program. The au-
thors thank Mark Hereward and Patty Glynn for their
assistance in preparing the 1910 Public Use Sample
for analysis, and Avery Guest, Tim Guinnane, S. Philip
Morgan, and R.S. Oropesa for comments on an earlier
draft of this paper.

‘Most theoretical statements about the historic re-
The rural American South during the early
twentieth century is an excellent example of a
society in which the nature and extent of economic
opportunity varied markedly across groups, es-
pecially racial groups. At that time, the South
was sharply stratified along two distinct dimen-
sions — class and caste. Among rural whites,
class position was determined largely by owner-
ship of land. While rural blacks also exhibited
class variation, their location in a subordinate
caste was more salient (Dollard 1937; Flynn 1983;
Mandle 1978). The caste position of southern
blacks reduced their access to some forms of
economic opportunity and prohibited their access
to others. We believe that this stratification system
must be considered when examining the links
between the economy and marriage. In particular,
we show that the different economic opportuni-
ties open to blacks and whites produced racial
variation in the relationships between specific
features of the economy and entry into marriage.

We formulate our predictions in terms of the
marriage behavior of males. Because of the hus-

 

lationship between economic opportunity and mar-
riage are drawn from studies of the demographic sys-
tem in preindustrial northwest Europe. However, the
fundamental logic has been applied to societies in
which residential and financial independence are pre-
requisites to marriage.
Dixon (1971) has suggested a useful conceptual
framework for understanding geographic varia-
tion in marriage behavior. She delineates three
factors that intervene between the social struc-
ture and nuptiality: (1) the availability of mates;
(2) the feasibility of marriage; and (3) the desir-
ability of marriage. The availability of mates is
largely a function of the relative numbers of males
and females of marriageable age. The feasibility
of marriage depends on a couple’s access to eco-
nomic resources, but also varies according to
cultural expectations regarding the financial and
residential independence of newlywed couples.
Finally, the desirability of marriage reflects the
presence or absence of attractive alternatives to
marriage. Although not part of Dixon’s scheme,
we suggest that the desirability of marriage in a
given locale may vary by occupation and social
position. For example, for those in some occupa-
tions, particularly agriculture, marriage (and
children) may enhance economic well-being by
increasing household production and income.
Consistent with this general framework, we
focus first on the ability and motivation to marry
in agricultural societies, like the rural South in
the early 1900s. In such settings, access to land is
critical to the economic outlook of young adult
males. For example, Hajnal (1965) largely at-
tributes the historically late age at marriage in
western Europe to land shortages that limited the
ability of young adults to establish independent
households. Similarly, Levine (1977) credits the
shift from household to capitalist production in
some rural areas of western Europe with relaxing
this constraint by reducing dependence on land
acquisition, thereby leading to earlier marriage
and childbearing. The American South in the early
twentieth century differed in many respects from
the western European societies studied by Hajnal
and Levine. Southern marriage traditionally oc-
curred much earlier, in large part because land
was abundant. However, that began to change
during the latter half of the nineteenth century.
Studies of the effects of declining land avail-
ability on American family formation in the
nineteenth century (e.g., Easterlin 1976; Forster
and Tucker 1972; Shapiro 1982; Yasuba 1961)
have generally concluded that couples had smaller
families where arable land was in short supply.
Some scholars have speculated that declining land
availability reduced fertility in part by restricting
marriage.? Where land was readily available,
young men could establish themselves as farmers
with relative ease; where it was difficult to acquire,
they were forced to postpone marriage or to seek
nonownership options such as farm tenancy or
wage labor.’ The availability of these alternatives,
in turn, depended upon the structure of local
economies. Thus, the feasibility of marriage was
potentially influenced by the availability of agri-
cultural land and alternatives to farm ownership
in the local economy.

Less attention has been devoted to under-
standing the implications of economic conditions
for the motivation to marry. It is commonly as-
sumed that individuals want to marry, given ade-
quate economic resources (Hermalin and van de
Walle 1977; Malthus 1986), but there is reason
to believe that the incentives for early marriage
also varied with the economic structure. The
economic opportunities available in communities
determined the employment options faced by
young men and women, which entailed distinct
conditions and incentives for family formation.

Perhaps most fundamental is the distinction
between employment in the wage economy and
the family-based farm economy. This distinction
has been drawn clearly in a number of studies of
economic organization and family formation (e.g.,
Caldwell 1982; Levine 1977; Tilly and Scott
1978). The farm household, regardless of land
tenure, generally functioned as a unit of econom-
ic production (Tolnay 1986). All family members,
including wives and children, performed valu-
able economic roles. The labor of wives and chil-

? A lack of data on U.S. marriage behavior in the
19th century limits the empirical study of this issue.
The U.S. census first collected information on marital
status in the census of 1880; marriage data were not
included in the published tabulations until 1890.

3 Another alternative was migration to areas of more
favorable opportunities. Although migration was im-
portant during the period under study, an examination
of its effects on marriage is beyond the scope of the
present paper. Our cross-sectional census data pro-
vide no information on geographic mobility in young
adulthood. The relationship between migration and
marriage at the turn of the century is examined with
longitudinal data in Landale (1989a).
dren was critical to the success of all but the
wealthiest farms — large families could produce
higher yields and increase household income. In
short, the organization of the farm economy cre-
ated a clear incentive for early marriage and
childbearing.*

The situation of wage laborers in the farm and
nonfarm sectors differed from that of farmers in
several important respects. First, the wage econ-
omy was generally organized around the labor
inputs of individuals rather than families. Be-
cause a family was not required for the success-
ful performance of most wage jobs, the organi-
zation of the workplace did not encourage early
family formation.> In fact, it may have discour-
aged youthful marriage by providing an inde-
pendent source of income for single women.
Second, wage labor was generally performed
outside the home. Although farm wives could
perform productive work while they cared for
their offspring, employment outside the home
required alternative child-care arrangements. In
general, the separation of the workplace from the
home reduced the economic contributions of
married women. This placed a greater economic
burden on husbands, creating a potential disin-
centive for early marriage. The major exception
was married black women, who worked outside
the home in significant numbers and contributed
substantially to family income.

In sum, the economic structure was linked to
marriage in several distinct ways. First, it defined
the opportunities for economic self-sufficiency
that were critical to household formation. The
scarcity or abundance of those opportunities de-
termined the feasibility of marriage. Second, it
influenced the employment options available in
the local environment. Some options were con-
ducive to marriage while others provided fewer
incentives for early family formation. In addition,
marriage chances were constrained by the avail-
ability of appropriate mates. A relative abundance
of potential partners encourages entry into mar-

*The economic contributions of family members
are also reflected in the preference of landowners for
tenants with wives and children (see e.g., Davis,
Gardner, and Gardner 1941, pp. 327-8).

* Newby’s (1989) description of cotton mill pro-
duction in the New South presents a somewhat differ-
ent view of the wage labor environment. According to
Newby, mill operators sought families with other
possible workers—including women and children. In
this part of the nonfarm economy, wage labor may not
have been incompatible with early family formation.
Still, our distinction between employment in the wage
economy and the farm economy applies generally.
The agricultural system of the South was shaped
by a complex set of circumstances that arose af-
ter Emancipation. Southern planters had to find a
substitute for the slave labor they had lost. At the
same time, freedmen had to find a niche in the
market economy. Solutions to this economic
puzzle were constrained by the planters’ lack of
capital (Jaynes 1986) and the federal govern-
ment’s decision not to require massive land re-
distribution. After considerable experimentation,
an uneasy “compromise” was reached that al-
lowed southern planters to retain ownership of
the land, while allowing black farmers more au-
tonomy than the work gang. This compromise
was the tenancy system that dominated southern
agriculture until the middle of the twentieth cen-
tury (Ransom and Sutch 1977).

There were different styles of tenancy — some
required different resource inputs by tenants,
others provided different forms of compensation.
Some tenants paid cash rent for access to the
land and provided their own tools and work ani-
mals. At the other extreme, sharecroppers pro-
vided little more than the labor that they and their
families could perform and received a share of
the cash crop as compensation. Whatever the
specific arrangements, however, all forms of
tenancy shared the same fundamental character-
istic — the tenant family worked land that they
did not own.

In some agricultural settings, tenancy is sim-
ply a rung on the ladder leading to farm owner-
ship. Through saving, a tenant farmer may grad-
ually accumulate sufficient resources to purchase
land and establish economic independence. For
blacks in the rural South, however, tenancy was
generally a terminal status. A combination of
discriminatory treatment, oppressive economic
practices, and legal barriers conspired against
movement up the agricultural ladder.

The southern caste system guaranteed that
blacks would encounter greater resistance to up-
ward mobility than whites. As Flynn noted (1983,
p. 24), “The latitude or maneuvering room of
blacks within their subordinate position — their
ability to demand share privileges, advance to
‘independent tenancy’, and occasionally even
become landowners — was fundamentally of-
fensive to the white sense of social order.” As a
result, blacks were typically denied credit for
investments such as land purchases (Mandle
1978) or driven from their property (Jaynes 1986,
p. 256).

Perhaps even more effective in restricting the
upward mobility of rural blacks was the system
of crop liens and debt peonage that virtually
precluded savings by tenant families. For most
tenant farmers, the crop in the fields represented
their only equity. Especially in lean years, but
probably in most years, tenant families could not
save enough to meet their expenses from harvest
to harvest. Southern merchants were more than
willing to extend operating credit at exorbitant
rates of interest, using the farmer’s maturing crop
as collateral (e.g., Ransom and Sutch 1977;
Mandle 1978; Schwartz 1976). The merchant’s
lien assured that the farmer’s share of the profits
was sliced even thinner. Meager profits and usu-
rious interest rates virtually guaranteed that the
farmer’s indebtedness extended from one year to
the next. Mired in this system of debt peonage,
most black tenants found it impossible to accu-
mulate savings. Moreover, this exploitative eco-
nomic arrangement was buttressed by the south-
ern legal system, which prevented impoverished
farmers from escaping the yoKe of debt peonage
by mechanisms like antienticement and vagran-
cy laws (Jaynes 1986, p. 310; Myrdal 1975).

Southern whites did not escape the perils of
the plantation system of agricultural production.
During the last decades of the nineteenth century
and the early decades of the twentieth century,
more and more rural whites sank into tenancy.
Despite the rapid deterioration of rural white
fortunes in the South, tenancy remained propor-
tionately far more common among blacks than
whites. For example, in 1910 75 percent of all
black farm operators were tenants, compared to
Rural black males also faced bleak prospects for
employment outside of agriculture due to the rel-
atively retarded development of an industrial
economy in the South and the exclusion of blacks
from many of those industrial enterprises that
did exist (Mandle 1978; Wright 1986). A few
industries welcomed black males for the most
strenuous and dangerous tasks, e.g., blacks were
relatively well-represented in the turpentine and
timber industries. The steel mills of Birmingham
were another exception to the general exclusion
of black males from southern industry (Wright
1986).

More typical was the southern textile industry
which effectively excluded black males. Textile
manufacturing was the South’s most striking
success in the development of an industrial base
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Yet black males were virtually excluded from
the textile industry (Jaynes 1986, pp. 272-4).
White labor also organized successfully to close
other avenues of escape from plantation agricul-
ture. Efforts to exclude blacks from some skilled
occupations (e.g., carpentry, brick masonry) were
successful, as were efforts to drive black labor
from the docks of many southern ports. The result
was an occupational structure sharply segment-
ed by race.

In sum, black males who wished to escape the
oppressive conditions of the plantation agricul-
tural economy faced disheartening obstacles in
the nonagricultural economy. Not only were they
virtually excluded from large segments of the
southern economy, but within those sectors in
which they were allowed to compete they were
relegated to the most menial positions. Although
not perfectly defined by race, the southern econ-
omy reflected the southern caste system. It was a
“dual” economy that offered different opportu-
nities and potential for mobility to blacks and
whites.
and more importantly, they should cause the
marital behavior of blacks and whites to respond
differently to the prevailing economic structure.

Considering the racial difference in marriage
timing, we expect black males to have married
earlier than white males. The heavier concentra-
tion of rural blacks in tenancy combined with the
restricted opportunities for farm ownership like-
ly encouraged early marriage among black males.
The tenant household functioned as an autono-
mous unit and income (for both the tenant family
and the landlord) depended on the labor of fam-
ily members. Male tenant farmers had a strong
incentive, then, to marry early (Tolnay 1984).
Moreover, there was little reason for black males
to postpone marriage while they tried to accu-
mulate sufficient resources to purchase their own
land because the road to farm ownership for
blacks was littered with obstacles erected by the
southern caste system.

We also expect to find significant racial dif-
ferences in the structural determinants of marriage
behavior. The socioeconomic environment varied
across regions of the South, e.g., some areas had
higher levels of farm tenancy, greater availabili-
ty of manufacturing employment opportunities,
and cheaper land than other areas. These structural
characteristics affect marriage patterns by influ-
encing the “desirability” or “feasibility” of mar-
riage. However, we contend that these structural
factors had substantially different impacts on
marriage for blacks and whites.

We hypothesize that high levels of farm tenan-
cy in an area encouraged early marriage for black
males and discouraged early marriage for white
males. For many white males, tenancy was a
temporary status and farm ownership was an
achievable goal. In areas with high levels of ten-
ancy, however, white males may have had to
wait somewhat longer before they were in a fi-
nancial position to buy land. We also expect the
average cost of a farm to have discouraged early
marriage among white males, for whom higher
farm costs likely meant a longer wait to accu-
mulate the resources to purchase land. In contrast,
high farm costs would be less relevant to black
males because of the social and economic barri-
ers to ownership; they should have no independent
effect on their marriage patterns.

Finally, we hypothesize that manufacturing
employment opportunities discouraged early
marriage among whites, but were unrelated to
black marriage patterns. Employment in the wage
economy had substantially different implications
for family formation than farming because it was
Data from the 1910 Public Use Sample (PUS) of
the United States census (Strong, Preston,
Lentzner, Seaman, Williams 1989) are employed
to test these hypotheses. The 1910 PUS is a na-
tionally representative sample of households
drawn from the microfilmed records of the thir-
teenth census. One in every 250 households
originally enumerated was included in the sample,
yielding a total sample size of 88,814 households
comprising 366,239 individuals. Although the
1910 PUS is a household sample, each sampled
household includes information on all individu-
als residing in the household. We analyze the
individual-level data, which include basic de-
mographic and social variables, such as age, sex,
race, marital status, birthplace, literacy, and oc-
cupation. The household data allow us to locate
individuals by county, state, and region of resi-
dence.

We restrict our analysis to young men and
women living in the rural South in 1910.7 Indi-
viduals are classified as rural if they resided in a
place with fewer than 2,500 residents. To provide
additional information about the residential en-
vironment, we appended county-level data to each
of the individual-level census records (Inter-
University Consortium for Political and Social
Research 1989). The county-level data describe
the local economy and population, including the
conditions and organization of agriculture and
the prevalence of manufacturing activity. Where
possible, we include race-specific measures of
the local opportunity structure. Where race-spe-
cific data are unavailable or inappropriate, our
measures refer to the total economy and popula-
tion of the county. With the exception of two
variables described below, the county-level
measures are based on data from 1910.

We focus on the young adult population be-
cause our interest is in identifying conditions that
facilitate or retard early marriage. The analysis is
restricted to males aged 20-24 and to females
aged 18-22. These age groups exhibit substan-
tial variation in marital status in the rural South
in 1910. Because females tended to marry at an
earlier age than males, we selected a slightly
younger age group for the analysis of female
marriage behavior. The dependent variable for
examining the nuptial behavior of these men and
women is a dichotomous measure of marital sta-
tus in 1910: ever-married vs. never-married. The
ever-married (coded 1) includes those who were
married, divorced, separated or widowed at the
time of the census.?

Two types of variables are included as predic-
tors of marital status: individual characteristics
of the young men and women and characteristics
of the county of residence.
We measure the difficulty of acquiring land with
the average value of an acre of farmland in the
county of residence. This is a direct measure of
the relative cost of purchasing a farm and is highly
correlated with other measures of land availabil-
ity (e.g., population density, proportion of all
farmland improved) employed in previous stud-
ies (Leet 1977).'? The prevalence of tenant farm-
ing is measured by the ratio of tenant farms (cash

 

merator. Often, though not always, this was the head
of the household. This may have some bearing on the
accuracy of the individual characteristics. For exam-
ple, our measure of literacy is the reported ability of
household members to read and write rather than a
demonstrated ability to read and write.

"It was not possible to differentiate tenant farmers
from farm owners. Although the 1910 census includes
data on whether a farm was owned or rented, it does
not provide information on which household member
held the title to owned farms. Preliminary analysis of
the ownership data revealed that ownership was con-
founded with marital status: the majority of men liv-
ing on owned farms were single men residing in the
parental household. Thus, although the farms were
owned, the young men were probably not the farm
owners. Because a high percentage of the single men
continued to live with their families of origin, it was
not possible to determine whether the men themselves
owned land.

"2 Early in our analyses we included a measure of
the percentage of all farmland that was improved in
1910. Although it is also considered an indicator of
agricultural opportunity, it had no significant inde-
pendent effect in our equations and was dropped.
or share) to all farms. Because the prevalence of
farm tenancy in southern counties varies sharply
by race, this ratio is computed separately for farms
operated by blacks and whites.

Two indicators of opportunities for nonfarm
employment in the county of residence are in-
cluded: the per capita investment in manufactur-
ing and per capita manufacturing establishments
(x 1000). These variables are constructed from
1900 census data because the information is not
available in the 1910 census. Although the ten-
year lag clearly introduces some error into the
measurement of these variables, we believe their
inclusion provides important information about
alternatives to agricultural employment. Infor-
mation on employment in manufacturing is not
available by race. Thus, these variables describe
the role of manufacturing in the overall oppor-
tunity structure.

To differentiate the effects of manufacturing
employment from the more general influence of
urbanization, we include as a control a measure
of the proportion of each county’s population
Table 1 presents the means and standard devia-
tions for all variables. Among males aged 20-24,
a substantial racial difference in the timing of
marriage is evident: 37 percent of white males
were ever-married compared to 47 percent of
black males. Similarly, white females aged 18-
22 were less likely to have entered marriage than
their black counterparts, although the difference
(47 percent vs. 52 percent) is less than that for
males. Clearly, young blacks entered marriage
more readily than whites.
A majority of both black and white males were
employed in the agricultural sector. White men
were slightly more likely to be farmers (owners
or renters) than black men (27.6 percent vs. 26.0
percent) and a substantially higher percentage of
the young white males worked on family farms
(20.4 percent vs. 13.6 percent). A somewhat
higher percentage of white men were employed
outside of farming though the difference is not
striking (36.1 percent vs. 32.0 percent). The de-
tailed occupational distributions for blacks and
whites (not shown) show that young black men
in nonfarm employment were more likely to be
in unskilled manual occupations than white men.

The ability to read and write was more preva-
lent among whites than blacks: over 90 percent
of the white males and females were literate
compared to 64.4 and 75.8 percent of black men
and women, respectively. Although literacy was
rising among southern blacks during the period,
it was by no means universal in rural areas by the
early twentieth century.

County characteristics are quite similar across
the four race-sex groups with the exception of
the race-specific measure of tenancy. The prev-
alence of tenancy is mich higher among black
farmers than white farmers. Black males in the
sample resided in counties in which, on average,
68.6 percent of black farmers were tenants. In
contrast, an average of 37.7 percent of white
farmers were tenants in the residential counties
of white males. Despite the growth of tenancy in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
farm ownership remained the norm among white
farmers in the South.

Zero-order correlations among all variables
(available from the authors) reveal the expected
relationships between marriage timing and the
predictor variables. Moreover, they suggest that
collinearity among the independent variables is
not a serious problem in our multivariate analysis.
ior of black and white males. For white males,
the predicted effect of land prices on marriage is
evident: the higher the average cost of an acre of
farmland, the lower the likelihood of marriage
(equation 1). This is consistent with our expecta-
tion that white males, aspiring to farm owner-
ship, postponed marriage in counties where land
was costly. In contrast, the hypothesized effect
of tenancy on marriage for white males is not
borne out — the effect of tenancy is not significant
and its sign is opposite of that predicted.

In contrast to the findings for whites, the tim-
ing of marriage was unaffected by land prices for
black males (equation 3). The chance that a young
black man could acquire the resources to purchase
a farm was sufficiently remote that land prices
were largely irrelevant to family formation. Op-
portunities for tenant farming clearly encouraged
early marriage among rural black males. The
magnitude of the relationship can be evaluated
by comparing the predicted probabilities of mar-
riage at various levels of tenancy. Using equa-
tion 3 to predict marital status and setting all
covariates (other than tenancy) to their sample
means, the predicted probability of marriage is
.38 with 40 percent of black farmers engaged in
tenant farming, compared to .43 with 60 percent
tenant farmers. This indicates a substantial influ-
ence of opportunities for tenant farming on mar-
riage among rural black men.

The pattern of results for the manufacturing
variables is also consistent with our hypotheses.
For white males, per capita manufacturing es-
tablishments has a statistically significant negative
relationship with the likelihood of marriage
(equation 1). This supports our expectation that
employment in the wage economy discouraged
early entry into marriage. However, per capita
manufacturing investments are unrelated to
marital status. It is unclear why the two dimen-
sions of manufacturing activity exhibit different
relationships with the marriage variable. For black
males, neither indicator of local manufacturing
activity is related to marriage, reflecting the rel-
ative lack of opportunity for blacks in the manu-
facturing sector.

The sex ratio in the county is an important
predictor of marital status for males of both rac-
es. A relatively high ratio of males to females
indicates a scarcity of potential mates. Accord-
ingly, there is a negative relationship between
the sex ratio and marriage for males. The pro-
portion urban in the county population has no
effect on marriage patterns among blacks or
whites.
We tested the statistical significance of race
differences in the effects of the agricultural and
manufacturing opportunity variables by pooling
the black and white male samples and including
multiplicative interaction terms in the logistic re-
gression equations. Only interactions involving
the measures of economic opportunity were ex-
amined, since our theoretical framework explic-
itly hypothesizes racial differences in their effects
on marriage. We included only county charac-
teristics (and age) in the equation when testing
for interactions because our interest is in racial
differences in the overall effect of the opportu-
nity variables on marriage, i.e., prior to the intro-
duction of controls for the mediating influence
of occupation and literacy. The results indicate a
significant racial difference in the effect of land
prices on marriage, but not tenancy. The effect of
per capita manufacturing establishments also
differs significantly by race, but there is no dif-
ference between blacks and whites in the effect
of per capita manufacturing investments.
Equations 2 and 4 add individual measures of
occupation and literacy to the predictors in
equations | and 3. The full equations enable us to
assess the mediating role of the socioeconomic
attributes of residents. In particular, we are con-
cerned with several issues related to the type of
economic activity performed by men. First, we
assess whether occupation, broadly defined, af-
fected entry into marriage. Second, we consider
whether the effect of occupation on marriage
chances was similar for black and white men.
And finally, we assess the role of occupation as
an intervening variable between the larger eco-
nomic structure and marriage.'3

The results for both black and white men show
considerable variation in the likelihood of mar-
riage by occupation. Farmers had a much higher
likelihood of early marriage than men in other
occupations. Farming creates clear incentives for
early family formation — whether tenant or
owner, the farmer has much to gain from the
labor of additional family members. The situation
of farmers stands in sharp contrast to that of men
employed for a wage. Because the organization
of the wage economy was independent of the
family unit, these men profited little from early
marriage and family formation. Accordingly, they
were much less likely than farmers to have mar-
ried in their early adult years. The magnitude of
the difference is illustrated with a comparison of
farmers and nonfarm workers. Among whites,
farmers were over four times as likely to have
married by ages 20-24 than nonfarm men; among
blacks, farmers were more than seven times as
likely to have married than those employed out-
side of agriculture."

White males who were unable to read and write
were substantially more likely to have married
than literate males. In contrast, literacy had a
much weaker impact on the likelihood of marriage

3 Tt may be somewhat problematic to interpret oc-
cupation as an intervening variable, since marital sta-
tus and occupation are measured at the same point in
time and “present” occupation may not be the same as
occupation at time of marriage. However, because we
are considering young men with relatively short marital
durations (if married), we believe there is little risk in
assuming that occupation at marriage was the same as
occupation at the census date.

'4The particularly low marriage chances of family
farm laborers undoubtedly reflect, in part, the rules of
co-residence. Young men were likely to live and work
on their parents’ (or other relatives’) farms during the
years before they married. As a general rule, they
were expected to be financially and residentially in-
dependent after marriage. Thus, the observed rela-
tionship is likely due to the effect of marital status on
living arrangements rather than vice versa.
among black males, perhaps because literacy did
not play a major role in determining the career
trajectories of young black men.

The effects of the county-level predictors for
white men change little from equation 1 to equa-
tion 2 with one important exception: the statisti-
cally significant negative coefficient for land cost
in equation 1 is markedly weakened in equation
2. This is consistent with previous studies of the
period (Landale 1989a, 1989b) which show that
high land prices impeded entry into farming.
Where land was difficult to acquire, young men
entered occupations that were less conducive to
family formation. Apparently, much of the im-
pact of land cost on marriage was mediated by
occupation.

Occupation also appears to intervene between
the prevalence of tenancy and marriage for black
men. The strong and statistically significant co-
efficient for black tenancy in equation 1 is no
longer significant in the full equation, presumably
because blacks residing in areas of widespread
tenancy had greater opportunities to become
farmers (albeit tenants).

Overall, we find considerable support for our
hypotheses. Different features of the opportunity
structure were salient to the marriage behavior of
black and white males. The marriage behavior of
white males responded to land prices and manu-
facturing activity in the county. Although we
expected high levels of tenancy to impede entry
into marriage among white men, the results did
not support this hypothesis. The single feature of
the opportunity structure relevant to marriage
among black males was the prevalence of tenant
farming in the county. Both land costs and the
presence of manufacturing opportunities were
much less important for the marriage behavior of
black males.

Parallel analyses for black and white males at
older ages (results not shown) suggest that it is
the timing of marriage, rather than the overall
propensity to marry, that is affected by the op-
portunity structure of the county. The significant
effects described above become progressively
weaker at older ages. This is demonstrated by the
coefficients and t-values associated with differ-
ent variables across the age groups 20-24, 25-29
and 30-34. While the coefficient for the effect of
land prices is -.006 for white males 20-24, it
shrinks to -.004 (t = -1.73) and -.001 (t = -0.27)
for ages 25-29 and 30-34, respectively. Similar-
ly, the coefficient for the influence of per capita
manufacturing establishments among white males
falls from -.139 for ages 20-24 to -.065 (t= -1.54)
Table 2 also presents results from similar analy-
ses for white and black females aged 18-22. The
female equations differ from those for males in
omitting occupation from the predictors. Because
the results for the females of each race change
little after inclusion of individual characteristics,
we focus our discussion on the full equations.
(Significance tests for racial differences in the
effects of the county-level measures of econom-
ic opportunity are based the restricted equation.)

The overall pattern of results for white females
is generally similar to that for white males. Lit-
erate white females were less likely to have mar-
ried than those who could not read and write.
High land prices reduced the likelihood of early
marriage. The number of manufacturing estab-
lishments per capita in the county also appears to
have discouraged early marriage. The sex ratio
among whites has the predicted positive effect
on female marriage. Although these relationships
are consistent with our hypotheses, the positive
and statistically significant coefficient for farm
tenancy is clearly contrary to our expectations. It
is unclear why a high prevalence of tenancy
among white farmers encouraged marriage
among young white women in the absence of a
similar effect for young white males. We can
only speculate that perhaps older tenant farmers
were selecting younger women as their brides.!°

'5 Some unexpected findings also emerge from the
analyses of older males. For example, among white
males, the coefficient for the prevalence of tenancy
becomes positive and statistically significant at ages
25-29 and 30-34. We are somewhat reluctant, howev-
er, to place as much confidence in the overall pattern
of results for dlder men. For many older men, mar-
riage occurred in the relatively distant past. In the
interim, it is possible that they migrated from their
county-of-marriage or that the county opportunity
structure changed. Although a complete discussion of
the equations for older males is beyond the scope of
the present paper, results are available from the authors
upon request.

'eTenancy had a significant positive effect on mar-
riage among white males 25-29 and 30-34 years of
age.
A common opportunity thesis underlies explana-
tions of historic patterns of marriage in western
societies. The basic argument is summarized by
Hermalin and van de Walle (1977): “Our model
starts with the proposition that people want to get
married. To do so they require a material basis,
which includes a place to live and a means of
livelihood. It follows logically that they will get
married, provided dwellings and jobs are avail-
able. We assume, on the basis of these premises,
that the extent of nuptiality reflects the availabil-
ity of a material basis of marriage” (pp. 80-1).

We attempted to refine the opportunity thesis
of nuptiality, in two ways. First, we argued that
the motivation as well as the ability to marry
varies with the economic structure. Some eco-
nomic activities provide clear incentives for ear-
ly family formation, while others do not. It is not
just the ability to support a family that leads to
early marriage; rather, it is some combination of
adequate resources and perceived gains. Second,
we argued for the importance of systems of strat-
ification for nuptial behavior. Groups in distinct
positions in the social hierarchy differ with re-
spect to their access to positions and rewards.
Thus, the social system mediates the relationship
between the economic structure and marriage.
When groups are denied access to certain op-
portunities for social and economic mobility, then
conditions in the corresponding sectors of the
economy will not figure prominently in their
decisions to marry.

We tested these refinements by examining the
timing of entry into marriage in the rural South
near the turn of the century, when the southern
Caldwell, John C. 1982. Theory of Fertility Decline.
New York: Academic Press.

Davis, Allison, Burleigh B. Gardner, and Mary R.
Gardner. 1941. Deep South: A Social Anthropo-
logical Study of Caste and Class. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Dixon, Ruth B. 1971. “Explaining Cross-Cultural
Variations in Age at Marriage and Proportions
Never Marrying.” Population Studies 25:215-33.

Dollard, John. 1937. Caste and Class in a Southern
Town. Garden City: Doubleday.

Easterlin, Richard A. 1976. “Factors in the Decline of
Farm Fertility in the United States: Some Prelimi-
nary Research Results.” Journal of American His-
tory 63:600-14.

Flynn, Charles L. 1983. White Land, Black Labor:
Caste and Class in Late Nineteenth-Century Geor-
gia. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

Forster, Colin and G. S. L. Tucker. 1972. Economic
Opportunity and White American Fertility Ratios
1800-1860. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Habakkuk, H. J. 1971. Population and Economic
Development Since 1750. New York: Humanities
Press.

Hajnal, John. 1965. “European Marriage Patterns in
Perspective.” Pp. 101-43 in Population in History,
edited by D. V. Glass and D. E. C. Eversley. Lon-
don: Edward Arnold.

Hermalin, Albert I. and Etienne van de Walle. 1977.
“The Civil Code and Nuptiality: Empirical Inves-
tigation of a Hypothesis.” Pp. 71-111 in Population
Patterns in the Past, edited by Ronald D. Lee. New
York: Academic Press.

Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR). 1989. Guide to Resources and
Services 1988-89. Ann Arbor: University of Mich-
igan, Institute for Social Research.

Jaynes, Gerald D. 1986. Branches Without Roots:
Genesis of the Black Working Class in the Ameri-
can South, 1862-1882. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Landale, Nancy S. 1989a. “Opportunity, Movement
and Marriage: U.S. Farm Sons at the Turn of the
Century.” Journal of Family History 14:365-86.

. 1989b. “Agricultural Opportunity and
Marriage: The United States at the Turn of the
Century.” Demography 26:203-18.

Leet, Don R. 1977. “Interrelations of Population
Density, Urbanization, Literacy and Fertility.” Ex-
plorations in Economic History 14:388-401.

Levine, David. 1977. Family Formation in an Age of
Nascent Capitalism. New York: Academic Press.

Malthus, Thomas R. [1826] 1986. “An Essay on the
Principle of Population, Part II.” In The Works of
Thomas Robert Malthus, Volume III, edited by E.A.
Wrigley and David Souden. London: William
Pickering.

Mandle, Jay. 1978. The Roots of Black Poverty: The
Southern Plantation Economy After the Civil War.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Myrdal, Gunnar. 1975. An American Dilemma: The
Negro Problem and Modern Democracy. New
York: Pantheon Books.

Newby, I. A. 1989. Plain Folk in the New South: So-
cial Change and Cultural Persistence, 1880-1915.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

Ransom, Roger L. and Richard Sutch. 1977. One Kind
of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of
Emancipation. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Schwartz, Michael. 1976. Radical Protest and Social
Structure: The Southern Farmers’ Alliance and
Cotton Tenancy, 1880-1890. New York: Academ-
ic Press.

Shapiro, Morton O. 1982. “Land Availability and
Fertility in the United States, 1760-1870.” Journal
of Economic History 42:577-600.

Strong, Michael, Samuel H. Preston, Harold R.
Lentzner, Jeffrey R. Seaman, and Henry C. Wil-
liams. 1989. User’s Guide: Public Use Sample, 1910
United States Census of Population. Philadelphia:
Population Studies Center, University of Pennsyl-
vania.

Tilly, Louise A. and Joan W. Scott. 1978. Women,
Work, and Family. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and
Winston.

Tolnay, Stewart E. 1984. “Black Family Formation
and Tenancy in the Farm South, 1900.” American
Journal of Sociology 9:305-25.

. 1986. “Family Economy and the Black
American Fertility Transition.” Journal of Family
History 11:267-83.

Wilson, William Julius and Kathryn Neckerman. 1987.
“Poverty and Family Structure: The Widening Gap
Between Evidence and Public Policy Issues.” Pp.
63-92 in The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City,
the Underclass, and Public Policy, by William
Julius Wilson. Chicago: The University of Chica-
go Press.

Wright, Gavin. 1986. Old South, New South. New
York: Basic Books, Inc.

Wrigley, E.A. and Roger Schofield. 1981. The Pop-
ulation History of England, 1541-1871: A Recon-
struction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Yasuba, Yasukichi. 1961. Birth Rates of the White
Population in the United States: An Economic Study
(Studies in Historical and Political Science, Series
79, No. 2). Baltimore: the Johns Hopkins University.
