@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
I examine the extent to which health-related events account for the
well-established relationship between undesirable life events and
psychophysiological distress. Employed in the analysis is a distress scale similar
to others often used in previous research. This scale, the Macmillan Health
Opinion Survey index, relies heavily on psychosomatic symptoms as indicators of
distress. The analysis clearly indicates that when health-related events are
controlled, other undesirable events have small and nonsignificant effects upon
psychophysiological distress. Further, the analysis also shows that
health-problem events are more strongly related to physiological than to
psychological items on the distress scale. The results clearly suggest that
previously well-established correlations between undesirable events and distress
may have been inflated due to the operational confounding of health-related items
on the independent and dependent variable scales. The implications of these
findings for research in the Holmes-Rahe tradition~and for life-events research in
general-are discussed.
of time, the greater is the probability that
he/she will exhibit symptoms of physical
or psychological disturbance (Brown and
Birley, 1968; Birley and Brown, 1970;
Paykel et al., 1969; 1975; Paykel, 1974a;
1974b; Myers et al., 1971; 1972; 1974;
Coates et al., 1969; B. S. Dohrenwend and
B. P. Dohrenwend, 1974a; 1974b). Re-
cently, a number of attempts have been
made to identify the specific characteristic
of life events which leads to these out-
comes. Proponents of what can be termed
the ‘‘total-change’’ approach argue that
change itself is the crucial stressful char-
acteristic of life events (Holmes and Rahe,
1967; Markush and Favero, 1974; Un-
lenhuth and Paykel, 1973; Masuda and
Holmes, 1967; Froberg et al., 1971). These
researchers measure life change as the
sum of all events experienced by an indi-
vidual in a given time period—i.e., the
sum of desirable, undesirable, and am-
biguous events. (Often, these researchers
give each event a mean ‘‘readjustment
weight’’ before summing.) Proponents of
what can be called the ‘‘undesirability”’
approach, on the other hand, identify un-
favorable or negative change as the crucial
stressful property of life events. These in-
vestigators measure undesirable change as
the sum (or weighted sum) of undesirable
events only (Clayton et al., 1972; Brown
and Birley, 1968; Paykel et al., 1975;
Paykel, 1974a; 1974b; Hudgens et al.,
1967; 1970; Myers et al., 1971).

Recently, five studies have directly
compared the predictive utility of total
change measures to that of undesirability
measures, with psychological disturbance
or distress as the dependent variable (B.
S. Dohrenwend, 1973; Gersten et al.,
1974; Vinokur and Selzer, 1975; Mueller
et al., 1977; Ross and Mirowsky, 1979). In
four of the five studies, undesirability
measures are more highly correlated with
psychological disturbance than are total
change measures (Gersten et al., 1974;
Vinokur and Selzer, 1975; Mueller et al.,
1977; Ross and Mirowsky, 1979).
Moreover, several of these studies dem-
onstrate that the correlation between total
number of events and disturbance drops
nearly to zero when the effects of undesir-
able events are partialled out (Vinokur
and Selzer, 1975; Mueller et al., 1977;
Ross and Mirowsky, 1979). Thus, the re-
lationship between total number of events
and disturbance found in a host of previ-
ous studies can almost certainly be attrib-
uted to the effects of undesirable events
alone.

Because the four studies from which
these conclusions were drawn employ a
variety of samples, life-event scales, and
measures of psychological state, the gen-
eral consistency of their findings is strik-
ing. It seems reasonable to conclude that
undesirable events are the most useful
predictors of psychological disturbance or
distress. However, careful reexamination
indicates that all four of these studies
contain a serious methodological flaw.
Furthermore, because these four studies
are characteristic of life-events studies in
general, it appears that most past work
may be similarly flawed. The problem lies
in the fact that the independent and de-
pendent variables in these studies are, in
part, operationally confounded.
Operational confounding occurs either
when theoretically distinct concepts are
measured with similar or identical indica-
tors or when indicators of one theoretical
concept measure other concepts as well.
In the life-events literature cited above,
two theoretically distinct concepts—
undesirable change and psychological
distress—are measured with several items
which are highly similar. For example,
checklists of undesirable events typically
include items which represent major
changes in health—e.g., severe physical
illness or injury, serious accident, change
for the worse in eating habits, change for
the worse in sleeping habits, and frequent
minor illnesses. These are unfavorable
changes which require readjustment in the
individual's daily activities and, as such,
deserve inclusion in an undesirable-events
checklist.2 Unfortunately, psychological
disturbance or distress is usually mea-
sured with psychosomatic symptom indi-
ces. The most frequently used are the
Langner (1962) 22-item index of psychiat-
ric impairment and the Gurin (1960)
symptom index. These indices include
such items as stomach upsets, poor appe-
tite, weakness, dizziness, loss of weight,
sleeping difficulties, pains and ailments all
over the body, and general ill health.
Clearly, many of these psychophysiologi-
cal symptoms are identical to (or direct
corollaries of) the health-related items on
the events checklists. Thus, undesirable
change and psychological distress are op-
erationally confounded due to the inclu-
sion of similar health-related items in the
two measures.*

Health-related events and physiological
symptoms of distress are probably highly
correlated, and, as B. P. Dohrenwend
(1974:305) notes, ‘*... there is nothing
that predicts the symptomatology that de-
fines disorder like a portion of that very
same symptomatology.”” These observa-
tions suggest that the overall relationship
between undesirable events and distress
may have been inflated in previous studies
due to the operational confounding of
health-related items on the independent
and dependent variable scales commonly
used. Given these considerations, one
The data upon which this study is based
come from the Seattle and Denver Income
Maintenance Experiments. The Seattle
and Denver Income Maintenance Ex-
periments (SIME/DIME) were longitudi-
nal studies designed to assess the impact
of guaranteed income upon the lives of
economically disadvantaged urban adults.
The Seattle experiment began in January,
1970, and the Denver experiment began in
January, 1971. Approximately 5,000
families participated in the experiments.

To draw the sample, low-income areas
of each city were canvassed to obtain
enumerations of families that met the eli-
gibility criteria. To be eligible, a family
had to consist of at least a male and a
female head of household (married or
cohabiting, with or without children), or a
single head of household with one or more
dependent children. Selection by family
structure produced a sample of three
types of adult household heads: married
men, married women, and single—i.e.,
formerly married—women. The head of
household had to be between 18 and 58
years of age and not disabled. Income for
a family of four could not exceed $9,000
for a family with one earner or $11,000
with two earners. These limitations on in-
come were adjusted by an index that de-
pends on family size. Finally, family
heads had to be one of three racial-ethnic
backgrounds: white, black, or Chicano
(Mexican-American). Whites, blacks, and
Chicanos are, roughly, equally repre-
sented in the Denver sample. The Seattle
sample consists of whites and blacks only,
equally represented.

Families, within strata, were randomly
assigned to control or experimental con-
ditions. That is, assignment to treatments
was random within categories of family
© The Macmillan index and its variants have been
severely criticized in recent reviews (Seiler, 1973;
Tousignant et al., 1974; Spiro et al., 1972). The three
most serious difficulties are: (1) the scale lacks diag-
nostic specificity, (2) social desirability may bias re-
sponses, and (3) a physical health bias may be pres-
ent. However, none of these problems mitigates
against the use of the index in this report. First since
the purpose of the paper is to assess psycho-
physiological distress in the sample and not the prev-
alence of particular psychiatric disorders, lack of
diagnostic specificity is not a handicap. Second, al-
though it is possible that subjects may respond with
socially desirable answers to the symptom items, this
bias should simply lessen variance in the scores and
make significant effects harder to obtain. The tend-
ency to respond with socially desirable answers may
vary by sex, socioeconomic status, or race-ethnicity,
but these variables will be controlled in the analysis.
Finally, the possibility that a health bias exists in the
index is a serious problem and has already been
discussed (see fn. 4). Despite the possible health
bias, it is important to remember that this index,
containing both physical and more ‘‘psychological’’
symptoms, has strong criterion validity through the
known-groups technique. Several investigators have
concurred that the instrument is interpretable as a
measure of mild psychological impairment or dis-
tress (Seiler, 1973; Tousignant et al., 1974; Myers et
al., 1971; Spiro et al., 1972).

7 Single females in Seattle actually answered the
distress questions at Time | when male heads did.
to psychotic symptoms (Schwartz et al.,
1973; Leighton et al., 1963). Individuals
scoring high on the index are likely to be
those whose psychological state impairs
their everyday functioning to some de-
gree, not individuals who are actively
psychotic.®

Responses to the index are summed.
The total score ranges from 18 (little or no
distress) to 71 (high distress). Cronbach’s
(1951) alpha, a measure of internal con-
sistency, is satisfactorily high, approx-
imately .80 or above for. all groups here
analyzed.

The psychophysiological distress index
was administered several times during the
experiment. Here, I present results of an
analysis of distress responses at Time 2,
controlling for prior levels of distress at
Time 1. For male heads of household, the
first distress measure was taken approx-
imately four months after enrollment in
the experiment, and the second was taken
approximately 20 months after enroll-
ment. For females, the first measure was
taken eight months after the start of the
experiment; the second, 24 months after
enrollment.’ (Administrations were
staggered, by gender, to preclude con-
tamination from spouse’s responses.) For
both males and females an interval of
about sixteen months separates the Time 1
and Time 2 measures. Analysis is per-
formed only on those individuals present
at both administrations of the index.

Table 1 reports the distributions and
means of the distress scores for husbands,
wives, and single women at Time 2. (The
distributions for distress at Time 1 ap-
proximate those in Table 1, so are not
shown here.) Husbands, wives, and sin-
gles are analyzed separately because, in
previous work with this data, significant
gender and marital-status interactions
with distress were found.’

On scales similar to the distress index
used here, Tousignant et al. (1974),
Jackson (1962), and Myers et al. (1974)
have classified individuals who score in
the upper two-thirds of the scale as
showing ‘‘high impairment.’’ Using 36 as
the break-point on this scale, only 13.1%
of the husbands show high distress (or
impairment), as opposed to 23.3% and
24.4% of the wives and singles, re-
spectively. Thus, in this sample, women
report more psychophysiological distress
than do men. This finding is consistent
with a large body of literature which doc-
Table 1. Distributions and Means of Psychophysiological Distress Scores at Time 2

 

 

 

Husbands? Wives* Singles?

Scores % in Category % in Category % in Category
18-25 46.3 33.6 35.9
26-35 40.6 43.1 39.7

% Showing Low Impairment -. . 86.9 ++ + 76.8 .. 75.6
36-45 10.4 18.7 17.1
46-55 2.4 3.6 6.3
56-65 2 1.0 1.0
66-71 1 0.0 0.0

% Showing High Impairment «2. 13.1 po OCs 2. 24.4
Mean Distress 27.8 30.1 30.3

Sample N 908 925 624

 

a ‘*Husbands’’ and ‘‘Wives’’ refer to individuals who were married or cohabiting at Time 1. ‘‘Singles”’
refers to women who were separated, divorced, or widowed at Time 1.
Table 2. Percentage with One or More Experiences of Each Life Event, from Time | to Time 2

 

 

 

Husbands? Wives* Singles*
% Experiencing % Experiencing % Experiencing

Desirable Events Event Event Event
Reconciliation 9 Ll 1.2
Remarriage 5 3 75
Pregnancy (or spouse pregnant) 8.5 8.7 3.9
Birth of child 8.5 8.7 3.9
Child or children return home 5.0 4.8 11.0
Other family member joins

household 4.8 5.3 75
Vacation from work 40.6 15.8 29.6
Begin employment (full- or

part-time) 48.9 39.4 40.1
Begin school/training program 14.4 11.9 15.9
Occupational status increases? 20.5 9.3 9.6
Spouse begins employment 25.0 27.0 1.9
Spouse’s occupational status in-

creases” 5.6 15.8 4
Spouse starts school or training

program 12.0 11.3 4
Family income increases 50% or

more . 25.3 24.4 25.2
Undesirable Events: Nonhealth-Related
Separation/divorce 5.7 8.2 1.6
Death of spouse 3 I 0
Death of child or other family

member aa) 2 B
Child or children leave home 12.5 9.7 18.4
Other family member leaves

household 3.0 4.5 6.5
Spouse suffers serious health

problems 38.6 42.7 2.3
Employment ends 26.5 32.3 25.6
End school/training program 14.4 11.7 17.2
Occupational status decreases? 16.2 6.9 9.6
Spouse’s employment ends 20.8 26.5 1.8
Spouse ends school/training

program 9.7 13.3 2
Spouse’s occupational status

decreases” 4.1 13.3 9
Family income decreases 50%

or more 8.5 9.4 12.8
Retirement al 8 a
ble event experienced by an individual is
weighted by ‘‘1.’’ Events are summed to
give three scores for the individual: total
number of undesirable events experi-
enced, number of undesirable nonhealth-
related events experienced, and number
of undesirable health-related events expe-
rienced. No attempt is made here to utilize
other weighting schemes inasmuch as (a)
the results of Gersten et al. (1974), Muel-
ler et al. (1977), and Ross and Mirowsky
(1979) indicate that little predictive power
is gained from the use of such schemes,
and (b) not all events listed have similar
counterparts on previously developed
weighting scales (compare with Holmes
and Rahe, 1967, and Hough et al., 1976).

Previous life event studies have been
roundly criticized for their reliance upon
subjects’ ability to recall events which oc-
curred during the previous one or two
years (Paykel, 1974b; Hudgens, 1974;
Hudgens et al., 1970). The reliability of
recall over such long periods of time is
certainly questionable. It is also possible
that recall is distorted or biased toward
negative events, especially if subjects
seek to explain current illness to the re-
searcher in terms of past events (Brown,
1974). The advantage of using SIME/
DIME data is that information was
gathered about particular events (marital
and family changes, job and educational
changes, changes of income) at every
interview—i.e., every four months. Thus,
the period of recall for subjects was rela-
tively short. Further, the data about these
objective changes were gathered for rea-
sons of program administration, so re-
porting of undesirable events should not
be biased by the subject’s desire to ex-
plain a current illness.
Multiple regression techniques were used
to examine the possibility that the overall
relationship between undesirable events
and psychophysiological distress is largely
attributable to the effects of health-related
events. To establish first the nature of the
relationship between undesirable events
and distress, psychophysiological distress
at Time 2 was regressed on a set of back-
ground variables and on the total undesir-
able events measure. (The set of back-
ground variables includes several
sociodemographic characteristics!® and
each individual's initial distress score at
Time 1. The inclusion of an initial distress
score means that, technically, panel
analysis is performed here.) In equation
form, the first regression appears as fol-
lows:
where, again, italics indicate sets of co-
efficients and variables, by is a constant
and f is a random error term. The coeffi-
cient by estimates the effects of undesira-
ble health-problem events upon
psychophysiological distress. The coeffi-
cient b; estimates the effects of other un-
desirable events. The relevant results of
these two regressions are shown in panels
(1) and (2) of Table 3.

The total undesirable events measure
(panel (1) of Table 3) has a significant pos-
itive effect upon distress in all three
groups: the more undesirable events expe-
rienced, the greater the reported
psychophysiological distress. This result
is consistent with the findings of a number
of previously cited studies.

In all three groups, health-problem
events significantly increase
psychophysiological distress (see panel (2)
of Table 3). Other undesirable events have
small and nonsignificant effects upon dis-
tress. These results clearly support the
hypothesis that health-related events
strongly contribute to the overall relation-
ship between undesirable events and
psychophysiological distress. Operational
confounding between health-related
events and symptoms is confirmed at least
indirectly by these findings.

More direct evidence for the existence
of confounding can be obtained by sub-
dividing symptoms on the distress index
into two types, primarily physiological
and primarily psychological. If opera-
tional confounding occurs, health-
problem events should be more strongly
related to physiological symptoms than to
psychological symptoms on the index.

Psychological symptoms'! were chosen
on the basis of findings from previous re-
search (Gurin et al., 1960; Crandell and
Dohrenwend, 1967; Mirowsky, 1979).
These are items identified through the use
of exploratory factor analysis or by panels
of clinical experts as being rarely organic
in origin and probably more psychological
in nature. Physiological symptoms!?—
symptoms possibly (or probably) organic
in origin—were identified in similar fash-
ion.

Responses to psychological items were
summed; scores ranged from a low of 5 to
a high of 15. Cronbach’s (1951) alpha for
the psychological subscale was .50 or
greater for all groups analyzed here. Re-
sponses to the physiological items were
also summed; scores ranged from a low of
13 to a high of 52. Cronbach’s alpha for
The relevant results of these regression
analyses are summarized in Table 4.

The total undesirable events measure
(panel (1) of Table 4) significantly in-
creases both psychological and physio-
logical symptoms in all but one group.
Undesirable events have no significant
effect upon the psychological symptoms
of wives. For every group in panel (1)
undesirable events are more strongly re-
lated to physiological than to psychologi-
cal symptoms. These results again imply
the presence of operational confounding
between health-related events and physi-
ological symptoms. Direct evidence of
confounding can be found in panel (2).
Panel (2) indicates, as expected, that
health-problem events are more strongly
related to physiological than to psycho-
logical symptoms on the distress index.
This pattern holds in all three groups. In
contrast, other undesirable events have
small and nonsignificant effects upon both
physiological and psychological symp-
toms. The results in Table 4 further sub-
stantiate the hypothesis that the relation-
ship between undesirable events and dis-
tress is largely attributable to the opera-
tional confounding of health-related items
on the events index with physiological
symptoms on the distress index.

Panel (2) of Table 4 yields somewhat
unexpected results as well. Health-
problem events have significant positive
effects upon psychological symptoms in
all three groups; other undesirable events
are unrelated to psychological symptoms.
These findings suggest that (1) the psy-
chological symptoms utilized here are
themselves partially confounded with
health status, or that (2) health-problem
events are more important determinants
being fired from work, and having a seri-
ous accident may have been caused by
prior psychological distress. Similarly,
sleeping and eating difficulties and fre-
quent minor illness may be symptoms of
prior physical illness. Clearly, as B. S.
Dohrenwend and B. P. Dohrenwend note
(1974a:322), ‘tone cannot safely make the
etiological inference from [a] correlation
that life events cause illness since it is also
possible that the correlation is due at least
in part to the onset of illness causing life
events or to a common factor causing
both.”’ B. P. Dohrenwend (1974) has em-
phatically recommended keeping such
contaminated life events analytically dis-
tinct when examining the relationship
between events and disorder. Alterna-
tively, adding a control for prior physical
or psychological distress can reduce this
type of contamination. (Initial
psychophysiological distress was con-
trolled in the study reported here, for this
reason.) Thus, criticism of the indepen-
dent variable scales used in life-events
work has resulted in useful recom-
mendations for addressing these prob-
lems.

Unfortunately, few life-event re;
searchers have examined their dependent
variable scales as critically as their inde-
pendent variable scales. Investigators
have generally failed to notice that many
items on their dependent variable scales
are identical to, or direct corollaries of,
particular types of life events. Specifi-
cally, many psychophysiological symp-
toms on scales of psychological distress
may be operationally confounded with
health-related life events. Thus, the re-
lationship between undesirable life events
and psychological distress (as measured
with a psychosomatic scale) may be highly
inflated due to the strong correlation of
health-related symptoms with health-
related events.

With these considerations in mind, the
extent to which health-related events ac-
count for the relationship between unde-
sirable life events and distress were
studied, using a psychophysiological dis-
tress index similar to others often used in
previous research. The analysis clearly
indicated that, when the effects of
health-problem events are controlled,
other undesirable events cease to have
any significant effect upon
psychophysiological distress. The
analysis also verified that health-problem
events are more strongly related to physi-
ological than to psychological items on the
distress scale. These results imply that the
correlations between undesirable events
and psychophysiological distress found in
previous studies may have been inflated
due to the operational confounding of
health-related items on the independent
and dependent variable scales.
Thus, investigators who have employed
psychosomatic indices as dependent mea-
sures may have found (anticlimactically)
that health problems are simply related to
other indicators of health problems. This
disappointing possibility may also apply to
research which predicts physical illness
from scores on the Holmes-Rahe
Schedule of Recent Events. The Schedule
of Recent Events (SRE) includes numer-
ous life changes which are health-related.
Scores on the SRE have been found to
correlate strongly with the incidence of
coronary heart disease (Rahe et al., 1974;
Theorell, 1974), fractures (Tollefson,
1972), time of onset of leukemia in chil-
dren (Wold, 1968), and seriousness of ill-
ness (Wyler et al., 1971), among other
outcomes. It may not be total life change
as measured by the SRE but health-
related events alone which predict these
physical health outcomes.

Despite the evidence presented in this
paper, it would be inappropriate to con-
clude that the relationship between unde-
sirable events and distress is a spurious
one. The limited socioeconomic range of
the SIME/DIME sample may have re-
duced variation in all measures taken. Re-
duced variation may account for the non-
significant relationship between other un-
desirable events and distress when
health-problem events are controlled.
When the analysis was recently replicated
using the broader socioeconomic sample
from Myers’s New Haven panel study
(see Myers et al., 1971, 1972, 1974, for
details of sampling and measurement),
other undesirable events were signifi-
cantly and positively related to
psychophysiological distress when
health-problem events were controlled.!?
(However, as found in this paper, health-
problem events were more strongly re-
lated to distress than were other undesira-
ble events; also, health-problem events
were more strongly related to physiologi-
cal than to psychological symptoms.)!*
Finally, Gersten et al. (1974) and Vinokur
and Selzer (1975) found small but signifi-
cant correlations between undesirable
events and psychological state when non-
physiological indicators of distress were
used (e.g., paranoia, delinquency, aggres-
sion, suicidal tendencies). Thus, the re-
lationship between undesirable events and
distress is probably not a spurious one.
However, given the possibility that the
independent and dependent variables
have been confounded in much previous
research and that correction for con-
founding may severely attenuate the re-
lationship between these variables, seri-
ous question must be raised about the
ability of life events to predict subsequent
psychological or physical health out-
comes. To better substantiate the re-
lationship between undesirable events and
physical illness, researchers should keep
health-related events analytically distinct,
as B. P. Dohrenwend (1974) recommends.
Also, to better substantiate the relation-
ship between undesirable life events and
psychological distress, it seems impera-
tive that researchers employ non-
physiological indicators of distress either
in addition to or as replacements for the
psychosomatic scales currently in use.
Crandell, D. L., and B. P. Dohrenwend

1967 ‘‘Some relations among psychiatric symp-
toms, organic illness, and social class.”’
American Journal of Psychiatry
123:1527-38.

Cronbach, L. J.

1951 ‘Coefficient alpha and the internal
structure of tests.’’ Psychometrika
16:297-334,

Dohrenwend, Barbara Snell

1973 ‘Life events as stressors: a methodological
inquiry.”’ Journal of Health and Social Be-
havior 14:167-75.

Dohrenwend, Barbara Snell, and Bruce P. Dohren-
wend

1970 ‘‘Class and race as status-related sources of
stress.”’ Pp. 111-40 in S. Levine and N. A.
Scotch (eds.), Social Stress. New York:
Aldine.

1974a ‘‘Overview and prospects for research on
stressful life events.’’ Pp. 313-31 in B. S.
Dohrenwend and B. P. Dohrenwend (eds.),
Stressful Life Events: Their Nature and
Effects. New York: Wiley.

1974b Stressful Life Events: Their Nature and
Effects. New York: Wiley.

Dohrenwend, Bruce P.

1974 ‘Problems in defining and sampling the rel-
evant population of stressful life events. Pp.
275-310 in B. S. Dohrenwend and B. P.
Dohrenwend (eds.), Stressful Life Events:
Their Nature and Effects. New York:
Wiley.

Dohrenwend, Bruce P., and Barbara S. Dohrenwend

1969 Social Status and Psychological Disorder.
New York: Wiley.

1976 ‘‘Sex differences in psychiatric disorders.””
American Journal of Sociology 81:1447-59.

Fréberg, Jan, Claes-Goran Karlsson, Lennart Levi,
and Lars Lidberg

1971 ‘‘Physiological and biochemical stress
reactions induced by psychosocial stimuli.”’
Pp. 280-95 in L. Levi (ed.), Society, Stress
and Disease, Vol. 1: The Psychosocial En-
vironment and Psychosomatic Diseases.
London: Oxford University Press.

Gersten, Joanne C., T. S. Langner, J. G. Eisenberg,
and Lida Orzek

1974 ‘‘Child behavior and life events: undesira-
ble change or change per se?’’ Pp. 159-70 in
B. S. Dohrenwend and B. P. Dohrenwend
(eds.) Stressful Life Events: Their Nature
and Effects. New York: Wiley.

Gove, Walter

1972 ‘‘The relationship between sex roles, men-
tal illness, and marital status.’’ Social
Forces 51:34-44.

Gove, Walter, and Jeanette F. Tudor

1973 ‘‘Adult sex roles and mental illness.”’

American Journal of Sociology 78:50-73.
Gurin, G., J. Veroff, and S. Feld

1960 Americans View Their Mental Health. New

York: Basic Books.
Holmes, T. H., and R. H. Rahe

1967 ‘The Social Readjustment Rating Scale.”
Journal of Psychosomatic Research
11:213-18.
Hough, R. L., D. T. Fairbank, and A. M. Garcia

1976 ‘*Problems in the ratio measurement of life
stress.’ Journal of Health and Social Be-
havior 17:70-82.

Hudgens, Richard W.

1974 ‘*Personal catastrophe and depression: a
consideration of the subject with respect to
medically ill adolescents, and a requiem for
retrospective life-event studies.’’ Pp.
119-34 in B. S. Dohrenwend and B. P.
Dohrenwend (eds.), Stressful Life Events:
Their Nature and Effects. New York:
Wiley.

Hudgens, Richard W., J. R. Morrison, and R. G.
Barchha

1967 ‘Life events and onset of primary affective
disorders: a study of 40 hospitalized pa-
tients and 40 controls.’’ Archives of Gen-
eral Psychiatry 16:134-45.

Hudgens, Richard W., Eli Robins, and W. B. Delong

1970 ‘‘The reporting of recent stress in the lives
of psychiatric patients.’’ British Journal of
Psychiatry 117:635—43.

Jackson, Elton F.

1962 ‘‘Status consistency and symptoms of
stress.’’ American Sociological Review
27:469-80.

Kurz, Mordecai and Robert G. Spiegelman

1972 ‘The design of the Seattle and Denver In-
come Maintenance Experiments.’’ Re-
search Memorandum 18, Center for the
Study of Welfare Policy. Menlo Park:
Stanford Research Institute.

Langner, T. S.

1962 ‘*A twenty-two item screening scale of psy-
chiatric symptoms indicating impairment.”’
Journal of Health and Human Behavior
3:269-76.

Leighton, Dorothea C., J. S. Harding, D. B.
Macklin, A. M. Macmillan, and A. H. Leighton

1963 The Character of Danger: Psychiatric
Symptoms in Selected Communities. New
York: Basic Books.

Macmillan, A. M.

1957 *‘The Health Opinion Survey: technique for
estimating prevalence of psychoneurotic
and related types of disorder in com-

 

munities. Psychological Reports
3:325-39.
Manis, Jerome, M. L. Brawer, C. L. Hunt, and L. C.
Kercher

1963 ‘*Validating a mental health scale.”” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 28:108-16.
Markush, Robert E., and R. V. Favero
1974 ‘Epidemiologic assessment of stressful life
events, depressed mood, and
psychophysiological symptoms—a prelimi-
nary report.”’ Pp. 171-90 in B. S. Dohren-
wend and B. P. Dohrenwend (eds.),
Stressful Life Events: Their Nature and
Effects. New York: Wiley.
Masuda, M., and T. H. Holmes
1967 ‘*Magnitude estimations of social
readjustments.’’ Journal of Psychosomatic
Research 11:219-25,
Mechanic, David
1974 ‘*Discussion of research programs on rela-
tions between stressful life events and

episodes of physical illness.’’ Pp. 87-97 in

B. S. Dohrenwend and B. P. Dohrenwend

(eds.), Stressful Life Events: Their Nature

and Effects. New York: Wiley.
Mirowsky, John

1979 ‘Summary of factor analysis of 32 psycho-
logical symptoms from the New Haven
community survey.”” Unpublished tables.

Mueller, D., D. W. Edwards, and R. M. Yarvis

1977 ‘Stressful life events and psychiatric
symptomatology: change or undesirabil-
ity.’ Journal of Health and Social Behavior
18:307-16.

Myers, Jerome, J. J. Lindenthal, and Max Pepper

1971 ‘*Life events and psychiatric impairment.”
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease
152, 3:149-57.

1972 ‘‘Life events and mental status: a longitudi-
nal study.’’ Journal of Health and Social
Behavior 13:398-406.

1974 ‘Social class, life events, and psychiatric
symptoms: a longitudinal study.”’ Pp. 191—
205 in B. S. Dohrenwend and B. P.
Dohrenwend (eds.), Stressful Life Events:
Their Nature and Effects. New York:
Wiley.

Paykel, E. S.

1974a *‘Recent life events and clinical depres-
sion.”’ Pp. 134-63 in E. K. E. Gunderson
and R. H. Rahe (eds.), Life Stress and IIl-
ness. Springfield, Ill.: Charles C Thomas.

1974b ‘*Life stress and psychiatric disorder: ap-
plications of the clinical approach.”’ Pp.
136-49 in B. S. Dohrenwend and B. P.
Dohrenwend (eds.), Stressful Life Events
Their Nature and Effects. New York:
Wiley.

Paykel, E. S., J. K. Myers, M. N. Dienelt, M. N.
Klerman, J. Lindenthal, and M. Pepper

1969 ‘‘Life events and depression: a controlled
study.’ Archives of General Psychiatry
21:753-60.

Paykel, E. S., B. Prusoff, and J. K. Myers

1975 ‘*Suicide attempts and recent life events.””

Archives of General Psychiatry 32:327-33.
Rahe, R. H., M. Romo, L. Bennett, and P. Siltanen

1974 ‘‘Recent life changes, myocardial infarction,
and abrupt coronary death.”’ Archives of
Internal Medicine 133:221-8.

Ross, Catherine E., and John Mirowsky II

1979 ‘tA comparison of life event weighting
schemes: change, undesirability, and
effect-proportional indices.”’ Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 20, 2:166-77.

Schwartz, Carol C., J. K. Myers, and B. M. As-
trachan

1973 *‘Comparing three measures of mental
status: a note on the validity of estimates of
psychological disorder in the community.”’
Journal of Health and Social Behavior
14:265-73.

Seiler, Lauren

1973 ‘‘The 22-item scale used in field studies of
mental illness: a question of method, a
question of substance, and a question of
theory.’’ Journal of Health and Social Be-
havior 14:252-64.

Spiro, H. R., I. Siassi, and G. Crocetti

1972 ‘*What gets surveyed in a psychiatric sur-
vey? A case study of the Macmillan
Index.’’ Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease 154, 2:105-14.

Theorell, T.

1974 ‘‘Life events before and after the onset of a
premature myocardial infarction.’’ Pp.
101-17 in B. S. Dohrenwend and B. P.
Dohrenwend (eds.), Stressful Life Events:
Their Nature and Effects. New York:
Wiley.

Thoits, Peggy A.

1979 ‘‘Income maintenance, life changes, and
psychological distress: implications for life
events theory.” Research Memorandum
66, Socioeconomic Research Center. Menlo
Park: SRI International.

Thoits, Peggy A., and Michael Hannan

1979 ‘‘Income and psychological distress: the
impact of an income maintenance experi-
ment.’’ Journal of Health and Social Be-
havior 20:120-38.

Tollefson, D. J.

1972 ‘The relationship between the occurrence
of fractures and life crisis events.’’ Master’s
thesis, School of Nursing, University of
Washington, Seattle.

Tousignant, M., G. Denis, and R. Lachapelle

1974 ‘*Some considerations concerning the va-
lidity and use of the Health Opinion Sur-
vey.’ Journal of Health and Social
Behavior:241-52.

Uhlenhuth, Eberhard, and E. S. Paykel

1973 ‘Symptom intensity and life events.’’ Ar-

chives of General Psychiatry 28:473-7.
Vinokur, A., and M. L. Selzer

1975 ‘‘Desirable versus undesirable life events
Their relationship to stress and mental dis-
tress.”’ Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 32, 2:329-37.

Wold, D. A.

1968 ‘‘The adjustment of siblings to childhood
leukemia.’’ Medical thesis, School of
Medicine, University of Washington, Seat-
tle.

Wyler, A. R., M. Masuda, and T. H. Holmes

1971 ‘‘Magnitude of life events and seriousness
of illness.’’ Psychosomatic Medicine
33:115-22.
