@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2093506?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
COMPARATIVE analysis can be pursued
A in many ways: it can be cross-cul-

tural, or it can focus on different
groups within the same society. It can com-
pare groups between broad categories as well
as within them. This paper reports on re-
search that at one time or another has in-
volved all of these approaches, although
only one type (between-category compari-
sons) is emphasized in the present discussion.
The central concern in the study is to under-
stand differences between various kinds of
highly institutionalized human groups. The
thesis is that they fall roughly into two
discrete types, called here “formal” and
“communal” organizations. The initial hy-
pothesis to this distinction (outlined below)
has already received some verification; more
is added here. Two additional hypotheses

* Revised version of a paper read before the
Midwestern Sociological Society, St. Louis, Missouri,
April 16, 1970. I wish to express my thanks to all
those who have generously contributed advice and
suggestions, and in particular to James L. Price,
Julia Brown, Gene Summers, Charles Perrow, Alvin
H, Scaff, and Robert Nisbet. The study resulting in
this publication was made possible by a Ford
Foundation Faculty Research Fellowship. The con-
tents of this discussion, however, are the sole re-
sponsibility of the author.
The problem consists of an apparent, discrete difference between communal and formal organ-
izations. Research was designed to test the first hypothesis: If a group is primarily oriented to
the attainment of a specific goal, then it excludes familial behavior. Four types of groups are
selected: (1) Groups such as Relocation Centers for the Japanese in the U.S. in World War II,
“captive communities,” challenge the hypothesis in seeming to contain the family in a formal
organization. (2) Groups such as Shakers and Trappist monks, “limited communities,” seem
to exclude the family from communal organizations. The other groups are logical counterparts
of the first two: (3) “Intentional communities” (Hutterites and Kibbutzim) and (4) “total
institutions” (English Public Schools). Neither should require that the first hypothesis be
modified if it is valid.

Study of the Relocation Centers generated the second hypothesis: The greater the depriva-
tion of freedom, the greater the antagonism of those deprived. Freedom is thought to increase
as alternatives increase, to require discipline, to be relative to the definition of the situation
and thus to be both psychological and social. Study of the limited communities generated the
third hypothesis: Only if a group is not primarily oriented to the attainment of a specific goal
will it maximize the freedom of its members. Intentional communities and limited communi-
ties support all hypotheses. The organization of the group appears largely responsible for the
definition of the situation relative to freedom. The family, although not necessary to com-
munal organizations, is nevertheless quite basic to it and is antithetical to formal organizations.
groups that could possibly contain the char-
acteristics of both formal and communal
organizations (at least on an a priori basis).
One of the central characteristics of formal
organizations has already been mentioned:
specific goals. Research to date (cf. Hillery,
1968) indicates that one of the central char-
acteristics of communal organizations is the
family (i.e., a group having at least as its
nucleus a sanctioned sexual union of a man
and a woman who are also engaged in child
nurture). The basic question may thus be
phrased in terms of Hypothesis 1: Jf a hu-
man group is primarily oriented to the at-
tainment of a specific goal, then it excludes
familial behavior.

This hypothesis grows out of a taxonomy
of human groups, the essentials of which are
presented in Chart 1. This is not the place
to give the rationale for developing the tax-
onomy (see Hillery, 1968). It should be
noted that there are innumerable ways of dif-
ferentiating human groups. The criteria
chosen here are admittedly not sufficient for
a complete understanding of human groups,
no more than the criterion of motility is suf-
ficient for understanding the difference be-
tween animal and plant life. But like mo-
tility, the criteria are believed to be useful—
certainly for present purposes.

One problem deserves special treatment,
since it figures so largely in community litera-
ture, namely, the problem of spacial use or
territory. It is interesting that for conceptual
purposes the problem of territory appears
to become of less theoretical importance as
the concepts become more general. Thus,
while territory is quite important to the
understanding of a particular city or a par-
ticular prison, generally it does not seem
to be as important to understanding the dif-
ference between communal and formal or-
ganizations. In fact, Nisbet (1970) has intro-
duced a distinction between personal and
territorial groupings that cuts across the
taxonomy introduced here. His distinction
is a useful one and has an extensive develop-
ment (e.g., Maine, 1861; Jenks, 1898). It
raises the distinct possibility that the em-
phasis of community theorists on territory
may be misplaced. In the struggle of the
state (as a formal organization) against the
family and related communal organizations,
the state has sought increasingly to destroy
the power of its older rival groups, and one
way in which this was done, as Jenks (1898)
has shown, was by giving more consideration
to an individual’s territorial location than to
his group (i.e., communal) membership. In
fact, it could well be argued that formal or-
ganization, per se, increasingly emphasizes
a sharper definition of boundaries, growing
out of a greater interest in controlling in-
dividual behavior, which stems in turn from
the concern of the organization with task
orientation. From this point of view, it would
be argued that the important point is not
territory itself but rather the relationship
between territory and an emphasis on spe-
cific goals.

There are numerous other such problems
that could be mentioned. The discussion here
is limited to only one set of criteria which
can be shown to be fruitful for raising im-
portant points about the nature of human
groups. The groups to be studied are ar-
ranged within the taxonomy as they would
appear if the taxonomy were valid. But cer-
tain groups are so chosen as to challenge the
taxonomy. Thus, two taxonomies are pre-
sented in Chart 1: A general theoretical tax-
onomy, represented by the broad categories
of Formal and Communal Organizations,
Expressive and Informal Groups. (For the
development of this taxonomy, see Hillery,
1968). Within this chart, a smaller taxonomy
is presented (elaborated in Chart 2) de-
picting Captive, Intentional, and Limited
communities and Total institutions. Captive
communities constitute a challenge to the
hypothesis in that they appear to contain
the famliy in a formal organization; limited
communities appear to challenge the hy-
pothesis in that they seem to exclude the
family from communal organization. The
particular intentional communities are se-
lected such that they modify the family in
certain ways; the particular total institution
is chosen because it departs from practices
common to total institutions generally. In
spite of these variations, if the initial hy-
pothesis is valid, neither the intentional com-
munities nor the total institutions should re-
quire a modification of the general tax-
onomy.?”
FORMAL
ORGANI -
ZATIONS
State

Firm

Local
Business

"Captive
Communi-
ties"

Total In-
stitutions

EXPRESSIVE
GROUPS

Social
Movements

Crowds

 

COMMUNAL
ORGANI-
ZATIONS

Nation
Vill
(village
or city)

Family

Intention-
al Commu-
nities
Limited
Communi-
ties

INFORMAL
GROUPS

Ethnic
Groups

Cliques
(represented by the solid line). Groups of
low institutionalization are depicted as not
being sharply distinguished in respect to
goals: this is because their goals are less often
defined with precision.

In view of the difficulty of defining “com-
munity” (cf. Hillery, 1951), the term is used
very loosely; in this research, “community”
refers simply to the three kinds of groups
listed in Chart 2. All communities, then, are
not necessarily communal organizations, ac-
cording to the general taxonomy (i.e., cap-
tive communities). Other communal organ-
izations are shown in Chart 1.

Since the concept “goal” *® is used quite
broadly in the literature, it is important that
“specific goal” be defined clearly. The defini-
tion follows Parsons (1960:17—18). A specific
goal has at least three characteristics: (1)
the product of the goal is identifiable, such
as automobiles, M.D. degrees, etc.; (2) the
product can be used by another system; i.e.,
the output of one system is the input for
another system, and (3) the output is amena-
ble to a contract; e.g., it can be bought and
sold. Again because of the many connotations
of “goals,” it may be helpful to use the
term “output goal” as synonymous with
“specific goal” (See Gross, 1968, 1969).

The hypothesis may be more clearly (if
less briefly) stated by expressing ‘output
goals” in terms of their consequences. In
order to produce an output goal, the mem-
bers of a group must behave such that a mea-
surable output results, and this output in
turn must be able to be contracted for by
another system. The hypothesis maintains
that the wholehearted commitment of a
group to such a goal (or even several such
goals) is antithetical to the family; e.g.,
such a group would exclude persons from act-
ing out familial roles within the group.

The group-types that are used to in-
vestigate this hypothesis are discussed in
the following order: (1) captive communi-
ties, (2) limited communities, (3) intentional
communities, and (4) total institutions.

Captive communities. A study of the Jap-
anese Relocation Centers in the U.S. in
World War II (hereafter called “the Cen-
ters”) brings forth the following two points:
(1) the Centers were in part communal or-
ganizations, but (2) they cannot be under-
stood without introducing the concept of
freedom. In other words, these were captive
communities, and to ignore the fact of their
captivity, of the loss of their freedom, is to
ignore a key point. The Centers in general
represent one of the best-documented group
types in the sample, much of the important
literature still being accessible. (See espe-
cially Spicer e¢ al., 1969, Thomas and Ni-
shimoto, 1946; Leighton, 1945). The story
is too well known to require more than a
brief description. In response to mounting
war hysteria in World War II, the Japanese
in the West Coast, both citizen and alien,
were evacuated inland. Most of them
(110,000) were sent to ten “Relocation
Centers,” located primarily in the western
states.

There were important differences in the
Centers, as will be seen, but they shared
in common the fact that the people were
forced to set up living patterns against their
will, in places not of their own choosing.
Further, the places to which they were sent
were “administered” * by a staff they did
not select. Most of the evacuees stayed in
the Centers for two and a half years.

The Centers strongly confirm the hypoth-
esis that was advanced at the beginning of
this paper. Perhaps most important is that
the staff of the Centers manipulated the fam-
ilies contained within the Centers, in one
way or another. Sometimes this was done
directly, by internment of a male member.
More often, the manipulation was uninten-
tional, as when family members felt com-
pelled to follow other members who were
reassigned to certain camps because they
classified themselves as disloyal. At other
times, some members were encouraged to
leave the Centers, whether or not they went
with their families. The significant point is
that family life was secondary to the task of
custody, and the family was made to fit
custodial rules more than vice versa. In other
words, the decision to place the Japanese
in custodial centers was made and maintained
apart from any consideration as to whether
they were family members. To be sure, pro-
visions were made for families, if the Jap-
anese happened to have families. But familial
considerations had no effect on the specific
goal of custody. Therefore, the first hypoth-
esis is maintained: To the extent that a
group (here, the staff) is primarily oriented
to the attainment of a specific goal (in this
case, custody), it excludes the family (in
that families, as families, were not at the
same time permitted to be both staff members
and evacuees).

The question arises: what is the difference
between captive and other communal organ-
izations? The inescapable conclusion is im-
plied in the label that has been given them:
captive communities have been denied a
significant increment of their freedom. The
problems raised when the concept of freedom
is introduced are admittedly formidable, but
face them we must if we are to understand
what has happened.®
Freedom is not often discussed in the so-
ciological literature,® and accordingly it is
helpful to consider some related concepts.
In part, freedom is reciprocally related to
power—the more power one has over me,
the less freedom I have.’ Following Bier-
stedt’s analysis (1950), we may think of
power as latent force, and force as the re-
duction of alternatives. It follows that in one
sense freedom increases as one’s alternatives
increase (Hillery, 1968:75—76.)

But even from what little has been pre-
sented here about the Centers, it is apparent
that freedom depends on the definition of the
situation. One defines the things that con-
stitute his freedom, the things that are his
alternatives. (I do not define my skin or
my rib cage as a prison, and so I do not feel
constrained.) This leads to a second aspect
of freedom, the act of making a choice (de-
veloped in Roth, 1969). If one alternative
is chosen, another is thereby ruled out, and
thus the choice necessitates a discipline.
From this point of view, the act of disciplin-
ing one’s self is as much a part of freedom
as is an increase of alternatives. For ex-
ample, referring again to the ghetto, if a
group of Jews build a wall around their
quarter to keep the gentiles out, we may
class this as an act of freedom, If on the
other hand these same gentiles were to build
a wall against the wishes of the Jews, this
would be an act of deprivation, of loss of
freedom.
These observations can be ordered under
four headings. Recognizing that we only be-
gin to describe freedom here, we may say
that (1) freedom increases as alternatives in-
crease; (2) any selection from among al-
ternatives requires discipline; (3) freedom is
relative to the definition of the situation
and thus is both psychological and (4) so-
cial.8 In regard especially to the first two
points, they appear to be two dimensions,
although interrelated. On the one hand, al-
ternatives cannot increase forever. On the
other hand, man is social and his freedom is
thus disciplined by the necessity of associ-
ation wtih people (cf. Nisbet, 1953, 1962:
237). In fact, people themselves may and do
become part of one’s alternatives, as in mate
selection.

The alternatives, it should be noted, need
not attain any special quantity (beyond some
plural) in order to be significant; the value
of the selection depends on the system.
Choice of a job within a prison, for example,
is not equal to choice of whether to go to
prison or not. It follows that in some cases
a single choice may determine all subsequent
alternatives (cf. Parsons, 1966:9 on cyber-
netic aspects of control).

These concepts can be readily applied to
the Centers. (1) As mentioned, a group of
people were forced or compelled (i.e., made
to act against their will) to settle in the
various Centers and to live there, most of
them for several years. (2) The people
responded to this act with an attitude that
could best be called antagonistic (Spicer,
1969). This occurred in all of the camps,
though as we shall see, in varying degrees.
In fact, from the evidence a second hypoth-
esis may be advanced: All other things equal,
the greater the deprivation of freedom, the
greater the antagonism ® of those deprived.
The point is not whether such a hypothesis
is obvious or not. The point is that it is a
matter of record (Spicer, 1969:83), and if it
can be extended to other groups, it will
have far-reaching consequences for conclu-
sions we may wish to draw concerning social
organization.

Evidence on the extent and degree of an-
tagonism can be measured in part by replies
to a question asked of all persons in the
Centers who were 17 years of age and over:
“Will you swear to abide by the laws of the
United States and to take no action which
would in any way interfere with the war ef-
fort of the United States?” (Thomas and
Nishimoto, 1946:61.) Response varied from
Tule Lake, in which 42% of all eligible per-
sons either refused to answer or answered
negatively, to Granada and Poston, in which
only 2% and 6% (respectively) fell in this
category. Poston is particularly interesting,
because though it contained the next to low-
est percentage of persons who refused to co-
operate, it was also one of the Centers with a
severe strike in which military action of some
sort was involved (Leighton, 1945). A com-
parison between the two Centers—one at
Tule Lake and the other at Poston—is in-
structive.

In Poston, the disturbance was solved
fairly quickly, and the Project Director took
a course of action which eventually led to the
Japanese themselves assuming significant
control of the Center (Leighton, 1945). Tule
Lake, however, was desiginated as the camp
to which all those who openly professed dis-
loyalty to the United States were sent with
their families. Disturbances at Tule Lake
eventually led to the imposition of martial
law and application for denationalization by
seven out of every ten of the Japanese from
this Center who were American citizens
(Thomas and Nishimoto, 1946:156-157).

The importance of a comparison between
Tule Lake and Poston is that the people at
Tule Lake were put there because many of
them were defined as disloyal, by themselves
and by the U.S. Thus, (1) there was a defini-
tion of the evacuees at Tule Lake as persons
who were opposed to the U.S. administration,
(2) there occurred a more forcible depriva-
tion of freedom than at Poston, and (3) this
was accompanied by a greater antagonism.!°
Similar observations can be had from simi-
lar conditions (although the data are not
nearly so complete), particularly the slave
planation (Bryce-Laporte, 1968), the more
extreme types of concentration camps (such
as some maintained by the Japanese in World
War II—Vaughan, 1949), and various types
of ghettoes (Wirth, 1928; Poll, 1969; Lie-
bow, 1967). In each case, if the members of a
community believe that their freedom has
been deprived, they will respond with be-
haviors that can be called acts of antagon-
ism and conflict. Where open acts of conflict
are prohibited (as in the Japanese Interment
Center at Bacolod in the Philippines), hos-
tility may be displayed in increased morbid-
ity and mortality rates, and increased weight
loss (Vaughan, 1949:112-113; Bryce-La-
porte, 1968:153). But the crucial element
is the definition of the situation. Such an-
tagonism is not as apparent if the boundaries
around the communal organization are drawn
by the people themselves; this is the lesson
to be gained from Wirth’s (1928, especially
pp. 50-51, 290) classic study of the ghetto
and Poll’s (1969) study of the Hasidim.
Are captive communities then “really”
communities? It is impossible to explore this
point here; however, we can say that captive
communities, such as the Centers, contain
all those components found in other com-
munities, i.e., as listed in the model common
to cities and villages, called ‘“vills” elsewhere
(see Table 1; Hillery 1963, 1968). But the
Centers include a component not found in
the vill—a staff to which they are antagon-
istic, from which they are split. The im-
portant thing about this staff is that it causes
a behavioral reaction among the inmates that
can be identified with this antagonism.
Captive communities, therefore, must be
conceptualized as composed of two discrete
parts: (1) a formal organization or “staff”
attempting to attain (or maintain) a speci-
fic goal (custody), and (2) a group of “cap-
tives” that comprise a communal organiza-
tion, based on the family, highly institution-
alized, but not oriented to the attainment of
a specific goal.

This raises the point of whether the cap-
tive community is a total institution in Goff-
man’s (1957, 1961) terms. It deviates sig-
nificantly from total institutions in that the
very presence of the family introduces a
range of freedom that prohibits the control
of the staff from even approaching “total.”
Because of this, captive communities cannot
become “forcing houses for changing persons”
(Goffman, 1957:48). In this sense, the Jap-
anese internment center described by
Vaughan (1949) is closer to a total institu-
tion, for there sexual contact was prohibited.
The Japanese, however, were not especially
concerned about “forcing” change, outside of
maintaining custody and deferential be-
havior.

From the evidence submitted in this dis-
cussion, therefore, captive communities do
not properly belong in the cell to which they
are assigned in Chart 2. The formal organiza-
tion does not “contain” the “captured” fami-
lies; these families, if they are even permitted
to operate as families, are carefully isolated
from the decision-making bodies.

Limited Communities. If the initial hy-
pothesis is correct, then the family should
occupy an important role in communal or-
ganizations. The question here is, can groups
be found which are communal organizations
(according to the criteria in Chart 1) but
which lack the family? If so, then the ques-
tion follows, what are the consequences for
social behavior and social structure?

There are at least two kinds of groups
which fit the criterion of “limited communi-
ties’—monasteries (Hillery, 1969) and
Shakers (Andrews, 1963) .12 The monasteries

12Tt is extremely difficult to find viable groups
that fall into this classification. Monasteries are
clearly pertinent, but one may argue that they are
the only “successful” groups of their kind, having
existed for many hundreds of years. The Shakers
rank next in longevity. However, their long life
span is quite misleading; they stopped generating
new communities quite soon and have been declin-
ing for most of their history (see the discussion
in the text), And, according to Kanter (1968), the
Shakers are the longest lived “utopian” communities
(she does not consider monasteries).
to be discussed in this paper are “Trappist”
(Cistercians of the Strict Observance). Data
have been collected on two.

For all practical purposes, the Shakers
can also be called monastic. They differ from
the Trappists, among other things, in that
they are wholly Protestant in genesis and in
that individual houses contain both sexes
(although celebacy is maintained).

Shakers have existed for almost 200 years
(since 1776). But no lasting community has
been established since 1829, and thus Shaker
communities stopped regenerating new colo-
nies after 53 years of operation.1® Many rea-
sons could be given for their decline. Clearly
important was the lack of a recruitment
policy.1* In addition, Shakers were not af-
filiated with any established church from
which they could draw members." Finally,
although the point must remain hypothetical,
they had an inadequate leadership structure.
Each of these points is discussed.

The lack of a recruitment policy and of an
affiliation with a larger body becomes a
weakness, obviously, when a system aban-
dons the family. The interesting point is
that for some types of communities families
can be omitted, for even if one argues that
the Shakers were really not successful (and
the point is admittedly moot), Trappist
monasteries have existed for hundreds of
years.!6 The Trappists, of course, have had
the Roman Catholic Church as a system
from which to draw recruits.
There is another difference between Shak-
ers and Trappists. With few exceptions, the
communal organizations under study choose
their own ruler. The exception is the Shakers,
and they support the hypothesis introduced
in the previous section, since their exception
to the rule may actually explain their decay.
One of the problems constantly with the
Shakers was that of leadership. The practice
was to assign leaders to the various com-
munities, and the leaders were at times re-
sented (Andrews, 1963:235). According to
Andrews (1963:50), the last significant
leader died in 1787. After 1792, the ministry
withdrew from access to the people, living
apart and working through other elders and
deacons (Andrews, 1963:106, 149). Then
the leadership began to falter in their efforts
to socialize the orphans and the young whom
the Shakers brought into their communities.17

The argument is not that a multitude of
rules deprived the Shakers of freedom, for
they too were free to come and go. Indeed,
the Trappists have regulations as restrictive
as the Shakers’, especially in reference to
diet.18 The significant difference is that each
local Trappist monastery chooses its own
leader, the Abbot. The Shakers did not.

It is not certain that an imposed leader-
ship structure was even in part responsible
for the decline of the Shakers.19 But when
limited communities are compared with cap-
tive communities, and both are compared
with vills, the element of freedom looms
large. A monk, Shaker or Catholic, chooses
a local house as well as a rule. Apparently,
if an outside source imposes leadership on a
local house, it introduces a significant depri-
vation of foreign origin, i.e., one not of the
monk’s own choosing.?°
In spite of the relative deficiencies of the
Shakers, both they and the Trappists raise
a third hypothesis: Only if a group is not
primarily oriented to the attainment of a
specific goal will it maximize the freedom
of its members. Put in another way, relative
to other groups (see Chart 1), freedom tends
to be maximized in communal organiza-
tions.21 This hypothesis is even accentuated
by the comparisons in the research design
(Chart 2). If one feature had to be used
to separate a monk from a prisoner (to make
the most extreme comparison), it would
probably be that the monk entered his group
because he chose to and is similarly free to
leave.

Can it be said that the monasteries max-
imize the freedom of their members? Cer-
tainly, alternatives are curtailed: for ex-
ample, the monks are celibate; they fast and
maintain extensive periods of silence. But to
talk with these men (and the Shakers—see
especially Neal, 1963) is to be impressed
with the lack of manifest antagonism. The
point is that the monk is where he is because
he has made what for him is the most signifi-
cant choice of his life. Deprivations are an
important part of this call, but they are
deprivations chosen by him, and they can
be renounced whenever he so wishes.?? The
monastery is the place where he is free to
follow his call to the maximum of his ability.

A more complete explanation of any lack
of hostility should also include mechanisms
for conflict resolution. One such mechanism
is that of requiring intense dedication, and
this is accomplished partly by the highly
selective nature of the recruitment. Over
90% of all applicants to Trappist mon-
asteries eventually leave before full profes-
sion. (This estimate was supplied by the
monks.) They are in a sense rejects, whether
they are rejecting the monastery or the
monastery is rejecting them. This high de-
gree of rejection may contain a form of con-
flict on the part of those who cannot make
the sacrifice.

Another point follows from a study of
limited communities. It is possible (although
rare) to have systems that are communal
organizations that do not have the family,
but in such cases, a great deal of energy must
be expended by someone to maintain the
system, energy specifically in the form of
recruitment. In other words, it is vastly
easier to have communal organizations with
the family than without it. Thus, communal
organizations have a higher probability of
containing families.

There may be another point: George
Bernard Shaw has said that marriage pro-
vides the maximum of temptation with the
maximum of opportunity. The point is par-
ticularly suggestive in the present context.
In spite of the problems inherent in any
family, a freedom of access of its members
to each other is apparently so permitted that
people will seek out such a form of be-
havior. To deprive a system of the family
is thus to deprive it of a significant area
of freedom. The difference in a monastery,
of course, is that the monks are not deprived.
They renounce.

Intentional Communities. These are com-
munal organizations that have been inten-
tionally founded for some purpose other
than a specific goal. Limited communities
are also intentional communities, but they
have been separated (because of the absence
of the family) for present research needs.
The purpose or intention of the community
is usually ideological, whether religious, eco-
nomic, political or some combination. In the
systems discussed, the Hutterite colonies
illustrate religious commitment; the Israeli
kibbutzim have developed politicoeconomic
justification. Emphasis is on the Hutterites.

Both the Hutterites and the Israelis mod-
ify the family in that they have shorn it of
virtually all functions except two: (1) sanc-
tioning the sexual union of the spouses and
(2) providing some nurturances to the
members (the children receive some initial
socialization, but the community also pro-
vides a substantial—probably even a major
—share of emotional nurturance to all mem-
bers). Communal kitchens, nurseries, and
economic systems operate separately from
the family.

Conditions of freedom in intentional com-
munities are comparable to limited communi-
ties. Although monasteries may have more
emphasis on asceticism (or discipline), in-
tentional communities—at least those con-
sidered here—apply many constraints to the
individual in that life is closely planned. All
of them, however, require that the individual
make his own decision, as a young adult,
whether he will enter the community. In
the kibbutzim, the new member undergoes
a year’s probation, regardless of whether
he has been reared in the kibbutz. For the
Hutterites, a new member must ask for
baptism. And though personal pressures may
be great (which is a significant point in con-
sidering freedom), the choice is his. It is
significant that most young kibbutz mem-
bers and Hutterites choose to stay.

The freedom then that is offered to the
members of these two intentional com-
munities may be called a freedom of disci-
pline. However, another aspect must be
considered: most of the new members have
been very effectively socialized—effective,
that is, from the point of view of the sys-
tem—since they stay. Thus, the available
alternatives are those that have been shown
to them by the system, those they have been
socialized to accept. From this point of view
there is less discipline involved in the choice.
(See especially Bettelheim, 1969:216.)

The hypothesis concerning families and
specific goals is actually not relevant to in-
tentional communities, since only communal
organizations are being considered (and
thus, the variation between communal and
formal organizations cannot be discussed in
this context). Concerning the hypothesis re-
lating freedom and antagonism, however,
there is some evidence. According to Hostet-
ler and Huntington (1967), Hutterite women
are much more antagonistic than men—they
complain more and are more often at odds
with the system. But women are openly con-
sidered inferior by the Hutterites and are
treated as such, specifically by not giving
them positions of responsibility or authority.
We meet conditions reminiscent of the Shak-
ers and their “administered” communities,
and of captive communities. However, in
view of the marital and familial ties uniting
husband and wife, one cannot speak of a
staff-inmate split. On the contrary, the high
degree of cohesion among the Hutterites
through the centuries has made them of spe-
cial interest to students of social change (cf.
Eaton, 1952).

Most of what has been said in these para-
graphs is also pertinent to the third hypoth-
esis; both intentional communities and lim-
ited communities maintain and protect the
freedom of their members. That the freedoms
seem more tightly structured than those to
which we are accustomed is another matter.
The members are free to choose.

Total Institutions. Attention is directed to
those total institutions that seem to offer the
greatest challenge to the hypotheses. The re-
lation of prisons and mental institutions to
communal organizations has been considered
elsewhere (Hillery, 1963, 1968), and it was
from a consideration of these that the first
hypothesis was developed and that much
of the background for the other two hypoth-
eses was established. Major consideration in
the present discussion is given to the English
public schools, as treated by Weinberg
(1967). These systems are total institutions
in that (1) they exclude the schoolboy’s
family from the operation of their system;
(2) they have the institutions of maintenance
(recruitment, custody, treatment, and dis-
charge—see Hillery, 1963, 1968); (3) they
are “forcing houses” for changing persons;
and (4) they sharply curtail the freedom of
their clients (the schoolboys). They are also
primarily oriented to the attainment of a
specific goal, i.e., the production of members
of the British elite. Given this last point and
the fact that the schoolboy’s family is ex-
cluded from the staff, the first hypothesis is
upheld. The other two hypotheses are also
still tenable: freedom is less than in com-
munal organizations, and the schoolboys
show hostility and antagonism which can be
related to their deprivation of freedom.

English public schools differ from classic
total institutions (prisons and mental in-
stitutions) in several ways. (1) On an ap-
parently minor level, religion and recreation
are utilized in the development of ethno-
centrism among the clients. A form of ex-
treme loyalty is produced, carrying over into
alumni associations, the “Old Boy clubs.”
More important, (2) the members are so-
cially and biologically immature humans, and
thus normal sociological and psychological
generalizations do not always apply. (3) The
members are highly acceptable socially. They
are neither threats to the society nor are
they inherently incapable; in fact, they are
children of the elite, to be trained as elite.
(4) The clients are made a part of the staff
through the prefect system, wherein senior
boys are given substantial responsibility over
their juniors. In brief, the English public
schools are peculiar especially in that the
clients are extremely ethnocentric, immature,
nondeviant, and some are part of the staff.
But they exhibit the classic aspects of total
institutions in deprivation of freedom and
family.

The most important of these differences
seems to be in the absence of a staff-inmate
split. The English public schools are truly
borderline because they blur the split, giv-
ing relative freedom to some. Therefore, if
the English public schools are total institu-
tions as Weinberg maintains (and I believe
correctly so), it follows that the staff-inmate
split need not occur in total institutions.”
Are the English public schools then com-
munities? One need not pursue this question
as a matter of definition. If intentional and
limited communities are somehow designed
to maintain and protect the freedom of their
members, then this is not true of English
public schools. These schools are designed
to force new members to become part of a
system. This is qualitatively different from
the rearing of children in intentional com-
munities—where the members are given a
choice to stay within the system; and it is
a real choice in that each is allowed to “fail,”
according to his choice. The schoolboy, on
the other hand, is in the system because his
parents put him there, and there he stays
until he graduates. Then he is out of the
system,

The key again therefore hinges on choice
and alternatives. There is also evidence to
support the hypothesis that deprivation of
freedom is conducive to antagonism. Boys
do try to run away, they often become “res-
tive” after returning from vacations, and
although conservatism is the value to which
they are socialized, there is a sizeable mi-
nority who express liberal or labor views in
debates (often more than 40%). Neverthe-
less, although hostility is there, much of it
appears to be successfully diverted in at least
three ways: through recreation (and perhaps
religion), through extending the promise that
some of them will get a chance to control,
and by the fact that the schoolboy knows
that his “term” had a definite ending point.

Conclusions. The three hypotheses are
summarized in Chart 3. Note that only the
first hypothesis is clearly irreversible (Zet-
terberg, 1966): familial behavior is not per-
mitted where specific goals are primary, but
familial behavior may also not appear (as
in monasteries) where specific goals are not
primary. Whether the remaining hypotheses
are irreversible cannot be determined from
the data at hand. Not enough is known about
organizational conflict to say that it is neces-
sarily the reciprocal of freedom, although the
data in this discussion distributes themselves
as if that were so. Hypothesis 3, however,
does seem irreversible; it is difficult to see
how communities that have slave systems
could maximize freedom. This apparently
could only happen if the slave communities
had more freedom relative to the culture in
which such communities were found. Until
data are forthcoming, therefore, it is best to
suspend judgment. Accordingly, Hypothesis
3 cannot be said to be substitutable for either
Hypothesis 1 or 2.

It is important to recall that Hypothesis 1,
as illustrated in Chart 3, refutes the illustra-
tion given in Chart 2: Captive communities
do not “contain” the family, in the sense of
permitting familial behavior to determine the
existence of the group. The presence of the
family in captive communities—whether
these be relocation centers, slave plantations,
or concentration camps—is something which
exists in spite of the system, not because of
it. The family is tolerated, if at all; the latter
possibility shown progressively by the treat-
ment the family receives in slave plantations
(where it is systematically disrupted) and
in concentration camps (where the members
are permitted to exist within the camp, but
where certain crucial functions of the family
are prohibited, such as sexual intercourse).

The question remains, to how many other
groups can the hypotheses be applied? If
we consider only the third hypothesis, ap-
plication would seem on the surface to be
quite extensive. Formal organizations ap-
pear to be especially limited in developing
freedom, in that formal organizations are
concerned only with part of the human being.
They are primarily oriented to the attain-
ment of a specific goal, and as such cannot
be concerned with maximizing freedom. The
very emphasis on rationality and specializa-
tion in formal organizations appears to pre-
clude this.**

Even more relevant, the third hypothesis
has been developed from total institutions
and related systems (captive communities)
which care for a larger share of life than
other formal organizations. In the same vein,
expressive and informal groups (see Chart 1)
seem to sustain the hypothesis in that they
cannot maximize freedom since they are less
institutionalized and hence are more ephem-
eral. Only communal organizations are suf-
* Captive Communities
Total Institutions

 

Intentional Communities
Limited Communities
? Captive Communities
Total Institutions

 

   
 

Intentional Communities bd
Limited Communities
seemingly the confirming case: persons who
willingly submit to torture and death because
they choose such an alternative over others.
Thus we may say that freedom depends first
on the definition of the situation.”

Nevertheless, although the definition of
the situation is necessary, it is not sufficient.
It appears to be the organization of the group
that prompts the definition of the situation
as much if not more than vice versa. The his-
tories of slave plantations, relocation centers,
and concentration camps, in particular, in-
dicate that men will attempt to change the
structure of these systems in such a manner
that freedom as they define it can be more
fully exercised.

Similarly with total institutions—few per-
sons want to stay within them. That such a
system may be accepted as a temporary situ-
ation is shown by the English public schools.
However, the schoolboy does not remain a
schoolboy forever, and he displays significant
antagonism while he is within the school.

What then is the difference between struc-
tures that make for freedom and those that
do not? From this preliminary perspective,
commitment to a specific task, above and
beyond the needs of the individuals within
the system, is the pivotal negating factor.
Anything which places people first seems to
increase freedom, as the people will define
it. Stated in so simple a manner, the state-
ment appears almost obvious, and this prin-
ciple echoes throughout the Judaeo-Christian
heritage. The discovery here, if it may be
called that, is one of indicating what to look
for in the social structure.

There is, however, another structural fea-
ture that is important: freedom seems some-
how associated with the family. Systems
may be free and dispense with the family
(as in monasteries), and they may “capture”
the family and curtail freedom (as in some
concentration camps), but in both cases,
such modifications are attained only with
considerable difficulty. Why this is so is not
clear, except that the family generally places
people first.

The family accordingly is a very basic
group in communal organizations and is anti-
thetical to formal organizations.2® On the
other hand, the act of committing the system
totally to specific goals is equally basic to
formal organizations and is seldom found as
the primary purpose of communal organiza-
tions, Apparently, therefore, the difference
between formal and communal organizations
is one of the few sociological distinctions that
is not on a continuum, that is of the variety
of either-or, a set of discrete attributes.
When the sharpness of this dichotomy is
linked with the relation to freedom that has
been outlined, a new perspective is given
to the dedication of so many to such con-
cepts as democracy, liberty, independence,
and emancipation. Freedom has meaningful
roots at many points in human behavior.
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich

1967 Letters and Papers from Prison. New

York: Macmillian.
Bryce-Laporte, Roy Simén

1968 The Conceptualization of the American
Slave Plantation As a Total Institution.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Univer-
sity of California, Los Angeles.

Degré, Gerard

1946 “Freedom and social structure.” American

Sociological Review 11 (October) :529-536.
Delp, Alfred

1963 The Prison Meditations of Father Alfred

Delp. New York: Herder.
Eaton, Joseph W.

1952 “Controlled acculturation: A survival tech-
nique of the Hutterites.” American Socio-
logical Review 17 (June) :331-340.

Etzioni, Amitai

1964 Modern Organizations. Englewood Cliffs,

N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Furfey, Paul Hanly

1953 The Scope and Method of Sociology. New

York: Harper and Brothers.
Godden, Rumer

1969 In This House of Brede. New York:

Viking.
Goffman, Erving

1957 “The characteristics of total institutions.”
Symposium on Preventive and Social Psy-
chiatry. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt.
Printing Office.

1961 Asylums. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.

Gould, Julius and William L. Kolb, eds.

1964 A Dictionary of the Social Sciences. New

York: The Free Press.
Gross, Edward

1968 “Universities as organizations: A research
approach.” American Sociological Review
33 (August) :518-544.

1969 “The definition of organizational goals.”
British Journal of Sociology 20 (Septem-
ber) :277-293.

Hillery, George A., Jr.

1951 “Definitions of community: Areas of agree-
ment.” Rural Sociology 20 (June):111-123.

1963 “Villages, cities, and total institutions.”
American Sociological Review 28 (Octo-
ber):779-791.

1968 Communal Organizations: A Study of Lo-
cal Societies, Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.

1969 “The convent: Community, prison, or task
force?” Journal for Scientific Study of
Religion 8 (Spring) :140-151.

Hostetler, John A. and Gertrude Enders Huntington

1967 The Hutterites in North America. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Jenks, Edward

1898 Law and Politics in the Middle Ages. New

York: Henry Holt and Co.
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss

1968 “Commitment and social organization: A
study of commitment mechanisms in uto-
pian communities.” American Sociological
Review 33 (August):499-517.
Kolb, William L.

1953 “A social-psychological conception of hu-
man freedom.” Ethics 63 (October): 180-
189.

Kushner, Gilbert

1968 Planned Change in an Administered Com-
munity: Immigrants from India in Israel.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Univer-
sity of Arizona.

Leighton, Alexander H.

1945 The Governing of Men. Princeton, New

Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Lekai, Louis J.

1953 The White Monks: A History of the Cis-
tercian Order. Okauchee, Wisc.: Our Lady
of Spring Bank.

Liebow, Elliot
1967  Tally’s Corner. Boston: Little, Brown and
Co.
Maine, Henry Sumner
1861 Ancient Law. London: John Murray.
Merton, Thomas

1953 The Sign of Jonas. Garden City, N-J.:

Doubleday.
Neal, Mary Julia, ed.

1963 The Journal of Eldress Nancy. Nashville:

Parthenon.
Nisbet, Robert A.

1953 The Quest for Community. New York:
Oxford University Press,

1962 Community and Power. New York: Ox-
ford University Press.

1970 The Social Bond. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf.

Parsons, Talcott

1960 Structure and Process in Modern Societies.
Glencoe, IIl.: The Free Press.

1966 Societies: Evolutionary and Comparative
Perspectives. Englewood Ciiffs, N.J.: Pren-
tice-Hall.

Perrow, Charles

1968 “Organizations: Organizational goals.” In-
ternational Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences. New York: Macmillan Co. and
The Free Press.

Poll, Solomon

1969 The Hasidic Community of Williamsburg.

New York: Schocken.
Roth, John K.

1969 Freedom and the Moral Life: The Ethics
of William James. Philadelphia: West-
minster.

Spicer, Edward H., Asael T. Hansen, Katherine
Luomala and Marvin K. Opler

1969 Impounded People: Japanese-Americans in
the Relocation Centers. Tuscon: University
of Arizona Press.

Spiro, Melford E.

1956 Kibbutz: Venture in Utopia. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

1958 Children of the Kibbutz. Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press.

Thomas, Dorothy Swaine and Richard S. Nishimoto

1946 The Spoilage. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press.
HE problem of relating attributes or di-

mensions of a social system to the ter-

ritory which that social system occu-
pies is a significant one whether human
ecology is defined broadly as embracing the
total exchange relationship between man and
his environment, or in its narrowest sense
as the study of the areal distribution of
social characteristics in human communities.
One dimension that can be treated profitably
in the latter sense concerns the ecological
distribution of social status within a given
community setting.

Persons of similar status, by implication,
engage in roughly similar behavior patterns
which in turn are consistent with and to a
large degree dependent upon their parallel
life styles (and/or chances). This pattern
manifests itself in many diverse settings,
only one of which is residential behavior.

*The data presented here are also utilized in
Hoiberg’s Masters Thesis (Hoiberg, 1969).
Persons of similar status, according to this
argument, tend to select residences near one
another in physical space which results in
a spatial clustering of places of residence by
those of similar social rank (Hawley and
Duncan, 1957).

Further, these similarities in residential
selection patterns augmented by an attendant
gross similarity in possessions will tend to
become symbolically characteristic of the
status levels in which they occur. Therefore,
residential areas will tend to have symbolic
meanings which are associated with the other
status characteristics of their inhabitants.
In this way, status characteristics can be
associated with residential areas even though
particular residents may deviate from what
is characteristic of any given area.

With the exception of the unlikely case
where a given area is completely homogene-
ous, there will tend to be some local varia-
tion in the status levels of a dwelling area.
