@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
State women’s suffrage movements are investigated to illuminate the circumstances
in which social movements bring about political change. In 29 states, suffragists
were able to win significant voting rights prior to passage of the Nineteenth Amend-
ment. In addition to resource mobilization, cultural framing, and political opportu-
nity structures, the authors theorize that gendered opportunities also fostered the
successes of the movements. An event history analysis provides evidence that gen-
dered opportunity structures helped to bring about the political successes of the
suffragists. Results suggest the need for a broader understanding of opportunity
structure than one rooted simply in formal political opportunities.
(Larson 1965), but in New York, which
passed full suffrage in 1917, by the 1910s, a
quarter of a million suffragists participated
in various state suffrage organizations
(McDonald 1987:150).

We examine the circumstances that led
states to adopt full, primary, or presidential
suffrage prior to ratification of the Nine-
teenth Amendment. To do this, we investi-
gate the U.S. state suffrage movements and
the contexts in which they mobilized. With
few exceptions (Gamson 1975), sociologists
only recently have begun to consider why
some movements succeed and others fail in
their attempts to bring about social change
(Guigni 1998). As McAdam, McCarthy, and
Zald’s (1988) extensive review of the move-
ments literature reveals, most movement
studies have focused on movement emer-
gence and development. But recently, a few
policy studies have shed light on movement
political outcomes (Amenta and Poulsen
1996; McCammon 1995; Quadagno 1992).
Their theoretical focus, though, is on the in-
terests of state actors and policy change, and
thus these studies typically offer only pass-
ing attention to the role of social move-
ments, noting simply the presence or ab-
sence of movement activity and rarely not-
ing variations in the organizational strength,
strategies, and ideologies of movements. In
addition, some movement researchers have
turned their attention to the systematic study
of movements and their outcomes, but the
theoretical focus of this work has also been
somewhat narrow (Amenta, Dunleavy, and
Bernstein 1994; Banaszak 1996; Giugni,
McAdam, and Tilly 1998). Movement re-
searchers who examine the success of move-
ments either focus primarily on the strate-
gies of the movements themselves (Morris
1993) or, in examining the context of mobi-
lization, limit their consideration to political
institutions and actors, that is, to the politi-
cal opportunity structure (Amenta, Car-
tuthers, and Zylan 1992; Gelb 1987).

We argue that a model of movement suc-
cess must consider not only the mobilization
of the movements but the broad context in
which those movements operate, including
political and other social dynamics that can
affect movement success. We elaborate on
this below, but first we point out that a
model of the political success of movements
must theorize the impact of movements and
their contexts on political decision-makers.
Bringing about political or policy change—
in the case of the suffragists, the expansion
of voting rights—requires a willingness on
the part of political decision-makers to sup-
port such change. A model of movement suc-
cess, then, must specify the circumstances
fostering such willingness on the part of po-
litical actors.

Sociological theories of the state and of
policymaking have long recognized the need
to theorize the interests and actions of state
actors to understand the policymaking pro-
cess (Alford and Friedland 1985). Yet, the
few recent studies examining movement
success fail to acknowledge this point ex-
plicitly and thus fail to draw on the diverse
theories of the state to understand the full
range of factors that can influence political
decision-makers.

As movement researchers shift their focus
away from the determinants of movement
mobilization to the determinants of move-
ment outcomes, they bring with them the
concept of “political opportunity structure.”
Defining the political process model,
McAdam (1982) states that “any event or
broad social process that serves to under-
mine the calculations and assumptions on
which the political establishment is struc-
tured occasions a shift in political opportu-
nities” (p. 41, emphasis in original). But re-
cently, political opportunity structure is typi-
cally considered to encompass only dynam-
ics involving electoral politics and the state.
For instance, Jenkins and Klandermans
(1995) write that “social movements develop
in a context defined by the state and the rep-
resentation system, which afford opportuni-
ties for mobilization and set limits on the ef-
fectiveness of movement strategies” (p. 7,
emphasis added; also see Skocpol 1992:41).
McAdam (1996:27), surveying the recent lit-
erature, lists various “dimensions of politi-
cal opportunity,” all of which are character-
istics of the formal political structure, its ca-
pacities, and the configuration of political
elites. Others as well limit their view of the
opportunity structure to the formal political
landscape of party politics and the structure
and action of the state (e.g., Amenta et al.
1992; Amenta et al. 1994; Banaszak 1996;
Brockett 1991; Costain 1992; Kriesi 1995,
Tarrow 1998).

But this narrow definition of opportunity
structure represents only one view offered
by state theorists of the factors that can in-
fluence policymaking. The focus on politi-
cal structures and dynamics, typically ex-
cluding other contextual influences, repre-
sents a polity- or state-centered theory of
policymaking (Evans, Rueschemeyer, and
Skocpol 1985; Skocpol 1980). This view
holds that the interests of political decision-
makers, particularly those of state actors, are
based on preserving or expanding their in-
stitutional authority, and their lawmaking
decisions reflect this orientation (Alford and
Friedland 1985; Rueschemeyer and Evans
1985). A political opportunity for movement
success arises, then, when political circum-
stances shift such that political actors are
willing to support policy change because
they perceive the change will strengthen or
preserve their own institutional positions.
Empirical research in this area clearly dem-
onstrates that formal political dynamics like
these influence political decision-making
and thus can influence the political success
of social movements (Amenta and Poulsen
1996). But the underlying assumption that
political decision-making and movement
success are unaffected by circumstances be-
yond these formal political dynamics is too
narrow.

Society-centered approaches to political
decision-making, such as feminist (Connell
1990; MacKinnon 1989), class (Block 1977;
Domhoff 1998), and racial (Quadagno 1994)
theories of the state, offer a starting point for
broader theories of the types of opportunity
structures that may influence movement out-
comes. Society-centered theories assume
that gender, economic class, and race rela-
tions can and do influence policymaking. We
use polity- and society-centered theories to
argue that not only did opportunities for
granting suffrage to women emerge from
changing dynamics in formal politics that al-
tered the political interests of political deci-
sion-makers, but opportunities emerged in
gendered ways as well.

Specifically, we posit that shifting gender
relations produced a gendered opportunity
for women’s suffrage by altering attitudes
among political decision-makers about the
appropriate roles of women in society. That
is, changing gender relations altered expec-
tations about women’s participation in the
polity, and these changes in gendered expec-
tations increased the willingness of political
decision-makers to support suffrage.

Thus, we argue that, on the one hand,
shifts in political circumstances altered the
political calculus on which decision-makers
based their actions, providing a political op-
portunity for suffrage. On the other hand,
changing gender relations also caused politi-
cal decision-makers to alter their views
about the proper roles for women in society,
and these changing attitudes about gender—
not changing attitudes about the political vi-
ability of a particular stance on suffrage—
provided a gendered opportunity for suffrage
success. Thus, political dynamics and
changing gender relations both influenced
whether political actors voted for suffrage,
but through different mechanisms: one
through changing political interests; the
other through changing attitudes about
women’s roles in society.

Gender theorists point out that gender can
permeate all organizations and processes in
society (Acker 1992; Lorber 1994). While
we find in the history of suffrage that the
opportunity structures helping the suffragists
win voting rights typically took one of two
forms—political or gendered—we also find
that in some cases political opportunities in-
volved gendered considerations as well. That
is, formal political interests were intertwined
with gendered expectations, often expecta-
tions about how women as voters would cast
their ballots. Thus, consideration by social
movement researchers of only political op-
portunity structures is simply too narrow an
approach to understanding the full range of
opportunity structures that foster movement
success. Others have pointed to a need to re-
fine our understanding of movement oppor-
tunity structures by recognizing that factors
beyond formal political dynamics can influ-
ence movements and their success (Gamson
and Meyer 1996; Goodwin and Jasper 1999:
53; Koopmans 1999; Rucht 1996; Taylor
1999). The opportunity structures confronted
by the suffragists offer a chance to view this
broader range of opportunity structures.

Our work advances theorizing of social
movement success, but we also anticipate
that it will add to the historical literature on
suffrage success. The work of historians
studying women’s suffrage often parallels
that of sociologists studying social move-
ments. Historians explaining suffrage have
emphasized the political circumstances nec-
essary for winning the vote (Buenker 1971;
Edwards 1997) or the movement strategies
needed for success (Degler 1980; Flexner
1975). Some have pointed to changing gen-
der relations as a contributing factor to suf-
frage victories (Kraditor 1965; Morgan
1972). Other historians, though, contend that
the states granting suffrage had little in com-
mon and that these states gave women vot-
ing rights for idiosyncratic reasons (Beeton
1986; Larson 1971a).!

We have collected data from primary and
secondary sources on all state suffrage
movements and their contexts. These data
We define movement success in terms of
“political or policy outcomes” (Staggenborg
1995:341), a definition that falls within
Gamson’s (1975) notion of “new advan-
tages” and Kitschelt’s (1986) “structural im-
pact.” Success for the suffragists was win-
ning voting rights, a goal that, when ach-
ieved, would fundamentally redefine
women’s role in society by giving them “po-
litical citizenship” (T. Marshall 1950). In 29
states, women achieved full, primary, or
presidential suffrage prior to passage of the
Nineteenth Amendment.” Table 1 lists the
states and the years in which each state
granted women these forms of suffrage. We
focus on full, primary, and presidential suf-
frage because they represent the state suf-
frage movements’ most significant victories
(Banaszak 1996:84). In a one-party South,
winning the franchise in primary elections
was tantamount to gaining full suffrage
(Harper [1922] 1985:637), and winning
presidential suffrage was considered a major
victory by the suffragists (Buechler 1986).
Some states granted suffrage through leg-
islative action alone. In other states, both
the legislature and the electorate voted on
the matter. Thus, two groups—state legisla-
represent the only attempt thus far to sys-
tematize and analyze the historical knowl-
edge on the state suffrage movements, and
our analysis allows us to compare states that
did and did not grant suffrage. Contrary to
the argument that states granting suffrage
had little in common, we identify a number
of characteristics common to the suffrage
states. Our comparative analysis also reveals
that no single cause can explain women’s
suffrage success. Women did not win the
vote simply because of particular political
circumstances, or solely because of the strat-
egies used by the suffragists, or simply be-
cause of changing gender relations. A com-
bination of factors was required to broaden
democracy to women.
We argue that changing gender relations can
provide a gendered opportunity for move-
ment success. Gender relations refer to “the
social organization of the relationship be-
tween the sexes” (Scott 1986:1053; also see
Lorber 1992). According to Acker (1992)
gender relations are a “pervasive ordering of
human activities, practices, and social struc-
tures in terms of differentiations between
women and men” (p. 567). This social order-
ing also represents a balance of power be-
tween the sexes that is maintained by so-
cially constructed and widely held under-
standings of the appropriate (and different)
roles for women and men in society (Connell
1987:96-97; Scott 1986). During the nine-
teenth century, a clear cultural demarcation
between women’s and men’s appropriate so-
cial spheres emerged, with women’s place
defined as the private sphere of child-rear-
ing and domestic work and men’s place de-
fined as the public sphere of politics and
business (Welter 1966). Such beliefs ex-
cluded women from having a formal voice
and thus formal power in politics. But the
suffragists found gendered opportunities in
changes or variations in gender relations that
altered existing views about the proper roles
of women. These variations occurred in a
variety of contexts but, in each case, pro-
duced gendered opportunities that ultimately
fostered suffrage success.

In particular, the rise of the “new woman”
offered a gendered opportunity to the suf-
fragists. Around the turn of the century,
women increasingly received extensive edu-
cation, worked outside the home, entered
professional careers, had fewer children, di-
vorced, and became involved in various
charitable and political activities (Giele
1995; Matthews 1992). Women were mov-
ing into traditionally male domains, and the
social order between the sexes began a trans-
formation. The growing presence of this new
woman in the public sphere—in factories,
offices, universities, and the professions—
gradually weakened the widely held nine-
teenth-century assumption that women’s ap-
propriate place was in the home.

Not only did such changes create a grow-
ing population of independent women who
were often predisposed to suffrage argu-
ments (DuBois 1975), but the blurring of
this public/private distinction helped per-
suade the population more generally, includ-
ing male political decision-makers in state
legislatures and the electorate, of women’s
ability to participate in the public sphere, in-
cluding politics (S. Marshall 1998; Morgan
1972). Caruso (1986), in her study of the
movement in Michigan, tells us that there
was a “realization that women were already
playing a public role” and this “helped de-
fuse the fear of women engaging in activi-
ties that obviously were not connected to the
home” (p. 269). Ivie (1971) writes of the
suffrage movement in Oklahoma that “pub-
lic opinion had changed sufficiently to make
possible effective suffrage work. Women
were involved in civic affairs, more
[women] were economically independent,
and greater numbers of women were openly
stating their opinions. Oklahoma was ready
soil for suffrage work” (p. 68; also see
Alexander 1970:22; Fus 1972:101—102, 133;
Giele 1995:162; Lerner 1981:365-66; White
1974:359). We argue that where women
moved into previously male spheres of ac-
tivity, gender attitudes became more egali-
tarian and suffrage success was more likely
as lawmakers and the male electorate acted
on these changing views.

Another gendered opportunity emerges
from previous suffrage successes. In some
states, suffragists won partial suffrage in the
form of municipal, tax, or school suffrage.
Also, some states bordered states in which
full, primary, or presidential suffrage had
been enacted. These legal changes repre-
sented a fundamental shift in gender rela-
tions in that they expanded women’s politi-
cal rights; such changes previously in a state
or in a neighboring state also altered views
about women’s capacity to participate in
politics. It might be argued that because such
changes involved a legal change, it is a po-
litical opportunity. But we maintain that at
its core it is a gendered opportunity (albeit
with a political catalyst) because the change
in law redefined gender relations by allow-
ing women formal access to the polity and,
as the historical record suggests, political
decision-makers began to view gender rela-
tions differently. As the public witnessed
women voting in minor elections locally or
in major elections in neighboring states with
competence and good results, views toward
women’s political participation liberalized
and acceptance of suffrage rights grew
(Fleming 1990:40; Jensen 1973:266; Larson
1971b:17-18; Smith 1975:26). We hypoth-
esize that where the suffragists had gained
such rights, they were more likely to succeed
when pressing for full, primary, and presi-
dential suffrage.

A third gendered opportunity exists in
populations with a particular ethnic makeup.
Some studies of women’s suffrage suggest
that certain ethnic groups strongly opposed
suffrage for women, and they did so, for the
most part, on the basis of traditional beliefs
about the role of women in society
(McDonagh and Price 1985; McDonald
1987). Irish- and Italian-Americans, whose
family practices at the time tended to be
more traditional and grounded in the belief
that women’s appropriate place was in the
domestic sphere, were less receptive to ar-
guments that women should have the vote
(McDonagh and Price 1985). We hypoth-
esize that where there were high proportions
of Irish and Italian immigrants, suffragists
confronted a significant hurdle to winning
suffrage because legislators and electorates
would be less willing to support suffrage
given the prevalence of conservative gender
relations and attitudes. But where these
groups made up smaller percentages of the
population, more liberal gender relations
prevailed and an opening, or gendered op-
portunity, for winning the vote existed.4

The fourth gendered opportunity concerns
the western frontier states. Many of the
western states were the first to grant full suf-
frage to women (see Table 1). Some histori-
ans argue that the arduous life on the fron-
tier produced unusual gender relations that
compelled women and men to labor side by
side to contend with the harsh and as yet un-
tamed physical environment (Cole 1990;
Turner 1972). As Cole (1990) states, “the
frontier provided women with opportunity:
[T]here they could be fiercely independent,
capable, and durable” and they were “free
from the constraints which bound their east-
ern sisters” (pp. 262-63). Thus, the shared
and more equal circumstance of women and
men in the West fostered a frontier egalitari-
anism. Again, because gender practices
shaped gender ideologies, this increased the
chances that decision-makers would support
suffrage.

A fifth gendered opportunity is both gen-
dered and political. World War I and its im-
mediate aftermath generated an opportunity
for the suffragists—it provided a circum-
stance that increased the number of suffrage
political allies. Political opportunity theo-
rists posit that when a movement can claim
allies in the polity—political elites sympa-
thetic to the movement’s demands and will-
ing to act on the movement’s behalf—the
movement is more likely to succeed
(McAdam 1996; Tarrow 1998). During the
war, the suffragists often set aside their suf-
frage work and contributed instead to the
war effort. They raised funds for overseas
hospitals and helped organize student
nurses. And more generally, women assumed
duties in the economy—in factories and on
farms—previously done by men (Flexner
1975). Toward the end of the war and imme-
diately after, politicians and male voters
were more willing to support women’s suf-
frage, acknowledging not only women’s ef-
forts during the war but the contradiction of
fighting a war for democracy in Europe
when half of the U.S. population was dis-
franchised (Sinclair 1965). To legitimate
their incumbency and political office, many
politicians felt pressure to make their posi-
tion consistent with arguments in favor of
the war.

World War I, then, was a gendered oppor-
tunity in that the war brought suffragists and
women generally, as Flexner (1975) states,
“out of their homes into new spheres of ac-
tion” (p. 298). These new roles altered gen-
dered relations and changed attitudes about
women’s fitness for the public sphere. But
the opportunity was also political in that
politicians understood the harm that an in-
consistent position on democracy could do
to their political well-being. The war thus
represents both a gendered and a political
opportunity, and we hypothesize that during
and just after World War I, states should
have been more likely to enact suffrage.
out that such instabilities compel parties to
search for additional sources of political
support, given that periods of conflict can
threaten the tenure of political actors hold-
ing public office (McAdam 1996; Piven and
Cloward 1977:28-29). Third-party challeng-
ers, such as the Populists, Progressives, Pro-
hibitionists, and Socialists, sought to
broaden their party’s base and, in some in-
stances, supported women’s suffrage, believ-
ing that women voters, in turn, would sup-
port their parties (Berman 1987; Marilley
1996). This political dynamic was evident
among the Populists in Colorado in the
1890s (Marilley 1996:124-25). We hypoth-
esize that where third parties presented sig-
nificant challenges to Democratic or Repub-
lican legislators, a political opportunity for
suffrage, one rooted in political conflict, ex-
isted. But this political opportunity also con-
tained a gendered element: Not only did
third-party challengers conduct an analysis
of the policy positions most likely to get
them elected, they incorporated into this
analysis expectations about the “women’s
vote,” thus bringing gender to bear on their
political calculations.°

The second of these political opportunities
stems from involvement of the liquor and
brewing industries in debates over suffrage.
These industries opposed suffrage, fearing
that female voters would favor prohibition
(Catt and Shuler [1926] 1969). Prohibition,
of course, would deeply hurt profit-making
in these industries. These industries not only
worked to persuade the public to oppose suf-
frage, but heavily lobbied politicians to vote
against it. With passage of state prohibition
laws, however, the liquor and brewing indus-
tries’ opposition subsided. We theorize that
the waning of economic resistance to suf-
frage provided “space” for political deci-
sion-makers to support suffrage. Their politi-
cal calculations were no longer constrained
by a monied interest opposing suffrage. The
suffragists, then, encountered a political op-
portunity for success. But gendered expec-
tations also factored into this political oppor-
tunity: The absence of concern about the
women’s vote (following prohibition) pro-
duced the political “space” in which pol-
icymakers could now favor suffrage.®

These last two political opportunities—
third-party challenges and prohibition—are
different from the gendered and political op-
portunity that World War I offered the suf-
fragists. Third-party challenges and the pas-
sage of prohibition clearly presented politi-
cal opportunities for suffrage success be-
cause the historical record indicates that the
political calculus of decision-makers
changed under these circumstances. But be-
cause there is no evidence of changing be-
liefs about gender roles, third-party chal-
lenges and prohibition did not offer gen-
dered opportunities for suffrage, only politi-
cal opportunities tempered by expectations
about the women’s vote.

The final political opportunity concerns
the degree of access to the polity experi-
enced by the suffragists; this opportunity
does not have a gendered component. Al-
though political opportunity theorists often
use the existence of voting rights as an indi-
cator of the openness of the polity, we must
consider another indicator of political access
because suffragists did not have voting
rights (Amenta et al. 1994; Tarrow 1998).
Even without the vote, suffragists could and
did lobby state legislators to introduce a bill
or resolution in the legislature that, if passed
by the legislature (and in many cases the
electorate as well), would grant voting rights
to women. The procedural ease or difficulty
of winning the passage of such legislation,
then, offers an indicator of political open-
ness. The procedure required to change vot-
ing policy was substantially less complex in
some states in that fewer decision-makers
were involved in the decision-making pro-
cess. For instance, in territorial Wyoming
only one positive legislative vote was
needed to grant women suffrage. In Nevada,
however, a favorable vote on a resolution for
a referendum on a State constitutional
amendment was required in two consecutive
legislatures which met only every other year,
and only then was the measure taken to the
electorate.

Thus, not only is this last political oppor-
tunity not gendered, it offers a different kind
of political opportunity for suffrage success
in that, where it existed, fewer decision-
makers were involved in granting the vote
to women. The other two political opportu-
nities offer an opportunity for political
change by altering the political interests of
decision-makers in ways that make them
more inclined to enact policy change. One
political opportunity is a quantitative shift in
the number of decision-makers; the others
are qualitative shifts in decision-makers’ in-
terests. We hypothesize that states with sim-
pler procedures for changing suffrage law
offered a more accessible policymaking pro-
cess that heightened the chance that suffrage
would be passed.”
ing perspectives offer insights into the ac-
tions of movement activists and the ways in
which those actions influence political deci-
sion-makers’ support for movement agendas.
Contrasting these perspectives with those
emphasizing opportunity structures high-
lights the distinction between the influences
of agency (the movement itself) and struc-
ture (the movement’s context). We consider
both because we believe that both influence
movement outcomes. We hypothesize that
the ability of a movement to effect political
change hinges in part on the same factors that
resource mobilization theorists deem crucial
to movement emergence and development—
organization and key strategies (McCarthy
and Zald 1977; Piven and Cloward 1977)—
because successful movement mobilization
aids a movement’s ability to bring about po-
litical change (Gamson 1975).

Every state except Wyoming had a state
suffrage association, and therefore the sim-
ple presence of such an organization is not
likely to explain whether a state suffrage
movement was successful.§ The extent of or-
ganizing, however, may influence suffrage
political success. The larger the movement,
the more capable it should be of disseminat-
ing its message and thus of convincing leg-
islators and the electorate to vote for suf-
frage. In some states, the suffrage move-
ments organized men’s or college women’s
suffrage leagues in addition to state suffrage
associations, and some states had multiple
state suffrage leagues. We use a measure of
the number of organizations in a state as one
indicator of the extent of organizing. An-
other measure of the extent of organizing is
membership in state suffrage associations,
which varied widely across states (National
American Woman Suffrage Association
[NAWSA] 1893-1917, 1919). Utah and New
Hampshire had some of the largest per capita
memberships, while South Carolina and
Idaho had some of the smallest. We expect
that the larger the per capita membership,
the more successful the movement.

Until recently, little has been written on
the relationship between movement strate-
gies and movement outcomes (Banaszak
1996; Klandermans 1989; Morris 1993).
The history of suffrage movements makes
clear that suffragists relied almost exclu-
sively on what R. Turner (1970) labels “‘per-
suasion strategies,” or “the use of strictly
symbolic manipulation without substantial
rewards or punishments” (p. 149). In most
cases, the suffragists relied on argument to
persuade others that their goals were wor-
thy. Rarely did they rely on disruptive tac-
tics.?

Movement researchers recognize the im-
portance of struggles over meanings and be-
liefs in movements. Snow et al. (1986) refer
to “frame bridging” and Gamson (1988) re-
fers to “cultural resonance” to describe a
process in which movement participants, in
the public rationales for their demands, use
themes and ideas that tap into widely held
beliefs. This resonance with popular beliefs
helps to build movement strength and effec-
tiveness by expanding support for the
movement’s cause (McCammon 1995;
Quadagno 1992).

Suffrage movement histories suggest that
a shift in the suffragists’ ideological ration-
ales for the vote occurred as the suffragists
learned that they could link their arguments
to existing beliefs espousing women’s fit-
ness for roles in the private or domestic
sphere (Baker 1984; Buechler 1986; Mar-
illey 1996). Kraditor (1965) writes that the
suffragists began to rely less on “justice ar-
guments” and instead began to use “expedi-
ency arguments.” The earlier justice argu-
ments used by the suffragists were based in
liberal individualism—suffragists asserted
that women deserved political rights equal
to those of men because, like men, they
were citizens. Such arguments, however, di-
rectly challenged the widely accepted
boundary separating men’s and women’s
spheres in that they attempted to redefine
women’s roles, particularly by defining
women’s participation in politics (or in the
public sphere) as acceptable (Baker 1984).
But over time, suffragists began to use ex-
pediency arguments. What we call a “sepa-
rate-spheres argument” emphasized that
state policies increasingly regulated the do-
mestic sphere and that women could bring
knowledge of the domestic sphere to the po-
litical arena in determining, for instance,
how food, water, domestic violence, child-
ren’s schooling, and even alcohol abuse
should be regulated. Marilley (1996) makes
a similar point when she focuses on the
emergence of “home protection” arguments
among the suffragists. The strategy of es-
pousing separate-spheres arguments, we ex-
pect, should have produced success for the
suffragists because, unlike justice argu-
ments, separate-spheres arguments did not
overtly challenge the traditional roles of
women and men. Such arguments simply
pointed to the advantage of allowing women
to help regulate the private sphere. Thus, po-
litical decision-makers should find these ar-
guments more convincing than those based
on justice.

A second hypothesis about successful
strategies used by the suffragists concerns
two types of tactics used by the suffragists—
insider and outsider strategies (Ornstein and
Elder 1978). Both of these strategies, where
used, should help the suffragists win the vote.
Insider strategies are the political activities
that the suffragists engaged in to influence
political “insiders,” that is, state legislators.
Suffragists lobbied lawmakers to introduce
suffrage bills and resolutions into the legis-
lature or to cast a favorable vote on suffrage,
worked to elect sympathetic legislators, and
routinely appealed to state political parties,
particularly the Democrats and Republicans,
to endorse suffrage. Banaszak (1996:139)
argues that such political strategies were key
for suffragist success. We also argue that they
were important because convincing the leg-
islature to approve suffrage was necessary
for winning the vote in every state.

Outsider strategies, on the other hand, are
tactics aimed at persuading the general pub-
lic of the movement’s goals, and they target
citizens or “outsiders” to the polity. Such
strategies included formal and informal pub-
lic speeches—the latter involving “street
speaking” (soapbox speeches on street cor-
ners) and “autotours” (statewide speaking
tours in which speeches were given from au-
tomobiles)—parades, booths at fairs, store-
front advertising, and pamphleting. While
outsider strategies could influence legisla-
tors, their impact may be most discernible in
states in which a public referendum on the
suffrage question was required and thus in
which public opinion was crucial to the out-
come. This was the case in most states vot-
ing on full suffrage for women.

To close this discussion of suffragist strat-
egies, we consider the impact of fundraising
on political success. Fundraising does not fit
neatly into either the insider or outsider clas-
sification. Successful fundraising could sup-
port both insider and outsider work, for in-
stance, by affording the suffragists trips to
the state capitol or party conventions to
lobby politicians or allowing the suffragists
to purchase space to advertise in newspapers
or literature to distribute. But also, because
increased funding can translate into many
different types of activities—whatever was
deemed critical by suffrage leaders—fund-
raising becomes an important strategy that
should foster movement success. In effect, it
gave the suffragists flexibility because they
could target insiders or outsiders for their
persuasion tactics, whoever was deemed
more important. The histories of suffrage are
replete with instances of fundraising activi-
ties, and the national suffrage organization
(NAWSA) was adamant in its communica-
tions to state suffrage associations that they
engage in a variety of fundraising activities.
We expect that fundraising heightened suf-
fragists’ chances of political success.

Finally, we briefly consider another
“agent” that may have influenced the suc-
cess of the suffragists. Anti-suffrage organi-
zations mobilized in many states to oppose
voting rights for women. Members of this
countermovement argued that suffrage posed
a threat to the “sanctity of the home” and
that involvement in politics would overbur-
den women, cause discord between husband
and wife, and violate the natural and biologi-
cal differences between women and men
(Camhi 1994). Where this resistance to suf-
frage existed, political decision-makers may
have been persuaded by its arguments and
may have voted against giving women the
vote. Thus, where the anti-suffrage organi-
zations were most active should be where
the suffragists were least successful.
We use discrete-time methods in event his-
tory analysis to examine the factors leading
to suffragists’ political success between
1866 and 1919 (when Congress passed the
Nineteenth Amendment). All data are annual
(i.e., calendar year), state-level data. Our de-
pendent variable indicates years in which
states granted full, primary, or presidential
suffrage, the suffragists’ most significant po-
litical successes. The variable is coded as 0
for years prior to the enactment of suffrage
and 1 for the year in which suffrage was
granted. Sources used in the construction of
the dependent variable include: Flexner
(1975), NAWSA (1940), and numerous
state-specific sources. !°

We collected a large portion of our data on
the state suffrage movements and their con-
texts from an extensive search of secondary
materials on each of the state movements
(over 650 sources in all). We also relied on
volumes 3, 4, and 6 of The History of Wo-
man Suffrage (Stanton, Anthony, and Gage ,
vol. 3, [1886] 1985; Anthony and Harper,
vol. 4, [1902] 1985; Harper, vol. 6, [1922]
1985), which were written by movement
participants and contain lengthy descriptions
of the state suffrage movements. In addition,
we examined The Hand Book of the National
American Woman Suffrage Association and
Proceedings of the Annual Convention from
1893 to 1919, the years of its publication for
our period. For six states (Arizona, Dela-
ware, Maine, New Hampshire, New Mexico,
and North Dakota), few secondary materials
exist, and we conducted archival research in
the states to supplement secondary accounts.
For these states, we also examined the
Woman’s Journal from 1870 to 1919, a suf-
frage newspaper published by NAWSA and
its predecessors that routinely reported state
suffrage events. Unless other sources are
noted, the reader can assume that the source
of data for a variable came from this exten-
sive collection process.

We used content analysis to code the in-
formation in each article, book, dissertation,
or archival source that we read. Three cod-
ers collected data, and Krippendorff’s (1980)
alpha ranged from .91 to .95 on selected
sources for which we assessed interrater re-
liability.

The rise of the new woman is indicated
with an index that combines three measures:
(1) the proportion of college and university
students who are female (U.S. Department
of Commerce various years; U.S. Office of
Education various years), (2) the proportion
of lawyers and doctors who are female (U.S.
Bureau of the Census various years; U.S.
Department of Commerce various years),!!
and (3) the number of prominent women’s
organizations active in a state (viz., the Con-
sumers’ League [Nathan 1926], the General
Federation of Women’s Clubs [Skocpol
1992:330], the National Congress of Moth-
ers [Mason 1928:295], the National Wo-
men’s Trade Union League [Dye 1980; Na-
tional Women’s Trade Union League
(NWTUL) various years], and the Woman’s
Christian Temperance Union [WCTU]). We
combined these three measures by summing
their standardized values (a = .64).!?
Legal changes expanding women rights
are indicated by (1) the earlier passage in a
state of municipal, tax, or school suffrage
(coded as a simple count of the number of
forms of partial suffrage in existence; same
sources as full, presidential, and primary)
and (2) the proportion of neighboring states
that enacted full, primary, or presidential
suffrage.'> Each of the legal variables is
lagged one year because we assume that
there will be a brief delay in the effects of a
change in law.

The presence of Irish and Italian immi-
grants is measured by the number of Irish-
and Italian-born immigrants living in a state
per 1,000 in the population (U.S. Bureau of
the Census various years).

We use a dichotomous measure to indicate
the western frontier states (defined on the
basis of census categories). The measure is
coded 1 if the state is in the West and 0 oth-
erwise. The western states are: Arizona,
California, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Mon-
tana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico,
North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South
Dakota, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.

World War I is a dichotomous variable
coded 1 in 1917 and 1918, the years of U.S.
involvement in the war, and 0 otherwise.
The term is lagged one year because of our
expectation that the effects of World War I
on suffrage success will be experienced later
in the war and in its immediate aftermath.

Third-party legislative challenges are in-
dicated by the percentage of seats in the state
legislature held by third parties. This vari-
able is lagged one year. Although the mea-
sure is not a direct indicator of third-party
challenges during elections, it reflects the
outcome of elections. We lag the variable to
approximate the influence of a third-party
challenge during an election in the previous
year.!4

The passage of a state prohibition law is
coded 1 for years following the passage of a
prohibition law and 0 otherwise (Cashman
1981).

The accessibility of the polity measures
the procedural difficulty of winning suf-
frage. It is indicated with a variable coded 1
through 5, with 1 representing the simplest
procedures and 5 the most difficult (a fuller
description of this variable is available on
request from the authors).

We measure the extent of suffrage orga-
nizing in a state by: (1) the number of suf-
frage organizations in existence in a given
year (including state associations, college
women’s suffrage leagues, and men’s suf-
frage leagues), and (2) members (per
100,000 in the population) in the NAWSA-
affiliated state suffrage associations
(NAWSA 1893-1917, 1919). Membership is
estimated from dues paid by state associa-
tions to NAWSA (Banazak 1996:231-33).

The suffragists’ use of separate-spheres
arguments is coded 1 if a separate-spheres
argument was made (in a public speech or
public document) in a given year, and 0 oth-
erwise.!5
Insider strategies used by the suffragists
include lobbying state legislators, writing
them letters, giving speeches in the legisla-
ture, presenting petitions to the legislature,
campaigning for pro-suffrage candidates,
and seeking endorsements from political
parties at state party conventions. Outsider
strategies include holding formal public
meetings (usually with an admission fee and
lecturers), giving informal public speeches
(such as street speaking and autotours), par-
ticipating in parades, setting up booths at
fairs, and distributing leaflets door to door
or on public streets. The insider and outsider
strategy variables are counts of the different
types of strategies used in a given year.

Fundraising activity on the part of the suf-
fragists is indicated by any activity that was
designed to raise money for the movement,
such as selling tickets to suffrage lectures
and plays, soliciting donations, and holding
various types of sales to raise money. If the
suffragists engaged in any such activities in
a given year the measure is coded 1 and 0
otherwise.

The presence of anti-suffrage activity is
coded 0 when no activity occurred, 1 when
out-of-state anti-suffrage groups were ac-
tive, 2 when a few state anti-suffragists were
active, and 3 when a state anti-suffrage or-
ganization existed.

We also include in our models dichoto-
mous variables indicating the various de-
cades in our period of analysis (the decade
of the 1910s is the reference category).
Many states passed suffrage in the last de-
cade of our analysis (see Table 1). Including
the decade measures allows us to determine
whether, after controlling for other factors,
any period effects remain.
only the significant variables from Models 1
and 2.!7 Models 4 through 6 are variations
on Model 3.

The impact of gendered opportunity struc-
tures on movement success is shown in the
first two panels (labeled “Gendered Oppor-
tunity Structures” and “Gendered and Politi-
cal Opportunity Structure”) for Models 1
through 3. Although not all gendered oppor-
tunity variables are significant, there is sub-
stantial evidence that gendered opportunities
for suffrage success existed. The presence of
the new woman—educated, professional,
and politically and civically active women—
significantly enhanced the likelihood that
the suffragists would win the vote. Further-
more, Model 4 shows that all three of the in-
dividual measures used to construct our
new-woman index are significant predictors
of suffrage success. These results suggest
that the presence of such women demon-
strated to the larger population that women
were fit for a significant political role in the
public sphere and convinced legislators and
the electorate to support women’s suffrage.
The presence of the new woman thus played
an important role in helping the suffragists
win the vote.

Moreover, the passage of full, presiden-
tial, and primary suffrage in one or more
neighboring states significantly encouraged
the passage of these types of suffrage in a
particular state. This suggests another
gendered opportunity rooted in the legal cli-
mate. Laws granting women broader citi-
zenship rights helped to redefine appropri-
ate gender roles. The redefinition of legal
gender roles in one state appeared to alter
thinking about gender roles by political ac-
tors in neighboring states, resulting in the
passage of suffrage there as well. Interest-
ingly, the passage of various forms of par-
tial suffrage (school, tax, and municipal
suffrage) in a state did not increase the like-
lihood of suffrage success in that state. This
suggests that for a gendered opportunity of
Table 2. Maximum-Likelihood Coefficients from an Event History Analysis of Factors Influencing
the Passage of Women’s Suffrage in U.S. States, 1866 to 1919

 

 

Independent Variable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3° Model 4° Model 5° Model 6
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Sat, 09 Jul 2016 18:40:21 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
this nature to occur, the enactment of suf-
frage must have been of the same caliber,
that is, full, presidential, or primary. Minor
forms of suffrage apparently did not trans-
form attitudes about women’s political
rights and clearly did not lead to the pas-
sage of major forms of suffrage.

The presence of Irish and Italian immi-
grants had no significant negative effect on
winning the vote for women. Thus, the ab-
sence of these groups did not provide a
gendered opportunity for suffrage success.
Several other studies (e.g., Lerner 1981;
Mahoney 1969) also provide evidence that
immigrants were no less likely to support
suffrage than were native-born residents.
Although we do not have a direct measure
of immigrant attitudes, our results generally
are in line with these findings. Also, the
western frontier did not provide a gendered
opportunity for the passage of suffrage. It
may be that the new-woman measures bet-
ter explain suffrage success in the West:
Educated and professional women were of-
ten more prevalent in the West than in other
regions (U.S. Bureau of the Census various
years; U.S. Department of Commerce vari-
ous years; U.S. Office of Education various
years). !8
States were significantly more likely to
enact suffrage toward the end of or just after
World War I (see panel labeled “Gendered
and Political Opportunity Structure’). Al-
though this effect indicates a political oppor-
tunity for suffrage, it also adds to the evi-
dence that gendered opportunities were in-
strumental in bringing about women’s suf-
frage.

The fact that the new-woman variable and
the measures of suffrage in neighboring
states and World War I are the significant
gendered opportunity indicators suggests
that gendered opportunities for suffrage
stemmed particularly from women’s grow-
ing presence in the public sphere. These
measures, unlike most of the other gendered
opportunity measures (e.g.,, the measures of
immigrants and western states) are clear in-
dicators of women’s movement into the pub-
lic sphere.

Among the measures of political opportu-
nity structures, the passage of state prohibi-
tion laws and the accessibility of the policy-
making process significantly influenced
whether the suffragists won citizenship
rights (third panel, Models 1 through 3).
These results, combined with those for the
World War I variable, indicate that political
opportunities also helped suffragists gain the
vote. Increased political support for the suf-
fragists during the war, reduced liquor indus-
try opposition after the passage of state pro-
hibition laws, and simpler enfranchisement
procedures all worked favorably for the suf-
fragists.

Third-party representation in the legisla-
ture did not provide a significant political
opportunity for the enactment of suffrage.
Perhaps during periods of third-party con-
flict, some political actors supported suf-
frage, hoping to appeal to future women vot-
ers, while others opposed suffrage, fearing
harm to (re-)election chances.

The results for the resource mobilization
and ideological framing measures suggest
that larger suffrage movements were no
more successful in winning the vote than
smaller movements (fourth panel, Models 1
through 3). Neither measure of the extent of
organization—the number of suffrage orga-
nizations (Model 1) or the size of member-
ship (Model 2)—is significant. This finding
is not surprising for two reasons: Gamson
(1975:51) found a similar pattern in his early
work, and some suffragists recognized the
importance of small, quiet movements. For
instance, Abigail Scott Duniway, an activist
in the northwest, saw the merit of what she
called the “still hunt”—dquiet persuasion on
many fronts so as not to arouse the opposi-
tion (Moynihan 1983; also see Trout 1920).
These results, along with Gamson’s, suggest
that movement researchers need to rethink
the role of large movements in winning po-
litical gains.

Also, the use of insider or outsider strate-
gies does not significantly predict suffrage
success.!9 The nonsignificant results for in-
sider strategies run counter to Banaszak’s
(1996) claim that the lobbying efforts of the
suffragists were key to their success. Model
5 includes a term indicating the use of out-
sider strategies in states where a public ref-
erendum was required to amend the state
constitution.2° Where the procedure for
changing voting rights entails a vote by the
electorate, outsider strategies—designed to
sway public opinion—may be more effective
in bringing about suffrage success. But the
results show that the use of such strategies
in referendum states did not significantly in-
crease the suffragists’ likelihood of winning
voting rights.

Two strategies, however, when employed
by the suffragists, did help them achieve
their goals—fundraising and the use of sepa-
rate-spheres arguments (fourth panel, Mod-
els 1 through 3). The significant result for
fundraising suggests that this activity was
key because it afforded the suffragists many
ways of influencing the actions of political
decision-makers. The significant result for
the separate-spheres measure suggests that
when suffragists framed rationales for suf-
frage along the lines that women would use
the vote to protect their children and their
homes, they were effective because such ar-
guments were consistent with established
gender beliefs.

Two of the significant measures in these
models have missing data: women’s repre-
sentation among college students and
among professionals. Both measures have
missing data at the beginning of our time
period.*! Because missing data in event his-
tory analysis can introduce censoring,
which can then produce sample selection
bias and thus biased estimates (Yamaguchi
1991:3-9), Model 6 excludes these two
variables from the analysis to ascertain
whether censoring affects our findings.
However, the results are substantively un-
changed once the earlier years are included
in the analysis.”

Finally, the results for the decade mea-
sures (the fifth panel of Table 2) suggest that
our substantive variables explain period dif-
ferences in the pace of suffrage reform over
time. None of the decade measures is signifi-
cant, indicating that once other factors have
been taken into account, the 1910s are no
different from the other decades. The flurry
of suffrage successes in the 1910s probably
results from a combination of many of the
factors shown here to be significant—the
emergence of the new woman, the increas-
ing number of states having already passed
suffrage, World War I, state prohibition laws,
and greater fundraising and separate-spheres
framing on the part of the suffragists. (Our
indicators show that both of these last mea-
sures were increasing over time.)
Susan B. Anthony declared, in her last pub-
lic address in Washington, D.C. in 1906, that
“failure is impossible” (Harper 1908:1409).
She was right: In 1920, with ratification of
the Nineteenth Amendment, women won the
right to vote in all elections across the
United States. But for five decades, suffrag-
ists in the state movements had battled for
the vote with varying degrees of success.
Our goal has been to uncover the circum-
stances that produced political success for
some of the state movements. The histories
of the state suffrage movements provide a
rare opportunity to compare, systematically,
multiple movements working toward the
same general goal. Our findings reveal that
several circumstances were necessary for
suffrage success.

Not only did resource mobilization, cul-
tural framing, and political opportunity
structures help to produce movement suc-
cess, but gendered opportunity structures
were important as well. In the case of the
suffragists, changing gender relations fos-
tered movement success by altering beliefs
among political decision-makers about the
proper role of women in society. These
changed beliefs, we argue, made legislators
and the electorate more willing to vote for
suffrage. Some of the political opportunities
that benefited the suffragists also had gen-
dered elements. In fact, the political oppor-
tunity provided by World War I was so inter-
twined with a gendered opportunity that we
could not analyze them separately. Clearly,
gender theorists are correct when they state
that gender “is integral to many societal pro-
cesses” (Acker 1992:565).

Our most important theoretical conclusion
is that social movement scholars must rec-
ognize that other types of opportunity struc-
tures, beyond those stemming from formal
political dynamics and the formal political
interests that they generate, can also influ-
ence movement success. Our findings that
gendered opportunities fostered suffrage
success and that political opportunities were
gendered in various ways demonstrate that
more than simply formal politics matter for
movement success.

Opportunity structures can take a variety
of forms. In the context of suffrage, we
found evidence of political and gendered op-
portunities and even a combined gendered
and political opportunity. Researchers study-
ing other movements may find different
types of opportunity structures. Among
movements working to redefine broad cul-
tural definitions of women’s and men’s roles
in society, gendered opportunities—opportu-
nities emerging from changing gender rela-
tions and altered views about gender—are
likely to be crucial to movement success.
However, a social movement struggling to
redefine the position of a racial group in so-
ciety, such as the civil rights movement’s at-
tempt to achieve political inclusion for Afri-
can Americans, is likely to find opportunity
structures in changing race relations that al-
ter people’s thinking about the appropriate
relations between races. Similarly, changing
economic relations between employers and
workers may provide an opportunity struc-
ture for working-class political success.

Thus, rather than using the narrower “‘po-
litical opportunity structure” to refer to the
contextual factors that influence movement
success, researchers would do well to use the
broader and simpler term, “opportunity
structure.” Then, to determine the precise
nature of the opportunities—be they gen-
dered, racial, ethnic, class or combinations
of these—researchers must carefully exam-
ine the evidence in the particular context for
their movement(s) and scrutinize the dynam-
ics shaping the willingness of key political
decision-makers to support policy change.
We draw once again on McAdam (1982:41,
italics in original), but with an important re-
vision: “[A]ny event or broad social process
that serves to undermine the calculations and
assumptions” of key political decision-mak-
ers presents the possibility of an opportunity
structure for movement success.

Our findings about the role of gendered
opportunities in producing suffrage success,
along with the way in which the suffragists
framed their rationales for expanded politi-
cal rights, reveal a paradox in the circum-
stances leading to suffrage success. Compet-
ing logics appear to have been at work. On
the one hand, the suffragists were more suc-
cessful when they used an ideological ratio-
nale that resonated with widely accepted but
highly traditional beliefs about women’s ap-
propriate roles in society. The suffragists’
use of separate-spheres arguments, which
held that women should be allowed to vote
because they could protect and help regulate
the domestic sphere, significantly aided the
suffragists in their bid for the vote.

On the other hand, the presence of the new
woman (an independent, civically active,
and educated woman), along with expanded
political rights in neighboring states and
women’s contributions during the war,
helped the suffragists win voting rights.
These circumstances successfully chipped
away at the traditional belief that women’s
only appropriate place in society was in the
domestic sphere. Here, more egalitarian gen-
der relations created an opportunity for suf-
frage success, unlike the separate-spheres
arguments that tapped into support for tradi-
tional gender relations. That both dynamics,
one rooted in traditional beliefs about gen-
der roles and the other rooted in the emer-
gence of more egalitarian relations, could be
operative during these years is not surpris-
ing when one considers the fundamental
changes that women’s lives were undergoing
(Flexner 1975). In such a period of transi-
tion, competing logics were simultaneously
at work.

Finally, our findings show that not only
did opportunity structures help the suffrag-
ists win the vote, but the actions of the suf-
fragists themselves were important. The suf-
fragists were clearly agents in the redefini-
tion of democracy that occurred during these
years. They were active in all states, and the
degree to which they mobilized financial re-
sources and the manner in which they
framed rationales for the vote significantly
influenced whether they were successful in
winning the vote. But the outcome was not
entirely within their control. Gendered and
political dynamics transpiring in the broader
context also mattered. In the end, then, we
argue, as have others, that both agency and
structure determine a movement’s political
success.
Acker, Joan. 1992. “Gendered Institutions: From
Sex Roles to Gendered Institutions.” Contem-
porary Sociology 21:565-69.

Alexander, Thomas G. 1970. “An Experiment in
Progressive Legislation: The Granting of Wo-
man Suffrage in Utah in 1870.” Utah Histori-
cal Quarterly 38:20-30.

Alford, Robert R. and Roger Friedland. 1985.
Powers of Theory: Capitalism, the State, and
Democracy. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Allison, Paul D. 1984. Event History Analysis:
Regression Longitudinal Event Data. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.

Amenta, Edwin, Bruce G. Carruthers, and
Yvonne Zylan. 1992. “A Hero for the Aged?
The Townsend Movement, the Political Me-
diation Model, and U.S. Old-Age Policy,
1934-1950.” American Journal of Sociology
98:308-39.

Amenta, Edwin, Kathleen Dunleavy, and Mary
Bernstein. 1994. “Stolen Thunder? Huey
Long’s ‘Share Our Wealth,’ Political Media-
tion, and the Second New Deal.” American So-
ciological Review 59:678-702.

Amenta, Edwin and Jane D. Poulsen. 1996. “So-
cial Politics in Context: The Institutional Poli-
tics Theory and Social Spending at the End of
the New Deal.” Social Forces 75:33-61.

Anthony, Susan B. and Ida Husted Harper.
[1902] 1985. The History of Woman Suffrage.
Vol. 4. Reprint, Salem, NH: Ayer.

Baker, Paula. 1984. “The Domestication of Poli-
tics: Women and American Political Society,
1780-1920.” American Historical Review 89:
620-47.

Banaszak, Lee Ann. 1996. Why Movements Suc-
ceed or Fail: Opportunity, Culture, and the
Struggle for Woman Suffrage. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

. 1998. “Use of the Initiative Process by
Woman Suffrage Movements.” Pp. 99-114 in
Social Movements and American Political In-
stitutions, edited by A. N. Costain and A. S.
McFarland. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Little-
field.

Beeton, Beverly. 1986. Women Vote in the West:
The Woman Suffrage Movement, 1869-1896.
New York: Garland.

Berman, David R. 1987. “Male Support for
Woman Suffrage: An Analysis of Voting Pat-
terns in the Mountain West.” Social Science
History 11:281-94.

Block, Fred. 1977. “The Ruling Class Does Not
Rule: Notes on the Marxist Theory of the
State.” Socialist Revolution 7:6-28.

Brockett, Charles D. 1991. “The Structure of Po-
litical Opportunities and Peasant Mobilization
in Central America.” Comparative Politics
23:253-74.

Buechler, Steven M. 1986. The Transformation
of the Woman Suffrage Movement: The Case
of Illinois, 1850-1920. New Brunswick: Rut-
gers University Press.

Buenker, John D. 1971. “The Urban Political
Machine and Woman Suffrage: A Study in Po-
litical Adaptability.” The Historian 33:264-79.

Camhi, Jane Jerome. 1994. Women against Wo-
men: American Anti-Suffragism, 1880-1920.
Brooklyn, NY: Carlson.

Caruso, Virginia Ann Paganelli. 1986. “A His-
tory of Woman Suffrage in Michigan.” Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of English: American
Studies, Michigan State University, Lansing,
MI.

Cashman, Sean Dennis. 1981. Prohibition: The
Lie of the Land. New York: Free Press.

Catt, Carrie Chapman and Nettie Rogers Shuler.
[1926] 1969. Woman Suffrage and Politics:
The Inner Story of the Suffrage Movement. Re-
print, Seattle, WA: University of Washington
Press.

Cole, Judith K. 1990. “A Wide Field for Useful-
ness: Women’s Civil Status and the Evolution
of Women’s Suffrage on the Montana Frontier,
1864-1914.” American Journal of Legal His-
tory 34:262-94.

Connell, R. W. 1987. Gender and Power: Soci-
ety, the Person and Sexual Politics. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.

. 1990. “The State, Gender, and Sexual
Politics: Theory and Appraisal.” Theory and
Society 19:507-44.

Costain, Anne N. 1992. Inviting Women’s Rebel-
lion: A Political Process Interpretation of the
Women’s Movement. Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Deane, Glenn, E. M. Beck, and Stewart E. Tol-
nay. 1998. “Incorporating Space into Social
Histories: How Spatial Processes Operate and
How We Observe Them.” Jnternational Re-
view of Social History 43:57-80.

Degler, Carl N. 1980. At Odds: Women and the
Family in America from the Revolution to the
Present. New York: Oxford University Press.

Domhoff, G. William. 1998. Who Rules Amer-
ica? Power and Politics in the Year 2000.
Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.

Doreian, Patrick. 1981. “Estimating Linear Mod-
els with Spatially Distributed Data.” Sociologi-
cal Methodology 11:359-88.

DuBois, Ellen. 1975. “The Radicalism of the
Woman Suffrage Movement: Notes Toward
the Reconstruction of Nineteenth-Century
Feminism.” Feminist Studies 3:63-71.

Dye, Nancy Schrom. 1980. As Equals and As Sis-
ters: Feminism, the Labor Movement, and the
Women’s Trade Union League of New York.
Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press.

Edwards, Rebecca. 1997. Angels in the Machin-
ery: Gender in American Party Politics from
the Civil War to the Progressive Era. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Evans, Peter B., Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and
Theda Skocpol. 1985. Bringing the State Back
In. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Fleming, Sidney Howell. 1990. “Solving the Jig-
saw Puzzle: One Suffrage Story at a Time.”
Annals of Wyoming 62:23-74.

Flexner, Eleanor. 1975. Century of Struggle: The
Woman’s Rights Movement in the United
States. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.

Fus, Dennis A. 1972. “Persuasion on the Plains:
The Woman Suffrage Movement in Nebraska.”
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Speech, In-
diana University, Bloomington, IN.

Gamson, William A. 1975. The Strategy of So-
cial Protest. Homewood, IL: Dorsey.

. 1988. “Political Discourse and Collec-
tive Action.” International Social Movement
Research 1:219-44.

Gamson, William A. and David S. Meyer. 1996.
“Framing Political Opportunity.” Pp. 275-90
in Comparative Perspectives on Social Move-
ments: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing
Structures, and Cultural Framings, edited by
D. McAdam, J. D. McCarthy, and M. N. Zald.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Gelb, Joyce. 1987. “Social Movement ‘Success’:
A Comparative Analysis of Feminism in the
United States and the United Kingdom.” Pp.
267-89 in The Women’s Movements in the
United States and Western Europe, edited by
M. F. Katzenstein and C. M. Mueller. Phila-
delphia, PA: Temple University Press.

Giele, Janet Zollinger. 1995. Two Paths to Wo-
men’s Equality: Temperance, Suffrage, and the
Origins of Modern Feminism. New York:
Twayne.

Giugni, Marco G. 1998. “Was It Worth the Ef-
fort? The Outcomes and Consequences of So-
cial Movements.” Annual Review of Sociology
98:371-93.

Giugni, Marco G., Doug McAdam, and Charles
Tilly, eds. 1998. From Contention to Democ-
racy. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

Goodwin, Jeff and James M. Jasper. 1999.
“Caught in a Winding, Snarling Vine: The
Structural Bias of Political Process Theory.”
Sociological Forum 14:27-54.

Hackett, David G. 1995. “Gender and Religion
in American Culture, 1870-1930.” Religion
and American Culture: A Journal of Interpre-
tation 5:127-5S7.

Harper, Ida Husted. 1908. The Life and Work of
Susan B. Anthony. Vol. 3. Indianapolis, IN:
Hollenbeck.

. [1922] 1985. The History of Woman Suf-
frage. Vol. 6. Reprint, Salem, NH: Ayer.

Ivie, Mattie L. 1971. “Woman Suffrage in Okla-
homa, 1890-1918.” Master’s thesis, Oklahoma
State University, Stillwater, OK.

Jenkins, J. Craig and Bert Klandermans, eds.
1995. The Politics of Social Protest: Compara-
tive Perspectives on States and Social Move-
ments. Minneapolis, MN: University of Min-
nesota Press.

Jensen, Billie Barnes. 1973. “Colorado Woman
Suffrage Campaigns of the 1870s.” Journal of
the West 12:254-71.

Kitschelt, Herbert P. 1986. “Political Opportu-
nity Structures and Political Protest: Anti-
Nuclear Movements in Four Democracies.”
British Journal of Political Science 16:57-85.

Klandermans, Bert. 1989. “Introduction: Organi-
zational Effectiveness.” International Social
Movement Research 2:383-94.

Koopmans, Ruud. 1999. “Political. Opportunity.
Structure. Some Splitting to Balance the
Lumping.” Sociological Forum 14:93-105.

Kraditor, Aileen S. 1965. The Ideas of the Wo-
man Suffrage Movement, 1890-1920. New
York: Columbia University Press.

Kriesi, Hanspeter. 1995. “The Political Opportu-
nity Structure of New Social Movements: Its
Impact on Their Mobilization.” Pp. 167-98 in
The Politics of Social Protest: Comparative
Perspectives on States and Social Movements,
edited by J. C. Jenkins and B. Klandermans.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.

Krippendorff, Klaus. 1980. Content Analysis: An
Introduction to Its Methodology. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.

Larson, T. A. 1965. “Woman Suffrage in Wyo-
ming.” Pacific Northwest Quarterly 56:57-66.

. 197 1a. “Emancipating the West’s Dolls,

Vassals, and Hopeless Drudges: The Origins of

Women Suffrage in the West.” Pp. 1-16 in Es-

says in Western History in Honor of Professor

T. A. Larson, vol. 37, edited by R. Daniels.

Laramie, WY: University of Wyoming Publi-

cations

. 1971b. “Woman Suffrage in Western
America.” Utah Historical Quarterly 38:7-19.

Lerner, Elinor. 1981. “Immigrant and Working
Class Involvement in the New York City Wo-
man Suffrage Movement, 1905-1917: A Study
in Progressive Era Politics.” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Department of Sociology, University of
California, Berkeley, CA.

Lorber, Judith. 1992. “Gender.” Pp. 748-54 in
Encyclopedia of Sociology, vol. 2, edited by E.
F. Borgatta and M. L. Borgatta. New York:
Macmillan.

. 1994. Paradoxes of Gender. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.

MacKinnon, Catharine. 1989. Toward a Feminist
Theory of the State. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Mahoney, Joseph F. 1969. “Woman Suffrage and
the Urban Masses.” New Jersey History 87:
151-72.

Marilley, Suzanne M. 1996. Woman Suffrage and
the Origins of Liberal Feminism in the United
States, 1820-1920. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Marshall, Susan E. 1998. “The Gender Gap in
Voting Behavior: Evidence from a Referen-
dum on Woman Suffrage.” Research in Politi-
cal Sociology 8:189-207.

Marshall, T. H. 1950. Citizenship and Social
Class. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Mason, Martha Sprague. 1928. Parents and
Teachers: A Survey of Organized Cooperation
of Home, School, and Community. Boston,
MA: Ginn and Company.

Matthews, Glenna. 1992. The Rise of Public
Woman: Woman’s Power and Woman’s Place
in the United States, 1630-1970. New York:
Oxford University Press.

McAdam, Doug. 1982. Political Process and the
Development of Black Insurgency, 1930-1970.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

. 1996. “Conceptual Origins, Current
Problems, Future Directions.” Pp. 23-40 in
Comparative Perspectives on Social Move-
ments: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing
Structures, and Cultural Framings, edited by
D. McAdam, J. D. McCarthy, and M. N. Zald.
1977. New York: Cambridge University Press.

McAdam, Doug, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer
N. Zald. 1988. “Social Movements.” Pp. 695—
737 in The Handbook of Sociology, edited by
N. J. Smelser. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

McCammon, Holly J. 1995. “The Politics of Pro-
tection: State Minimum Wage and Maximum
Hours Laws for Women in the United States,
1870-1930.” Sociological Quarterly 36:217-
49.

McCammon, Holly J. and Karen E. Campbell.
2001. “Winning the Vote in the West: The Po-
litical Successes of the Women’s Suffrage
Movement, 1866-1919.” Gender and Society
15:56-83.

McCarthy, John and Mayer Zald. 1977. “Re-
source Mobilization and Social Movements: A
Partial Theory.” American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 48:1212-41.

McDonagh, Eileen L. and H. Douglas Price.
1985. “Woman Suffrage in the Progressive
Era: Patterns of Opposition and Support in
Referenda Voting, 1910-1918.” American Po-
litical Science Review 79:415-35.

McDonald, David K. 1987. “Organizing Wom-
anhood: Women’s Culture and the Politics of
Woman Suffrage in New York State, 1865—
1917.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of His-
tory, State University of New York, Stony
Brook, NY.

Morgan, David. 1972. Suffragists and Demo-
crats: The Politics of Woman Suffrage in
America. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State
University Press.

Morris, Aldon D. 1993. “Birmingham Confron-
tation Reconsidered: An Analysis of the Dy-
namics and Tactics of Mobilization.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 58:621-36.

Moynihan, Ruth Barnes. 1983. Rebel for Rights:
Abigail Scott Duniway. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.

Nathan, Maud. 1926. The Story of an Epoch-
Making Movement. Garden City, NJ: Double-
day, Page, and Co.

National American Woman Suffrage Association
(NAWSA). 1893-1917, 1919. The Hand Book
of the National American Woman Suffrage As-
sociation and Proceedings of the Annual Con-
vention. New York: National American Wo-
man Suffrage Association.

, 1940. Victory: How Women Won It. New
York: H. W. Wilson.

National Women’s Trade Union League. 1911,
1915, 1917, 1919, 1922. Proceedings of the
Biennial Convention of the National Women’s
Trade Union League of America. Chicago, IL:
William C. Faehse.

Ornstein, Norman J. and Shirley Elder. 1978. In-
terest Groups, Lobbying and Policymaking.
Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly
Press.

Piven, Frances Fox and Richard A. Cloward.
1977. Poor People’s Movements: Why They
Succeed, How They Fail. New York: Vintage.

Quadagno, Jill. 1992. “Social Movements and
State Transformation: Labor Unions and Ra-
cial Conflict in the War on Poverty.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 57:616-34.

. 1994. The Color of Welfare: How Rac-
ism Undermined the War on Poverty. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Rucht, Dieter. 1996. “The Impact of National
Contexts on Social Movement Structures: A
Cross-Movement and Cross-National Com-
parison.” Pp. 185-204 in Comparative Per-
spectives on Social Movements: Political Op-
portunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cul-
tural Framings, edited by D. McAdam, J. D.
McCarthy, and M. N. Zald. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Rueschemeyer, Dietrich and Peter B. Evans.
1985. Pp. 44-77 in Bringing the State Back In,
edited by P. B. Evans, D. Rueschemeyer, and
T. Skocpol. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Scott, Joan W. 1986. “Gender: A Useful Cat-
egory of Historical Analysis.” American His-
torical Review 91:1053-75.

Sinclair, Andrew. 1965. The Better Half: The
Emancipation of the American Woman. New
York: Harper and Row.

Skocpol, Theda. 1980. “Political Response to
Capitalist Crisis: Neo-Marxist Theories of the
State and the Case of the New Deal.” Politics
and Society 10:155-201.

. 1992. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers:
The Political Origins of Social Policy in the
United States. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.

Smith, Ann Warren. 1975. “Anne Martin and a
History of Woman Suffrage in Nevada, 1869-
1914,” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of His-
tory, University of Nevada, Reno, NV.

Snow, David A., E. Burke Rochford Jr., Steven
K. Worden, and Robert D. Benford. 1986.
“Frame Alignment Processes, Micromobili-
zation, and Movement Participation.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 51:464-81.
Staggenborg, Suzanne. 1995. “Can Feminist Or-
ganizations Be Effective?” Pp. 339-55 in
Feminist Organizations: Harvest of the New
Women’s Movement, edited by M. M. Ferree
and P. Y. Martin. Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press.

Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, Susan B. Anthony, and
Matilda Joslyn Gage, eds. [1886] 1985. His-
tory of Woman Suffrage. Vol. 3. Reprint, Sa-
lem, NH: Ayer.

Tarrow, Sidney. 1998. Power in Movement: So-
cial Movements and Contenious Politics. 2d
ed. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Taylor, Verta. 1999. “Gender and Social Move-
ments: Gender Processes in Women’s Self-
Help Movement.” Gender and Society 13:8-
33.

Trout, Grace Wilbur. 1920. “Side Lights on Illi-
nois Suffrage History.” Journal of the Illinois
Historical Society 13:145-79.

Turner, Frederick Jackson. 1972. “The Signifi-
cance of the Frontier in American History.”
Pp. 1-18 in The Turner Thesis: Concerning
the Role of the Frontier in American History,
edited by G. R. Taylor. Lexington, MA:
Heath.

Turner, Ralph H. 1970. “Determinants of Social
Movement Strategies.” Pp. 145-64 in Human
Nature and Collective Behavior: Papers in
Honor of Herbert Blumer, edited by T. Shib-
utani. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

U. S. Bureau of the Census. 1872, 1883, 1897,
1902, 1914, 1923. Census of the United States.
Population. Washington, DC: Government
Printing Office.

U. S. Department of Commerce. 1919, 1920,
1922, 1923. Statistical Abstract of the United
States. Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office.

U. S. Office of Education. 1872-1900, 1902-
1914, 1916, 1917. Annual Report of the Com-
missioner of Education. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.

Welter, Barbara. 1966. “The Cult of True Wom-
anhood: 1820-1860.” American Quarterly
18:151-74.

White, Jean Bickmore. 1974. ““Woman’s Place Is
in the Constitution: The Struggle for Equal
Rights in Utah in 1895.” Utah Historical
Quarterly 42:344-69.

Yamaguchi, Kazuo. 1991. Event History Analy-
sis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
