@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2090510?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
HO observes whom, when, where, and

\V) how must be more or less established
and therefore roughly predictable if

a social structure is to operate with a certain
amount of stability. Regulation of observa-
bility, of the “extent to which the norms and
role performances within a group are readily
open to observation by others (status-inferi-
ors, peers, and status-superiors),”+ is a

*This paper attempts a beginning formulation
of a series of hypotheses, some of which will be
further refined in field research now conducted
under a grant by the National Institute of Mental
Health, grant No. M-3534,

I wish to acknowledge my debt to Robert K.
Merton whose extended critical comments on earlier
drafts have helped me immensely in formulating the
final version.

1 Robert K. Merton, Social Theory and Social
Structure, Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press, 1957, p.
structural requirement. The limitations and
restrictions concerning the presence of others
makes it possible for status-occupants to pre-
sent themselves in different ways with differ-
ent persons. Since the form as well as the
content of communication defines the nature
of the relationship, one communicates some
things to some people at some time, other
things to other people at other times, neither
merely to follow convention, nor only to pre-
serve autonomy and the right to privacy.
What Radcliffe-Brown has called “avoidance
rituals” * is part of sets of prescriptions for

 

319. The concept of observability has been dealt
with by Merton in various contexts. See esp. ibid.,
pp. 247, 319-22, 336-87, 374-77.

2A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, Structure and Function
in Primative Society, London: Cohen and West,
Ltd., 1952, pp. 108 ff. and 135 ff.
conduct that serve to maintain and organize
a social system.

Observability and its function can be
studied to advantage in bureaucartic organ-
izations, since access to observation is there
formalized through the offices that persons
occupy. The term office denotes both the
position a person has in social space, and the
physical space, the bureau, where he exer-
cises his skills for meeting the demands en-
tailed in his position. For so intimately linked
are the man and his territory that the latter
helps to give him identity. The place of work
within the organization delimits and defines
the meaning of a man’s activities, so that
being separated from his role-partners in
physical space is as much symbolic of his
identity as it is functional for the ongoing
concern. Whether in industrial plants or in
the army, in universities, hospitals, or among
businessmen, offices insulate and connect the
actors through an apparatus both physical
and social of telephones, paper records and
intermediary persons such as secretaries, as-
sistants, etc., thus affecting the patterned
amounts and kinds of observability.

Insulation from observability and access to
it are just as important structural elements
in a bureaucracy as the distribution and de-
limitation of authority.? The purpose of this
paper is to specify some of the implications
of differential observability in connection
with authority structure, and in relation to
different types of conformity. By combining
some of Merton’s propositions derived from
his theory of conformity with some pro-
positions from his theory of reference group
behavior, types of mechanisms of social con-
trol can be systematically identified.
internalize the values of his society and sub-
group, to make them “his own,” so that he
conforms not only because he must, but also
(and often primarily) because his inner dis-
position favors such behavior.

A person belongs to various subgroups,
often with differing values and beliefs. If he
were to try to make the values of all these
groups continually “his own,” he would soon
suffer from personality disorganization. In
fact, his conforming behavior is the result of
internalized values in some instances, but
not in others. Here Merton’s distinction be-
tween different kinds of conformity clarifies
the situation. He speaks of attitudinal con-
formity when individuals grant legitimacy to
designated institutional values and norms;
behavioral conformity when, whatever their
attitudinal position, they act in accord with
values and norms; and doctrinal conformity,
when they state institutionalized beliefs to
others.*

These different forms of adaptation are
available to different persons, and to the
same person on different occasions in his
various roles. The choice in range and inten-
sity of attitudinal commitment provides a
social mechanism for the articulation of roles,
in addition to those identified by Merton,®
which reduce the difficulties of differing and
opposed expectations facing the status-
occupant.

The point here is not mainly that role
partners who are sufficiently removed spati-
ally can be placated through written commu-
nication in doctrinal fashion, or that a per-
son can “put on an act” for the benefit of the
rare visitor. Rather, selection between these
types of conformity is often socially pre-
scribed. Some status-holders may expect that
a person show mainly attitudinal conformity
(“at’s not that I mind the way he acts, it’s
his attitude”), others congratulate him for
his doctrinal conformity (“he’s sure good to
have around when it comes to whipping up
enthusiasm’) ; still others demand behavioral
conformity only (“why doesn’t he just do
his job; who cares about what he thinks?”).
It is important to realize that such varied

“Conformity, Deviation and Opportunity Struc-
tures,” American Sociological Review, 24 (April
1959), pp. 177-188.

5 Social Theory and Social Structure, op. cit., pp.
371 ff.
expectations are by no means just coinci-
dences, but flow from the structural positions
that particular role-partners occupy.

These differences in types of expected con-
formity make it possible for the status-occu-
pant to maintain his reserve and to remain
reasonably stable in the face of contradictory
expectations.® They give him some degree of
freedom in dealing with others. The ability
to defer expression of attitudes and to adapt
behavior is expected, as when someone is
positively valued for “being able to get along
with people.” To be sure, if he exaggerates
this ability, he is accused of being “just an
operator.” In other words, the differentiated
behavior of the status-occupant in relation to
the members of the role-set is itself an ex-
pectation, conformity to which invites ap-
proval, overconformity to which, here as
elsewhere, invites negative sanction.

To be sure, consistent lack of attitudinal
conformity would be a serious source of
anomie, especially since, if combined with
behavioral or doctrinal conformity, it would
not be easily detectable and hence control-
lable. Yet, in many situations behavioral
conformity is defined as sufficient. For ex-
ample, if a prejudiced white nurse is sub-
ordinate to a Negro head nurse, behavioral
conformity to the head nurse’s order is
enough to maintain this part of the authority
system. Similarly, if the houseowners of a

6 There are some data available to support the
hypothesis that mechanisms for the articulation of
roles are more readily available in bureaucratic
organizations than in primary groups. John A.
Clausen, reporting on research conducted by the
Laboratory of Socio-environmental Studies at the
National Institute of Mental Health, writes that
9 out of the 10 male patients in the sample held
their jobs and performed more or less adequately
in them up to a month or less before they were
hospitalized. On the other hand, 9 out of the 14
female patients were performing almost none of
their household tasks, or performed with sub-
stantial decrease in effectiveness. There was also
marked decrease in the performance of most male
patients as far as household tasks were concerned.
This difference between “home” and “job” in the
ability to carry out role performance may well be
related to the fact that in primary groups, such
as the family, there is a much more frequent
expectation of attitudinal commitment, whereas
in secondary groups the freedom from total at-
titudinal commitment lightens the burden on the
role-incumbent. (“The Marital Relationship Ante-
cedent to Hospitalization of a Spouse for Mental
Illness,” mimeo., p. 7.)
7 Cf. Merton’s distinction between prejudice and
discrimination which leads him to a distinction
between various types. For example, he speaks of
“the unprejudiced discriminator” a “man of
expediency who, despite his own freedom from
prejudice, supports discriminatory practices when
it is the easier or more profitable course,” and of
the “prejudiced non-discriminator” who is the
“reluctant conformist to the creed.” “Discrimina-
tion and the American Creed,” in Discrimination
and National Welfare, R. M. Maclver, editor, New
York and London: Harper Bros., 1949, pp. 99-126.

8Qn the functions of doctrinal conformity in
bureaucratic organizations for the maintenance of
an individual’s sense of autonomy, see Melville
Dalton, Men Who Manage, New York: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1959, esp. pp. 268 ff.

Lionel Kochan, Acton on History, London:
André Deutsch, 1954, p. 26.

10 The institutionalization of doctrinal conform-
ity in the Communist Party has often been a
source of amusement for groups sharing different
values. For example, the story has it that right
after the disposition of Mussolini, Togliatti paid
a visit to Silone, a one-time member of the Com-
munist Party, then residing in Switzerland, asking
him to “make a sacrifice for the Party.” He handed
him a statement with the request to affix his
signature to it. Upon reading it, the baffled Silone
looked up and said: “But I don’t believe a word
of it.” “If you did,” answered Togliatti, “it would
not be a sacrifice.”
Some of the above illustrations are ex-
amples of doctrinal conformity. They are
oral or written statements of institutionalized
values and beliefs addressed to others. They
are predicated, therefore, upon observability,
be it by the public or in direct interaction."

Much of what is called ceremonial activity
requires doctrinal conformity only, although
it can be coupled with other types. The rene-
gade’s public confession, the speech of a
president at a yearly banquet of a club, or
at commencement exercise, are occasions
through which beliefs are stated to others
and values are verbally emphasized.

This type of conformity is not limited to
verbal behavior. Saluting the flag or standing
up at the tune of the national anthem are ac-
tivities of the same order. They imply a type
of ritual conformity that need not be backed
up by beliefs. If Khrushchev, during his re-
cent visit to this country, stood up when the
national anthem was played, this was not
mistaken by anybody as a manifestation of
American patriotism, nor was he accused of
opportunism. The meaning of his joining
with others in this concerted act was the ac-
knowledgment of their values, and this is all
that is required under such circumstances.
The man who bends his head or salutes a
flag which claims neither his allegiance nor
his respect may do so because he is in the
presence of others for whom it is a symboli-

11Qn some socially patterned ways for assuring
observability by the public, see Merton in The
Student Physician, Cambridge: The Commonwealth
Fund, 1957, pp. 17-18.
Conformity within a status system is not
only shown verbally or through task per-
formance. The tone of voice, the smile, pos-
ture, and gestures help to indicate to others
in the social system attitudes in regard to
relations with them.!8 They help to convey
to status-holders that the relation with them
is accepted as defined, or not accepted, as the
case may be. The slight stiffening of the body
in the presence of a subordinate, the slight
sideways nod of the head when facing a
superordinate, and similar gestures help to
communicate the acceptance of the terms of
the relationship and hence to maintain the
social structure. This is the structural im-
portance of manners and etiquette, found
even in those groups that pretend to scorn
them. Deference and demeanor ?* do not
merely serve to pay respect to other indi-
viduals or to pay tribute to convention, but
to maintain the relational system. Not only
through actual performance on the job,
through output, does one live up to the de-
mands of a social system, but by behaving
appropriately with the various role-partners.

12 This point was suggested to me by Merton in
a personal communication.

13In German, the word Haltung denotes both
posture and attitude.

14 For a brilliant analysis of this topic, see Erving
Goffman, “The Nature of Deference and De-
meanor,” The American Anthropologist, 58 (June,
1956), pp. 473-502.
Gestures and bearings, the nod of the head,
the smile, and the frown are the undeliberate,
spontaneous, yet learned, manifestations of
attitudes adequate or inadequate, as the case
may be, for maintenance or change of the
structure.

The measure of spontaneity inherent in
such behavior, that is, the fact that it is
hardly preceded by deliberation, can and
often does reveal attitudes that are dysfunc-
tional for certain task performances. This is
especially so in relationships that are am-
biguous.® For example, the male accountant
who has to accept the directives of a female
office manager may find it hard to conceal his
annoyance at this local departure from cer-
tain norms prevailing in the culture at large,
where men are supposed usually to take the
initiative. Their official work relations would
be made all the more difficult if he were to
share an office with her. Her gestures and
bearings might constantly remind him of
what he considers a contradiction in status.
In turn, his demeanor may communicate his
annoyance, and soon task performance may
fall below a tolerable level.16

In hospital wards, nurses insist that interns
write their orders in the order-book instead
of passing them on orally. This insistence is
not merely meant for the legal protection of
the nurse or the formalization of the relation-
ship; avoiding the encounter between her
and the intern minimizes the display of atti-
tudes that might be incompatible—the young
physician’s feeling of superiority through
identification with colleagues and seniors in
the profession, and the experienced nurse’s
condescending attitude toward a “novice,”
a “mere” student of medicine.!7

Similarly, in his study of the social struc-
ture of the restaurant, Whyte found that in
one restaurant, unlike many others, there
was no friction between the counterman and
the waitresses. What distinguished this
restaurant was the fact that “waitresses
wrote out slips which they placed on spindles
on top of a warming compartment separating
them from the countermen. . . . In most
cases, there was no direct face-to-face inter-
action between waitresses and countermen,
and indeed, the warming compartment was
so high that only the taller waitresses could
see over its top. .. .” One of the countermen
in this restaurant told the investigators that
“in all his years’ experience he had never
before worked in such a wonderful place... .
He described earlier experiences in other
restaurants where there had been no such
barrier” and “where the girls could call their
orders in,” which was “an ordeal to which no
man should be subjected.” 18

The association between “girls” and “or-
ders” on the one hand and “men” and “sub-
jection” on the other reflects the status con-
tradictions described above. The writing of
slips, in this case, prevents the actors from
repeatedly expressing their attitudes about
relations between sexes and limits their con-
formity to the practical task at hand.

In cases such as these, behavioral con-
formity can be better assured if observability
is restricted, thus concealing lack of atti-
tudinal conformity or conflicting attitudes.
abling role-partners to observe each other
and to give or take orders. Such concepts as
“observability” and “authority” suggest that
some of Merton’s propositions in his theory
of reference group behavior, more specifically
the theory of role-set, can be usefully applied
here.

In specifying selected social mechanisms
for the articulation of roles which reduce the
conflict imposed by differing expectations
facing a status-occupant, Merton notes that
the latter’s adaptation to conflicting expecta-
tions from members of his role-set is facili-
tated by different degrees of interest of the
various role-partners in the behavior of the
status-occupant, i.e., by the fact that they
are not all equally involved with him; that
not all role-partners are equally powerful in
shaping the behavior of occupants of a par-
ticular status; that not all role-partners are
equally in a position directly to observe the
behavior of the status-occupant.!®

It is instructive to examine the relations
between the type of conformity expected by
various role-partners and the other mecha-
nisms for articulating roles, i.e., the dis-
tribution of authority over the behavior of
the status-occupant, the differential observ-
ability of his behavior and the socially pat-
terned interest that members of the role-set
have in his behavior.

The relation between these variables is
complex. Authority does not necessarily im-
ply access to observation nor does interest
in the status-occupant necessarily imply
concern with his attitudes. In some struc-
tures, certain members of the role-set are
expected to have great interest in the be-
havior of a particular status-occupant, and
have the authority to shape his behavior. But
the role definition pertaining to that particu-
lar status-occupant does not afford them the
opportunity of observing the relevant be-
havior. A case in point is the relationship
between a professor of psychiatry who is a
senior staff member in a mental hospital and
his resident who is, in effect, an advanced
graduate student of medicine. The resident
cannot be observed directly by his senior
when he is engaged in psychotherapy with a
patient. The obligation toward one role-
partner (patient) thus restricts the privileges
of other role-partners (senior staff). In this
case, senior staff must assume that the be-
havior of the status-occupant that must go
unobserved will be controlled by his (con-
forming) attitudes. That is, in roles in which
behavior cannot be so easily observed, as in
the case of the physician in private prac-
tice,?° or even more so, the psychiatrist dur-
ing the therapeutic hour which precludes
even the presence of a nurse, or the priest
within the confessional, the demands on atti-
tudinal conformity, i-e., on inner acceptance
of the values and norms of the particular
social system will be the greater. This may
help explain certain cases of extreme, even
“rigid” attitudinal conformity. For example,
psychoanalysts are often blamed for their
“dogmatism,” that is for their overconform-
ity, for an unexamined adherence to values
which they may no longer consider in need
of rational justification.

Inversely, persons who operate “in the
glare of the spotlight,” as politicians, for ex-
ample, are compensated for having to take
into account in their doctrinal assertions the
widely differing publics to which they must
address themselves,” by the fact that their
attitudinal commitments are under less close
scrutiny.?? It should be possible to examine
how the role-partners’ concern with different
types of conformity by the status-occupant
relates to the two other mechanisms, namely
the patterned use of observability and au-
thority. Four possibilities will be considered
here, all cases where the role-partners have
marked interest in the status-occupant.

1. The status-occupant is observed di-
rectly during much of his activity by a role-
partner who has authority over him.

2. The status-occupant cannot be observed
directly during most of his activity by a role-
partner who has authority over him.

3. The status-occupant can be observed
during much of his activity by a role-partner
who is his subordinate.

4, The status-occupant cannot be observed
during most of his activity by a subordinate.

1. Direct observability by superiors. The
first type of relationship is exemplified by the
foreman-operator, the teacher-pupil in grade
school, the warden-prisoner or the nurse-
mental patient. In these instances, the person
in authority is concerned primarily with the
behavior of the status-occupant and close
observation is exercised partly because it is
assumed that behavior is not sufficiently
backed up by internalized values, and can-
not, therefore, be relied upon to motivate
conforming behavior. In the case of the
foreman-operator, the interests of manage-
ment and workers are often assumed to be
(and often are) antagonistic, the main in-
terest of the former being high productivity,
that of the latter being financial and other
rewards. In other cases, as with children or
mental patients, it is felt that norms are not
sufficiently internalized and that close ob-
servation is necessary to ensure their con-
formity. Concern here is mainly with appro-
priate behavior.

Therefore, persons in such positions tend
to be much concerned with “discipline.”
Since they are in a position of authority, ex-
pected to observe the behavior of status-
occupants, they usually have the role of
mediators within the hierarchy and are re-
sponsible for the behavior of the observed
status-occupants. They are transmitters of
information to persons on a higher echelon
who do not observe the behavior in the ranks
directly. This leads to the second type of
ors. At first sight it would seem paradoxical
to envisage a relationship in which a person
in authority does not have the right to ob-
serve his subordinates. Superior position
would seem to involve this right. But actu-
ally, of course, in bureaucratic organization,
the higher the person in authority, the more
is he removed—de facto and usually de jure,
too—from ready observation of the behavior
of those much lower in the hierarchy.” If a
person high in authority wants to observe be-
havior in the ranks, as when a general wants
to inspect the barracks, or a college president
wants to visit a dormitory, or incredibly, a
professor’s class, this is usually patterned
ceremonially. It is ordinarily understood that
the visit will follow a formal invitation or
that it will be announced ahead of time to
those who will be observed, giving them the
opportunity to adapt their behavior to the
anticipated visit. Frequent complaints about
breaches of such organizational etiquette
only confirm the analytical point.**

A literary example of how functioning was
felt to be impaired by violation of this in-
formal rule, comes from Tolstoy’s War and
Peace: “While the Tsar had been at Vilna
. .. (one party) thought and said that the
whole evil was primarily due to the presence
of the Tsar... ; that it was for the Tsar to
govern but not to lead his troops... ; that
the worst commander-in-chief, acting inde-
pendently, would be better than the best
commander-in-chief with his hands tied by
the presence and authority of the Tsar”
(italics added).

Subordinates find themselves restricted in
their behavior if they are under direct ob-
servation by persons who hold high author-
ity positions,?> since they know that the
latter are initiators of important decisions
that may seriously affect their lives. More-
over, just because the authority holder is in
a position to make important decisions, the
physical distance he keeps serves to prevent
him from developing friendly 7° or hostile
feelings 27 about his subordinates that would
interfere with the functional specificity of his
role,”® i.e., with his expected impartiality as
distributor of rewards and punishments. An
instructive illustration comes from the U. S.
Navy where the captain of a ship is not ex-
pected to show up unannounced with the
men, or even in the officers’ mess, and tends
by design to isolate himself.29

Hence, denial of observability seems to be
functional on two counts: for the protection
of both the subordinate and the superordi-
nate in their respective role performances.®°
Insulation from observability is the more
rigidly maintained the more vital the po-
tential decisions of the authority holder.
Denial of observability to him is a direct
function of the amount of power vested in
his authority.
Persons in authority to whom observability
is denied must be kept informed about some
aspects of the attitudes and behavior of
their subordinates, but they are primarily
interested in differing types of conformity.
For example, the psychoanalytically oriented
psychiatrist in a mental hospital who receives
his information from the nurse wants to
form a picture of the patient’s underlying at-
titude. The general manager of an industrial
firm usually wants to be able to evaluate
results, and is concerned with attitudes only
secondarily.51 The concern of those with high
position in the hierarchy may vary, yet only
rarely would it include concern with total
behavioral conformity.

This is one reason why, as has often been
pointed out, persons on the higher echelons
of an organization are usually more permis-
sive. It will be remembered that, in contrast
to the authority-holder discussed in this sec-
ond type of relationship, the person in au-
thority in case 1, who observes directly much
of the behavior of the status-occupant, tends
to be primarily interested in his behavior.
Although the tolerance of the authority-
holder in the present case is contingent upon
his knowledge of the intolerance of another
elsewhere in the organization, the authority-
holders in the two types of relationships have
a different interest in the conformity of the
status-occupant. How then, one is led to
ask, do they relate to each other? It is pos-
sible to specify, in this instance, one aspect of
what is probably Merton’s most important
contribution in his theory of role-set, namely,
the dynamics of the relationships between the
role-partners of a status-occupant.

81 Cf. “The superior relinquishes control over
technical procedures which his subordinate uses .. .
and focuses instead on the subordinate’s success or
failure in realizing organizational goals.” (Alvin W.
Gouldner, “Organizational Analysis,” op. cit., p.
414). The ensuing “tension between the superior’s
pressure for results and the subordinate expert’s in-
sistence on proper technical procedures” (Gouldner)
is compensated for, it seems to me, by the freedom
it leaves to the specialist to use the means as he
sees fit, ie., as they are prescribed by his other role-
partners, his professional peers, without being ham-
pered by being observed at every step of his pro-
cedure. This fact, then, that some role-partners are
interested in results while others are interested in
procedures is another “social mechanism for the
articulation of roles which reduce the burden of
differing expectations facing the role-incumbent”
(Merton).
One process within the role-set can be
identified as pertaining to the theory of com-
munication. The role-partner to whom ob-
servability of a status-occupant is denied
must rely on information received from an-
other role-partner of the same status-occu-
pant, ie., the observer or supervisor. He
wants to receive information about the
status-occupant relevant to his own in-
terest. Hence, in its transmission the infor-
mation must be filtered, limited to what is
considered organizationally essential to the
interested status-superior. When what is es-
sential to the mediator, such as the nurse or
foreman in the first type of relationship dis-
cussed here, is behavioral conformity and
when this is not essential to the person who
receives the information, communication is
often unsatisfactory with ensuing complaints
of “lack of information” on the part of some
and “nobody wants to listen to me” on the
part of others. For example, in the hospital
in which Stanton and Schwartz conducted
their study, nurses and aides kept systematic
records but complained that the psychiatrists
did not read them.” On the other hand, the
supervisors of nurses omitted in their reports
material that was of clinical importance.3*
Such difficulties in communication, it ap-
pears here, are structurally determined by
the difference in role-involvement on the
part of various role-partners who are con-
cerned with different types of conformity by
the status-occupant.

However, the restriction of access of one
role-partner, although it may make for diffi-
culties in communication, can be functional
for the articulation of roles of all concerned.
The value system in a mental hosiptal has it
that “it is better for patients if the presence
of the psychiatrist on the ward is restricted.”
Whatever the manifest purpose of this view
may be, it not only serves to reduce the pres-
sure on the patient to comply with differing
expectations on the part of two role-partners,
but also facilitates relations between two
role-partners who have different concerns
with the behavior of the status-occupant.3+
It has been argued here that persons high
in the hierarchy are typically denied direct
observability of much of a subordinate’s be-
havior. Conversely, persons in subordinate
positions often have a legitimate opportunity
to observe the behavior of their status-su-
periors directly and frequently.

3. Direct observability by subordinates.
A simple and familiar case is that of the
private secretary who is often in a position
to observe the official and unofficial organiza-
tional behavior of her employer in more de-
tail than any other of his role-partners. The
office nurse of the physician in private prac-
tice is in a similar position.

The close interaction with the status-
superior makes the observing subordinate
part of a small cultural subgroup, with its
own standards and values which may be
different from those of the culture at large.
This has been described as “participation in
guilty knowledge,” as “a way of looking at
things different from that of most people
and consequently potentially shocking to the
lay mind.” ®> It readily becomes a source of
pride, and a source of strain as well, in that
it isolates the subordinate from his own social
world and deprives him of the satisfac-
tions of friendship and solidarity with his
peers. (This may be one reason for the diffi-
culties that labor unions encounter in their
attempts to organize secretaries and nurses.)
The strain imposed by this close personal
interaction with superiors is even more seri-
ous if the value system the subordinate par-
ticipates in is not only different but in some
respects opposed to the values of his own
group.

Moreover, due to his superior position, the
status-occupant has ample room for deviant
behavior in the presence of his subordinate,
partly because of his power over him, partly
because the subordinate grants the prestige-
ful status-occupant the right of greater devi-
ation. This type of relationship may be a
source of considerable stress, as in the case
of the nurse who is torn between her profes-
sional ethics, her loyalty to her physician-
boss, and his relative power as well as au-
thority over her.

What compensates for relative lack of
formal authority, and the strains that close
observation of a status-superior may create,
is the fact that those who have little author-
ity in this type of relationship, are permitted
to see themselves as agents of social control.
As Hughes has noted, they often give the
following definition of their roles: “We in
this position save the people in the next
higher position above from their own mis-
takes.” °6 This type of social control is the
more important in occupations in which
practitioners work in isolation from col-
leagues and the public and are thus signif-
icantly insulated from observability, as, for
example, the private physician. One latent
function of the nurse in the physician’s office
is the protection of both patient and physi-
cian. She protects the patient from possible
infringements of etiquette, and protects the
physician by being a potential witness of
his proper behavior. Another case in point
is that of the surgeon who performs the
operation in the presence of nurses and
junior medical staff. The scrubnurse in the
operating room has the right (though she
may not often, in fact, exercise it) to
interrupt the operation if she sees a physi-
cian placing his hands in an area considered
aseptic, such as under the table.37

In these relationships those who observe
are concerned mainly with behavior. This is
probably one of the structural sources of the
“ritualism” and “pedantry” of which sec-
retaries and nurses are often accused.

The danger to the practitioners inherent
in the subordinates’ first-hand knowledge of
their behavior is averted by the stringently
adhered-to norm of confidentiality and by
the personal relation that often develops
through enduring social interaction.?® These
sharply restrict the power that the subor-
dinate may potentially derive from his
knowledge. The participation in guilty
knowledge referred to earlier is not only a
source of strain but creates a common bond
between superordinate and subordinate and
thereby reinforces the loyalty which is for-
mally prescribed and informally develops.

The solidarity that derives from participa-
tion in guilty knowledge further insulates the
actors against observability by the public
and assures the “quotient of ignorance that
all social groups require to preserve ‘esprit
de corps.’ ” 8

Considered in this context, Goffman’s
observations on “teamwork” gain theoretical
relevance. The reciprocal dependence and
reciprocal familiarity among members of the
team *° are derived in part from mutual
observability and are an important source
of social control. The team does not merely
monopolize control, as Goffman claims. It
both protects and controls its individual
members. It is thus an intermediary between

38 Because of the various strains and the close in-
volvement with the status-superior, the once-loyal
subordinate will on occasion become a violent enemy
of his superior, either for personal motives or for
structural reasons, as when the superior loses his
power and authority. He may then engage in public
revelations of the behavior he has observed. This is
a common-place in politics. The point here is
mainly that our analytical scheme permits us to
account in part for important historical episodes.

The possibility of such turnabout may already be
anticipated in the recruitment of subordinates who
may owe their positions to some quid pro quo (if
you'll tell, I’ll tell). This matter is the more serious
the more the norms of the sub-group deviate from
those outside. Forms of recruitment, then, are likely
to be a function of the degree of deviancy partici-
pated in.

39 Wilbert E. Moore and Melvin M. Tumin,
“Some Social Functions of Ignorance,” American
Sociological Review, 14 (December, 1949), pp.
787-95.

40Erving Goffman, The Presentation of Self in
Everyday Life, New York: Doubleday Anchor
Books, 1959, Chapter II.
them and the would-be observer, the public,
which, being permitted only partial glimpses
of their behavior, must have confidence in
the attitudes of the status-occupants.

Just as the continuous observer who is in
authority (case 1) mediates between the
status-occupant and somebody higher in the
hierarchy to whom such observation is
denied, the continuous observer who is in a
subordinate position mediates, if only sym-
bolically, between the status-occupant and
outsiders. The nurse, although she does not
ordinarily report to outsiders what she sees
(which may be a source of conflict between
her professional ethics and her loyalty to her
superior), can, and it seems, often does,
remind the practitioner of the expectations
of public and peers, by her sheer presence
and often by her words and deeds.

4. Restriction of observability by subor-
dinates. In this case the role-partner’s
interest in the status-occupant is not legit-
imized through investment with authority or
through institutionalized accessibility. Hence
the interest of the role-partner is not focused;
it is random, as it were. He will try to obtain
any information he can about behavior or
attitudes. This is a social situation most
productive of gossip and rumor. Gossip is
here not so much a function of individual
misbehavior as it is a necessary concomitant
of situations in which a role-partner is
interested in the behavior and attitude of a
status-occupant, but this interest is not
backed up by legitimate authority over him
or by legitimate direct access to his behav-
ior.

The knowledge obtained by subordinates
in this relationship is often used for status-
enhancement among peers, as when students
tell each other what they know, preferably
from first-hand observation, about their
teachers’ private lives. This is even more so
in hospital wards where patients relate
proudly to each other what they know about
some physician.

Gossip is especially prevalent in social
systems that are mobility-blocked, i-e.,
where insulation from observability helps to
maintain the rigid social distance between
status levels. Therefore, gossip flourishes
especially in organizations like hospitals.*!
Among patients, or among nurses, it con-
stitutes an attempt to “pass,” be it only
vicariously. However, it enriches and adds
uniqueness to the in-group culture through
transmission of folklore, for example, and
standardized joking. In this way gossip helps
to maintain the very status boundaries that
it attempts to trespass.

In their turn, authority-holders try to
protect themselves against possible illegit-
imate attempts by their subordinates to ob-
serve their behavior. They insulate their
attitudes from observability by rigidly con-
trolling behavior that might reveal private
attitudes. If physicians on hospital wards
seem to “dress up” and appear as it were
“on stage,” it is because this traditional garb
helps to limit observability, emphasizing
the fact that their “real lives” are inscru-
table. Similarly, the “inscrutable” behavior
of the psychotherapist—a source of much
bitter joking among ward patients in a
mental hospital—serves to insulate his
private attitudes from observability of pa-
tients with whom they share the same
physical space for a considerable number of
hours.#? “Inscrutability,” “ceremonial” ap-
pearance, etc., reduce observability in spite
of the presence of the role-partner.

Those in authority, then, will, in these
matters, thicken the insulation from observ-
ability of private attitudes by subordinates.
In the discussion of case 2, in which those
in authority have limited access to observ-
ing subordinates much lower in rank, it was
said that this limitation serves in part to
assure the insulation of subordinates from
interference by higher authority. It may
now be added that such denial of observ-
ability to superiors also preserves their own

 

Smith, Sociological Study of Hospitals, unpublished
Ph.D, dissertation, University of Chicago, 1949, and
William Caudill, The Psychiatric Hospital as a
Small Society, Cambridge: The Commonwealth
Fund, 1958, p. 7 and Chapter III, passim.

42 Freud knew that the psychoanalyst’s chair be-
hind the couch served this function. “I adhere
firmly to the plan of requiring the patient to recline
upon a sofa, while one sits behind him out of sight.
. .. I cannot bear to be gazed at for eight hours a
day (or more). Since, while I listen, I resign my-
self to the control of my unconscious thoughts, I do
not wish my expression to give the patient indica-
tions which he may interpret or which may influence
him in his communications.” (Collected Papers,
London: The Hogarth Press, 1949, Vol. II, p. 354.)
The principle of hierarchy involved in Weber’s conception of bureaucracy is incompatible
with preservation of the individual authority required by professionals in their work. Avail-
able analyses indicate, however, that even among non-professionals the relationships between
superordinates and subordinates in a work hierarchy are likely to deviate from those out-
lined by Weber in that they are affected by the norms and values workers bring to the
situation. The present study of the norms, values, and behavior exhibited by an hierarchically
organized group of physicians in a medical center suggests that supervisory relationships
among physicians represent an extreme case of such deviation. It also provides clues regarding
specific social mechanisms that serve to reconcile maintenance of individual authority with
hierarchical organization.
precisely all the processes involved in the
definition and enforcement of moral rules
that form the core problem of sociology.” #*
What we can legitimately hide and what we
can legitimately reveal to those with whom
we work and with whom we share tasks and
team-belongingness teaches us much about
the more general social dialectic of privacy
and access.

In every society, “the right to question
must be allowed to be limited by the right
to secrecy.” #4 Occupations and professions
form an ideal ground on which the inter-
sections of these two rights can be studied
in their crystallization in work rules and
role prescriptions. The determination of who
can hide from whom may be as essential to
the workings of a social system as deter-
mination of who has power over whom.
