http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089344?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
lished since 1948. The publisher of

each hopes I will adopt it as a text
for a course called “Minority Groups.” The
titles, points of view, and contents vary
widely. The most frequently-occurring word
is “minority,” yet the authors use it with
different denotative and connotative mean-
ings. There are also “race relations” and
“Gnter-group relations” and “inter-cultural
relations” and sometimes just “human rela-
tions’ 4—although that seems a rather
broad and ambitious topic for a single
course. Some texts describe a long or short
list of “groups” and may point out the
contributions of each to “our American way
of life.’ The main subject of others is
prejudice or discrimination and their effects,
often reflecting a neo-Freudian psychology.
There are also studies of the Negro in the
United States like those of Frazier and
Davie.? The typical recent text, however,
contains larger or smaller amounts from
each of several approaches.

The contents and approaches of these
texts are disturbing to one who believes
that sociology is concerned with the develop-
ment of empirically-tested generalizations re-
garding human relationships. A course on
“Minority Groups” should present, or at-
tempt to develop, generalizations regarding
“minorities.” ® Yet, there is now no “soci-
ology of minorities” in this sense. Nowhere
in the “minority” literature can one find a
systematic and comprehensive set of socio-
logical generalizations. This lack is not so
culpable, for such a set does not now exist.

QO: my desk are twelve books, pub-

* Paper read at the annual meeting of the Ameri-
can Sociological Society, September, 1955.

1 Everett C. Hughes and Helen MacGill Hughes,
Where Peoples Meet: Racial and Ethnic Frontiers,
Glencoe, Illinois: The Free Press, 1952, p. 135.

2Maurice R. Davie, Negroes in American So-
ciety, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1949;
and E, Franklin Frazier, The Negro in the United
States, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1949.

8 Jitsuichi Masuoka and Raytha L. Yokley,
“Essential Structural Requisites in Race Relations,”
Social Forces, 33 (October, 1954), p. 30.
What surprises me is the fact that many au-
thors do not seem to miss it. In the texts one
finds many facts, most of them interesting
and some of value. There are numerous
hypotheses and frequent personal opinions,
often stated as if they were conclusions.
Preachments regarding what, or who, is
bad and proposals for reform are quite
common. The few tested generalizations
present are often hard to recognize and
separate from less useful statements.

Anathema need not be pronounced on
all, however. As early as 1932, Young
sought for generalizations within a sociologi-
cal frame of reference not used again until
Part II of Simpson and Yinger.t* Among
other recent authors who have sought with
varying success for some conceptual system
are Berry, Marden, McDonagh and Rich-
ards, and Walter.> However, most of these
texts, too, contain a little something for
everybody: chapters on what prejudice is
and what race isn’t, sketches of selected
minority groups, advice or proposals on
how to solve “these problems.” Berry and
Marden, in very different ways, have been
most successful perhaps in the search for
sociological generalizations or uniformities
of some kind.

Despite recent improvement, however, the
teacher still seeks in vain for an objective,
systematic, comprehensive, sustained, soci-
ological analysis. A truly sociological ap-

4Donald Young, American Minority Peoples:
A Study in Racial and Cultural Conflicts in the
United States, New York: Harper and Brothers,
1932; and George E. Simpson and J. Milton Vinger,
Racial and Cultural Minorities: An Analysis of
Prejudice and Discrimination, New York: Harper
and Brothers, 1953.

5 Brewton Berry, Race Relations: The Inter-
actions of Ethnic and Racial Groups, New York:
Houghton Mifflin Co., 1951; Charles F. Marden,
Minorities in American Society, New York: The
American Book Co., 1952, esp. chapters 2 and 16;
Edward C. McDonagh and Eugene S. Richards,
Ethnic Relations in the United States, New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc. 1953; Paul A. F.
Walter, Jr., Race and Culture Relations, New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1952.
proach to minority phenomena has been
delayed, I believe, by two conditions. First,
we have been preoccupied with “problems”
and “what to do about them.” Our zeal to
change the way things now are (if only in
the minds of our students) has led us to
pass by the less interesting and more diffi-
cult tasks required for the slow building of
research-sharpened concepts and empiri-
cally-tested generalizations. Yet just these
tools are required for understanding and
controlling behavior, whether or not it is
“problem behavior.” © Secondly, sociological
theory has lacked a conceptual position
from which these phenomena can success-
fully be approached. It has been, and still
is, difficult even to delimit a workable area
for study.

If we would construct a “sociology of
minorities,” we must, therefore, do two
things: approach our data with objectivity
and develop a conceptual framework which
is at once sociological and apt. The remain-
der of this paper gives my ideas on where to
look and what to look for if we wish to
perceive minority phenomena accurately and
analyse them meaningfully. These ideas are
not wholly original and are obviously
hypotheses which require testing by use,
both in research and in the classroom.

Prejudice and discrimination are not use-
ful concepts for defining a sociology course,
or field of research.” Prejudice is a social
psychological idea, which has tended to
become psychiatric. Both prejudice and
discrimination have value loadings which
discourage objectivity. More important for
our purpose, however, is the fact that per-
sons are prejudiced against others, and
discriminate against them, in many ways
and for a variety of reasons which have
nothing to do with “minorities.”

To focus on groups of some kind cer-
tainly seems more sociological. It is decep-
tively simple, however, to define a minority
group merely as one which is numerically
smaller than another or to say that “It is
certainly incontrovertible that two men can
force one man to do what they want, and
that ten men can do it even more easily.
Given the same social organization, the
larger number can always control the
smaller. . .”§ One need only note that in
Tunica County, Mississippi, Negroes com-
pose 80 per cent of the population, or that
in any county the school board is smaller
than the number of teachers it controls,
to be reminded that in the real world of
adult interaction “social organization” is
rarely if ever “the same.” The effect of size,
including small size, on the interaction
within and between groups is a valid and
important sociological concern.® It is not,
however, what students of “minorities”
have traditionally been interested in.

A group or category whose members
differ from others of the same society in
nationality, in culture, or in observable
physical traits has been a favorite unit for
study. The trouble is that the members of
such groupings may or may not behave as
or be treated as “minorities,” depending
upon the presence or absence of other fac-
tors.1° While the descriptive study of such
groups has developed the useful and interest-
ing sketches found in Brown and Roucek 1%
and other texts, it has produced few if
any tested generalizations regarding the
relationships among members of different
be called (with several reservations) the
minority-dominant relationship.!2

Two characteristics of the relationship
seem obvious: is is one between persons of
unequal social power, who consequently
have unequal access to the opportunities
and rewards of the society.1* If social power
is defined broadly as the ability to control
the behaviors of others,!4 then it is likely
that there is some inequality of power in
every relationship.5 In the minority-dom-
inant relationship, however, the difference
in social power is both marked and
institutionalized,1® being rooted in fairly
rigid social structures. However, the rela-
tionship between the President of the United
States and any or all sociologists, or between
the head football coach and his “scholar-
ship boys,” is also one of marked and
institutionalized difference in social power.

The source of the difference in power
provides another characteristic of the rela-
tionship. The difference arises because the
individuals belong to categories 1” between
the members of which there is a certain
culturally-determined pattern of reciprocal
18 Masuoka and Yokley. of. cit., pp. 33-35;
and Francis, op. cit., pp. 222, 223.

19R, A, Schermerhorn, These Our People, Bos-
ton: D. C. Heath, 1949, p. 7; and Roucek, Joc. cit.

20 Gerth and Mills, op. cit., pp. 180, 181 (where,
however, the reference is to Klasse rather than
Stand); Parsons, op. cit., pp. 95, 96; MaclIver, op.
cit., pp. 107, 108; and Kingsley Davis, Human So-
ciety, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1949, pp.
94, 95, and “A Conceptual Analysis of Stratifica-
tion,” American Sociological Review, 7 (June, 1942),
p. 316. For other useful discussions of stratification
see Cuber and Kenkel, of. cit., Parts I and III;
Bendix and Lipset, op. cit.; A. M. Henderson and
Talcott Parsons, “Social Stratification and Class
Structure,” Part IV of Max Weber: The Theory
of Social and Economic Organization, New York:
Oxford University Press, 1947; Harold F. Kaufman,
et al., “The Problems of Theory and Method in
the Study of Social Stratification in Rural Society,”
Rural Sociology, 18 (March, 1953), pp. 12-24; and
Harold W. Pfautz and Otis D. Duncan, “A Critical
Evaluation of Warner’s Work in Community Strati-
fication,” American Sociological Review, 15 (April,
1950), pp. 205-215.

21 Bierstedt, op. cit., 1950, p. 731; and Pfautz
and Duncan, oP. cit., p. 211.

22Few attempts have been made to measure
differences in power, but such measurement should
prove possible. See Goldhamer and Shils, of. cit.,
p. 177; Kaufman, et al., op. cit., p. 14; and Cuber
and Kenkel, of. cit., pp. 315-316.

23 Parsons, op. cit., pp. 93, 101; and Richard
T. Morris, “Social Stratification,” in Leonard Broom
and Philip Selznick, Sociology, Evanston, Illinois:
Row, Peterson and Co., 1955, p. 167.
as in relationships between persons who
belong to different categories and groups.
Minority-dominant relations may be viewed
as one kind of stratified relationship,** a
subhead under inter-class relationships.

Minority-dominant relationships may be
distinguished from other inter-class relation-
ships by two main criteria. First, the rela-
tionship springs from membership in the
kind of categories called groups: “real”
social groups whose members have a definite
sense of belonging and _ well-developed
“we-they” feelings.2®> Secondly, the groups
are distinguished by real or alleged differ-
ences in observable physical traits, in cul-
ture, or in both.

Physical and cultural differences do not,
of themselves, create minority-dominant
relationships. The differences are important
as pegs upon which to hang culturally-
entrenched stereotypes.2° The pattern of
reciprocal attitudes which is a central
feature of the minority-dominant relation-
ship has four aspects: the attitudes of
dominant members toward themselves and
toward minority persons, and those of mi-
nority members toward themselves and
toward dominant persons. The defining
characteristic, without which the minority-
dominant relationship does not exist, is the
imputation by the majority of inherent su-
periority to themselves and of inherent
inferiority to members of the minority
group. Minority attitudes are subject to
variation, at least four possibilities being
readily observed. Minority persons may
accept the dominant definition of the situa-
tion believing, “Yes, we are different and
inferior.” Some say, “Yes, we are different,
but not inferior; one cannot judge such
differences in this way.” Perhaps the
“official” and most common attitude of
minority persons in the United States, is
“No, we are not different; we are essen-
tially alike in all important capacities.”
Finally, they may say, “We are indeed
different, and superior.” 27

To summarize, minority-dominant rela-
tionships are those which occur within a
society between persons who belong to well-
defined social groups whose members: (a)
differ or are thought to differ in culture or
observable physical characteristics; (b) re-
spond to each other in terms of a pattern of
culturally-defined reciprocal attitudes im-
puting inherent superiority to members of
one group and inherent inferiority to
members of another; and (c) have, be-
cause of membership in the groups, unequal
access to the sources and instruments of
institutionalized power and hence to the
opportunities and rewards of the society.
