@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2087966?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
ture is learned, the behavior of people

studied by the social scientist must
follow the laws of learning of experimental
psychology. A number of studies of social-
ization, or individual behavior within a cul-
ture, have contained this assumption. Their
chief inspiration has been Social Learning
and Imitation, by Neal Miller and John
Dollard.’ Our first objective will be to ex-
amine the reasoning which says that culture
must be comparable to a maze and person-
ality or individual behavior to an organism
moving in the maze. Our second objective
will be an examination of studies which
have applied learning theory to individual
behavior in a culture in order that we may
see what they have contributed to our
knowledge.

Describing culture as learned is a way of
emphasizing that it is nonbiological or super-
organic,” Gillin, for example, says that “. . .
we sometimes have difficulty in convincing
ourselves that the customs which we prac-
tice are actually acquired or learned. They
seem so much a part of our nature that we
are sometimes inclined to regard them as
inherited, in the biological sense.”? Kroeber
states: “In short, culture is superorganic or
superindividual in that, although carried,
participated in, and produced by organic
individuals, it is acquired, and it is acquired

Besse it is stated that, since cul-
through learning. What is learned is the
existent culture.’

In other words, socialization or person-
ality formation is a process of learning the
culture. If it is, and if experimental psy-
chology has worked out the laws of learning,
then these laws will tell us how culture is
acquired, used, changed, and transmitted, or
so it has been said more than once.®

Murdock, for example, concludes, “If
culture is learned, it must obey the laws of
learning, which the psychologists have by
now worked out in considerable detail.”®
Gillin proposes that “If we admit that cul-
ture is learned, we must then go to psy-
chology for the basic principles of learning
and behavior which have been tested by
experimental procedures on man and other
animals.” Hallowell states, “While it will
be unnecessary to go into the technical de-
tails of the learning process here, contempo-
rary learning theory does provide a fruitful
frame of reference in terms of which the
sociopsychological aspects of acculturation
may be conceptualized and may also be used
as a guide for empirical research.”® Kluck-
hohn, in his interpretation of anthropology
to the layman, says, “Like rats learning to
run a maze that has food at its exit, children
gradually familiarize themselves with the
well-trodden but often devious intricacies of
the cultural network.”®

The reasoning goes: culture is learned;
experimental psychology studies the laws of
learning; therefore the laws of learning ap-
ply to individual behavior in a culture. If
we substitute equivalent words for the last
word in each of the premises, we discover
that the appearance of certainty dissolves.
If we say: culture is acquired, and experi-
mental psychology studies the laws of train-
ing,’° it is no longer clear that we can con-
clude that these laws will illuminate culture.
The plausibility of the statement is re-
vealed to have rested on the use of the same
word, “learning,” in both premises.

To restore the syllogism by postulating
that experimental training and acquiring a
culture are the same is impossible, because
we would be assuming the conclusion. We
cannot, therefore, claim by logic that learn-
ing theory makes cultural behavior more
intelligible. We can make this transfer of
theory only if research on individual be-
havior in culture has justified it.

If the definition of learning used in ex-
perimental psychology were broad and gen-
eral, no more precise than, for example, that
it is the modification of behavior through
experience, then we could say that socializa-
tion is the result of learning, for personality
does not develop in social isolation. All pres-
ent theories of personality hold that it
develops through experience in some way.
However, the learning theory which social
scientists have borrowed from experimental
psychology is not a broadly defined one
which, if it refers to any kind of human
experience, must refer to all. Rather, it has
specifically defined concepts applicable to
circumscribed activities of a subject in an
experimental situation constructed for test-
ing the theory. The transferability of the
theory to the social scene must be demon-

® Clyde Kluckhohn, Mirror for Man, New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1949, p. 205.

10 E, R. Hilgard uses “training” as a synonym for
learning in experimental situations. See Theories of
Learning, New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1948, p. 4.
strated; it cannot be merely assumed on the
basis that both socialization and training
have been given the label of learning. Only
to the extent that acquiring a culture, or
individual behavior in a culture, does not
differ from the processes taken note of by
the experimental psychologist whose theory
is borrowed would this theory be transfer-
able.

Can learning theory be divorced from the
maze? Or rather, is the social level a maze?
If it is, here is what it looks like: “(No psy-
chologist would venture to predict the be-
havior of a rat without knowing on what arm
of the T-maze the food or shock is placed.
It is no easier to predict the behavior of a
human being without knowing the condi-
tions of his ‘maze,’ i.e., the structure of his
social environment. Culture, as conceived by
social scientists, is a statement of the design
of the human maze, of the type of reward
involved, and of what responses are to be
rewarded. It is in this sense a recipe for
learning.”21

When social scientists have referred to
learning theory, they have most commonly
meant Hull’s. There is, of course, not one
learning theory but a number, and their dis-
agreements are not trivial. The influence of
Hull’s theory has stemmed from its use by
Miller and Dollard in Social Learning and
Imitation. They say, “In its simplest form,
[Hull’s theory] is the study of the circum-
stances under which a response and a cue
stimulus become connected. After learning
has been completed, response and cue are
bound together in such a way that the ap-
pearance of the cue evokes the response.”!?
“The connection between a cue and a re-
sponse can be strengthened only under cer-
tain conditions. The learner must be driven
to make the response and rewarded for hav-
ing responded in the presence of the cue.
This may be expressed in a homely way by
saying that in order to learn one must want
something, notice something, do something,
and get something. Stated more exactly,
these factors are drive, cue, response, and
reward.”18 “A drive is a strong stimulus
which impels action.” In other words, a
drive is present when the creature is active.
A cue is a clue to the presence of drive-
reducing reward.1* A response is an act
which pays off with reward.’® A reward is
the reduction of drive.’”

It is important to remember that we are
about to consider learning theory used in
social situations, not learning theory in the
experimental situations constructed for it.
We cannot repeat too often that it must be
demonstrated and cannot be merely assumed
that culture is the equivalent of the maze.
On its own ground, learning theory is beyond
our appraisal. Applied to a maze, with a
subject, human or animal, in a state of
cooperation or deprivation, with the possible
actions artificially limited, with trials, mis-
takes, and successes quantified, the theory
yields prediction and analysis which are
satisfactory to the school which holds with
it. We are here concerned with the results of
its diffusion. If the theory is to be of use to
social science, it must apply not only in
constructed training situations but also in
the unconstructed, hurly-burly social situa-
tions which are our basic data.

We are likely to think that of course the
theory will be transferable, because we feel
certain that people have drives and make
responses, perceive cues and experience re-
wards. We feel thus certain because these
are all familiar terms from our everyday or,
as Miller and Dollard put it, our “homely”
conception of human activity. The factors of
learning theory, however, are not loosely
defined but are quite specific in their denota-
tions as well as being analytically related in
definite ways. “Drive” in experimental sit-
uations, for instance, is not simply urge,
activity, future goal, persistence, or any
other of the varying meanings which it
might take in conversation. It is a deduc-
tion from a particular amount of starvation
or some other equally specific condition.
“Response” is a push at a lever, a jump
from a grid, a right turn at an intersection
of passages. Are daydreaming, building a
boat, getting married, in this class?

How much more do we know about social-
ization from the studies which have used
learning theory? If they have contributed
something new, then the comparison of cul-
ture to a maze is more likely correct. If
they contain nothing new, then either cul-
ture is not a maze, with personality a react-
ing entity scurrying around in it, or these
particular authors have not succeeded in
showing that it can be so compared.

It is the conclusion of this paper that the
studies using learning theory which we shall
examine have failed to show that learning
theory can add anything to our understand-
ing of personality and culture. Anything,
that is, beyond another set of labels for data
already known. These studies have demon-
strated only what no one doubted, that we
can talk about social activity in the terms of
learning theory. They have not demonstrated
the analytic identity of culture and training
situation.

Becoming a Kwoma, by Whiting, is the
most lengthy attempt which has been made
to analyse socialization through learning
theory.1® The author left for New Guinea
with a Freudian orientation which included
a five-months’ training analysis. After his
return to Yale he became more acquainted
with Hull’s theory and then “reanalysed”
his data into the present book.'®

The following analysis of a learning epi-
sode is representative. “Kum, while playing
under the porch at Mar’s house one after-
noon, picked up a broom and started carry-
ing it outside. Kwiya and Awa [his classi-
ficatory sisters] . . . both noticed him and
told him to put it down. Kum did not head
at first, but when Kwiya threatened to
beat him unless he did so at once, he
quickly dropped the broom. In this case
the drive was the fear of being beaten; the
response was dropping the broom; the cues
were the instructions to drop the broom given
by Kwiya and Awa, the sight of objects
and people under the porch, the feeling of
the broom in his hand, etc.; the reward was
the reduction of the fear of being beaten.’”?°

This episode is described from the point
of view of a silent observer standing near.
Activity or “response” was seen, and from
it was inferred the drive, cues, and reward
which the observer’s theory demanded. This
is explanation after the fact and hence only
sterile labelling. When we are told that Kum
dropped the broom after his sister threatened
to beat him, what insight does it add to call
the threat a “cue”?

Other users of learning theory have
stopped with sterile labelling of events after
they have occurred. The masquerade of such
labelling as analysis is clearly revealed in
some of Miller and Dollard’s remarks on
diffusion. They report that the banana and
the domestic fowl spread rapidly over the
greater part of South America in the six-
teenth century and “safely infer that the
adoption of these new foods was rapidly
and decisively rewarded.”*1 In essence this
says no more than that people must have
liked the banana and the domestic fowl
because they adopted them. If they had not
been adopted, the authors would have been
able to “analyse” this fact just as well and
with no more data at hand, as the following
example shows. The Chinese did not borrow
milk as a food from the Mongols; the
Chinese “never tried out the use of milk
and hence could not be rewarded for adopt-
ing it. Apparently they scorned the practice
in common with other traits of their ‘bar-
barian’ neighbors.”?? The last sentence in-
creases our insight into the Chinese avoid-
ance of milk. Would it have been more
illuminating if it had been stated as “the
Chinese have an acquired drive of not
imitating Mongols?”

By assuming that labelling is analysis the
authors are able to “explain” why an inven-
tion is made when it is, not earlier or later.
“If a response which would be rewarded does

20 [bid., p. 188.
21 Miller and Dollard, op. cit., pp. 262-263.
22 Tbid., p. 265.
not occur, it is not learned’? “. . . the
wheel seems to have been invented only
once. The history of human society is teem-
ing with the unborn spirits of useful re-
sponses which for centuries did not occur,
were therefore not rewarded, and did not
become cultural habits.”24

Gillin’s use of learning theory in study-
ing the Indians and Ladinos in a Guatemalan
village is prefaced with a statement that,
though the language of learning theory may
seem stilted to many social scientists, it is
good to incorporate the conclusions of one
field into those of another field to which they
apply and that furthermore learning theory
makes it easier to be objective.”> He offers
four postulates, or “transformation equa-
tions,” to be used in explaining culture
change. Boiled down, they state that an old
custom will be retained as long as it is
satisfying, and that a new custom will be
adopted if it is more satisfying than former
customs or if former customs lose some of
their satisfactoriness. Satisfaction is not
defined but is apparently assumed to be
present whenever people act, whether they
are continuing an old custom or changing
their ways. Gillin’s use of learning theory
thus does not go beyond the labelling which
we have encountered before. As we have
found the labelling use of learning theory to
be, it is circular; the terms of the theory
are applied to events after they are known,
and then the events are offered as “analysed”
with something new added.

In a constructed training situation, reward
can be defined other than through the be-
havior of the subject. That is, it is a safe bet
that a hungry organism will eat. The reward,
such as food pellet or the cessation of an
electric shock, is thus defined other than
in terms of the subject’s behavior. There
is no need to distinguish the subject’s defini-
tion of the situation from that of the
observer. The abstraction of most of the
life, that is, of the variety, from the sub-

23 Ibid, p. 27.

24 Tbid., p. 28.

25 John Gillin, “Parallel Cultures and the Inhi-
bitions to Acculturation in a Guatemalan Village,”
Social Forces, 24 (October 1945), 8-9.
ject by the artificiality of the experimental
situation makes it unnecessary for the ob-
server to attribute much complexity to the
subject. It is such a simplified version of
learning theory which these social scientists
employ and such a simplified picture of the
experimental situation to which they compare
culture.

The crude hedonism which infers reward
from overt acts in unconstructed social
situations directs attention away from the
questions to be answered in understanding
individual behavior. These include the rela-
tion of the social and psychological aspects
of individual behavior, especially the rela-
tion of psychological motivation to social role,
and the problem of creativeness or change,
both social and psychological.

To conclude, none of the writers has
succeeded in getting beyond supplying new
labels for events after they occur. They
reason in a circle by inferring drive, cue, and
26 One suggestion of the relation of direct learn-
ing to personality is given by A. Kardiner: “If we
were to stop our consideration of basic personality
structure with those systems which, though they
originate in actual experience, become the uncon-
scious basis for projective systems, we could be
justly accused of omitting several very important
sources of ‘learning,’ which play a prominent role in
the adaptation of the individual. There is a large
contingent of data imparted to the child by direct
tuition. To this group belong all explanations about
the outer world, how to deal with it, and the rela-
tions of man to it, and the conventionalized atti-
tudes which govern the relations of people to each
other. These systems are consciously inducted,
much of their content being subjected to demon-
strations of a kind, and in some instances are modi-
fiable.” The Psychological Frontiers of Society,
New York: Columbia University Press, 1945, p. 31.
