@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2091276?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
* This work has been supported in part by Grants
OM-82, MH 07327-01, MH 07328-01 and MH
10328-01 from the National Institute of Mental
Health, U.S. Public Health Service. It has also
been supported in part by Grant U1053 from the
N.Y.C. Health Research Council to the Community
Population Laboratory of the School of Public
Health & Administrative Medicine. For their help
in facilitating interviews with psychiatric patients
included in this study, I would like to thank Dr.
Elizabeth B. Davis of Harlem Hospital, Dr. Roger
MacKinnon and Dr. Joseph Snyder of Vanderbilt
Clinic of the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Cen-
ter, and Dr. Jack Sheps of Jewish Memorial Hos-
pital. I would also like to express my appreciation
to Mr. Edwin Chin-Shong for his able assistance
in analyzing the data, to Dr. John Colombotos and
Dr. Gladys Egri for undertaking the classification of
stressor events and providing helpful comment, and
to Dr. Barbara S. Dohrenwend for useful criticism.

1¥For a review of these interpretations and some
of the studies on which they are based, see H. War-
ren Dunham, “Social Structures and Mental Dis-
orders: Competing Hypotheses of Explanation,” in
Causes of Mental Disorders: A Review of Epi-
demiological Knowledge, 1959, New York: Milbank
Memorial Fund, 1961, pp. 227-265.
There are, however, at least two major
difficulties with the evidence for social cau-
sation. First, there are studies which fail to
replicate the correlations on which the in-
terpretations are based.? Second, the corre-
lations themselves are open to equally plau-
sible opposing interpretations in which social
or geographical location is viewed as con-
sequence rather than cause of psychological
disorder; the assumption, as Dunham formu-
lates it, is that social selection “. . . explains
significant rate variations as due to the
manner in which a given social system func-
tions through time and in its functioning
tends to sort and sift persons into class and
community positions.” *

From the opposing vantages of social
causation and social selection, a number of
well-known dilemmas of explanation have
been posed. For example, with regard to
high rates of disorder found in new immi-
grant groups, does the impact of the strange
environment produce disorder, or are sick
people more likely to migrate? + With re-

2Tbid.; Robert J. Kleiner and Seymour Parker,
“Goal Striving, Social Status, and Mental Disorder:
A Research Review,” American Sociological Review,
28 (April, 1963), pp. 189-203; and Elliot G. Mish-
ler and Norman A. Scotch, “Sociocultural Factors
in the Epidemiology of Schizophrenia,” Interna-
tional Journal of Psychiatry, 1 (April, 1965), pp.
258-305.

3 Dunham, op. cit., p. 255.

4E.g., Benjamin Malzberg, Social and Biological
Aspects of Mental Disease, Utica, New York: State
Hospital Press, 1940, Chapter 6; @. @Qdegaard,
“Emigrations and Mental Health,” Mental Hygiene,
20 (October, 1936), pp. 546-553.

5E.g., Robert E. L. Faris and H. Warren Dun-
ham, Mental Disorders in Urban Areas, New York:
Hafner, 1960, especially pp. 163-177; Dorothea C.
Leighton, John S. Harding, David B. Macklin,
Allister M. Macmillan, and Alexander H. Leighton,
The Character of Danger, New York: Basic
Books, 1963, especially pp. 343-346; Alexander H.
Leighton, T. Adeoye Lambo, Charles C. Hughes,
Dorothea C. Leighton, Jane M. Murphy, and
David B. Macklin, Psychiatric Disorder Among the
Yoruba, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University
Press, 1963, especially p. 280.

6 Dunham, op. cit., p. 258.

7 Bruce P. Dohrenwend and Barbara S. Dohren-
wend, “The Problem of Validity in Field Studies
of Psychological Disorder,” Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 70 (February, 1965), pp. 52-69.

8 Note that social selection explanations do not
necessarily imply genetic or biochemical causation.
Any given social selection hypothesis posits an al-
ternative cause only to the specific social factor,
such as low class position, in the given correlation
to be explained. If our original social factor of, for
example, low class position, is discredited as a
cause, it is possible that a social factor other than
low class position has produced the disorder which
disorders widely held to be of psychogenic
origin.®

Consider by way of illustration some re-
sults from the Midtown Study in New York
City.1° In an advance over previous work
on this problem, the Midtown researchers
attempted to choose between social causa-
tion and social selection interpretations by
investigating the impact of parental class
position, a factor clearly antecedent to the
current psychiatric condition of their adult
respondents. Finding a significant inverse
relation between their respondents’ symp-
tomatology and the socioeconomic status
of their respondents’ parents, the investiga-
tors suggested that environmental depriva-
tion in childhood is a causal factor in psy-
chiatric disorder. However, they also found
that the relation between parental socio-
economic status and impairing symptoms
was weaker than the relation of own socio-
economic status to impairing symptoms.
Moreover, respondents rated impaired were
most likely to be found among those who
were downwardly mobile relative to their
parents, and least likely to be found among
those who were upwardly mobile. Accord-
ingly, the Midtown researchers concluded
that perhaps both social causation, in the
form of childhood deprivation, and social
selection, in the form of intergeneration
mobility, contribute to the strong inverse
relation between rates of impairing symp-
toms and the respondent’s own socioeconomic
status. Genetic predisposition could, how-
ever, with equal plausibility, be substituted
for childhood deprivation in this interpreta-
tion. The dilemma of the relative impor-
tance of social causation and social selection
explanations of class differences in psychiat-
ric disorder remains.

The problem of finding a basis for assess-
ing the relative importance of social causa-
tion vs. social selection factors in class
differences in rates of disorder has proved
persistent. Obstacles reside in the nature of
the epidemiological surveys, each conducted
at one point in time and necessarily without
experimental controls. Causality is inherently
difficult to demonstrate in such studies.
Short of experiments involving the manipu-
lation of social class, or possibly prospective
surveys over long periods of time, is there
any key to a solution? We will argue that
at least one such key does potentially exist.

The history of New York City has been
marked by great successive waves of new
immigrant groups: the Irish and Germans
in the 1840’s; the Jews and Italians starting
in the 1880’s; the Negroes after World War
I; and the Puerto Ricans after World War
II. Possibly excepting (non-Jewish) Ger-
mans, the initial conditions of these new
groups in the city have been those of
poverty, slums and working class jobs. The
Jews, the Irish and, to a lesser extent, the
Italians have moved up over succeeding
generations into relatively affluent and
largely middle-class circumstances. In this
process of assimilation, these three ethnic
groups have achieved a substantial share
in the wealth and power of the city.

In sharp contrast to these now relatively
advantaged ethnic groups are the Negroes
and Puerto Ricans—concentrated geographi-
cally in the city’s slums, and occupationally
in its low-paying unskilled and semi-skilled
jobs. Glazer and Moynihan summarize the
economic picture in the city as follows:

... the economy of New York . . . is domi-
nated at its peak (the banks, insurance com-
panies, utilities, big corporation offices) by
white Protestants, with Irish Catholics and
Jews playing somewhat smaller roles. In
wholesale and retail commerce, Jews predomi-
nate. White collar workers are largely Irish
and Italian if they work for big organizations,
and Jewish if they work for smaller ones.
The city’s working class is, on its upper lev-
els, Irish, Italian, and Jewish; on its lower
levels, Negro and Puerto Rican. Other ethnic
groups are found scattered everywhere, but
concentrated generally in a few economic
specialties.22
It would be consistent with the reports of
an inverse relationship between social class
and psychological disorder to expect rela-
tively high rates of such disorder among
New York Negroes and Puerto Ricans.1*
If such an expectation were confirmed by
the facts, what would it suggest? In social
selection terms, it would indicate that high
rates of prior psychological disorder, prob-
ably genetically produced, are causing the
low status of Negroes and Puerto Ricans in
New York City. Against the background of
the history and contemporary circumstances
of ethnic groups in New York City, such an
explanation would, however, strain credulity.
It is plausible only as an explanation of high
rates of disorder in the low status members
of groups which, as wholes, are relatively
advantaged.

Let us, then, make the plausible assump-
tion that the downward pressure maintaining
the low group status of Negro and Puerto
Rican New Yorkers stems more from such
social factors as society’s reactions to differ-
ence in skin color and to difference in the
culture of new immigrant groups than from
hereditary defects of personality. Let us also
assume that such downward social pressure
on Jewish, Irish, and Italian New Yorkers
is much less strong, since many of the social
obstacles to achievement now facing Negroes
and Puerto Ricans have either been removed
or were never encountered by these more ad-
vantaged ethnic groups. If, therefore, we hold
such indicators of class as income and edu-
cation constant and find that Negroes and
Puerto Ricans show higher rates of psycho-
logical disorder than their class counterparts
in the more advantaged ethnic groups, this
would be strong support for the social cau-
sation interpretation of class differences in
rates of disorder. The reason is that in-
creased downward social pressure would be
shown to produce an increment in psycho-
pathology over and above that produced by
the lesser downward social pressure on mem-
bers of more advantaged ethnic groups.

If, on the other hand, we were to find
that rates of psychological disorder among
Negroes and Puerto Ricans are lower than
rates among their class counterparts in more
advantaged ethnic groups, the implication
would be that class differences in rates of
disorder are due less to social causation than
to social selection. The reason is that less
psychological disorder among Negroes and
Puerto Ricans would demonstrate that in-
creased downward social pressure does not
lead to increased psychopathology. Rather,
these pressures would be seen to block up-
ward mobility to a greater extent for psy-
chologically heathy Negroes and Puerto
Ricans than for psychologically healthy
members of more advantaged ethnic groups.
As a result of these social selection processes,
there would be a larger “residue” of ill
among the low status members of the more
advantaged ethnic groups.!*

We have, then, a major substantive issue
which could turn on a simple question of
fact: Namely, do Negroes and Puerto Ricans
have higher or lower rates of psychological
disorder than their class counterparts in
more advantaged ethnic groups in New York
City?
for both Negroes and Puerto Ricans.’ It
is difficult, however, to interpret the results
of studies in which the circumstance of be-
ing in treatment constitutes the sole defini-
tion of disorder.1® For example, treatment
rates vary with the availability of treatment
facilities and with attitudes towards their
use. Either of these factors could be respon-
sible for spurious relations between ethnicity
and number of cases in treatment.
Recognition of this problem has stimu-
lated more than twenty-five attempts to
assess the prevalence of untreated as well
as treated disorder in communities. The over-
all rates of disorder reported in these stud-
ies range from less than 1% to more than
60%.17 Analysis of these differences shows
that the factors primarily responsible for the
great variability in rates are methodological,
involving, e.g., thoroughness of data collec-
tion and problems of case definition.1® De-
spite these overall inconsistencies, however,
14 of the 18 studies providing relevant data
on social class show the highest rate in the
lowest economic stratum.?® It seems reason-
able to inquire, therefore, whether they show
trends on ethnic and racial comparisons.
Rates comparing Negroes and whites can
be obtained from eight of these studies.
As Table 1 shows, the eight divide evenly,
with four showing higher rates for Negroes
and four showing higher rates for whites. If
it were possible to control social class in these
comparisons, we would expect differences fa-
voring whites to be decreased, and differences
favoring Negroes to be increased. On their
face, therefore, the results would tend to
support a social selection explanation of the
generally reported inverse relation between
social class and psychological disorder.
Note, however, that three of the four
studies showing higher rates for whites were
done in the South; the fourth, a nationwide
study of Selective Service applicants, in-
cludes the South (with about half the Negro
population of the United States).?° In con-
trast, three of the four studies showing higher
rates for Negroes were done in the North,
one of them in Canada. There is no persua-

20 Eli Ginzberg and Alfred S. Eichner, The Trou-
blesome Presence, New York: Free Press, 1964, p.
330. See pp. 329-332 for documentation of the
lower educational level and economic status of Ne-
groes in the South as compared to Negroes in the
North.
* Calculated by B. S. Dohrenwend.

** Results not reported in percentages.

+P, Lemkau, C. Tietze, and M. Cooper, “Mental Hygiene Problems in an Urban District: Second
Paper,” Mental Hygiene, 26 (1942), pp. 100-119.

21. G. Rowntree, K. H. McGill, and L. P. Hellman, “Mental and Personality Disorders in Selective
Service Registrants,” Journal of American Medical Association, 128 (1945), pp. 1084-1087.

3W. F. Roth and F. B. Luton, “The Mental Hygiene Program in Tennessee,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 99 (1943), pp. 662-675.

*B. Pasamanick, D. W. Roberts, P. W. Lemkau, and D. B. Krueger, “A Survey of Mental Disease in
an Urban Population: Prevalence by Race and Income.” In B. Pasamanick (Ed.), Epidemiology of
Mental Disorder, Washington, D.C.: American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1959, pp.
183-191.

°B. B. Cohen, Ruth Fairbank, and Elizabeth Greene, “Statistical Contributions from the Eastern
Health District of Baltimore. III. Personality Disorder in the Eastern Health District in 1933,” Human
Biology, 11 (1939), pp. 112-129.

°A. J. Rosanoff, “Survey of Mental Disorders in Nassau County, New York, July-October, 1916,”
Psychiatric Bulletin, 2 (1917), pp. 109-231.

™R. W. Hyde and R. M. Chisholm, “The Relation of Mental Disorders to Race and Nationality,
New England Journal of Medicine, 231 (1944), pp. 612-618.

® Dorothea C. Leighton, J. S. Harding, D. B. Macklin, A. M. Macmillan, and A. H. Leighton, The
Character of Danger, New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1963.
white America are always acting, transform-
ing their behavior to conform to white pre-
judices and avoid white punishment. The
resulting facade they present is often so con-
vincing that “. . . many white Americans
have long interpreted it as proof that Ne-
groes are happy and contented with their
lot.” 22 It seems possible that Negroes in the
South, more repressed than in the North,
would present the more undisturbed facade
in investigations conducted under white aus-
pices. If so, the results shown in Table 1
may reflect the white-oriented role behaviors
of Negroes in the South rather than their
psychiatric condition.

Only one published investigation of un-
treated disorder provides data on Puerto
Ricans, and this is the Midtown Manhattan
Study.23 Although there were very few
Puerto Ricans in the area of New York City
studied by the Midtown researchers (only
1.2% of the total population), 27 were
included in the sample of about 1600 re-
spondents. These Puerto Ricans were psy-
chiatrically evaluated as having the largest
proportion with impairing symptoms of all
the subgroups in the study.?* The researchers
compared a subsample of 252 respondents
having family incomes identical with those
of 18 Puerto Ricans in the lowest income
bracket. They report that the proportion
(31%) rated as showing impairing symp-
toms in the former was about half the pro-
portion among the low income Puerto Ricans
(61%).

Washington Heights, a different section of
New York City and the scene of our own
current research, provides opportunity for
more extensive comparisons. Washington
Heights contains four major ethnic groups;
in order of size, these are Jewish, Negro,
Irish and Puerto Rican. Our subjects consist
of a probability sample of about 1000 adults
from these four ethnic groups. Their ages
range from 21 to 59, similar to the 20-59
age limits in the Midtown Study.”®
Of these four main ethnic groups in Wash-
ington Heights, Negroes and Puerto Ricans
are far more disadvantaged socially and eco-
nomically than the Jewish or the Irish. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics has estimated
that the cost of a “modest but adequate”
level of living for a working-class family in
New York City is about $5,200—excluding
taxes.*° Fifty-one per cent of the Negroes
and 55 per cent of the Puerto Ricans have
family incomes of less than $5,000 per year
before taxes. Only 25 per cent of the Jewish
and 28 per cent of the Irish are below the
$5,000 figure. Outright poverty is most strik-
ing in the Negro group, where 26 per cent
have incomes of under $3,000. Sixteen per
cent are at this level among the Puerto
Ricans, seven per cent among the Jewish and
eight per cent among the Irish.

The clearest evidence of downward pres-
sure by the larger society on Negroes and
Puerto Ricans is in the relation of education
to income in these groups as compared with
the more advantaged Jewish and Irish. Table
2 shows that, at any given educational level
other than college graduate, income in the
Negro and Puerto Rican groups is well below
that of their educational counterparts among
the Jewish and Irish. Thus, although a per-
son’s education determines to a large degree
what income he can hope to earn, a Negro
or a Puerto Rican high school graduate is
likely at the present time to have to settle
for less than a Jewish or an Irish high school
graduate.

To exploit for our problem the research
potential of this situation in Washington
Heights, a measure of psychological disorder
is necessary. In the Midtown Study, about
120 items were used to elicit symptomatology
relevant to psychiatric assessment of the re-
spondents. Most of these items were selected
from two sources: the United States Army
Neuropsychiatric Screening Adjunct devel-
oped for Selective Service during World War
II, and the Minnesota Multiphasic Person-
ality Inventory. The main index of psychi-
atric disorder reported in Volume I of the
Midtown Study was based on averaged rat-
ings by two psychiatrists of responses to the
1,600 interviews. The interviews themselves
were conducted by lay interviewers. The rat-
ings ranged respondents on a scale from
“well” through five degrees of severity of
symptomatology: “mild,” “moderate,”
“marked,” “severe,” and “incapacitated.”
Almost a quarter (23.4%) of the Midtown
respondents were classified in the last three
categories: marked, severe, and incapaci-
tated. These are referred to collectively as
“impaired,” and are the “cases” in the Mid-
town Study sample.?7 Only a small minority
of these “cases” had ever been in psychiatric
treatment.

The Midtown researchers found that 22
symptom items from their questionnaire
could be scored to provide a close approxi-
mation of the Midtown Study psychiatric
ratings.?® The items are scored either “one,”
indicating the presence of a symptom, or
“zero,” indicating its absence. Thus, theo-
retically, an individual’s score can range from
zero to 22. Most responses to the questions
are in fixed alternative “yes-no” or “often-
sometimes-never” categories. For example,
the presence of the symptom is indicated by
the response “often” to the question “Are
you ever bothered by nervousness? Would
you say often, sometimes, or never?”
Langner, one of the Midtown researchers,
describes a score of four or more on these

22 items as useful “. . . since it identifies
only one per cent of the psychiatrically eval-
uated Wells, but . . . almost three quarters

of the entire Impaired group.” 2® On this
evidence, it seemed useful to include these
22 items from the Midtown Study in the
Washington Heights interviews.

If this 22-item index of psychological dis-
order shows the same relationship with class
in the Washington Heights sample as a
whole as was found in the Midtown Study
with the full evaluation, we can have in-
creased confidence that it provides a close
approximation to Midtown ratings. As Table
3 shows, there is a significant inverse rela-
tionship between impairing symptoms and
family income.

Table 4 shows that the relationship is
even stronger with educational level. Thus,
in general, the overall relationship reported
for class in the Midtown Study holds for
Washington Heights. What then of the cru-
cial question about rates of psychopathology
among Negroes and Puerto Ricans as against
rates in more advanced subgroups?

Table 5 shows that, with income as the
index of class, the Puerto Ricans have larger
proportions with four or more symptoms
than their counterparts in the other ethnic
groups. Table 6 shows that the results are
much the same if educational level is used
as the index of class.°°
If our comparisons involved only Puerto
Ricans and members of more advantaged
white groups, the results would support a
social causation explanation of class differ-
ences in rates of disorder. Once again, how-
ever, we are confronted by difficulties of in-
terpretation. As Tables 5 and 6 indicate,
Negroes do not show higher rates of symp-
toms than Jews or Irish; this contradicts ex-
pectations from the social causation hy-
pothesis.

There are two ways in which the results,
had they been other than what they are,
could have led to clear cut substantive in-
The question, of course, is whether these
results should be accepted at face value. Are
there problems of method that signal cau-
tion?

The problem of social desirability set
toward the symptom items. Is it possible, for
example, that, like the Negro respondents
to white interviewers in the Memphis poll
mentioned above, the Washington Heights
Negroes are playing a part they believe the
white interviewers in the present study ex-
pect of them? To test this possibility, a prob-
ability subsample of 30 Negro respondents
were reinterviewed on the 22 symptom items
by a staff of six Negro interviewers an aver-
age of two years after the first interview.
We found no difference in either the average
number of symptoms reported the second
time, nor in the proportion showing four
symptoms or more. If, therefore, the Ne-
groes in our Washintgon Heights study, two
thirds of whom were born in the South, are
presenting a facade which conceals their true
psychiatric condition, it may well be a differ-
ently motivated facade from that which
could account for the results obtained by
white vs. Negro interviewers in studies of
Negroes in the South.*! An indirect clue may
be contained in some results of research re-
ported by Manis and his colleagues.*”

These researchers attempted a cross-vali-
dation of the 22 Midtown items, using sam-
ples from patient and nonpatient popula-
tions. Finding that a group of predischarge
ward patients had an average symptom score
lower than two nonpatient groups consisting
of college students and a cross-section of a
community, the researchers argued that the
result indicated a failure of the test, since
“there is little or no reason to believe that
the mental health of these predischarge pa-
tients is equal to or better than the non-
hospitalized populations.” ® It seems likely
that the predischarge ward patients, in the
interests of “getting out,” were less willing
than the nonpatients studied to admit so-
cially undesirable behavior. Note that the
studies shown in Table 1 were all done prior
to the 1954 Supreme Court decision on school
desegregation. Is it possible that now, in the
1960’s, Negroes who originally came to New
York to improve their lot, also feel on the
verge of “getting out” as movements for
Negro civil rights and increased educational
and economic opportunity gather momen-
tum? And, like the predischarge ward pa-
tient, may these Negroes not also be showing
conscious or unconscious resistance to ad-
mitting characteristics they judge to be so-
cially undesirable? ** Such an interpretation
would be consistent with findings from re-
cent studies that Northern Negroes tend
more than whites to underreport hospitali-
zation for a variety of illnesses,®° and to state
somewhat higher educational and occupa-
tional aspirations for their children than
whites.3*> Whether and to what extent this
interpretation is correct, however, is another
question. As our further results will show, it
probably implies less chaos and more order
than exists for Northern Negroes under cur-
rent conditions.

Questions must also be raised about the
meaning of the high rates of symptoms shown
by Puerto Ricans. The entire Midtown sam-
ple reported an average of 2.8 of the 22
symptom items.37 The receiving ward pa-
tients studied by Manis et al. showed an
average of 6.1 of these symptoms. Langner
administered the 22 Midtown items in ques-
tionnaire interviews to a sample of 297 Mex-
ican born residents of Mexico City.?8 Their
mean score was 5.4 symptoms. Recall that
a score of four or more was used as the cut-
ting point in the analysis of data from Wash-
ington Heights reported above because this
score screened the large majority of those
judged impaired in the Midtown Study. Is
the average resident of Mexico City, then,
with a score of 5.4, a psychiatric case in the
sense of the Midtown Study evaluations? Or
is it possible that the difference between the
respondents in Mexico City and in Midtown
stems from a difference in normative orien-
tation towards these symptoms? Are Puerto
Ricans, with language and some other as-
pects of culture in common with Mexicans,
showing similar differences not in amount of
disorder, but rather in culturally patterned
As might be expected from a quick inspec-
tion of the examples above, most people see
the characteristics called for by these items
as socially undesirable. Some judgments by
a further subsample of 27 Jewish, Irish,
Negro and Puerto Rican respondents in
Washington Heights will illustrate.®® On a
scale from “one,” representing “extremely
undesirable,” to “nine,” representing “ex-
tremely desirable,” the average rating given
the 22 Midtown items was 3.2, with individ-
ual items ranging from 2.17 to 4.12.

To supplement these data we also collected
ratings from two other groups: from a small
sample of Negro males with fourth grade
education and below and, if they were mar-
ried, their wives—22 in all; and from 19
Puerto Rican residents of a tenement in a
section of the Bronx, adjacent to Washing-
ton Heights. By adding data from these two
groups to the data from the original 27, it is
possible to compare the ratings made by 18
Jewish and Irish respondents (combined
mean education 11.2 years) with the ratings
by 26 Negroes (mean education 6.6 years)
and by 24 Puerto Ricans (mean education
8.7 years).*° A vivid difference results.

Only one item received a scale value as
high as neutral (five on the scale) by any of
the three groups.*! There is, nevertheless a
clear contrast between the Puerto Ricans and
all the others. On 17 of the 22 items, the
Puerto Ricans give a less undesirable rating
than either the Jewish and Irish, or the
Negroes.*? The Negro respondents, if any-
thing, give slightly more undesirable ratings
than the Jews and Irish, exceeding them on
11 of the 22 items and tying them on three
more.

The Negroes, in contrast to the Puerto
Ricans, then, are close in their judgments
of social desirability to the norms of the
more assimilated Jewish and Irish groups.
With a sensitivity to such norms developed
under long-standing conditions of oppression,
and heightened, perhaps, at this time of in-
creased striving toward greater equality
within the value framework of the wider
society,*® the Negroes may be more likely
than the Jews or the Irish to suppress
admission of symptoms they judge socially
undesirable. If so, their actual rate of dis-
order may be much higher than the symptom
measure suggests.

The Puerto Ricans, in turn, regard the
characteristics described in the 22-item
screening instrument as less undesirable than
do members of the other ethnic groups. It
seems possible that they would also be more
willing than the other groups, on this ac-
count, to admit such characteristics. If so,
they may actually have a much lower rate
of disorder than their rate of reported symp-
toms would suggest. On the other hand,
the reason Puerto Ricans see these symp-
toms as less undesirable may be because
they are actually more common among
Puerto Ricans. If this is so, then higher rates
of reported symptoms among Puerto Ricans
and their lower tendency to see these symp-
toms as strongly undesirable, may both in-
dicate the same thing—higher actual rates
of disorder.**

Investigation of these possibilities ideally
requires a definition of untreated disorder
independent of the symptomatology we are
examining for differential susceptibility to
cultural patterning. As we have no such
definition for our nonpatients, no solution
of this order is possible. We can, however,
examine groups of Jewish, Irish, Negro and
Puerto Rican psychiatric patients, all inde-
pendently defined as ill by their patient
status.

To this end, we asked psychiatrists at
ber of symptoms related to each behavior
type among the 114 patients secured for
this study.*7

Our quota system provided a roughly
similar distribution of the six behavior types
in each of the four ethnic groups. Thus,
if similar degrees and types of disorder are
expressed in similar ways by each ethnic
group, we should find no ethnic differences
among these patients in rates of symptoms.
Table 8 shows that, as among our nonpatient
cross-sections in Washington Heights, there
is a generally higher rate among the Puerto
Ricans. It would seem, then, that we must
question high rates of such symptoms per se
as indicators of high rates of psychological
disorder in the nonpatient cross-sections.
This would be true regardless of whether
the high rate were due to cultural differ-
ences in willingness to admit such symptoms
when they are present, or to cultural differ-
ences in mode of expressing distress.*® If
the latter is the case, of course, another
problem is raised—the problem of the repre-
sentativeness of the sample of symptom
items.

The problem of bias in sampling symptom
items. The Midtown researchers report that
they attempted to include a sample of “.. .
such symptoms as would demonstrably repre-
sent the most salient and generalized indica-
tors of mental pathology.” *° Descriptively,
these were said to consist “. . . principally
of the psychophysiologic manifestations and
those tapping anxiety, depression, and in-
adequacy dimensions.” ©° Also included were
items “, . . bearing particularly on .. .
phobic reactions, and mood.” 54

 

a number of attitude studies since, and can be
found, for example, in Elaine Cumming and John
Cumming, Closed Ranks, Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1957.

47 The uneven n’s in the various ethnic groups
and among the various behavior types are due to
scarcity of some of the desired types of patient at
the facilities to which we had access. After a while,
we concentrated on securing the rarer types of
patients so as to have a roughly equal distribution
of the behavior types in each ethnic group. Even
so, we will have to go elsewhere to interview an ap-
preciable number of alcoholics and sociopaths.

48 See Charles Kadushin, “Social Class and the
Experience of Ill Health,” Sociological Inquiry, 34
(Winter, 1964), pp. 67-80.

49 Srole, et al., op. cit., p. 41.

50 Ibid., p. 42.

51 Ibid., p. 60.
The Midtown researchers also suggest,
however, that the full battery of items on
which their psychiatric evaluation was based,
and perhaps especially the derivative 22-
item screening instrument, tend to miss cer-
tain types of disorder such as alcoholism,
sociopathic traits, and the early stages of
paranoid schizophrenia.*? It seems reason-
able to consider the possibility, therefore,
that symptoms associated with these dis-
orders may be more prominent among New
York’s Negroes and Puerto Ricans than
among its white groups of predominantly
European ancestry, even with class con-
trolled.

53 For vivid illustrations of possible cultural (in-
cluding class subcultural) patterning of symptoma-
tology, and perhaps even of type of disorder, see
Andrew F. Henry and James F. Short, Suicide and
Homicide, Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1954; Marvin
K. Opler and Jerome L. Singer, “Ethnic Differences
in Behavior and Psychopathology: Italian and
Irish,” International Journal of Social Psychiatry,
2 (Summer, 1956), pp. 11-22; M. J. Field, Search
for Security, Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Uni-
versity Press, 1960; Joseph W. Eaton and Robert
J. Weil, Culture and Mental Disorders, Glencoe,
Ill.: Free Press, 1955; August B. Hollingshead and
Frederick C. Redlich, Social Class and Mental Ill-
ness, New York: Wiley, 1958; and Thomas S.
Langner and Stanley T. Michael, Life Stress and
Mental Health, New York: Free Press of Glencoe,
1963.
54This probability subsample was selected on
the basis of ethnicity of the male head of the
household. An equal number of households was
designated from each of the four main ethnic
groups, and within each ethnic group, proportional
allocation according to educational level of the
male head was employed. Negro and Puerto Rican
respondents were interviewed by Negro and Puerto
Rican interviewers. Husbands and wives were inter-
viewed separately but simultaneously in different
parts of their apartments by male and female in-
terviewers respectively. In all, 94 married couples
and 26 single male household heads (214 individ-
uals in all) were to be interviewed. Interviews were
completed with the designated respondents in 69%
of the households. An additional 12% had to be
removed from the sample because we could not
locate them, and because of verified moves out of
the state, death, etc. Respondents in 19% of the
households, disproportionately first-generation Irish,
refused to be interviewed after repeated call-backs.
In all, 71% of the designated respondents were in-
terviewed. This gives us a rather good representa-
tion of married couples in all groups other than
the Irish who were born in Ireland. It excludes a
very important category among Negroes, the fe-
male household head with children but no husband
present. Also, 14 of the 26 single male household
heads were Negro, and we succeeded in interview-
ing only eight of them. These eight probably in-
clude the more stable among the single male house-
hold heads in the Negro group. This inference is
based on the fact that differences between Negroes
and their Jewish and Irish educational counterparts
on the indices to be described are, if anything,
sharper when all single males in the subsample are
excluded from the analysis. The single males are
retained in Tables 9, 10 and 11 in the interest of
not further decreasing an already small n. If any-
thing, the nature of the sample as a whole, with its
emphasis on married couples and more stable single
males, should reduce rather than accentuate differ-
ences on the variables of interest: possible alcohol-
ism, possible sociopathy, and possible paranoid
tendencies. An additional problem arises, however,
from the fact that in this small sample, Negroes
and Puerto Ricans have almost a monopoly on
respondents who did not graduate from grammar
school, while Jews have the large majority of col-
lege graduates—thus compromising our ability to
control educational level. This is most important for
the results shown in Tables 10 and 11. Neverthe-
less, when respondents with 0-7 years of education
and those with college or more are omitted from
Tables 10 and 11, sharp contrasts tending to sup-
port the social causation hypothesis remain.
cies, sociopathic tendencies, and alcoholism
were included.

There were two items bearing on alcohol-
ism: “I have not had trouble with my health
or my work because of drinking.” “I have
had arguments with my family because of
my drinking.” These were answered either
“true” or “false,” with the first (and slightly
more likely to elicit problems) keyed
“false,” and the second keyed “true.” 5
Table 9 shows that there is a greater tend-
ency for combined Negroes and Puerto
Ricans of higher educational level to report
drinking problems than the Jews or the
Trish at higher educational levels. But the
similarity of the advantaged and disadvan-
taged ethnic groups at lower educational
levels, and the tendency of less-educated
Negroes and Puerto Ricans to report fewer
drinking problems than higher-educated Ne-
groes and Puerto Ricans is puzzling from
either a social causation or a social selection
point of view.

With regard to sociopathic tendencies, six
items were included. From most to least
likely to be answered in the sociopathic di-
rection they are: 56
Responses to all but the first of these
six items conform to the Guttman scale pat-
tern, thus providing a cumulative scale score
of from zero to five “sociopathic” responses.57
Table 10 shows that, if we disregard the 9
Jews of low education, these indications of
possible sociopathic tendencies are most pro-

 

face validity and with some changes in wording
from the MMPI. We provided alternative wordings
for each item so that each could have an equal
chance of being keyed “true” or “false.”

57 Guttman’s coefficient of reproducibility for the
five items that scaled is 0.905; Menzel’s coefficient
of scalability is 0.606. It is interesting to speculate
after the fact on why the item about “lying to
get ahead” did not scale. Possibly this is because it
involves achievement orientation, and hence focuses
to a greater extent than the other five on what may
be a form of middle-class sociopathy.
Taste 11. Possiste INDICATIONS oF PARANOID TENDENCIES ACCORDING TO ETHNIcITY AND EpucaTION *

 

 

 

 

 

(PER CENT)
Number of Not High School Graduate High School Graduate or More
‘Paranoid”
Responses Puerto Puerto
(0-6) Jewish Trish Negro Rican Jewish Trish Negro Rican
0 50.0 12.5 8.0 50.0 35.7 46.7 46.1
1 25.0 18.7 40.0 21.1 35.7 20.0 7.7
2 12.5 31.2 28.0 18.4 21.4 13.3 23.0
3 5000 31.2 16.0 10.5 7A 20.0 15.4
4 12.5 6.3 8.0 errs 7.7
Total % 99.9 100.0 99.9 100.0 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9
Total Respondents (9) (16) (16) (25) (38) (14) (15) (13)

 

*In comparisons of proportions scoring zero, one-tailed t-tests indicate that combined Negroes and
Puerto Ricans of lower educational level differ significantly (p<0.05 or better) from: combined Negroes
and Puerto Ricans with higher educational levels; combined Jewish and Irish of lower educational level;
and combined Jewish and Irish of higher educational level.
Taste 10. Possiste InpicaTions or SocropatHy Accorpinc To Erunicity anp Epucation *

 

 

 

   

(PER CENT)
“ Number of » Not High School Graduate High School Graduate or More
‘Sociopathic a —————————
Responses Puerto Puerto
(0-5) Jewish Trish Negro Rican Jewish Trish Negro Rican
0 Breer 25.0 Bert 8.0 34.2 42.9 33.3 23.0
1 33.3 43.7 31.2 40.0 26.3 50.0 13.3 38.4
2 44.4 31.2 31.2 28.0 34.2 Perr) 46.7 30.8
3 22.2 Bobo 31.2 20.0 5.3 7.1 6.7 7.7
4 6.2 4.0 peer aye
Total % 99.9 99.9 99.8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.9
Total Respondents (9) (16) (16) (25) (38) (14) (5) (13)

 

*In comparisons of proportions scoring zero, one-tailed t-tests indicate that combined Negroes and
Puerto Ricans of lower educational level differ significantly (p<0.05 or better) from combined higher-
educated Negroes and Puerto Ricans and from combined higher-educated Jews and Irish.
and Puerto Rican groups. Among the higher
educated respondents, Negroes and Puerto
Ricans tend to have higher scores than the
Jews and the Irish. Thus we have here
results which, on their face, are the most
consistent so far with a social causation
explanation.

The measures of possible sociopathic and
possible paranoid tendencies involved in
these results show little relation to the 22
Midtown-item score. This suggests that the
Midtown items may grossly underrepresent
psychological symptomatology, especially
among lower educated Negroes and Puerto
Rican respondents.®°

The problem of acquiescence response
style. Again, however, questions must be
raised about accepting these results at face
value. Recall that the possibly paranoid
items did not scale and that, on a random
basis, three of the six items were keyed
“true,” the other three “false.” It is neces-
sary to inquire whether tendencies to “yea-
say” (agree) or “naysay” (disagree) re-
gardless of item content may have constituted
a competing dimension that both generated
scale errors and distorted the substantive
results.6t

To investigate this problem of acquies-
cence response style, separate scores ranging
from zero to three were constructed for the
“true” and “false” keyed items respectively.
To the extent that yeasaying or naysaying
occurred, we would expect little correlation
between the two indices. We find that there
is a significant (p<0.05) positive correla-
tion of 0.33 for the higher-educated respon-
dents. For the lower-educated respondents,
however, the correlation is not only insignifi-
cant, but negative (—0.03). This negative
correlation is most pronounced in the Negro
group were it reaches —0.32.° Thus, we
must reckon with yeasaying or naysaying
response styles in interpreting the results
which, so far, are most consistent with a
social causation point of view.

Table 12 shows that we would have to
alter our interpretation if we relied on an
index made up of the false-keyed paranoid
items. Most important is the difference
among the lower educated Negroes depend-
ing on how the items are keyed. For them,
there appears to be a clear tendency toward
yeasaying.3

The problem of psychological symptoms
as indicators of psychological disorder. It
would seem, then, that further work in this
field can ignore the problem of response bias
only at its peril. Would control of response
bias in itself, however, provide adequate
measures of psychological disorder? This is
doubtful.

If a tendency to agree to items regardless
of their content on the part of lower edu-
cated Negroes were the whole story of their
higher scores on our measure of possible
paranoid tendency,** why, then, did such a

 

(high school graduates or more) in each ethnic
group are: Jewish, 0.42; Irish, 0.22; Negro, 0.42;
and Puerto Rican 0.39. For the lower educated (did
not graduate from high school) in each ethnic
group, they are: Jewish, —0.10; Irish, 0.41; Negro,
—0.32; and Puerto Rican, —0.02.

63 Among the low educated Puerto Ricans, there
are apparently both yeasayers and naysayers, and
these appear to balance each other on the two in-
dices.

64A check on the distribution of scale errors in
the sociopathy scale according to ethnicity and edu-
cational level indicates that such error was not due
in any important way to yeasaying or naysaying in
specific ethno-educational groups. There is a tend-
ency, not statistically significant, for the less-edu-
cated Puerto Ricans to have fewer respondents who
are scale types than the other lower educated re-
spondents. With this possible exception, error is not
appreciably more frequent in any one of the eight
ethno-educational groups than in any others. Over-
all, 62% of the respondents were scale types; the
range is from 44% among the lower-educated
Puerto Ricans to 69% among the lower-educated
Negroes. Since three of the sociopathy scale items
are keyed “true” and two are keyed “false,” even
roughly comparable indices cannot be built, as in
the case of the six paranoid items, for still further
checking. Nevertheless, the direction of relation-
ships seems similar for an index built of the three
“true” keyed items vs. an index built of the two
“false” keyed items according to ethnicity and
education. The fact that these five items scaled thus
appears to mean that content was dominant over
yeasaying or naysaying response styles in their case.
response style not produce similar high
scores on the 22 Midtown items which were
uncontrolled for acquiescence? For 11 of
these 22 items, a “yes” response was scored
as indicating pathology. The response al-
ternatives for most of the others were “often,
sometimes, or never” and might also be sus-
ceptible to yeasaying or naysaying tenden-
cies (see the examples given above).
Earlier, it was noted that the 22 Midtown
screening items were rated for degree of
social desirability by small samples of Jew-
ish, Irish, Negro and Puerto Rican respond-
ents. Puerto Ricans, it will be remembered,
tended to see these items as less undesirable
than did Jews and Irish. In contrast Negroes,
if anything, saw the items as more undesir-
able than did Jews and Irish. These same
respondents also rated the present items on
alcoholism, sociopathic, and paranoid tenden-
cies. Like the 22 Midtown items, these items
tend to fall on the undesirable side of the
scale. This time, however, the picture is
somewhat different for the Negroes. Com-
pared to the combined Jews and Irish, the
Negroes see four of the five sociopathic
items, four of the six paranoid items, and
one of the two alcoholic items as less socially
undesirable.© The results are similar for
the Puerto Ricans, but more pronounced,
because they tend to see the sociopathic
items as even less undesirable than the
Negroes.

It seems possible and even likely, there-
fore, that acquiescence styles among the
lower-educated Negroes do not operate in-
dependently of judgments of the social de-
sirability of the content involved.® Differ-
ences in the appraisal of social desirability
may account in part, at least, for our symp-
tom results. So again we must consider the
two alternative possibilities raised by the so-
cial desirability factor, this time for Negroes
as well as Puerto Ricans: Are Negroes and
Puerto Ricans simply more willing than the
Jews and the Irish to admit problems with
projected anger, and anti-social beliefs and
behaviors because they judge such things as
less undesirable? Or are these less undesir-

66 Jt has generally been assumed that the more
ambiguous an item, the more likely it is to elicit a
yeasaying or naysaying response style independent
of content (see, for example, Richard Christie and
Florence Lindauer, “Personality Structure,” Annual
Review of Psychology, 14 (1963), especially pp.
207-208.). It seems possible that the lower the edu-
cational level of respondents, the more ambiguous
some of these items may have appeared. However,
there is no apparent reason why the paranoid items
should seem more ambiguous than the 22 Midtown
items. To the extent that content was irrelevant as
a determinant of the responses of low educated
Negroes, for example, acquiescence should have led
to high scores on the 22 Midtown items as well as
on the paranoid index.
able ratings themselves a function of the
greater prevalence of such beliefs and be-
haviors in the Negro and Puerto Rican
groups?

It seems unlikely that normatively in-
duced variation in willingness to admit para-
noid and sociopathic tendencies is the whole
story. On these grounds, the Puerto Ricans
who see four of the five sociopathic items as
less undesirable than do the Negroes should
also show stronger tendencies to admit such
things than the Negroes. As can be seen
by glancing again at Table 10, this is not
the case. If anything, the Puerto Ricans
score lower than the Negroes on this index
of sociopathic tendencies.°7

Let us assume, then, at least for purposes
of argument, that Table 10 and Table 11
portray actual differences in beliefs and be-
havior between Jews and Irish on the one
hand, and Negroes and Puerto Ricans on
the other.®* If so, would there be any rea-
son to believe that these differences in re-
sponses to possibly sociopathic, and possibly
paranoid, symptom items are compelling evi-
dence of the presence of these types of
psychological disorder? It appears to be true
that our patient sample is more likely to
give paranoid responses to these items than
our non-patient sample; moreover, the pa-
tients who were judged to show paranoid-
like behavior by their psychiatrists are more
likely to give the paranoid types of responses
to these items than are the other patients.
It is possible that interviews with individuals
who have known sociopathic. histories would
reveal that they also will describe themselves
in terms of the sociopathic items. Should the
high rates of similar responses in our low
educated Negro and Puerto Rican commu-
nity samples, then, be taken as evidence of
the high frequency of such disorders in these
groups?

M. J. Field has pointed out that, in
Ghana, where nobody looks twice at a lorry
announcing in big letters, “Enemies all
about me,” or “Be afraid of people,” the
universality of the “normal” paranoid atti-
tude makes it necessary to diagnose para-
noid schizophrenia with great caution. She
writes: “But just as, in our own society, we
are able to recognize as abnormal the man
from whom no reassurance can shift the
groundless conviction that he has cancer, so
we are able in rural Ghana to recognize
the morbidly ineradicable paranoid convic-
tion.” 7° The sign of the difference between
normal and abnormal she refers to as the
“peculiar recalcitrant obstinacy” of the dis-
torted outlook.”! Is it possible that the re-
sponses of lower-class Negroes and Puerto
Ricans in our Washington Heights study to
the kinds of paranoid and sociopathic items
described above are less evidence of person-
ality disorder than of what Durkheim has
described as “derivatives” of anomie—the
currents of anger, disillusionment, discon-
tent and so on that are held, unlike that
comparative rarity, the act of suicide, to be
the more prevalent responses to anomie? 7

Attempts to codify clinical experience in
the form of diagnostic nomenclatures em-
phasize the persistence of symptomatology
indicative of pathology. Consider descrip-
tions of the functional mental disorders in
the widely used 1952 Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association. Here we read, for example, of

the “. .. increase in severity of symptoms
over long periods . . .” that is characteristic
of the simple type of schizophrenic reac-
tion,”® and of the “. . . chronic and pro-

longed course . . .” of paranoia.”4 Lifelong

studies of psychoneurotics are said to “...
usually present evidence of periodic or con-
stant maladjustment of varying degree from
early life.” 75 In most instances of the per-
sonality disorders, including sociopathy and
alcoholism, “. . . the disorder is manifested
by a lifelong pattern of action or behavior.

. .”7 And the symptoms of the psycho-
physiological autonomic and visceral dis-
orders are held to be “. . . due to a chronic
and exaggerated state of the normal physio-
logical expression of emotion. . . .” 77 Thus
most of the so-called functional psychiatric
disorders are described as chronic in nature.
They stem from a persistent defect of per-
sonality of whatever origin. It seems reason-
able to assume that a source in such defect
is what is meant by the term “pathology” in
relation to psychological symptomatology, or
by the term “disorder” in relation to per-
sonality.

The Midtown Study researchers suggest
that their untreated “cases” show psycho-
logical pathology like that of psychiatric
patients.”* Yet, unlike the psychiatric pa-
tient, seen over a course or several courses
of treatment, the untreated “case” in cross-
sectional surveys such as the Midtown Study
is seen at only one point in time.”® Moreover
the questions used to elicit evidence of symp-
tomatology in the Midtown Study vary
with respect to temporal reference, some
calling for present problems, some being of
the “have you ever” variety (see the sample
questions above). Is it possible that such
symptoms bear only a pseudo-resemblance
to the persistent symptomatology observed
in psychiatric patients?

Our subsample of 151 respondents in
Washington Heights were reinterviewed an
average of two years after the original in-
terviews were conducted. Both the first and
the second interviews with these respondents
included the 22 Midtown items. The sec-
ond interview also included some ques-
tions about objective events that might have
changed the respondent’s situation between
the two interviews, especially occurrences
related to work and physical health.

The relevant questions about intervening
events were as follows:
This classification of events was made
independently by a psychiatrist and a
sociologist who had no information about
the respondents’ psychological symptoms,
ethnicity, or class background. They dis-
agreed on 14 of the 74 events classified by
either one or the other in the above event
categories. None of these disagreements was
over whether an event was favorable or un-
favorable.

The questions included in the reinterview,
of course, provide far from a complete list
of the events that could have intervened
between the two interviews. Nevertheless,
56 respondents were classified as currently
influenced either by events judged entirely
favorable or by events judged entirely un-
favorable in the terms of the above catego-
ries. The direction of the changes in symptom
scores on the 22 Midtown items from the
first to the second interview for these re-
spondents, as well as for respondents not
so classified, are presented in Table 13.°°

Table 13 shows that the relation between
symptom changes and the quality of cur-
rently impinging events is  significant.**
Note that, since each respondent serves as
his own control on response bias, such bias
might diminish the magnitude of these
changes, but can in no way account for the
changes that occurred. The categories of
favorable and unfavorable events are de-
tailed to show that the results are not due
solely to changes in physical health with
which the 22-item symptom measure may
be contaminated, or to socioeconomic
changes which could be consequences rather
than causes of the symptoms of the main
earner. Thus we see, for example, that
symptoms tend to increase for respondents
whose spouses become ill, and that wives’
symptoms tend to increase or decrease with
negative or positive changes respectively in
their husbands’ job situation. These results
suggest, therefore, the importance of further
investigation of the individual’s contem-
porary situation, as distinct from his possi-
ble personality defects, in attempts to ex-
plain psychological symptomatology.®?
relation of these modes to the underlying
psychiatric condition of individuals.

Two major questions confront further
work in this field. First, what are the cul-
tural and situational factors that lead to
different modes of expressing psychological
symptoms? Second, under what conditions
does symptomatic expression of psychologi-
cal distress become evidence of underlying
Taste 13. Direction or Symptom CHANGE ACCORDING TO QuaLity or EvENTS CuRRENTLY IMPINGING
on RESPONDENTS AT TIME oF Szconp INTERVIEW * (PER CENT)

 

 

 

Direction of Symptom Change

 

No Change
Fewer More Same number No
Symptoms Symptoms of Symptoms Symptoms
onSecond onSecond onBoth on either Number of
Quality of Events Interview Interview Interviews Interview Respondents
Favorable (Totals 100 per cent) 41 23 13

 

23

31
