@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2091278?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
AyMOoND Boupon has introduced into

the sociological literature the problem

of the identification of coefficients in
systems of simultaneous linear equations.1
The identification question, which basically
involves the issue of whether or not there are
too many unknowns for solution, has been
well studied in the econometric and biometric
literature,” but to my knowledge, it has not
been previously called to the attention of

* I am indebted to the National Science Founda-
tion for partial support of this research (GS-746).
I would also like to thank James S. Coleman, Dud-
ley Duncan, Elton Jackson, Leo Goodman, and
Gerhard Lenski for their criticisms of an earlier
version of this paper.

1 Raymond Boudon, “A Method of Linear Causal
Analysis: Dependence Analysis,” American Socio-
logical Review, 30 (June, 1965), pp. 365-374.

2The most definitive discussions of the problem
I have encountered have appeared in the econo-
metrics literature. See especially J. Johnston, Econ-
ometric Methods, New York: McGraw-Hill Book
Co., 1963, Chap. 9; W. C. Hood and T. C. Koop-
mans (eds.), Studies in Econometric Method, New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1953; L. R. Klein, An
Introduction to Econometrics, Englewood Cliffs,
N. J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1962, pp. 15-18; T. C.
Koopmans and A. F. Bausch, “Selected Topics in
Economics Involving Mathematical Reasoning,”
Cowles Foundation Paper, No. 136 (1959); and T.
C. Koopmans, “Identification Problems in Eco-
nomic Model Construction,” Econometrica, 17
(1949), pp. 125-144. Among the biometricians,
Sewall Wright has made a number of contributions
bearing on the question of identification. For refer-
ences to his papers see S. Wright, “The Treatment
of Reciprocal Interaction, With or Without Lag, in
Path Analysis,” Biometrics, 16 (September, 1960),
pp. 423-445; and “Path Coefficients and Path Re-
gressions: Alternative or Complementary Con-
cepts?,” Biometrics, 16 (June, 1960), pp. 189-202.
the regression coefficients can always be

3 Identification problems also arise in situations
where one or more variables are unmeasured, as in
factor analysis, but I am not referring to the litera-
ture on this subject.

*See G. E. Lenski, “Status Crystallization: A
Non-Vertical Dimension of Social Status,” Ameri-
can Sociological Review, 19 (August, 1954), pp.
405-413; G. E. Lenski, “Social Participation and
Status Crystallization,” American Sociological Re-
view, 21 (August, 1956), pp. 458-464; G. E. Lenski,
“Comment,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 28 (Sum-
mer 1964), pp. 326-330; E. F. Jackson, “Status
Consistency and Symptoms of Stress,” American
Sociological Review, 27 (August, 1962), pp. 469-
480). Other authors have of course stressed similar
ideas, but I cannot deal with these in the present
paper. For example, see G. C. Homans’ discussion
of “status congruence” in Social Behavior: Its
Elementary Forms, New York: Harcourt, Brace &
World, Inc., 1961, pp. 248-251.
where the side arrows indicate the effects of
extraneous variables.

In studying the identification question, as
Boudon notes, there is no need to introduce
equation (1), but I prefer to retain it in the
system for heuristic purposes, while focusing
on equations (2) and (3). In operational
terms, the identification problem can be
interpreted as follows. We imagine a “true”
causal law or set of mechanisms as repre-
sented by the above equations. That is, a
unit change in X, will actually produce a
change in Xe of be units. The question,
however, is whether or not one could ever
determine the value of the true regression
coefficients from empirical data. One might
ask, “Suppose an unscrupulous demon were
to perform certain legitimate mathematical
manipulations, presenting to us some new
equations with different numerical values for
the slopes. Could we ever discover the hoax?”

Suppose, for example, that the demon were
to multiply equation (2) by an arbitrary
constant, A, and then add this new equation
to equation (3). This would give

5 Boudon, op. cit. See also Koopmans and Bausch,
op. cit., pp. 143-148. Wold and Juréen have noted
that recursive systems always involve identifiable
coefficients under these assumptions and claim this
to be a major advantage of these systems. See H.

A. Wold and L. Juréen, Demand Analysis, New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1953, pp. 49-52.
and unless certain @ priori restrictions are
imposed on the coefficients, this new equa-
tion will be indistinguishable empirically
from equation (3). Since A is an arbitrary
constant, this means that there are infinitely
many values for the slope coefficients that
will satisfy the equations. This, in turn,
means that one cannot infer the true causal
laws from the data.

Now suppose we impose the usual re-
strictions on error terms required by least
squares theory. This will involve the assump-
tion that the error term e; in any given
equation is uncorrelated with any independ-
ent variables included in that equation.® In
the case of simultaneous equations we may
also assume that the error terms are uncor-
related with each other, i.e., E(eye;)=0, for
all i;4j. This amounts to assuming, in causal
terms, that outside factors affecting one
variable are unrelated to those causing the
others. As Boudon shows, the coefficients
can then be identified.” If one looked only at
the slope estimates he could not determine
whether or not the demon had given him the
“wrong” law. But if he were to examine the
error terms, or deviations from predicted
values, he would discover that these were
correlated, contrary to the assumptions.

In the above simple illustration the error
term in equation (4) is Es=Ae2+es. This
term will ordinarily be correlated with the
error term é€: in equation (2), thus violating
the assumptions. If A=0, and if e2 and eg
are uncorrelated, then E3 and e2 will be un-
related. From this one might conclude that,
if the assumptions about error terms are to
be met, A must be zero, meaning that the
demon has not changed equation (3) at all.
There is only one A that will work (A=0),
and the coefficients can be identified.
But this reasoning is not quite correct. In
addition to the possibility that A=0, there
is also the alternative that e2=0.8 In this
case E3=es, and of course eg is uncorrelated
with the nonexistent e2, and the assumptions
are not violated. Let us examine this limiting
possibility more carefully, noting that for all
practical purposes we would reach essentially
the same conclusions if e2 were very small as
compared with es. In this latter instance, as
long as A is not made too large, there will still
be numerous solutions that are virtually in-
distinguishable, given the existence of sam-
pling fluctuations.

If e2 is zero, then Xz is a perfect mathe-
matical function of X,. One might argue that
empirically it will never happen that we find
two independent variables perfectly related
in this manner. But we shall examine below
an instance where one variable is defined so
as to be a perfect function of several others.
Here there may be no causal relationship
between the two, but a tautological one in-
stead. Thus savings may be defined as total
income less expenditures; similarly, in the
case of status inconsistency, we may define
inconsistency in terms of a mathematical
difference between two statuses. The only
empirical errors are those of measurement,
and we are here assuming measurement er-
rors to be nonexistent.®

If €2 is very small the coefficients will be
identifiable, in the technical sense, but sam-
pling errors will be extremely large. This
means that there will be a least squares solu-
tion that can be obtained by applying the
usual formulas more or less blindly. What
may not be recognized, however, is that
sampling errors may be so large that the
estimates are essentially useless if not mis-
leading. This is the problem of multicol-
linearity, or correlated independent varia-
bles.1° In the expression Aeo+es, the second
term will dominate unless A is very large.

8 Boudon’s proof that dependence coefficients are
identifiable under these assumptions about error
terms requires the further assumption that
E(esX2)540. Hence his proof breaks down in the
special case where the error term @ is zero. See
Boudon, of. cit., p. 374.

9 If measurement errors are explicitly introduced,
additional identification problems will arise.

10 See Johnston, op. cit., pp. 201-207; and H. M.
Blalock, “Correlated Independent Variables: The
Problem of Multicollinearity,” Social Forces, 42
(December, 1963), pp. 233-237.
Although E(e2E3) will not be exactly zero,
the very small value of e2 may produce a
near zero result with a finite number of
cases.

Let us next ask about the implications of
what we have had to assume to achieve iden-
tification even when ez is large. In this case,
X, and Xe are not highly correlated, and
least squares will give reliable estimates of
the parameters. The demon will not be able
to substitute “false” slope coefficients be-
cause reasonably large values of A will pro-
duce correlated error terms that can easily
be detected. But we have achieved identifi-
cation by making assumptions (about ex-
traneous factors) that we often don’t really
believe are correct. Especially when the error
terms are large, and therefore useful for
identification purposes, we usually expect
that some major extraneous factors have
been omitted. If so, then we have relatively
little faith in the assumption that the error
terms are really uncorrelated. On the other
hand, with relatively small error terms it
might be more plausible to assume that
there is a large number of minor disturb-
ances, none of which tend to dominate." It
might then be reasonable to assume uncor-
related errors.

The fact that it is necessary to make as-
sumptions about extraneous factors has been
emphasized repeatedly by myself and others,
and does not need to be stressed again at this
point. These assumptions are necessary
whenever one wishes to pass from straight-
forward description to interpretations of any
kind. But most sociologists would probably
consider such assumptions as necessary evils;
they are made with “tongue in cheek,” so to
speak. We merely hope that they are correct,
not really believing this to be the case. In a
sense, then, we are attaining identification
too cheaply. From the standpoint of the
mathematics, assumptions are either made
or not made; one does not distinguish de-
grees of faith in his assumptions. But from
the practical standpoint, we cannot avoid
doing this.

As will be discussed below, there are 2
number of other ways to achieve identifica-
Lenski has introduced the notion of status
inconsistency as a variable producing effects
on dependent variables over and above those
accounted for by separate status variables.18
In doing so, he has added a complicating
factor, the implications of which may be
quite disturbing. Although the literature on
status inconsistency has not generally been
formulated in terms of simultaneous equa-
tions or regression theory, and though critics
have not explicitly pointed to the identifica-
tion problem, it is quite apparent that the
existence of too many unknowns constitutes
the core of the problem. With the exception
of a recent paper by Jackson and Burke,'*
the usual mode of presentation of status-
inconsistency analyses has been in terms of
cross-classifications. I shall, however, use the
regression approach in the present context
because this makes it possible to see the
identification problem in greater generality.
I shall then comment briefly on how the
same problem arises in the case of cross-clas-
sifications.

12 For readers who wish to consider an additional
example involving the identification problem, Jack-
son and Curtis have noted that the problem of oc-
cupational mobility is basically the same as that
of status inconsistency. Y may represent some de-
pendent variable, X: father’s occupation, Xe re-
spondent’s occupation, and Xi:—kXz the respond-
ent’s occupational mobility. The identification
problem will then arise if one wishes to separate out
the component effects of father’s occupation, son’s
occupation, and mobility (or strains due to mo-
bility). See E. F. Jackson and R. F. Curtis, “Prob-
lems of Measurement and Analysis in the Study of
Social Stratification,” (unpublished manuscript).
See also O. D. Duncan, “Residential Areas and
Differential Fertility,” Eugenics Quarterly, 11 (June,
1964), pp. 82-89. Duncan presents mobility data
for which there is an apparent “inconsistency” ef-
fect explainable by a simple additive model.

18 See especially Lenski, “Status Crystallization,”
Op. cit.

14E, F. Jackson and P. J. Burke “Status and
Symptoms of Stress: Additive and Interaction Ef-
fects,” American Sociological Review, 30 (August,
1965), pp. 556-564.
As noted above, if Z is a linear function of
X1—kXe we will encounter the identification
problem, since we may multiply the second
equation by an arbitrary constant, add it to
the first, and produce a new equation that
cannot be distinguished empirically from the
first. One way out of the difficulty, as already
implied, is to impose @ priori restrictions on
bi, be, or bs. For example, one could assume
that education has no direct effect on liberal-
ism. Or one might at least specify the signs
of by and be, thereby obtaining some upper
and/or lower bounds on bs. These strategies
are essentially those proposed by Hyman,’¢

15 See “Comment,” op. cit., for Lenski’s latest
formulation.

16M. D. Hyman, “Determining the Effects of
Status Inconsistency: A Criticism of Lenski’s
Method and a Description of an Alternative Ap-
proach,” Public Opinion Quarterly (forthcoming).
and their practical implications deserve care-
ful study. I shall not, however, discuss this
approach in the present paper.

Before introducing modifications, let us
note a perplexing methodological problem
encountered in the interpretation of the slope
coefficients in this instance. Ordinarily, we
would interpret the b’s causally in terms of
an imaginary experiment in which all but one
independent variable is held constant. Thus
b; would be interpreted as the change that
would be produced in Y by a unit change in
X1 (income), with both X2 and Z held con-
stant. But even this imaginary experiment
would be impossible to perform, given the
fact that there is no error term in the equa-
tion for Z. We are conceiving of error terms
as due to factors left out of the theoretical
system, rather than as measurement errors.
Even though education and income are prob-
ably causally linked, we can imagine vary-
ing education while holding income constant
(or vice versa). This is true because we can
presumably manipulate other causes, say, of
income. These could be manipulated so as to
counteract the changes in education, in much
the same way that a physicist might hold
temperature constant (while increasing pres-
sure) by introducing a compensatory cooling
agent. But if status inconsistency is defined
as the difference between education and in-
come, it is manifestly impossible to vary one
factor while holding the other two constant.

The philosophical implications of this fact
remain to be explored. I suspect this means
that, even under ideal conditions, there could
be no empirical way of separating the “di-
rect” effects of inconsistency from those of
the two (or more) status variables. Even
though one may imagine that there are such
separate effects, we may be posing an opera-
tionally meaningless question. If so, it would
be well to be aware of this fact.

I don’t believe, however, that the theory
calls for the formulation as stated in equa-
tions (5). This model implies that a liberal
vote Y is caused by inconsistency, per se.
But Lenski posits that inconsistency pro-

 

Hyman notes that there could very well be an in-
consistency effect even when the interaction term
is zero, and he cautions against equating the inter-
action term with the effects of status inconsistency.
It appears as though most students of inconsistency
have, in fact, equated the interaction term with the
inconsistency effect.
The error term ew will now permit identifica-
tion, provided we are willing to make the
assumption that ey and ew are uncorrelated.

Unfortunately, however, there is a prac-
tical complication that reintroduces the iden-
tification problem through the back door.
Lenski and other students of status incon-
sistency have not been able to measure the
strain factor directly, and have had to use
status inconsistency as an indicator of
strain.’7 If W could be perfectly measured,
then we could indeed identify the coefficients.
But if Z is used as the measure of W, in
effect the error term ew is absorbed into Z,
and we are back where we started. One ob-
vious implication is that attempts must be
made to obtain independent measures of
strain, and then to relate these separately to
inconsistency, on the one hand, and to the
dependent variable on the other. But careful
conceptualization will be necessary, since the
theory calls for a special type of strain due
primarily to status inconsistency, rather than
“generalized” strains. Lenski has opened the
lid to Pandora’s box; it will not be easily
closed.18

17 The term “indicator” is of course ambiguous
in the causal sense. Since strain is unmeasured,
either its presumed cause (inconsistency) or its pre-
sumed effects (voting behavior, psychosomatic
symptoms) might be considered indicators. In the
present context, however, I mean simply that stu-
dents of status inconsistency have in effect substi-
tuted “inconsistency” for “strain” in the equation
used to predict the dependent variable.

18 If it were possible to estimate the separate ef-
fects of Ki and Xe taking out the inconsistency
effect, then there would of course be no identifica-
tion problem. One cannot examine only the “consist-
ent” individuals since, by definition, these people
must be alike on X1 and Xs, making it impos-
sible to distinguish their separate effects. But if it
is possible to measure W directly, and to find per-
sons who have inconsistent statuses but yet experi-
ence no strain, then the component parts can be
Assuming that the above problem can be
resolved, the process of identification will be
considerably aided if it is possible to find
and measure other causes of strain that are
not causally linked to inconsistency or to
either of the status variables. This illustrates
another major strategy of attack: that of
finding exogenous variables that affect some
but not all of the factors under consideration.
This particular approach has been studied
in detail by Koopmans '* and other econo-
metricians; the implications may be noted
briefly. The argument applies to linear
models only and is stated as though there
are no restrictions on the error terms. In
effect, the approach can be used to achieve
identification without resorting to such as-
sumptions about errors, or to supplement
them by further decreasing the number of
unknowns relative to the number of equa-
tions.

The necessary conditions for identification
can be stated rather simply. We write a
(linear) equation for each variable that is
dependent on any of the other variables. In
order for the coefficients in a given equation
to be identifiable, the number of variables
excluded from this equation must be at least
equal to one less than the number of equa-
tions. This criterion can be expressed in an-
other equivalent way. Referring to variables
that are not dependent on any of the others
as “exogenous,” and labeling the remainder
“endogenous,” the number of endogenous
variables appearing in any given equation
cannot be greater than one more than the
number of exogenous variables left out of
this equation.

As an illustration, consider equations (1)—
(3). As previously noted, equation (1)
should not be included for purposes of study-
ing identification because Xi is exogenous
and does not depend on either of the two
remaining variables. Equation (2) contains

 

identified. This means, of course, that there must
be other factors affecting the strain variable W in
such a way as to compensate for status inconsist-
ency. It is then a moot point whether it is plausible
to make the necessary simplifying assumptions
about the behavior of these other causes of W. If,
as suggested below, an additional cause V of W
can be measured and manipulated, then identifica-
tion may be more satisfactorily achieved.

19 For a very readable discussion of the necessary
conditions for identification see Koopmans, “Iden-
tification Problems” of. cit.
only one endogenous variable (Xe) and is
therefore identifiable even though no exoge-
nous variables have been left out. But equa-
tion (3) contains two endogenous variables,
with no omitted exogenous variables, and is
therefore not identified. Alternatively, we
note that there are two equations in the sys-
tem, with no omitted variables (of either
type) in equation (3); hence the number of
excluded variables (0) is two less than the
number of equations, and the coefficients
cannot be identified. In using this criterion
we are of course supposing that nothing is be-
ing assumed about the relationships among
error terms. A more general formulation, ac-
cording to Koopmans, is that the number of
linear restrictions on the parameters must be
at least equal to one less than the number of
equations.”°

Returning to the status inconsistency
problem, if we could find an exogenous vari-
able V that is an additional cause of W
(strain) but that does not appear in the
equation for Y, then we could identify the
coefficients in the first of equations (6). If,
in addition, we made the assumptions about
the error terms, the system would be “over-
identified” —there would be fewer unknowns
than equations. One of the excess equations,
or restrictive assumptions, could then be
used to test the adequacy of the model in
predicting empirical results. A second ex-
ogenous cause of W would of course be of
further help. But if V or other causes of W
were themselves dependent on the status
factors X; and Xe, then additional equations
would be required and identification would
not necessarily be achieved.

Again we cannot achieve identification
cheaply in such a manner. As Klein has
pointed out, an additional exogenous varia-
ble such as V must be a major determinant
of W, explaining a considerable proportion
of the variation.?? Otherwise, although least
squares estimates may be obtained and iden-
tification becomes technically possible, sam-
pling errors will be quite large. Students of
status inconsistency will therefore have to
pay careful attention to the question of sam-
Thus far I have been concerned with linear
systems only. The use of nonlinear functions
may also help to identify coefficients under
certain circumstances, and in fact Lenski’s
formulation would seem to suggest the use of
nonlinear models. In equations (6) we might
define inconsistency Z as a simple linear
function of the difference between X; and a
constant times X2. In other words, we could
retain the third equation in this set. But the
strain variable W might be taken as a non-
linear function of Z. One obvious possibility
is that inconsistency in either direction might
create strains and that very large inconsist-
encies might produce much greater strains
than smaller inconsistencies. If so, then we
might take W as a function of inconsistency
squared.?? A second possibility, noted by
both Mitchell and Hyman in their critiques
of status inconsistency theory, is that incon-
sistencies might have opposite effects de-
pending on their direction.?° A third alterna-
tive is that inconsistencies may produce
strains (of a given type) in one direction
only. This last possibility has been treated
more thoroughly in the work of Jackson.24

I will examine only the first of these situ-
ations. Suppose we use the following model:
Suppose our demon multiplies this equation
by A and adds it to the first. The result will
again be a valid equation that could serve to
represent a causal law capable of producing
the same empirical results as the first equa-
tion in system (7).

This time, however, the forms of the two
equations are quite different. The equation
produced by adding a multiple of the equa-
tion for W contains squared terms and a
cross-product term that do not appear in the
original equation. If one imposes a priori the
assumption that the contributions of the two
status factors (with strain held constant)
must be both linear and additive, he can
immediately rule out this more complex al-
ternative. The latter equation, interpreted
causally, says that there will be nonlinear
contributions from both X; and Xe, plus an
interaction component X,Xe, plus a direct
effect of the strain factor W.

Suppose we had allowed for (second de-
gree) nonlinear relationships with X, and
Xe, but not for nonadditive relationships.
Then the original equation could have con-
tained squared terms, and _ identification
would have depended on the cross-product
term. Had we allowed for both nonlinearity
and interaction (other than that produced
by status inconsistency or strain), then it
would have again been impossible to iden-
tify the coefficients without further restric-
tions. In other words, by using a simple
linear additive model in the first equation,
combined with nonlinearity in the second,
identification of the coefficients in the first
equation can be achieved. But with a more
general first equation this might not have
been possible.
where the symbols H, M, and L (and h, m,
and 1) stand for high, medium and low re-
spectively.

The symbols in the bodies of the above
tables might represent percentages of per-
sons who are “high” on liberalism, or per-
haps a mean liberalism score for each sub-
category.”> These are the figures that would
be expected under an additive model, with
no restrictions on the relative magnitudes
of the a’s and b’s. The additive model does
impose some restrictions, however. The same
value b; is added to both columns in the
first table, and similarly for the second
table. There is no problem of identification
in this simple case. In the first table there
will be four empirical values, one for each
cell. There are only three unknowns, how-
ever, and the excess equation can be used
as a check on the adequacy of the model.
Only under special circumstances will the
additive model work; if the figures are per-
centages, the additive model implies that
the difference of differences in percentages
In the first table there are now five un-
knowns and four equations; in the second
there are eleven unknowns and nine equa-
tions. In the general kxk case there will
be k—1 more unknowns than equations.
Clearly, some restrictive assumptions will be
necessary for solution.

Hyman and Mitchell argue in effect that
the identification problem (though they do
not use this term) has in the past been
avoided by making implicit assumptions
about some of the c’s.26 For example, in the
2 x 2 table, one might assume that c; = Ce,
in which case the effects of inconsistency
could readily be inferred. Such an assump-
tion would amount to presuming that incon-
sistency has the same impact on the depend-
ent variable, regardless of the direction of
the inconsistency. Hyman and Mitchell point
out that inconsistency might have opposite
effects, depending on direction.27 If we al-

26 Hyman, op. cit.; Mitchell, op. cit.

27Qne might raise the objection that the single
variable “inconsistency” could hardly be expected
to have opposite effects. It would perhaps be better
to reconceptualize “inconsistency” in terms of two
(or more) distinct variables, e.g., (1) the degree
low for this possibility, we cannot identify
any of the component parts, including even
the direction of the “main effects” of the
two status variables. Hyman’s suggestion, as
already noted, is to specify the direction
of the main effects, thereby imposing some
restrictions on the c’s.

Jackson and Burke make use of dummy-
variable regression analysis involving three
categories for both of the status variables.?°
They obtain a solution (in their Model IT)
by a procedure equivalent to setting all of
the c’s equal to zero except for ce and cs
in the second table. In other words, they
introduce interaction terms only in the case
of the extreme inconsistent cells Hl and
Lh. This procedure reduces the number of
unknowns to seven, two less than the neces-
sary minimum of nine. In effect this model
of Jackson and Burke allows for different
effects of extreme inconsistency, depending
on direction. But effects of moderate incon-
sistency are assumed negligible. Quite ob-
viously, other sorts of simplifying assump-
tions could be introduced, depending on
one’s theory. For example, one might as-
sume that none of the c’s are zero, but that
the inconsistency effects are proportional to
the magnitudes of the main effects and the
size of the inconsistency, as measured in
some determined way.
possible to see exactly what assumptions
must be made in order to achieve unambigu-
ous results. Furthermore, it should help one
locate the ambiguities in a systematic way,
without having to undergo lengthy verbal
discussions only to discover that the prob-
lem can be reduced to that of having too
many unknowns in the system.

Deductive reasoning, as used in mathe-
matics, shows up quite clearly the necessity
of making large numbers of simplifying as-
sumptions. Making these assumptions ex-
plicit is sometimes a very disturbing process
psychologically. What is most discouraging,
perhaps, is that the more variables one uses
in his theoretical system, the larger the pos-
sible number of interrelationships that may
hold among these variables. One may have
second- and higher-order interactions, re-
ciprocal causation, and so forth. In order to
make any inferences at all, it is necessary
to add assumption upon assumption until
the whole system seems unreasonable.

But the loss is only apparent, since com-
parable simplifying assumptions are always
implicitly made. Prior to Lenski’s formula-
tion, voting behavior might have been taken
as a simple additive function of status vari-
ables. In effect, this amounts to assuming
that the coefficient of the inconsistency com-
ponent is zero. This, too, is an assumption,
but an implicit one. We have therefore not
lost ground by bringing the inconsistency
factor into the picture. But as such factors
are included, we must be prepared to pay
the price of greater complexity, with all
this implies concerning analytical techniques
and theoretical difficulties.

In all of the preceding discussion, I have
made a major over-simplification by assum-
ing one-way causation. If reciprocal causa-
tion were explicitly handled in this instance,
it would no longer be possible to assume that
error terms are unrelated, and the identifica-
tion problem would appear in numerous
sociological examples. As noted earlier, it is
also encountered when one explicitly allows
for measurement errors. The issues discussed
in the present paper are therefore not
peculiar to status inconsistency or social
mobility theory.

Given the fact that there are large num-
bers of @ priori assumptions that can be
used to achieve identification, how can one
choose among these in some rational man-
ner? Perhaps we may have to fall back
on the criterion of simplicity, as ambiguous
as this may be in many instances. If a theory
such as that of status inconsistency can yield
a large number of predictions about diverse
dependent variables, and if no other single
alternative can do so, then one would ordi-
narily prefer the simpler more all-inclusive
theory. For example, if it were predicted
that inconsistencies between ascribed and
achieved statuses should produce strains,
whereas those between achieved statuses
should not, then one could test such a theory
by examining different pairs of status vari-
ables to see whether or not the interactions
occurred for the predicted combinations
the delegation of special tasks to a few lead-
ers. The separation of leadership from the
rank and file contributes to member apathy,
and this tends to strengthen the leaders’
powers and permit their self-perpetuation.
Frequently the organization’s existence be-
comes an end in itself for the leaders who
wish to retain the rewards of their high
position. The organization’s original goals
are often compromised and subverted as a
result of these oligarchical tendencies.
Lipset has reformulated the Iron Law, spe-
cifying other social conditions that underlie
the emergence of oligarchy and restrict the
development of democracy.? For example,

2Seymour M. Lipset, “The Political Process in
Trade Unions: A Theoretical Statement,” in
Morroe Berger, Theodore Abel, and Charles H.
Page (eds.), Freedom and Control in Modern
