@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
This project explores cohort and period trends in political participation in the United States
between 1973 and 2008. We examine the extent to which protest attendance and petition
signing have diffused to different kinds of actors across multiple generations; we test claims
central to understanding trends in social movement participation. Using aggregated, cross-
sectional survey data on political involvement from 34,241 respondents, we examine changes
in the probability of ever having attended a protest or signed a petition over time periods and
across cohorts using cross-classified, random-effects models. We find a strong generational
effect on the probability of ever having attended a protest, which explains much of the
observed change in self-reports of protest behavior. More than half of this generational effect
is a result of compositional change, but we find little evidence that protest attendance dif-
fused to new types of actors. We compare these findings with a less confrontational form
of protesting, petition signing, which shows more period than cohort effects. We argue that
social movement activities have not become a widespread means of civic engagement.
The proportion of individuals who reported
ever having attended a protest rose from
10.1 percent in the 1973 General Social Sur-
vey (GSS) to 18.8 percent in the 2004 GSS.
Social movement scholars, notably Tarrow
(1994) and Meyer and Tarrow (1998a,
1998b), argue that the United States and
other industrialized democracies are ‘“‘social
movement societies” in which marches,
demonstrations, boycotts, and other confron-
tational political tactics have become
historically were strongly associated with
political outsiders, such as civil rights acti-
vists and unruly student leftists, are now
a part of the modern political repertoire
available to the left and the right, to insiders
and outsiders, for a wide variety of issues.

Some scholars take this rise in the propor-
tion of individuals ever attending a protest to
indicate the health of advanced democracy
in the face of much-heralded declines in other
forms of civic engagement. Notably, Inglehart
and Catterberg (2002) and Dalton (2008b) see
the rise of post-material social movements,
such as the environmental movement in
advanced industrial democracies, as a sign
that a new form of engaged citizenship has
restructured the ways that individuals partici-
pate in governance. They see the rise and dif-
fusion of protest attendance and petition sign-
ing as evidence that any particular decline in
civic life (see Putnam 2000) is not a threat
to the health of democracy; these newly prom-
inent forms of political action allow citizens to
focus “‘on issues of greatest concern,”’ in con-
trast to the blunt tool of voting (Dalton
2008b:93).

We argue, however, that the extent of the
rise and diffusion of protest attendance and
petition signing is understudied. While studies
find some support for the diffusion and insti-
tutionalization of protest during the past 50
years (e.g., Soule and Earl 2005), the principal
mechanisms for this shift to a social move-
ment society remain underspecified in several
important ways.

First, it remains unclear how much of the
observed increase in movement participation
relates to generational change and how
much of this increased probability of protest
is the result of time period effects. Previous
research focuses exclusively on changes over
time, largely ignoring the role of generational
replacement and cohort socialization. By con-
trast, researchers studying other aspects of
social movements find large generational
effects (Whittier 1995). If the observed
changes are related to generational effects,
with protesting Baby Boomers replacing their
more quiescent parents, then the increase in
proportion ever protesting does not represent
a fundamental change in the way that individ-
uals interact with the state. Instead, it may be
a short-lived interruption in habits of civic
engagement. If, on the other hand, the
increase in protesting has affected individuals
who did not live through the 1960s, this sug-
gests a long-term shift in the practices of
governance.

Second, observed generational and tempo-
ral patterns in political participation might be
largely an artifact of compositional change. If
the increase in protest participation is largely
a function of the increasing proportion of
Americans who go to college, which is
a strong predictor of political engagement,
this would represent a different sort of change
mechanism than if the increase were caused
by the increased number of racial and ethnic
minority group members living in the United
States. We explore the extent to which
changes in the demographic profile of Amer-
icans drive participation changes over time
and cohorts.

Third, we know little about whether and
how specific individual characteristics associ-
ated with protest attendance have changed
over time and across cohorts. Current claims
that protest has diffused to different categories
of individuals say little about which individual
characteristics have become more or less
salient for protest attendance, and whether
any of these changes have occurred over peri-
ods or cohorts. The extent to which the
increase in protesting and petitioning is
restructuring modes of civic engagement
depends heavily on the extent to which it is
providing new means of participation to new
kinds of citizens.

Fourth, prior research has not examined
how temporal and generational trends com-
pare for different types of protest tactics. On
a spectrum of levels of institutionalization of
different political activities—ranging from
the entirely state-sanctioned and organized
electoral voting to state-overthrowing revolts
—-petition signing, for example, falls closer
to the voting end of the spectrum, while pro-
test remains rare, is often somewhat confron-
tational, and requires higher levels of commit-
ment. As a social movement tactic, petition
signing also differs from attending a protest
in that it is less collective. Although petition
drives seek many individuals’ signatures,
signing is an individual act, and even running
a petition drive may require little or no coor-
dination of groups. Petitioning, especially for
candidates and ballot initiatives, is also likely
to be highly routinized by the state. More gen-
erally, research describing and explaining
trends in costly, confrontational, rare, and
challenging tactics may not generalize to
less costly, less confrontational, more com-
mon, and more institutionalized tactics.

In this project, we address these four sets of
unanswered questions by theoretically and
empirically specifying the relations among
generations, time periods, individual charac-
teristics, and political activism. We accom-
plish this using all available national survey
data on ever having protested or signed
a petition from 1973 to 2008; this encom-
passes 34,241 respondents from 21 different
surveys conducted by 11 polling organiza-
tions. Protest, as operationalized here,
includes participating in activities variously
referred to as demonstrations, marches, sit-
ins, public protests, and picketing. Missing
data are multiply imputed. We employ
cross-classified, random-effects models
(CCREM) to model cohort and period
effects simultaneously (Yang 2008; Yang
and Land 2006, 2008).

We find that in protest behavior, temporal
(period) trends are dwarfed by generational
(cohort) trends. These generational trends are
not linear but bell-curve shaped, with the
probability of ever having protested highest
for individuals born around 1950. By contrast,
the change in petition signing is more related
to period effects. Additionally, more than half
of the estimated generational change in both
protest behavior and petition signing is related
to demographic compositional change. We
find little evidence of protest diffusing to
As developed by Tarrow (1994) and Meyer
and Tarrow (1998a, 1998b), the social move-
ment society (SMS) thesis offers three pri-
mary hypotheses about protest in advanced
industrialized societies. First, the SMS thesis
maintains that protest has changed from
being an irregular and episodic occurrence
to being a perpetual and pervasive feature
of modern life as a result of the protest
movements of the 1950s and 1960s. Second,
the SMS thesis holds that protest has dif-
fused in its constituencies, claims, and tar-
gets over time. In this view, protest is no
longer dominated by student radicals, ethnic
minorities, and union activists, as it purport-
edly was four decades ago, but it is now
a political tool used by actors of many dif-
ferent political orientations and social loca-
tions. Claims that once were seen as outside
the purview of movements have become
grounds for protest, and private as well as
public institutions have become targets of
protest. Third, the SMS thesis argues that
movement tactics have become steadily
more a part of conventional politics through
the professionalization of movement actors
and the institutionalization of movement
repertoires.

In the view of SMS proponents, it is not
just movement participants who have become
professionalized; rather, states and move-
ments now often engage each other in predict-
able, patterned ways, such that demonstrations
and state responses are often orderly, planned,
and coordinated (della Porta 1995, 1998). A
common concern among SMS scholars is
whether the expansion and routinization of
less confrontational forms of protest (e.g.,
petitioning) chiefly account for the condition-
ing of a social movement society, while more
confrontational forms of protest (e.g., riots
and building occupations) have declined.

Several empirical studies find some sup-
port for the SMS ideas of more frequent and
more diffused protest in the United States
and other Western countries. Several studies
based on individual-level survey data indicate
that more U.S. citizens report having partici-
pated in movement activities now than in
prior decades (e.g., Dalton 2006, 2008a;
Inglehart and Catterberg 2002; Verba, Schloz-
man, and Brady 1995), as do residents of other
advanced industrial democracies (e.g., Dalton
2006; Inglehart and Catterberg 2002; Rucht
1998). As Figure 1 shows, the proportion of
people saying they have ever been to
have cooperated in setting boundaries for
“acceptable” kinds of protest (della Porta,
Fillieule, and Reiter 1998; McCarthy and
McPhail 1998). Police response has moder-
ated over time, with presence of police
violence declining from 14 percent of con-
frontational events in 1970 to 2 percent in
1985 (Soule and Earl 2005).

Participation in protest remains uncom-
mon in the United States; individual-level
survey data generally find few individuals
who have protested recently. For example,
in the 2004 GSS, only 6 percent of respond-
ents reported attending a protest in the past
year, which is less than the rate of political
donations (32 percent), boycotting products
(35 percent), contacting elected officials
(23 percent), or attending a political rally
(13 percent) during the same time period.
This suggests that while attending a protest
may be more routinized, it is still rarer
than other forms of political action and
about three-quarters of people who have
ever attended a protest last did so more
than a year ago.

Although not always articulated as such,
SMS proponents’ claims are situated within
a broader debate about political participation
in contemporary democracies. While Putnam
and others (see Putnam 2000) conclude that
American democracy is imperiled by a steep
decline in civic and political engagement,
Inglehart and Catterberg (2002) and Dalton
(2008b) propose analogous counter-argu-
ments pointing to a shift in the underlying
norms of citizenship that have engendered
changes in the prevalence of distinct forms
of political participation. These counter-
arguments to the civic disengagement thesis
make SMS-like claims that unconventional
forms of political participation, including
protest and petition signing, have increased
as commitments to “‘materialist values’’ or
“duty-based citizenship” have given way
to an embrace of ‘‘postmaterialist values”
and “‘engaged citizenship” (Dalton 2008b;
Inglehart and Catterberg 2002). Indeed,
echoing the chorus of SMS proponents,
We present six hypotheses about changing
patterns of political involvement. Our first
two hypotheses concern the role of time
period and generational effects. To the
extent that the increase in protest participa-
tion is largely the result of routinized
interactions between social movement
organizations and the state (and other tar-
gets), as some SMS scholars suggest, we
would expect that the increase in protest
participation would largely be a function
of period effects, with generational and
compositional effects playing a secondary
role. Dalton (2008b:90), for example, finds
that “‘signing petitions and participating
in more challenging protest activities dis-
play a marked increase from 1975 to the
present.”

A major source of these period effects is
likely the institutionalization of protest that
SMS scholars have noted, especially the
decline in the potential disruptiveness of pro-
test, which reduces the cost and risk associ-
ated with participation. For example, accord-
ing to the 2008 American National Election
Study, among respondents who have ever pro-
tested, only 32 percent report ever fearing
being arrested. For respondents born between
1930 and 1960, however, the rate is 40 per-
cent, dropping to 24 percent for individuals
born after 1960.' The drop in perceived risk
over time may be an important cause of
increased protest participation; people unwill-
ing to participate in high-risk forms of activ-
ism may have become more willing to protest
due to the perceived decline in associated
risks.
Other scholars, however, point to the
importance of early political experiences that
vary significantly by generation, rather than
by time period. Putnam (2000), for example,
suggests that the observed increase in protest
participation could be driven by generational
replacement. Much evidence suggests that
generational replacement is a central cause
in observed macro-level changes in political
attitudes. For example, individuals who were
young adults during the feminist movement
of the 1970s are more likely than older and
younger cohorts to call themselves feminists
and to have such a self-identification linked
to a stable set of beliefs (Schnittker, Freese,
and Powell 2003). Similarly, growing toler-
ance of homosexuality in the United States
and Canada has resulted from both time
period and cohort effects (Andersen and Fet-
ner 2008). In the realm of protest activity,
Baby Boomers, many of whom were active
as very young adults in the student and anti-
war movements of the 1960s, increased their
share of the adult population as early, less
protest-oriented generations died off. This
gave the appearance of a general trend
toward increased participation in the protest
form of political action. In reality, however,
this exceptional ‘political generation”
(Mannheim 1952) that came of age during
the 1960s protest wave may be an aberration
in a general trend toward decreased participa-
tion in civic life.
ways, predictors of protest mirror those of vot-
ing and other, more conventional forms of
political participation (Brady, Verba, and
Schlozman 1995; Verba et al. 1995). People
with high levels of interest in politics and
high levels of organizational membership are
more likely than the uninterested and the unin-
volved to have protested in the past year
(McAdam 1986; Schussman and Soule 2005;
Verba et al. 1995).

In other ways, however, researchers
find that determinants of protest diverge
from determinants of conventional political
involvement. For example, using data from
1990, Schussman and Soule (2005) find that
the positive effects of education and income
on the likelihood of a person having protested
in the past year disappear when measures of
political engagement and structural availabil-
ity (e.g., organizational membership and being
asked to protest) are accounted for, as does the
positive effect of being African American.
Being young is positively correlated with hav-
ing protested in the past year, as is liberalism
(Hirsch 1990; Schussman and Soule 2005;
Wiltfang and McAdam 1991).

Schussman and Soule (2005) suggest that
gender became a nonsignificant predictor of
protest by 1990, in contrast to prior findings
that women protest less than men (Dalton
2006; Taylor and Raeburn 1995; Verba et al.
1995). Beyond this evidence about the chang-
ing effect of gender, little is known about how
predictors of protest participation may have
changed over time. Additionally, as protesting
has become less disruptive, it may have
become more appealing to individuals who
are less likely to be interested in a pitched bat-
tle with the police, such as non-youths and
others with less biographical availability.
This shift in perceived risk is more nuanced
than the general shift we consider in Hypoth-
esis 1; here we suggest that a decline in per-
ceived risk may have affected different sorts
of people differently. While the SMS thesis
of a diffusion of protest throughout society
implicitly suggests that various predictors of
protest may be weakening, we know of little
empirical work that examines change in pro-
test predictors during the past few decades.

Using the 1999 to 2002 World Values Sur-
vey (WVS) data, Dalton (2006) examines the
strength of various predictors of respondents’
stated willingness to engage in a challenging
action in the United States. He finds moderate
effects for education, union membership, and
left/right political orientation, and strong
effects for age. Dalton (2006:71, 2008a:69)
speculates that youths may be more willing
to engage in protest, with this willingness
declining as individuals age; alternatively, he
suggests that “age differences in protest may
represent a generational pattern of changing
participation styles” rather than a youth
effect. Furthermore, Dalton (2006:72—73)
claims that the effect of age has declined
over time “‘as acceptance of protest has
spread throughout society. . . . Even seniors
are now willing to take to the barricades.”
We argue, however, that such a weakening
of the age effect, if it exists, might reflect
generational replacement as Baby Boomers
matured, rather than a more general decline
in the age effect per se. Using a panel study
of Baby Boomers, Jennings (1987) found
that while this generation became more
politically conservative as it aged, individu-
als who protested during college remained
distinct in political beliefs and behaviors
later in life.

In addition, Dalton (2006:74, 2008a:73)
proposes that the “new citizen politics,”
which is characterized by a shift in citizens’
level and style of political action toward
greater participation and control, may enhance
the importance of social status as a predictor
of participation. In other words, the better-
educated are more likely to avail themselves
of new forms of participation. If this is the
case, we would expect the protest participa-
tion gap between college and non-college
graduates to have increased over time. These
studies of individual correlates of protest par-
ticipation suggest two possible hypotheses
related to observed shifts in aggregate protest
participation.
If protest has become more widely avail-
able over either time period or cohort, we
would expect correlations between individual
characteristics and protest behavior to have
declined. At the extreme, if everyone is
equally likely to attend a protest, then none
of the significant predictors from early
time periods or generations would have
any predictive power in later time periods
or among later generations. Alternatively,
if new categories of individuals now find
protest an option, but the diffusion is not
uniform, we might expect previously non-
significant variables to have a larger effect
over either time or generations. For exam-
ple, a marked increase in conservatives
attending protests might result in a conserva-
tive orientation becoming a significant pro-
test predictor relative to a moderate orienta-
tion. Protest by right-wing groups trended
upward as a share of all protest events
between the late 1960s and the mid-1980s,
and the average size of right-wing or conser-
vative movement protest events increased
during this period as well (Soule and Earl
2005), although this shift in size was also
found in non—right-wing events. The 1980s
saw the increasing prominence of the Chris-
tian right and pro-life movements, which
may have increased the probability of non-
liberals protesting, although earlier right-
wing movements, such as the anti-busing
and anti-gay movements of the 1970s, also
mobilized conservatives.
Finally, we are interested in variation in the
relative importance of generational and period
effects on different types of political activism.
Specifically, we compare protest attendance
with petition signing, a more common and
less costly form of political participation.
While some SMS research (e.g., Crozat
1998; McVeigh and Smith 1999) disaggre-
gates more and less confrontational types
of dissent, extant research does not explore
whether changes in protest and petition
activity are explicable through the same
set of causes or require different explana-
tions, nor does it examine differences in
the determinants of these activities over
time.

The ballot initiative process, which is per-
mitted in 23 states, has had a large hand in
institutionalizing petition signing. In states
with this system, proposed statutes or consti-
tutional amendments can be put on the ballot
if enough petition signatures are collected.
These usually require a large number of
signatures; for example, in 2010 in California,
statewide ballot initiatives required 433,971
signatures to appear on the ballot (Bowen
2010). The success of California’s Proposi-
tion 13, which limited property taxes, is
often credited with:the growth of state ballot
initiatives, which increased from 18 a year
in the 1970s to 25 a year in the 1980s, 38
a year in the 1990s, and 37 a year in the
2000s (Initiative & Referendum Institute
2010). This formalization makes petition
signing significantly different from protest-
ing, as state statutes about the form that
protests can take allow a great deal more lat-
itude. Additionally, the benefits of protest-
ing are much less definite; a certain number
of petition signatures may guarantee an ini-
tiative is placed on the ballot, but no such
threshold exists for measuring the success
of a demonstration. Petition signing also dif-
fers from attending a demonstration in that
signing a name can take less than 10 sec-
onds and requires no planning, meaning
the cost of participating is radically lower.
While most protesters in the contemporary
United States face little risk of being
arrested, petition signers have almost no
chance of being arrested, meaning the event
is less risky. Because petition signers rarely
face police barricades or counter-signers,
the average level of physical contention is
much lower.
a number of desirable properties, such as pro-
viding detailed information about the size of
a protest event, the types of claims being
made, and authorities’ reactions, although
the newspaper reporting process may intro-
duce its own sources of bias (see Oliver
and Myers 1999). For the hypotheses we
seek to test, newspaper data are unsatisfac-
tory because they provide little information
about the individual participants and less still
on their birth cohorts.

Another effective approach to studying
long-term trends in political participation
uses longitudinal data on individuals. For
example, McAdam’s (1988) examination of
Freedom Summer participants and non-
participants, before participants left for Mis-
sissippi and two decades later, relies on this
research strategy. While this and other lon-
gitudinal studies have contributed greatly
to our knowledge of the personal conse-
quences of activism in the 1960s, no longi-
tudinal studies have made cross-cohort com-
parisons of protest activity, and no such data
currently exist.

We complement these two extant strategies
by using multiple, cross-sectional surveys that
asked very similar questions about respond-
ents’ historical participation in protest events
and petition signing. While we are not able
to track specific individuals over time, we
are able to track multiple cohorts’ experiences
over time. This is central to understanding dif-
ferences in age, period, and cohort effects that
cannot be disentangled through either longitu-
dinal data on one cohort or a cross-sectional
analysis. Crozat (1998) adopts a similar strat-
egy in looking at acceptance of protest tactics,
but he uses only two time periods and does
not attempt to disentangle period from cohort
effects. Dalton (2006) compares the effect
sizes of predictors of protest across different
waves of the WVS, attributes observed differ-
ences largely to period effects, and likewise
does not explore generational replacement as
a possible mechanism for observed changes.
Our approach builds on and advances these
studies by examining period and cohort
effects in an analysis that pools multiple sur-
veys over three decades.

We aggregated all available U.S. national
surveys that asked some variant of the ques-
tions “Have you ever participated in a protest,
march or demonstration?” or ‘“‘Have you ever
signed a petition?” Eleven polling institutions
conducted a total of 21 such surveys from
1973 to 2008; this encompasses 32,192
respondents asked about protesting and
25,812 who were asked about petitions.” We
include all respondents age 18 years and
over (for details of the surveys, see the online
supplement _[http://asr.sagepub.com/supple
mental]). Combined, these surveys enable us
to reliably estimate cohort and generational
effects, as we have responses from at least
70 individuals from each of 22 different
four-year birth cohorts observed for at least
three four-year periods and eight cohorts
across the entire time period. Additionally,
because we have individual-level descriptive
data, we can model potential changes in indi-
vidual-level correlates of protest over time
and generations. We also are able to simulta-
neously distinguish between period and cohort
effects, examine the extent to which these two
effects are driven by compositional change
across periods, and identify the degree to
which various predictors of protest attendance
and petition signing changed over time period
and generation. Finally, each survey asked
comparable questions about individual demo-
graphic characteristics, enabling us to create
a full set of individual predictor variables.

A major limitation of these data is that our
first observation is not until 1973, which is at
the tail end of the 1960s protest cycle. We are
not able to measure the extent to which the
1960s wave of mobilization fundamentally
altered the number and types of people who
engage in protest. Unfortunately, no national
surveys asked about protest participation
prior to the early 1970s.> However, because
of the nature of the question (“Have you
ever... ”), we are able to measure self-
reports of protest and petition signing that
occurred prior to 1973. Additionally, we can
establish to what extent patterns formed dur-
ing this period shifted in the 35-year period
following it.

An additional limitation of the data is that
questions are not the same across surveys
(see the online supplement for exact question
wording), and having the data collected by
multiple survey organizations introduces fur-
ther biases into the analysis. When aggregat-
ing cross-sectional data, a common practice
is to only use data from the same survey
series, such as the GSS, the American
National Election Survey, or the WVS (e.g.,
Andersen and Fetner 2008). Unfortunately,
no single survey series asked questions about
protest on more than five occasions, and
restricting ourselves to one survey, such as
the WVS, would severely limit our ability to
differentiate period from cohort effects. We
seek to reduce any bias that may arise by con-
trolling for polling “house effects” and word-
order effects through the inclusion of indicator
variables in all of our models for survey orga-
nization that are observed over more than one
year. Because question wording is highly cor-
related with sponsoring organization, we can-
not reliably distinguish between the effect of
question wording and other survey sponsor
effects, such as sampling procedure. For
example, the word “‘demonstration”’ is present
for all questions except those in the two Roper
surveys, which ask about “protest march or
sit-in.” Our indicator variable for Roper thus
controls for both the absence of the word
and any Roper-specific biases.

Because our survey questions are not iden-
tical across the different years and surveys
(see the online supplement), one important
consideration is whether there is any system-
atic bias in the scope of behaviors the ques-
tions called to mind. For instance, if earlier
surveys referred to protest attendance using
terms that called a wide array of behaviors
into respondents’ minds, while later surveys
asked the protest question in such a way that
respondents understood protest more nar-
rowly, this skew would misleadingly produce
the appearance of a decline in protest. To
examine this possibility, we categorize all
questions as “broad” or “narrow,” based on
how inclusive a normal reading of the ques-
tion would be. We classify all but five ques-
tions as lending themselves to a broad inter-
pretation of protest. The question wordings
we identified as potentially reducing survey
participants’ self-reported participation were
from the 1973 Confidence in Government
study, the 1973 GSS, the 1978 Roper study,
the 1983 New York Times poll, and the 1985
Roper study. These questions referred to a sub-
set of protest activities or asked the question in
such a way that respondents might be expected
to underreport participation, relative to the other
question wordings used in the surveys. While
the differences in wordings are small, the fact
that all of the potentially narrowing question
wordings appear in studies conducted during
the early part of our time period indicates that,
if anything, our study is biased toward finding
expanding, rather than stable, protest trends
over time. (Several of the questions asked about
attendance only at “lawful” demonstrations, but
we do not categorize these questions as narrow
because the number of people who have partic-
ipated in illegal demonstrations but not legal
protests in this country is likely trivial. Further-
more, the questions referring to “lawful” dem-
onstrations mostly appear on surveys from the
early and middle years of our study period,
meaning that any effect they might have would
be to tilt our findings further toward a finding of
a positive time trend for protest.)

For each survey analyzed, the online sup-
plement lists the year it was conducted, the
sponsoring organization, the number of
respondents, the proportion that reported
ever having attended a protest and signed
a petition, and any variables that we entirely
imputed (see below for more on the process
of multiple imputation).
march, or demonstration, and whether
a respondent reported ever having signed
a petition. In a perfect world, each survey
would have asked respondents whether they
had ever protested, accompanied by a series
of follow-up questions designed to recon-
struct the respondent’s protest history. Longi-
tudinal data tracking multiple cohorts with
repeated questions about recent protest and
petition involvement would also be well-
suited to address this question. Such data,
however, have not been collected. This ques-
tion is limited, in that answers might reflect
some social desirability basis when an indi-
vidual was surveyed or might be affected by
recall error, with respondents either forgetting
they ever signed a petition or attended a pro-
test, or responding they did, when they had
not. Studies of misreporting religious atten-
dance (e.g., Hadaway, Marler, and Chaves
1993) and voting (Silver, Anderson, and
Abramson 1986) find that mistaken respond-
ents are generally usually engaged in the
activity, but happen not to have done so dur-
ing the question’s time frame. As our ques-
tions have a lifetime time frame, we expect
the effect of misreporting to be small (in con-
trast to questions that ask about attending
a protest at a specific event). The major lim-
itation, however, is that we are not able to
track annual levels of participation, the way
that event-count data from newspapers do.

Our strategy of aggregating responses to
the “ever” question has several benefits that
outweigh its limitations. First, as noted earlier,
national surveys on non-electoral politics were
not fielded until the 1970s, and these early
surveys focused exclusively on ‘“‘ever”’ hav-
ing participated. The questions analyzed
here are the only available option to capture
this crucial period along with early-
twentieth-century birth cohorts. Second, to
the extent that attending a protest happens
when individuals are under age 18 or away
at college, questions about recent activity
are likely to miss much protest activity, as
these individuals are excluded or underrep-
resented in most national surveys.
We group birth cohort into four-year catego-
ries. While our groups could have been theo-
retically driven, such as creating categories
based on membership in Early Boomers,
Late Boomers, and Generation X, no consen-
sus exists on which dates differentiate these
groupings, especially for pre- and post-
Boomers (Gillon 2004). We are also
sympathetic to the notion that, at certain
times, micro-cohorts may exist that vary sig-
nificantly in political orientation, despite
being born only a few years apart (Whittier
1995). To create period-cohort cell sizes
that are not unreasonably small, however,
some grouping is required. Because surveys
on protesting were not conducted regularly,
we are not able to divide our periods into uni-
form bins. We are also concerned about con-
structing individual periods that rely only on
one survey organization, as we would be
unable to distinguish the effect of that period
from the effect of that pollster. Our eight
time periods range from two to five years
and are listed in the online supplement.
This strategy is similar to conventional age
binning procedures, for example, that group
individuals into uneven bins such as 18 to
24, 25 to 35, and so on, followed by a 65
plus bin. Because we are not imposing a lin-
ear constraint on the effect of time periods,
such as entering a single year variable in
a regression model, varying bin widths have
no substantive impact on our results. Results
from other period and cohort binning strate-
gies provide similar results and are available
from the authors.
Our socioeconomic measures include edu-
cation, income, and union membership. We
measure education with indicators for not hav-
ing completed high school and for having
a college degree or more. In the United States,
colleges have historically been sites of protest
(Van Dyke 2003), and high levels of educa-
tion are associated with higher degrees of
political interest and civic skills linked to
political participation (Brady et al. 1995;
Schussman and Soule 2005). The intermediate
level of education, completing high school
and some college but not a degree, is the
excluded category. More fine-tuned measures
of educational attainment are not possible,
given the various sources of data and the mul-
tiple ways this question was asked. A prelim-
inary analysis on a subset of the data sug-
gested that combining high school degree
with some college experience yields identical
results to analyses that separate these levels.
We measure income with indicators for hav-
ing a family income in the bottom or top
quartile of respondents for a given survey.
The excluded category is individuals in the
second or third quartiles. Like education, fam-
ily income is associated with the resources and
skills often thought of as prerequisites for
political action (Brady et al. 1995). Union
membership was self-reported and measured
dichotomously. Union members are linked to
political organizations that may provide the
ideological support for attending a protest.
More directly, the labor movement has mobi-
lized its members for protest demonstrations,
such as the 1963 March on Washington and
the 1999 anti-WTO protest in Seattle, and
interpersonal ties among union members may
encourage participation by facilitating recruit-
ment (Brady et al. 1995; McAdam 1986).
We also measure several demographic
characteristics: race, age, sex, and marital sta-
tus. We measure race with indicator variables
for respondents reporting being African
American, Latino, or a member of any other
racial group. White is the excluded racial
category. Prior research finds that while ethnic
minorities may be less likely to participate in
institutional politics, they are more likely to
participate in protest (Paulsen 1991;
Schussman and Soule 2005). We include age
with two indicators: whether a respondent
was under 35 years or over 55 years at the
time of the survey. While younger respondents
may be more biographically available for pro-
test (McAdam 1986), older respondents have
had more opportunities to have ever attended
a protest or signed a petition. We operational-
ize sex by an indicator of whether a respondent
is male, because prior research suggests that
men have lower barriers to participation in
activism (McAdam 1992). We also include
a dichotomous indicator for whether a respon-
dent was ever married, because married indi-
viduals are thought to be less biographically
available (McAdam 1986).

Additionally, we use two measures of
geography. First, we include a measure of
Census region, with indicator variables for liv-
ing in the South, Midwest, and West, with
East as the excluded category. Regional vari-
ables control for unobserved cultural variation
in the likelihood of participating in political
action and for structures that encourage partic-
ipation, particularly the fact that many west-
em states have mechanisms for putting initia-
tives up for vote after collecting petition
signatures (Gloger 2006) and that southern
states were especially active in criminaliz-
ing protest activity during the 1950s and
1960s (McAdam 1988; Weaver 2007). We
also include a measure of community size,
with indicators for individuals living outside
of metropolitan statistical areas or in small
towns coded as rural and those living in cit-
ies with a population greater than 100,000
coded as urban. As most major protests are
in big cities, residents of large metropolitan
areas may find participation easier than
would similarly minded people in more
remote locations.

Finally, we measure political beliefs with
indicator variables for whether a respondent
identified as being liberal or conservative.
On some surveys, this was a simple recoding
of the original response. In other cases, it was
based on converting a 10-point scale, where
we coded respondents who chose the three
most liberal numbers as liberal and those
who chose the three most conservative num-
bers as conservative.* Protest attendance is
thought to be a more established part of liber-
als’ tactical repertoire (Schussman and Soule
2005). We measure party membership by
identification with either the Democratic or
the Republican party. We do not use this vari-
able in the main analyses, because including
beliefs and party membership would introduce
a significant amount of confusion when inter-
preting the coefficients due to the correlation
between the two. We include party member-
ship in our multiple imputation models, how-
ever, to help provide estimates of political
beliefs where the data are missing.

In all models, we also include indicator
variables for a survey’s sponsoring institution,
with the WVS as the excluded category. We
observe modest polling institution effects,
with the strongest being significantly low lev-
els of participation by respondents in the
Roper surveys, a data source Putnam (2000)
famously used in his analysis of social capital.
Our strong suspicion is that the Roper effect is
largely the result of question order. While
most surveys asked about attending a protest
within the context of possible political actions,
the Roper survey asked about attending a pro-
test alongside questions about beliefs in UFOs
and criminal convictions. The indicator varia-
bles for survey sponsor control for this and
other sponsor-specific sources of error.
variables of both sorts were multiply imputed
(MI) (Allison 2001; King et al. 2002). We
implemented this imputation through the ice
suite of programs for Stata (Royston 2004).
MI is especially advantageous for the sec-
ond type of missing data, where respondents
were not asked specific questions. For exam-
ple, respondents were not asked about their
political beliefs in the 1973 Confidence in
Government (CIG) survey. For unasked ques-
tions, we use a respondent’s answers to other
questions, along with the estimated relation
between these other questions and the variable
not asked, to impute answers (see Gelman,
King, and Liu [1999] for a complete descrip-
tion of the process). Imputing data for unasked
questions has a statistical advantage in that the
missingness is not caused by any unobserv-
able respondent characteristics that may com-
plicate standard MI. That is, we are not imput-
ing the political beliefs of someone who
purposefully avoided answering the question;
rather, we impute the political beliefs of some-
one who had not been asked about them. We
also use MI to translate the measure of educa-
tion used in the first two waves of the WVS,
which asked about age when schooling was
completed, into the education measure we
employ. We leverage the fact that this WVS
measure of education was asked alongside
a more standard measure of educational attain-
ment in later years to estimate attainment for
the earlier years. Reported results, except
where noted, are based on the combined
results of five imputations, which allow us to
accurately estimate our parameters and fully
represent the uncertainty of the imputed data.
where the logit of the probability of an out-
come is modeled as the function of an inter-
cept (bo) and a vector of fixed coefficients
(b,), along with random intercepts for cohort
(uj) and period (vj) and an error term (ej).
This is an extension of the standard, multi-
level model, which nests individuals within
mutually exclusive categories, such as stu-
dents within schools. Within a cross-classified
framework, individuals are modeled as being
exposed to two or more random factors that
are not hierarchically related. For example,
we might examine the influence of primary
and secondary schools on student achieve-
ment, where students are exposed to both
institutions. In our cases, individuals are
exposed to both their birth cohort and the sur-
vey time period.

We are also interested in testing the
assumption that individual-level covariates
are fixed across periods and cohorts. We relax
this assumption in some of our models by esti-
mating the following model:
We begin by exploring the outlines of cohort
and generational shifts in political activities.
Models 1, 2, and 3 in Table 2 model the like-
lihood of ever having attended a protest, and
Models 4, 5, and 6 model the likelihood of
ever having signed a petition. Model 1
presents results of a baseline model that
includes only indicators for polling organiza-
tions and a random intercept for time period.
Model 2 presents the same model but repla-
ces the random intercept for time period
with one for birth cohort. Model 3, the best
fitting in terms of the BIC statistic, is
a cross-nested model with random intercepts
for period and cohort effects.

While the interpretations of the cohort and
period variances are not straightforward, com-
parisons of their size across the three models
are instructive in examining the extent to
which political action varies more by cohort
or by generation. The variance statistic indi-
cates the distribution of period or cohort
effects; larger variances are associated with
larger differences between periods or cohorts.
When estimated in different models, the esti-
mated cohort variance for protest of .387 is
approximately six times that of the .064
period estimate; when modeled together, the
cohort effect is 10 times larger (.326/.032).
This suggests that period effects on protest
behavior are dwarfed by cohort effects. Addi-
tionally, the estimated cohort variance
declines by only 15 percent between Models
2 and 3, which suggests that little of the
post-1973 observed variation in protest partic-
ipation by generation was caused by period
shifts.

Models 4, 5, and 6 in Table 2 duplicate
Models 1, 2, and 3, respectively, in that
they estimate period effect, generation
effect, and both simultaneously, controlling
only for polling organizations, but the
dependent variable is the likelihood of
ever having signed a petition. Like the mod-
els for attending a protest, the model that
includes both period and cohort effects pro-
vides the best fit, based on the BIC statistic.
Unlike attending a protest, however, the
period and cohort effects are modest and
of equal size. Additionally, the variance
for period and cohort shrinks little in the
combined model, suggesting that they are
operating separately. In summary, both peti-
tion signing and attending a protest show
period and cohort effects, with cohort
effects strongest for attending a protest and
both effects comparable for petition signing.

Table 3 explores how much of the
observed variation across time-period and
birth cohort is the result of changing demo-
graphics and political beliefs. The models
include controls for education levels, race
and ethnicity, density, family income, gen-
der, marital status, age, union membership
and political beliefs, and region. These mod-
els are central to testing Hypothesis 1
(change over time, net of compositional
effects), Hypothesis 2 (change over genera-
tion, net of compositional effects), and
Hypothesis 5 (compositional effects). Mod-
els 7, 8, and 9 present the results for attend-
ing a protest, controlling for a random
period effect (Model 7), a random cohort
effect (Model 8), and both (Model 9). Mod-
els 10, 11, and 12 duplicate this order for
petition signing.
Estimates of the period variance effect in
Model 9 are slightly larger than those of
Model 3 of Table 2, which suggests that esti-
mated variation across time is not explained
by demographic change, but rather is hidden
by it. By contrast, the estimated generational
variance declines more substantially, by
approximately a quarter in Model 8, which
does not estimate period effects, and by 60
percent in Model 9, which does estimate
period variance. Model 9 is the best fitting,
as measured by the BIC statistics, which
implies that both generational and period
effects should be included in the model. Gen-
erational variance remains large, however,
and is 2.6 times greater than period variance
(.13/.05). In summary, this provides strong
support for Hypothesis 1, with evidence of
a generational effect net of both period and
compositional effects. It is also evidence in
favor of Hypothesis 2, the period-effect
hypothesis, although the effect is much
smaller than the cohort effect. While cohort
compositional change does explain some of
the cohort variance, we find evidence to reject
Hypothesis 5, which holds that change in pro-
test is entirely rooted in compositional change.
Even with a large number of individual pre-
dictors whose means vary significantly over
the 30-year average, significant generational
and cohort variances remain present.

Model 12, which simultaneously estimates
period and cohort variance for petition sign-
ing, shows a similar pattern; it is the best fit-
ting model. Accounting for compositional
effects reduces the period effect but not the
cohort effect, with the estimated period vari-
ance in the full model approximately three-
quarters that of the null model from Table 2.
The period effect is more than five times
(.18/.04) that of the cohort effect after control-
ling for individual-level predictors.

To understand the direction and magnitude
of the period and cohort effects, Figure 2,
which is based on Models 9 and 12, shows
plots of predicted values for each cohort and
survey period with all other variables set to
their sample means. Figure 2a, the protest by
birth cohort figure, sets the period variance
at zero, and Figure 2b sets the generational
variance at zero. This isolates either genera-
tional or period effects as the cause of
observed changes. Figures 2c and 2d, based
on Model 12, replicate this analysis for peti-
tion signing. Figure 2a shows that the three
four-year birth cohorts encompassing
respondents born between 1943 and 1954
have the highest likelihood of reporting ever
Married

Under 35

Over 55

Male

Union member

—.141**
(3.32)
—.049
(1.20)
—.289**
(6.46)
.237**
(7.09)
-440**
(8.67)

Census Region (East excluded)

South

Midwest

West

Constant

—,.300**
(6.32)

—.187**
(3.70)
.043
(.85)

—1.930**
(16.29)

—.173**
(3.94)
—.183**
(3.78)
118
(2.08)
.234**
(6.94)
.384**
(7.49)

—.289**
(6.01)

—.174**
(3.39)
.054
(1.06)

—2.230**
(15.70)

—.183**
(4.18)
.037
(.60)
—.081
(1.17)

.232**
(6.86)

-405**
(7.84)

—.296**
(6.16)

-.181**
(3.53)
.046
(.90)

—2.206**
(15.10)

-110**
(2.95)
—.278**
(7.26)
—.172**
(4.62)
—.065*
(2.31)

.321**
(6.78)

—.141**
(3.05)

.194**
(4.19)

.518**
(11.12)
141
(.76)

.046
(1.18)
—.388**
(7.33)

.173*
(2.62)
—.068*
(2.41)

.297**
(6.19)

-.129*
(2.81)
.211**
(4.57)
.539**
(11.62)
.251*
(2.22)

.052
(1.36)
—.189**
(3.91)
—.029

(55)
—.069*
(2.41)

.304**

(6.39)

-.141**
(3.08)

.201**
(4.35)

.525**
(11.29)

.03

(.15)

 

(continued)
Table 3. Random Intercept Models of the Likelihood of Ever Attending a Demonstration or
Protest (Models 7 to 9) or Signing a Petition (Models 10 to 12) with the Full Set of Predictor

Measures and Fixed Effects for Survey Conducting Organizations

 

 

 

Protest Petition
Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 Model 11 Model 12
Political Beliefs (moderate excluded category)
Liberal .884** -859** -867** .270** .244** .257**
(19.60) (19.54) (19.66) (6.53) (5.89) (6.14)
Conservative —.144** —.132* —.128* 026 012 032
(3.02) (2.80) (2.75) (.73) (.34) (.91)
Education (high school degree/some college excluded category)
No degree —.600** —.539** —.531** —.819** —.758** —.784**
(10.66) (9.58) (9.39) (19.06) (17.66) (18.09)
College degree 815** .835** .818** .624** .639** .622**
(19.18) (19.12) (18.65) (14.39) (14.45) (14.06)
—.600** —.539** —.531** —.819** —.758** —.784**
Race/Ethnicity (non-Hispanic white excluded category)
Black -410** -406** -405** —.451** —.464** —.462**
(7.67) (7.51) (7.47) (7.12) (7.21) (7.18)
Latino -127 -155 .154 —.838** —.820** —.814**
(1.70) (2.10) (2.08) (12.26) (12.31) (11.94)
Asian/Other —.108 —.077 —.096 —.643** —.610** —.624**
(1.22) (.88) (1.09) (8.16) (7.87) (7.90)
Density (suburban excluded category)
Rural —.117 —.103 —.114 —.017 —.02 —.017
(1.97) (1.73) (1.90) (46) (.54) (.45)
Urban. .266** .275** .284** 051 015 .057
(5.62) (5.69) (5.85) (1.22) (.35) (1.33)
Family Income (quartiles 2 and 3 excluded)
Income low —.064 —.04 —.043 —.360** —.344** —.343**
(1.35) (.84) (.89) (9.67) (9.25) (9.15)
Income high .089* -057 071 -263** .235** .254**
(2.19) (1.40) (1.72) (6.28) (5.61) (6.06)
having attended a protest. There is a drop-off
for individuals born immediately after this
period and a flat trend for those born after
that, until individuals born in the 1980s, where
we see an uptick, with those born in the 1980s
approximately 1.3 times (18.2 percent/13.8
percent) more likely to report having protested
than those born in the 1970s. Individuals in
the three peak protesting cohorts are 1.6 times
more likely than the three previous cohorts
(born 1931 to 1942) to report having pro-
tested, and they are 2.2 times more likely to
have protested than the three cohorts prior to
them (born 1919 to 1930).

By contrast, Figure 2b, which shows pro-
test by survey period net of generational and
compositional effects, shows no major move-
ments and could best be described as a slow
shift upward. This supports Hypothesis 6,
which holds that protesting and petition sign-
ing will follow different period and cohort tra-
jectories. If we had data for 10 years earlier,
we would likely see a large shift in the late
1960s, but since then, there have been only
modest period effects, with the odds of ever
having protested increasing by 1.3 times
from the 1970s to the 1980s and 1990s, and
by 1.2 times from the 1980s and 1990s to
the 2000s. This can be contrasted with the
period effect shown in Figure 2d for petition
signing, which shows a relatively linear and
quite substantial increase between the early
and later periods, net of other effects. The
birth cohort analysis, Figure 2c, shows a simi-
lar trend to Figure 2a, with a gradual increase
up to the generation born around 1950 and
declines ever since, but with changes of
a much smaller magnitude. In summary, the
large generational variance from Model 9 is,
to a large degree, a function of the very high
rate of attending a protest among early Baby
Boomers, with a secondary contribution by
increased protest among Generation Y.

We return to Table 3 to discuss the effect
sizes and significance levels for each of our
predictor variables. Our results are broadly
consistent with prior research on political par-
ticipation, even when controlling for genera-
tional and period effects simultaneously (see
Models 9 and 12 for attending a protest and
petition signing, respectively). We use these
two models to estimate the probability of
ever attending a protest or signing a petition
with all other variables set to the mean, and
without cohort and period effects. Liberals
(23.6 percent) are twice as likely as political
moderates (11.6 percent) to have protested,
but political moderates are only 1.1 times
more likely than conservatives (10.1 percent)
to report attending a protest. Individuals with-
out a high school degree are the least likely to
have protested (7.4 percent), and those with
a college degree (23.5 percent) are two times
more likely to have protested than those with
a. Protest by birth coh “1b. Protest by survey period
likely to have protested than non-members
(12.4 percent); men (14.4 percent) are 1.3
times more likely than women (11.8 percent)
to have protested; and individuals who have
never been married (14.6 percent) are signifi-
cantly more likely than married respondents
(12.6 percent) to report ever having protested.
Neither of the age variables are significant,
which, counter-intuitively, suggests a very
strong age effect. That is, if the probability
of ever having protested changes little after
a respondent enters the survey universe at
age 18, most first protests likely occur during
the early years of life.

We turn next to individual-level covariates
of petition signing. While liberals (61.5 per-
cent) are 1.1 times more likely than moderates
(55.8 percent) to report having signed a peti-
tion, conservatives (55.4 percent) do not differ
significantly from moderates. We find a clear
education and income gradient for petition
signing, with college graduates (70.4 percent)
1.8 times more likely to have signed a petition
than non-high-school graduates (38.5 per-
cent), and those in the wealthiest income quar-
tile (63 percent) 1.3 times more likely to have
signed than those in the lowest quartile (48.0
percent). Whites (60.5 percent) are 1.25 times
more likely to have signed a petition than
African Americans (48.4 percent); 1.7 times
more likely than Latinos (35.6 percent);
and 1.4 times more likely than other ethnic
groups (44.2 percent). A strong regional
effect is present, with individuals in the
South (50.0 percent) being the least likely
to have signed, followed by those in the
East (53 percent), and then those in the Mid-
west (58.7 percent), while residents in the
West (66.8 percent) are the most likely to
report petition signing. Union members
(64.1 percent) are 1.1 times more likely
than non-members (55.8 percent) to have
signed a petition. Females are slightly
more likely than males to have signed a peti-
tion, and marital status has no significant
effect on petition signing.

While petition signing rates are higher than
protesting rates for both whites and African
Americans, whites are more likely than Afri-
can Americans to sign petitions, net of other
factors, while African Americans are more
likely than whites to have been to a demonstra-
tion, net of other factors. This is likely a legacy
of the African American civil rights move-
ment, which established the protest march as
a central element of African Americans’ polit-
ical repertoire.

To test whether the types of individuals
who protest have changed over time period
(Hypothesis 3) or cohort (Hypothesis 4),
we relax the assumption that each of the
individual predictors has an effect that is
fixed across time or cohort by adding a series
of random coefficient models. As noted ear-
lier, these models estimate random inter-
cepts for both cohorts and periods, along
with a random coefficient by either cohort
or period. We use the BIC statistic from
Table 3’s Model 9 as the baseline model
with each of our new models for attending
a protest, and from Table 3’s Model 12 for
each of our new models for petition signing.
Negative BIC change statistic values can be
interpreted as meaning that the model fit
improved beyond what would be expected
by reducing the degrees of freedom in esti-
mating additional parameters. Table 4 sum-
marizes our findings.

Overall, we find very little evidence that
the effect of individual characteristics varied
over time or over cohort for either attending
a protest or petition signing. Whatever base-
line relations between individual characteris-
tics and political action were established prior
to our first observation in 1973 remained
largely in place during this time period.
Across the 38 demonstrations estimated,
only one significant finding is present, as
shown in Row 4. In all other cases, the more
parsimonious model—the model without the
period or cohort varying effect—is a better
fit. The one exception is that the significant
variation in the effect of going to college on
the likelihood of ever attending a protest
varies by cohort.

We plot this relation in Figure 3, which
shows the likelihood of ever having protested
by educational attainment and birth cohort.
The plot shows that the 1960s came with
much more intensity for individuals who
went to college than for those who did not.
While individuals with all levels of educa-
tional attainment are more likely to have pro-
tested if they were born between 1943 and
1954, the effect is greatest for those who
went to college. The gap is largest for the
cohort born between 1947 and 1950, where
college graduates (42 percent), who most
likely attended in the late 1960s, were four
times more likely to have protested than
high school graduates (10.4 percent) of this
generation. While individuals without college
degrees represent an increasing proportion of
those who have ever protested in post-Boomer
cohorts, this is not because individuals with
less education are protesting more. Rather,
the highly educated are attending protests
Table 4. BIC Change Score From the Full Random Intercept Models of the Probability of Ever
Attending a Protest or Demonstration (Table 3, Model 9) or Signing a Petition (Table 3, Model

12) with Full Set of Predictor Measures and Fixed Effects for Survey Conducting

 

 

Organizations
Demonstration
Row Variable Cohort Period
1 Liberal 5.051 8.784
2 Conservative 10.316 9.931
3 No Degree 2.67 5.337
4 College Degree —7,427* 6.891
5 Black 231 9.721
6 Latino 6.892 5.164
7 Asian/Other 10.379 10.195
8 Rural 10.379 10.183
9 Urban, 10.379 10.258
10 Income Low 10.379 3.528
11 Income High 9.638 7.945
12 Married 4.994 1.534
13 Under 35 9.863 5.511
14 Over 35 10.379 10.343
15 Male 9.42 4.664
16 Union 9.905 8.967
17 South 8.408 10.379
18 Midwest 10.302 10.012
19 West 10.367 10.183

Cohort

8.421
10.159
9.762
9.635
9.899
10.13
3.651
10.158
10.013
9.742
10.149
8.705
8.77
7.575
9.704
10.159
4.923
8.907
9.589

Period

—2.508*
4.303
6.935

—2.359*
6.057

10.159
—.644*
7.541
5.906
5.51
9.367
9.81
10.02
6.322
8.587
9,941
9.218
2.025
8.523

 

Note: Each model separately allows the effect of the listed variable to be estimated as a random effect by
cohort and period. A negative change score indicates a model with a better fit than the baseline model,
accounting for changes in the degrees of freedom. Combined results of five multiple imputations.

*p < .05.
less, with the ratio down to 1.7 times more in
the cohort born in the 1970s. This diminish-
ing college effect over time may be a result
of the fairly unique historical circumstances
of the late 1960s; it may also reflect the
decline of higher education as a sufficient
criterion of access to the “‘center of critical
social and political networks,”’ as access to
college education expanded during this
period (Nie, Junn, and Stehlik-Barry
1996:7). However, inequality between col-
lege and non-college graduates increased
again for the most recent cohorts, suggesting
that college remains central to political
engagement, and that when cohorts do pro-
test more, it is driven by college graduates.

Unlike the models for protesting, the mod-
els for petition signing show no evidence that
the effect of individual predictors varied over
42%

 

 

College Degree,
e
High School Degree
18%
01 ae he,
i OMeM¢ Me Meme ome
0% ; + : 380 191
as 1920 1940 1960 1980 1986

Birth Year
evidence for another two. Hypothesis 2, which
highlights the role of birth cohorts, especially
the Baby Boomers, in predicted protest partic-
ipation (net of other factors), and Hypothesis
6, which predicts that petition signing and pro-
test participation would follow different tra-
jectories over period and cohort, are both sup-
ported. We find some support for Hypothesis
5, which holds that some of the cohort effects
in protesting can be explained by correlated
trends in cohort demographics, which we esti-
mate to explain more than half the genera-
tional trend. We also find some support for
Hypothesis 1, that the likelihood of attending
a protest has increased over time. While
period effects are secondary to cohort effects
in protest participation, we still observe a pos-
itive period trend, net of cohort and demo-
graphic effects. Finally, we find no support
for Hypotheses 3 and 4, which hold that pro-
test participation diffused to new kinds of peo-
ple, as the individual effects are remarkably
stable across time and cohorts.

In their essay outlining the social move-
ment society thesis, Meyer and Tarrow
(1998b) ask, ‘“‘Has something fundamental
changed in the politics in contemporary
industrial democracies?” We answer that in
terms of the overall level of protest participa-
tion and in the types of people who demon-
strate, there has been no fundamental change.
We find only a slight trend toward greater par-
ticipation in demonstrations during the past 35
years, and that cohorts born after the Baby
Boomers are much less likely than their
parents to have participated in a protest,
although we note a small resurgence among
individuals born in the 1980s. Combined
with the lack of social and demographic diffu-
sions, this suggests that the United States may
have a social movement generation, but it is
not a social movement society.

The SMS thesis is part of a larger debate
concerning the character of political participa-
tion in advanced industrialized democracies,
especially in the United States. Whereas
Putnam (2000) claims that American civic
disengagement threatens to unravel demo-
cratic citizenship, Inglehart (1997) and Dalton
(2008b) argue that forms of political participa-
tion in the United States are changing rather
than declining, and that these changes are
driven by the shifting commitments underly-
ing American citizenship norms. While
decline arguments contradict the claims of
the SMS thesis or ignore confrontational pol-
itics altogether, focusing instead on voter turn-
out and civic organizational memberships,
change arguments frequently support SMS
proponents’ fundamental claims that uncon-
ventional forms of political participation
have become a pervasive feature of contem-
porary democracies.

Our findings support a less dramatic inter-
pretation of the observed changes in forms of
political participation, at least in the United
States, as much of the increase in protest
attendance is driven by generational replace-
ment. Most people have never protested. Indi-
viduals born between 1960 and 1980 are not
attending protests as much as earlier cohorts.
This suggests that attending a protest
represents a form of citizen engagement
highly bounded by birth cohort, educational
attainment, and political beliefs. The slight
resurgence of protesting among individuals
born in the 1980s was largely driven by the
college educated, suggesting that within the
American context, protest participation is still
tightly entwined with opportunities on college
campuses for activism and students’ exposure
in college classes to social and political cri-
tiques that are less easily accessible to individ-
uals not in college. The lack of a strong period
effect is all the more surprising given the ways
that the act of protest itself has changed over
time, becoming less confrontational and risky
and more routinized and institutionalized. One
would expect that as the cost of participation
declined, new kinds of people would partici-
pate, but that has largely not been the case.
It could be that these institutionalizing trends
in mobilization permitted people to be active
for longer than they would have previously,
but our results cannot speak to this issue
because most survey questions about protest
pertain only to whether respondents have
“ever” protested.

More promising for non-electoral forms of
participation, however, is the robust increase
over time in petition signing, as shown in
Figure 2d. While there are strong regional
effects, the growth in petition signing is
national, suggesting that its appeal extends
beyond the increasingly corporatized peti-
tion-signature efforts in some West Coast
states (Gloger 2006). Unfortunately, while
individuals on the left and the right are com-
fortable with petitioning signing as a means
of influencing policies, petition signing is
highly stratified by race and socioeconomic
status. Individuals who belong to the most
privileged groups are more likely to partici-
pate, similar to electoral politics. Notably,
whereas protest attendance rates are not strat-
ified by income, petition signing is. This sug-
gests that while the form may allow citizens to
participate in governance on specific issues in
ways that are not historically common, it is
not challenging the existing biases in the types
of people who are represented (Bartels 2008).

We note one major limitation with our data:
we cannot say whether these generational and
period trends affect the probability that indi-
viduals continue to attend political demonstra-
tions throughout their lives. Because we only
have evidence on whether individuals went
to a demonstration or signed a petition, not
when they first did so or how recently, we can-
not say whether Baby Boomers disproportion-
ately swelled the ranks of marches in the
1990s and 2000s. Extant evidence suggests
that high-risk activism increases one’s proba-
bility of political involvement years later
(e.g., Goldstone and McAdam 2001), although
this has not been tested on any non-60s influ-
enced generations. Testing whether there is
a generational residue that affects individuals
later in life—net of individual protest history
—would be a promising line of inquiry.

We suggest two additional lines of inquiry
for future research on the relationships among
political action, cohorts, and time periods.
First, following McVeigh and Smith (1999),
it would be useful to examine not only specific
types of political action by themselves, but
also changes in the configurations of political
actions. For example, has there been a change
in the types of individuals who use both insti-
tutionalized and non-institutionalized political
acts, as opposed to one or the other? Second,
as noted earlier, in this article we largely
explore one facet of the SMS hypothesis—the
extent to which protest has spread through-
out society. An analysis similar to ours,
but using organizational sponsorship of dif-
ferent sorts of actions (instead of individual
participation) as the dependent variable,
would also be useful. Such an analysis could
help specify whether the increase in organi-
zational sponsorship of demonstrations dur-
ing this time period (Soule and Earl 2005)
was primarily related to the development
of new organizations with a protest orienta-
tion, or whether it was more the result of
established organizations’ tactical shifts.
Minkoff’s (1999) analysis of changes in
social movement organizational orientation,
for example, found strong age effects on the
likelihood of switching between service and
advocacy agendas. Conducting a similar
. Authors’ calculation.

2. These questions might have been asked on other

occasions, but this is the universe of surveys avail-
able to researchers through the Interuniversity Con-
sortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR),
the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, or
the survey sponsor (in the case of the Center for
Information and Research on Civic Learning and
Engagement).

. The two national surveys that did ask questions
about protest participation focused specifically on
young people (Jennings and Niemi 1981) and on
African American college students (Biggs 2006).

. For example, a Fox News poll in 2003 found that 3
percent of respondents had been to a demonstration
against the Iraq War. While the percentage is small,
it is likely a much larger number than the actual per-
centage of people who had attended demonstrations,
as this would imply that 6,000,000 people had been
at demonstrations, equivalent to 100,000 persons
attending demonstrations in all 50 state capitals
combined with 2,000 persons attending demonstra-
tions in each state’s 10 next-largest cities. These
crowd estimates are at odds with contemporary
news accounts, which reported that only a handful
of major cities approached the 100,000 figure.

. Complete details on this coding scheme and all
other transformations are available from the
authors.

. While the authors do not have the rights to distrib-
ute the data used in this study, Stata do-files to
Allison, Paul D. 2001. Missing Data. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.

Amenta, Edwin, Neal Caren, Sheera Joy Olasky, and
James Stobaugh. 2009. “All the Movements Fit to
Print: Who, What, When, Where, and Why SMO
Families Appeared in the New York Times in the
Twentieth Century.” American Sociological Review
74:636-56.

Andersen, Robert and Tina Fetner. 2008. ‘Cohort Dif-
ferences in Tolerance of Homosexuality: Attitudinal
Change in Canada and the United States, 1981—
2000.” Public Opinion Quarterly 72:311-30.

Bartels, Larry. 2008. Unequal Democracy: The Political
Economy of the New Gilded Age. Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press.

Biggs, Michael. 2006. ‘“‘Who Joined the Sit-ins and
Why: Southern Black Students in the Early
1960s.” Mobilization: An International Quarterly
11:321-36.

Bowen, Debra. 2010. “Statewide Ballot Initiative
Guide.” Sacramento: California Secretary of State.
Retrieved September 1, 2010 (http://www.sos.ca
-gov/elections/ballot-measures/how-to-qualify-an-initi
ative.htm).

Brady, Henry, Sidney Verba, and Kaye L. Schlozman.
1995. “Beyond SES: A Resource Model of Political
Participation.” American Political Science Review
89:271-95.

Crozat, Matthew. 1998. “Are the Times A-Changin’?
Assessing the Acceptance of Protest in Western
Democracies.” Pp. 59-82 in The Social Movement
Society: Contentious Politics for the New Century,
edited by D. S. Meyer and S. Tarrow. Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

Dalton, Russell J. 2006. Citizen Politics: Public Opinion
and Political Parties in Advanced Industrial Democ-
racies, 4th ed. Washington, DC: CQ Press.

. 2008a. Citizen Politics: Public Opinion and

Political Parties in Advanced Industrial Democra-

cies, 5th ed. Washington, DC: CQ Press.

. 2008b. “Citizenship Norms and the Expansion
of Political Participation.” Political Studies 56:76-98.

della Porta, Donnatella. 1995. Social Movements, Polit-
ical Violence, and the State: A Comparative Analysis
of Italy and Germany. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
. 1998. Policing Protest: The Control of Mass
Demonstrations in Western Democracies. Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota Press.

della Porta, Donnatella, Oliver Fillieule, and Herbert
Reiter. 1998. “‘Policing Protest in France and Italy:
From Intimidation to Cooperation?” Pp. 111-30 in
The Social Movement Society: Contentious Politics
for the New Century, edited by D. S. Meyer and S.
Tarrow. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

Gelman, Andrew, Gary King, and Chuanhai Liu. 1999.
“Not Asked and Not Answered: Multiple Imputation
for Multiple Surveys.” Journal of the American Sta-
tistical Association 93:846-57.

Gillon, Steve. 2004. Boomer Nation: The Largest and
Richest Generation Ever, and How It Changed
America. New York: Free Press.

Gloger, Andrew M. 2006. “Paid Petitioners after
Prete.” Initiative & Referendum Institute Report
2006-1. University of Southern California.

Goldstone, Jack and Doug McAdam. 2001. “Contention
in Demographic and Life-Course Context.” Pp. 195—
221 in Silence and Voice in the Study of Contentious
Politics, edited by R. R. Aminzade, J. A. Goldstone,
D. McAdam, E. J. Perry, W. H. Sewell, S. Tarrow,
D. McAdam, and C. Tilly. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Hadaway, C. Kirk, Penny Long Marler, and Mark
Chaves. 1993. ‘What the Polls Don’t Show: A
Closer Look at U.S. Church Attendance.” American
Sociological Review 58:741-52.

Hirsch, Eric L. 1990. “Sacrifice for the Cause: Group
Processes, Recruitment, and Commitment in a Stu-
dent Social Movement.” American Sociological
Review 55:243—-54.

Inglehart, Ronald. 1997. Modernization and Post-
Modernization. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Inglehart, Ronald and Gabriela Catterberg. 2002.
“Trends in Political Action: The Developmental
Trend and the Post-honeymoon Decline.” Jnterna-
tional Journal of Comparative Sociology 43:300—
316.

Initiative & Referendum Institute. 2010. “‘Statewide Ini-
tiatives Since 1904.” University of Southern
California. Retrieved Sept. 1, 2010 (http://www
.iandrinstitute.org/).

Jennings, M. Kent. 1987. “Residues of a Movement:
The Aging of the American Protest Generation.”
American Political Science Review 81:367-82.

Jennings, M. Kent and Richard G. Niemi. 1981. Gener-
ations and Politics. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

King, Gary, James Honaker, Anne Joseph, and Kenneth
Scheve. 2002. “Analyzing Incomplete Political Sci-
ence Data: An Alternative Algorithm for Multiple
Imputation.” American Political Science Review
95:49-69.
Mannheim, Karl. 1952. “The Problem of Generations.”
Pp. 276-327 in Essays on the Sociology of Knowl-
edge, edited by P. Kecskemeti. New York: Rout-
ledge & Kegan Paul.

McAdam, Doug. 1986. “Recruitment to High-risk
Activism: The Case of Freedom Summer.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 92:64-90.

. 1988. Freedom Summer. New York: Oxford

University Press.

. 1992. “Gender as a Mediator of the Activist
Experience: The Case of Freedom Summer.” Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology 97:1211—40.

McCarthy, John D. and Clark McPhail. 1998. “‘The Insti-
tutionalization of Protest in the United States.”
Pp. 83-110 in The Social Movement Society: Conten-
tious Politics for a New Century, edited by D. S. Meyer
and S. Tarrow. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

McVeigh, Rory and Christian Smith. 1999. “Who Pro-
tests in America: An Analysis of Three Political
Alternatives—Inaction, Institutionalized Politics, or
Protest.”” Sociological Forum 14:685-702.

Meyer, David S. and Sidney Tarrow, eds. 1998a. The
Social Movement Society: Contentious Politics
for a New Century. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield.

. 1998b. ““A Movement Society: Contentious
Politics for a New Century.” Pp. 1-28 in The Social
Movement Society: Contentious Politics for a New
Century, edited by D. S. Meyer and S. Tarrow. Lan-
ham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

Minkoff, Debra C. 1999. “Bending with the Wind:
Strategic Change and Adaptation by Women’s and
Racial Minority Organizations.” American Journal
of Sociology 104:1666—703.

Nie, Norman H., Jane Junn, and Kenneth Stehlik-Barry.
1996. Education and Democratic Citizenship in
America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Oliver, Pamela E. and Daniel J. Myers. 1999. “How
Events Enter the Public Sphere: Conflict, Location,
and Sponsorship in Local Newspaper Coverage of Pub-
lic Events.” American Journal of Sociology 105:38-87.

Paulsen, Ronnelle. 1991. “Education, Social Class, and
Participation in Collective Action.” Sociology of
Education 64:96-110.

Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse
and Revival of American Community. New York:
Simon & Schuster.

Raudenbush, Stephen W. and Anthony S. Bryk. 2002.
Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and
Data Analysis Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Royston, Patrick. 2004. “Multiple Imputation of Miss-
ing Values.” Stata Journal 4:227-41.

Rucht, Dieter. 1998. “The Structure and Culture of Col-
lective Protest in Germany since 1950.” Pp. 29-57
in The Social Movement Society: Contentious Poli-
tics for a New Century, edited by D. S. Meyer and
S. Tarrow. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Sampson, Robert J., Doug McAdam, Heather MacIndoe,
and Simon Weffer-Elizondo. 2005. “Civil Society
Reconsidered: The Durable Nature and Community
Structure of Collective Civic Action.” American
Journal of Sociology 111:673-714.

Schnittker, Jason, Jeremy Freese, and Brian Powell.
2003. ‘“‘Who are Feminists and What Do They
Believe? The Role of Generations.” American
Sociological Review 68:607-622.

Schussman, Alan and Sarah A. Soule. 2005. ‘‘Process
and Protest: Accounting for Individual Protest Par-
ticipation.” Social Forces 84:1083-1108.

Silver, Brian D., Barbara A. Anderson, and Paul R.
Abramson. 1986. “Who Overreports Voting?”
American Political Science Review 80:613—24.

Soule, Sarah A. and Jennifer Earl. 2005. ‘““A Movement
Society Evaluated: Collective Protest in the United
States, 1960-1986.” Mobilization: An International
Quarterly 10:345-64.

Tarrow, Sidney. 1994. Power in Movement: Social
Movements, Collective Action and Politics. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.

Taylor, Verta and Nicole C. Raeburn. 1995. “Identity
Politics as High-risk Activism: Career Consequences
for Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Sociologists.” Social
Problems 42:252-73.

Tilly, Charles. 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

. 1998. Popular Contention in Great Britain,
1758-1834. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Van Dyke, Nella. 2003. “Crossing Movement Bound-
aries: Factors that Facilitate Coalition Protest by
American College Students, 1930-1990.” Social
Problems 50:226-50.

Verba, Sidney, Kaye L. Schlozman, and Henry E. Brady.
1995. Voice and Equality: Civic Voluntarism in
American Politics. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

Weaver, Vesla Mae. 2007. “Frontlash: Race and the
Development of Punitive Crime Policy.” Studies in
American Political Development 21:230-65.

Whittier, Nancy. 1995. Feminist Generations: The Per-
sistence of the Radical Women’s Movement. Phila-
delphia: Temple University Press.

Wiltfang, Gregory and Doug McAdam. 1991. “Distin-
guishing Cost and Risk in Sanctuary Activism.”
Social Forces 69:987-1010.

Yang, Yang. 2008. ‘Social Inequalities in Happiness
in the United States, 1972 to 2004: An Age-
Period-Cohort Analysis.” American Sociological
Review 73:204-226.

Yang, Yang and Kenneth C. Land. 2006. “A
Mixed Models Approach to the Age-Period-
Cohort Analysis of Repeated Cross-Section Sur-
veys, with an Application to Data on Trends in
Verbal Test Scores.” Sociological Methodology
36:39-74,
work on framing effects in debates over same-sex mar-
riage has appeared in Cultural Sociology. His disserta-
tion addressed the recent emergence of social move-
ments aimed at marking past racial atrocities (such as
lynchings and race riots) in the United States. Research
and teaching interests include inequality, social move-
ments and cultural sociology, and criminal justice.
Vanesa Ribas is a doctoral student in the Sociology
Department at the University of North Carolina~Chapel
Hill. Her interests include race and migration, social
inequality and work, and social movements. Her disser-
tation will examine the social and economic incorpora-
tion of Latina/o migrants in the U.S. South, focusing
on the content of work-based social relations and identi-
ties through an ethnography of a food processing plant.
