@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
* Revised version of paper read at the annual
meeting of the American Sociological Society, Sep-
tember, 1955, and based on research sponsored by
the University of Notre Dame and supported by
grants of the Rockefeller Foundation and the
American Philosophical Society.

1 As a rule, the term “ethnic group” is used in
a very narrow sense which also colors the current
sociological meaning of “intergroup relations.”
Both refer to politically and socially dependent
groups and tend to exclude from sociological con-
sideration the relations between independent ethnic
groups or people studied more commonly by his-
torians, political scientists and ethnologists. It
would be good sociological theory if both kinds
of intergroup relations were viewed systematically
as two species of the same genus rather than as
separate compartments to be dealt with by different
learned disciplines.

Sociologists have vaguely applied the term
“large society” to the “obvious” but undefined
residue of a modern nation after it has been di-
vested of all those particular institutions, associa-
tions, subgroups, classes, minorities, and so on,
with which contemporary members of the pro-
fession are mostly concerned. Despite its short-
comings, the term is accepted because it does
not imply a commitment to any particular type of
total society.

2The term “dominant,” instead of the conven-
tional but misleading phrase “dominant group,”
has been adopted from Charles F. Marden, Mi-
norities in American Society, New York: American
Book Company, 1952, p. 29.

Sociologically speaking a “minority” may ac-
tually be larger than the “majority.”
ticular ethnic or culture group may in
reality consist of several different sections
which are differently related to the large
society and occupy different positions in
its structure. By analyzing a particular
case, this paper draws attention to some
factors which must be taken into account
in any attempt to describe adequately the
relationship of an ethnic group to the large
society. The dynamic nature of such rela-
tions makes a rapid, even crude, summary
of the ethnic history of the Upper Rio
Grande Region the most appropriate ap-
proach to our problem.

As is well known, the area had been
inhabited by several communities of Pueblo
Indians before it was conquered and colo-
nized by the Spaniards. Consequently, the
originally separate native societies were
integrated into a social system which was an
extension of the large society of colonial
Spain. The intergroup relations were based
upon force and domination, but involved
also more intimate interactions. First, there
was the common need of defense against
an external enemy, the Plains Indians.
Second, the economy favored exchange and
a certain division of labor. Still more crucial
was the fact that the Spaniards imposed
upon the native folk groups an_heter-
onomous institutional framework which,
nevertheless, left them considerable freedom
to manage their internal affairs. This insti-
tutional framework extended primarily to
the political, military, and economic sphere.
The Spaniards also occupied all the Stra-
tegic positions in the emerging regional
society in which a total social system of
Spanish design, the large society, was
combined with several localized folk societies
or ethnic groups. Finally, the Christian-
ization of the Indians made them equal
members of a religious system which
formed an integral part of Spanish society.
It implied a sharing of important values
and co-operation in very decisive activities,
such as religious ceremonies. Still more
significant, intermarriage was not only made
possible but actually enforced by the church
where sexual contact could not be avoided?

On the eve of the American conquest
the social structure consisted of a thin layer
of upper-class Spaniards, a broad peasant
substratum of Spanish colonial culture and
mixed racial origin, and several semi-auton-
omous communities of Pueblo Indians,
while the Plains Indians remained outside
the pale. There had also existed since the
1820’s a little colony of foreigners who
mingled freely with the natives. The posi-
tion of these Americanos, soon to be
strengthened through further immigration,
was changed radically when the army of
occupation entrusted them with the key
positions of civil administration. Yet the
new situation was not really characterized
by either culture conflict or the co-
existence of two separate and distinctive
social bodies. For the Americanos continued
to participate directly in the indigenous
Hispano society, although, because of their
newly won influence and prestige, they now
associated primarily with the native upper
class with whom they intermarried to a
considerable degree. The new upper class
was, if anything, more Spanish-Mexican
than Anglo-American. The decisive shift
occurred rather on the institutional level. It
was above all a question of who had the
power to interpret and enforce the rules of
the game, mainly in the economic, political
and legal sphere, and who selected and
controlled the personnel for all strategic
positions in the territory. The number
of Anglos was small, their inner coherence
vague and their cultural contributions in-
different, but their direct and indirect power
was real. Moreover, they functioned as rep-
resentatives of the large society upon which
the Hispanos now depended, and which had
the final word in all controversial matters.
It was this relationship which transformed
New Mexico’s native people into an ethnic
group or minority. In passing we might
mention that the Pueblo Indians at first con-
tinued to identify themselves with the old
order, but that they gradually drifted away
from the Hispano-dominated society into
Anglo-American tutelage.

Almost a full generation later, intergroup
relations changed again when a mighty
stream of immigrants from all walks of
life entered the Territory. While united
administratively, the country was thereby
divided sociologically into two sections, the
Old Spanish Core and the New Settlement.5
In the former the Hispano society remained
largely intact, and so did the relations to the
large society and to its local representatives
which had developed in the early days of
the occupation. The other section, however,
was first effectively occupied by Americans
and became indistinguishable from the rest
of America. It was largely dominated by the
Texanos who to the Hispanos appeared al-
most as another race; they were enemies and
intruders while the Anglos in their own
midst constituted a component of the indig-
enous society. Of course, the case is over-
simplified to stress a real difference. The
Hispanos, on the other hand, who migrated
from the Old Core into the New Settlement
found themselves in quite a different posi-
tion which resembled much more that which
was, for instance, typical of the French
Canadians crossing the border to New
England. In order to distinguish between
these two types of intergroup relations
the term “primary” and “derivative” mi-
nority groups are used.® The former applies
to situations like the one found in New
Mexico’s Old Core; the latter describes
conditions as they prevail in most other
parts of the United States. At one time, this
cleavage was clearly reflected in the econ-
omy of New Mexico. The small farms in the
irrigated valleys and on the more humid
mountain slopes were occupied by Hispanos
who also held a monopoly over sheep grazing.
Cattle ranching and dry farming, however,
were the domain of Texans and other
“Americans,” who included many readily
assimilated foreigners from overseas. Less
complete yet clearly perceptible was the
separation in other branches of the regional
economy where the upper ranks were heavily
weighted in favor of the Anglos, while His-
panos were found, often in large numbers,
among the lower ranks and unskilled labor.

Today the division between Old Core
and New Settlement has become blurred
inasmuch as the Hispano society itself is
being transformed from a primary into a
derivative ethnic group, to a large extent
because migratory labor, military service,
mass communications and education’ have
tended to increase interaction with the
dominant. Because education followed the
pattern of the large society, its area of
institutional dominance was vastly increased
and affected a more sensitive sphere of the
minority culture than could be reached by
politics, economy or law. While mere accom-
odation sufficed before, the dominant now
aimed at cultural homogeneity which in-
volved the remodelling of the minority after
its own image. Political and economic dom-
ination was replaced by cultural imperialism.
Under its impact the social structure has
changed again. The old upper class has
been reduced to near insignificance. Supe-
rior wealth, power and prestige now reside
outside the region. Simultaneously, the
regional class structure has become a replica
of the American class structure. The center
of gravity and group conflict is now in the
middle class which includes a far greater
proportion of Anglos. Middle-class occupa-
tions offer much fewer opportunities to
Hispanos, whose principal social elevators
are confined to politics and education.
American middle class standards of cultural
uniformity are fully operative. They find
their familiar expression in racial prejudice
and discrimination. But there are also real
cultural differences which handicap the
Hispanos: they simply do not possess the
qualifications recognized as conditions for
social acceptance and advancement. The
broad substratum of society is composed
mainly of Hispano, and in part Indian,
peasants and laborers. Locally, the old
Hispano social system still functions, but
it has been deprived of its natural élite and
economic base without which it cannot
maintain its closure and independence.®
Hispanos strive now as individuals to im-
prove their lot within the framework of
American society. They resent the blocks
which prevent them from equal participa-
tion and from rising in social status, but
they accept as valid the conditions under
which social advancement is possible in
this country.

The acceptance of American social defi-
nitions is also demonstrated by the effort
of the Hispanos to differentiate themselves
from the Mexicans, that is, more recent
immigrants from Mexico, in order to escape
the treatment accorded to foreigners and
“colored” races. There is also much less
co-operation between Hispanos and Indians
than before. The sense of a common destiny
has disappeared which once had united
Pueblo Indians and Hispano peasants under
the leadership of the Hispano upper class
and the native clergy ® against the American
aggressors. The two groups keep well apart
from each other. The Indians, who have
come under the influence of American
schools and other means of cultural dif-
fusion, now deal directly with the large
society and its agents. There is some advan-
tage in being classified as an Indian rather
than a Spanish-American or Mexican. The
Hispanos, on the other hand, have accepted
the American color scheme and find a
sense of superiority and a certain protection
against discrimination in their European
cultural and racial heritage. The distinc-
tion between Texanos and Anglos can still
be recognized. The former are apt to define
their relations with the Hispanos in the
racial terms of the South. This is felt as an
embarrassment by the Anglos who are more
ready to look upon the Hispanos as just
another Old World culture group to be
integrated into the American melting pot.
The complexity of intergroup relations in
the Upper Rio Grande Region is further
increased through the presence of smaller
yet locally important Old World ethnic
groups such as the Jews and Syrians, Be-
cause of their greater linguistic, religious
and cultural affinity to the Hispanos, the
Italians, French and French Canadians
appear ethnically ambivalent. Another com-
plication is introduced by the great variety
of Indian folk societies which had to be
neglected in this short paper.?°

The foregoing sketch seems to indicate
that in the analysis of inter-group relations
it is not sufficient to treat the dominant and
the ethnic groups as social systems func-
tioning separately on the same level, or to
stress differences in their cultural heritage.
This relationship is more significantly de-
termined by the institutional framework
within which all the components of an eth-
nically mixed society must operate. It is
heteronomous to the minority but not to
the dominant. Attention must be paid not
only to the degrees of heteronomy and cul-
tural differences. It is equally important to
know which spheres of ethnic group life
are, partially or wholly, regulated by the
large society and its organs. Other signifi-
cant factors include the control of strategic
positions in a regional society as well as the
class position of the representatives of the
large society with whom ethnics interact
most frequently and directly.

In conclusion it should be pointed out that
in a complex society the conditions and prob-
lems of different parts of one and the same
ethnic group may vary greatly according to
their position in the total social structure,
both vertically and horizontally. Among the
factors which favor disorganization of so-
called primary ethnic groups are shifts in
size and power as well as increasing com-
munication and interaction. But above all
the dislocation is due to the extension of the
institutional framework, which the large
society imposes upon the ethnic group, to
ever wider and more sensitive spheres of
social and personal life. Once disorganized,
a primary ethnic group need not disappear
through the successful assimilation of its
members. It may persist in the modified
form of a derivative ethnic group which
is characterized by quite different behavior
patterns. No longer does such a group pos-
sess an inner coherence and a group solidarity
which is able to resist the cultural and social
pressures of the large society and which is
often strong enough to absorb its local
representatives. A derivative ethnic group
is rather determined by social categoriza-
tions and definitions adopted from the large
society, and by the qualifications required
from individuals for direct participation in
its various strata.
