American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
‘UMEROUS students of working-class
N politics have noted and studied the

relationship between economic insecu-
rity and political radicalism. For example,
Karl Marx argued that a major consequence
of recurrent unemployment would be the
workers’ formation of organizations “in
order to destroy or to weaken the ruinous
effects of this natural law of capitalist pro-
duction in their class.” 1 Karl Kautsky be-
lieved that economic insecurity would be-
come so “intolerable for the masses of the
population” that they would be “forced to
seek a way out of the general misery, .. .
[finding] it only in socialism.”? More
recently, some social scientists have inter-
preted left voting as a consequence, inter
alia, of the fact that certain central “needs”
are not being met, the “need for security of
income” being foremost among them? A
good deal of comparative research has found
that the workers experiencing the most recur-
rent unemployment and underemployment
are the ones most likely to be discontented
with the existing order, to conceive of them-
selves as its “exploited victims,” to be “class
conscious,” and to support the political left
in their country.* Particularly apt to our

 

Paul Lazarsfeld, Allen Barton, and Juan Linz,
“The Psychology of Voting: Analysis of Political
Behavior,” in Gardner Lindzey, ed., Handbook
of Social Psychology, Vol. 2, Cambridge: Addison-
Wesley, 1954, pp. 1124-1175.

4See Richard Centers, The Psychology of Social
Classes, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1949, pp. 177-179; Herbert G, Nicholas, The British
General Election of 1950, London: Macmillan,
1951, pp. 297-298. Lipset, op. cit., pp. 113-114,
232-237, contains an excellent summary of the
literature and findings on the political effects of
unemployment. For the earlier literature, see Philip
Eisenberg and Paul Lazarsfeld, “The Psychological
Effects of Unemployment,” Psychological Bulletin,
35 (June, 1938), pp. 358-390. O. Milton Hall,
“Attitudes and Unemployment: A Comparison of
the Opinions and Attitudes of Employed and Un-
employed Men,” Archives of Psychology, 165
(March, 1954), is a monograph on the effects of
unemployment on the attitudes of professional en-
gineers during the depression of the ’30’s. Also see
John C. Leggett, “Economic Insecurity and Work-
ing Class Consciousness,” American Sociological
Review, 29 (April, 1964), pp. 226-234, and Richard
F. Hamilton, “The Social Bases of French Working
Class Politics,” unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Columbia University, 1963. General economic in-
security in any form—whether because of the fear
and presence of unemployment, or being in an
economically vulnerable position—apparently con-
duces to support of radical politics. Thus, Lipset
noted in Agrarian Socialism, Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 1950, pp.
10-18, that: “It was the economically and climati-
cally vulnerable wheat belt that formed the back-
bone of all protest movements from the independ-
ent parties of the 1870’s down to the contemporary
C.C.F, in Canada... It is highly significant that
own study is the conclusion by Zawadski
and Lazarsfeld in their study of unem-
ployed Polish workers during the depression
of the thirties, that “the experiences of un-
employment are a preliminary step for the
revolutionary mood, but . . . they do not
lead by themselves to a readiness for mass
action. Metaphorically speaking, these ex-
periences only fertilize the ground for revo-
lution, but do not generate it.” >

Less than a decade before the Revolution-
ary Government, headed by Fidel Castro,
came to power in Cuba, the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development
noted that “the insecurities which result
from chronic unemployment and from the
instability and seasonal fluctuations of the
Cuban economy, continue to keep the worker
in a state of anxiety.”® That the recurrent
unemployment and underemployment and
the consequent “state of anxiety” of the
Cuban workers in pre-revolutionary Cuba
later became a significant determinant of
their support for the revolution and its lead-
ership is the thesis of this article.

Cuba, prior to the 1959 revolution, was
both misdeveloped and underdeveloped. Her
economy was subject to the vagaries of ex-
port demand for sugar, and this created a
“boom and bust” psychology affecting all
strata of the population, not merely the
working class, and inhibiting general eco-
nomic growth. Chronic economic stagnation,
a fluctuating, perhaps decreasing, per capita
income,’ and widespread unemployment and
mentales de la economia cubana, Havana: Banco
Nacional de Cuba, 1950, p. 52. He deflated his in-
come series by means of the old United States
wholesale price index, since there was no Cuban
index. Money income figures for 1956-58 were ad-
justed by the writer, using the same set of prices.

8 As cited in Alberto Arredondo, Cuba: tierra
indefensa, Havana, 1945, p. 176.

9 Investment in Cuba: Basic Information for
United States Businessmen, Washington, D.C.: US.
Government Printing Office, 1956, p. 21, fn.

10 The 1953 Cuban census estimated 8.4 per cent
of the labor force was unemployed during the year’s
period of fullest employment, namely, at the height
of the zafra (Oficina Nacional de los Censos Demo-
grafico y Electoral, Censos de poblacion, viviendas
y electoral, Havana: Republica de Cuba, 1953).
Systematic data on unemployment and underem-
ployment were not collected in Cuba until 1957.
In 1957, 10.8 per cent of the labor force was esti-
mated as unemployed, on the average, during the
zafra, with a high during the dead season of 15.1
per cent. In 1958, the average unemployment in
the zafra and dead season was an estimated 8.4
per cent and 18 per cent respectively. Annual aver-
ages were 12.6 per cent in 1957, and 11.8 per cent
in 1958. Estimated underemployment averaged 7.6
per cent in 1957, and 7.2 per cent in 1958, making
a combined total of known average underemploy-
ment and unemployment of 20.2 per cent in 1957,
and 19.0 per cent in 1958. These figures are calcu-
lated from data in the following: Amnuario de
estadisticas del trabajo, 1959, Geneva: Oficina In-
ternacional de Trabajo, 1959, Table 10, p. 186;
Oficina Nacional de los Censos Demografico y
Electoral, Departamento de Econometria, “Canti-
dades y Indices de Empleo y Desempleo,” Empleo
y desempleo en la fuerza trabajadora, Havana:
Consejo de Economia, June 3, 1958, mimeographed ;
Encuesta sobre empleo, desempleo, y subempleo,
Havana, 1961 (unpublished data made available to
the author). A table showing unemployment and
underemployment in the Cuban labor force 1957-
1958, by month, appears in the author’s dissertation,
Working Class Politics in Cuba, p. 121. “Under-
employment” was defined by the Department of
Economic Statistics of the Cuban Government to
include “persons who work less than thirty hours
a week for pay, or ‘on their own account’ [self-
employed] and those who work without pay for
a relative.’ Departamento de Econometria, “In-
forme Tecnico No. 7,” Empleo y desempleo en la
fuerza trabajadora, Julio, 1959, Havana: Consejo
Nacional de Economia, October 5, 1959, p. 12
mimeographed.

11 Investment in Cuba, p. 24. “Only one-third
of the millworkers and one-twentieth of the field
workers are kept fully employed during the dead
season.” Cuba: Economic and Commercial Condi-
tions, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office,
1954, p. 39.

12 Cuba Economica y Financiera, Anuario Azu-
carea de Cuba, 1954, Havana, 1954; Investment in
Cuba, p. 23. If the 1953 census categories, “Crafts-
men, foremen, operatives, and kindred workers,”
“Laborers, except farm” and “Laborers, farm,” are
taken to constitute the working class, that class
numbered 1,111,743 in 1952, or 56.3 per cent of the
“economically active population.” There were an
estimated 474,053 sugar workers; thus they con-
stituted about forty-two per cent of the manual
working class, excluding private household workers,
service workers, and unclassified occupations, the
latter of which totalled about ten per cent of the
of the sugar crop profoundly affected un-
employment not only in sugar but through-
out the island’s industries, 20 per cent is
an absolute minimum estimate of pre-
revolutionary average unemployment.

It scarcely seems problematic, therefore,
that the severe and recurrent fluctuations of
the entire economy, and the consequent wide-
spread unemployment and underemployment
in the population, were of major significance
in the formation of the workers’ political
consciousness—especially given the signifi-
cant influence that revolutionary socialists
(first anarchosyndicalists and then Commu-
nists) had always exerted in the Cuban
working class.!8

That Fidel Castro believed unemployment
politically significant is clear. For example,
in his speech at his trial for leading the
abortive attack on Fort Moncada on July
26, 1953, he said that the revolutionaries
had based “their chances for success on the
social order, because we were assured of the
people’s support. . . .” Among “the people
we count on in our struggle,” he said, “are
the seven hundred thousand unemployed
Cubans, who want to earn their daily bread
honorably without having to leave their
country in search of sustenance; and the
five hundred thousand rural workers who
live in miserable bokios [huts], work four
months of the year and spend the rest of
it in hunger, sharing their misery with their
children. .. .” 14

Repeatedly in his speeches since coming
to power, Castro has referred to the problem
A people which produces below its capacities,
and, further, where an appreciable portion of
what it produces is carried off by others, is
not a people enjoying the economic and social
conditions propitious to progress and to re-
solving its problems. That is why our country
suffered that problem of permanent unem-
ployment; ... that is why there was chronic
unemployment in our country extending to
several hundred thousand idle citizens; that
is why the fields were worked only three or
four months a year. That is the reason for
the ills of the Republic, which could never
have been overcome if the Republic had not
adopted forms of social organization and pro-
duction putting human effort in harmony with
the interest of the people in progress and
greater production. . . . The issue became one
of the revolution having to resolve the un-
employment problem and, even more difficult,
to resolve it under conditions of economic
aggression, embargo on spare parts, raw ma-
terials and machinery, and complete suppres-
sion of the sugar quota.15
The data for this study are drawn from
the writer’s interviews with industrial work-
ers in Cuba in the summer of 1962. What
was significant about that period as far as
this particular study is concerned was that
the Revolutionary Government had by then
clearly consolidated its power (the Bay of
Pigs invasion being a year in the past); the
original relatively undifferentiated popular
euphoria had by then been long replaced
by relatively clear lines of social cleavage
generated in response to actions taken by
the Revolutionary Government; it was then
more than a year since Fidel Castro had
declared the revolution to be ‘socialist’; and,
therefore, a study of the differential ap-
peals of the ideology and social content of
the revolution to Cuban workers could be
meaningful and valuable."®

Our interviews were carried out with a
randomly selected sample of 210 industrial
workers employed in twenty-one work cen-
ters widely scattered throughout the island’s
six provinces. The writer chose the work
centers from a list of all mines, mills, fac-
tories and plants functioning in Cuba under
the direction of the Ministry of Industries.
There were approximately 200,000 indus-
trial workers employed in the industrial
work-places under the direction of the
Ministry of Industries. Excluded from rep-
resentation in the sample were the approxi-
mately 120,000 industrial workers employed
in some 250 industrial work-places under
the direction of the Department of Indus-
trialization of the National Institute of
Agrarian Reform [INRA]. Thus, sixty-two
per cent of Cuba’s industrial workers con-
stituted the population from which the sam-
ple of workers interviewed for this study
was drawn.

The work-places were selected by means
of a self-weighting random sample in which
the probability of a work-place being chosen
was directly proportional to the number of
workers employed in it. This sampling
method tended to exclude the smaller in-
dustrial work-places (known in Cuba as
“chinchales”) which abounded there.’®
where

m equals the number of industrial work-places se-
lected to be in the sample.

s equals the number of workers employed in a
given work-place for the sample.

k equals the fixed number of workers randomly
selected to be interviewed in each work-place.
N equals the total number of workers employed

in all work-places from which the sample was

drawn.
P equals the probability that a worker in the popu-
lation would be selected to be interviewed.

The method of sampling was employed to assure
the inclusion in the sample of workers actually in-
volved in industrial production using machine
power and machine methods of production, rather
than handicrafts methods of manufacture. In gen-
eral, the larger the factory, the more likely that
it was actually an industrial center. This was done
for the theoretical reason that a major focus of
the larger study, of which the findings reported
here are a part, was to be the revolution’s impact
on the workers’ estrangement from their work. It
was, therefore, particularly necessary to interview
‘industrial’ rather than handicraft workers. It need
hardly be pointed out that this method of sampling
the working class does not affect the explanatory
purposes of our study. “Representativeness,” as
Hans Zetterberg points out, “should not be con-
fused with randomization. Randomization can be
used to obtain representativeness. However, it is
also used as a method of controlling irrelevant fac-
tors when testing a working hypothesis.” (On The-
ory and Verification in Sociology, New York: Tres-
sler Press, 1954, p. 57).

20 This last method was employed only in the
mining town of Matahambre in Pinar del Rio. The
selection was not demonstrably random. It was im-
possible to pull men out of the mines during their
work. The attempt was made to select names from
the list of workers not working during that shift,
go to their homes, and interview them there. How-
ever, this proved to be impossible because there are
no addresses and fewer street names in Mataham-
The advantage of employing method (a)
for selecting the workers to be interviewed
is that the writer was able to see the work-
ers’ reactions within the work-places visited
—the reactions of the workers chosen to
be interviewed as well as of the other work-
ers present at that moment in the various
departments. Observation of the general
reactions of the workers—of reserve or sus-
picion, curiosity or friendliness—was an
important aspect of this study. Moreover,
so as to be certain that the worker selected
was, indeed, the worker interviewed, this
method of selection was preferable. Perhaps
if Cuba had not been the center of con-
troversy and the focus of American hostility
during the period in which the study was
done, this method would not have been
necessary. This precautionary measure was
also beneficial to the writer’s research since
it did provide the opportunity for direct
observation of the interaction among the
industrial workers themselves and between
them and administrative personnel.

The interviews were carried out in Spanish
by the writer and his wife, each separately
interviewing five workers per work-place.
All interviewing was carried out in com-
plete privacy, in a location provided within
the work-place, such as a class-room or
storage room or office. Each worker inter-
viewed, as well as anyone else concerned,
was specifically told before the interviewing,
in a variant of the following words, that the
writer was
Every precaution was taken in the inter-
viewing to discover and to prevent dissimu-
lation. Dissimulation, as well as uncon-
scious distortion, must be taken into account
in the evaluation of all interview data, in
whatever type of study. Internal checks for
consistency as well as external checks on
reliability must be built into any interview
schedule, wherever possible; this was done
in our study. The interviews were carried
out according to a formal set of questions
on a mimeographed interview schedule pre-
pared by the writer. It was quite clear to
the worker that he was being formally
interviewed in accordance with pre-deter-
mined questions, and that notes on his an-
swers were being taken throughout the
interview.

Stylized probes were also employed in
these interviews to make it especially dif-
ficult for the workers interviewed to give
answers they did not actually feel to be
true. For example, if a worker were asked:
“Do you think that your children have the
same opportunities, better opportunities, or
worse opportunities than others to live com-
fortably and happily?” and he answered:
“All children are equal now,” he would then
be asked some variant of “How is it possible
for all children to be equal? Please explain
what you mean.” Such probes were freely
used throughout the interview.

Because there were obviously some work-
ers who were suspicious or even frightened
of the purposes of the interview, every effort
was made to establish rapport quickly and
to put the respondent at his ease by stress-
ing that the interview was voluntary and
completely anonymous, and that the inter-
views were very important because they
would provide the basis for information
about working conditions in Cuba to Ameri-
cans and other non-Cubans throughout the
world. Occasionally a respondent would ask
that his words not be recorded until the
interview had terminated; we complied
readily. The interviews ranged in length
from forty-five minutes to three-and-a-half
hours, averaging about one hour and a
quarter, in privacy; a great effort of will
would be required in that situation con-
sistently to give answers thought to be suit-
able to the government and the interviewer.
It would require a certain level of dramatic
skill to feign enthusiasm or to manifest
feelings where these did not exist. More-
over, the refusal rate was very low (eight of
210 respondents, or less than four per cent) ;
in only a few instances did opponents of
the regime evidence either hesitancy or fear
in speaking their minds freely. Cubans are
highly voluble, volatile and loquacious, irre-
spective of their political views.

The interview schedule was organized in
such a way as to begin the interview with
questions which were, on the surface, far
removed from political questions of any
kind—such as length of residence in a par-
ticular place, or length of time working in
the work-place. The interviews were carried
out in accordance with established canons
of sociological interviewing, with especial
emphasis on anonymity, on the establish-
ment of rapport, and on special probing to
ascertain the truthfulness of a response.?+
In order to get at the workers’ attitudes
towards the revolution, several questions
were asked of them during the interview
which are believed to be more or less indica-
tive, taken in concert, of how they viewed
the revolution. Of the five chosen for com-
bination into an index of these attitudes,
two were ‘open-ended’ questions to which
the variety of responses possible was limited
only by the worker’s own imagination. The
first of these was:

(a) “Speaking in general, what are the
things in Cuba that you are most proud of
as a Cuban?” One hundred and fifteen work-
ers replied to this question in terms clearly
favorable to the revolution. Only such re-
sponses as could be regarded as clearly in-
dicating or explicitly stating support of the
revolution, such as mention of the revolu-
tion itself, of the “socialist government,” of
specific economic and social reforms of the
Revolutionary Government, or of increased
work security since the revolution, were
counted as ‘favorable.’ All others, whether
more or less ‘neutral’ responses or ‘clearly
hostile’ ones, were classified as ‘not clearly
favorable.’

The workers could be especially blunt in
their opposition, as was a young worker at
a paper milling plant in Cardenas, whose
answer was simply, “Of nothing, chico...
I don’t like Communism,” or as a West
Indian worker (with two teenage daughters
in the militia) at the nationalized Portland
Cement plant in Mariel explained (in Eng-
lish): “I stay only because I have two
daughters who will not leave—otherwise I’d
go away. . . No one bothers me, I just do
not like it. Why? I can’t say why. I guess I
just prefer the old Cuba... .”

In contrast to such clearly hostile remarks
were such noncommittal replies as a shoe-
maker’s “Of our movies and our athletes,”
or a brewery worker’s equivocal, “I am a
peaceful worker. I have no passionate inter-
est in anything. After my work, I pass my
time in my house in Manacas with my little
one and my wife,” or a cigar-maker’s witty
but equally noncommittal, “Our women and
our cigars.”

Occasionally a revolutionary worker would
wax poetic, as did a copper miner in Mata-
hambre: “Cuba is a cup of gold to me. It
is the only country in the world that is now
moving forward... .” A sugar worker’s sim-
ple statement was more typical, however: “I
earn good money now. I lack nothing. .. .
All of the workers are with the revolution.”
A Havana brewery worker said: “I am con-
tent with the revolution in general. .. . For
the first time one can do what one wants
without fear.”

The second of these open-ended questions
was (b) “What sort [clase] of people gov-
ern this country now?”

One hundred and twenty-five workers
replied to this question in terms clearly
favorable to the revolution.

Given the double meaning in Spanish of
the word clase, which can mean ‘type,’ ‘sort’
or ‘kind,’ as well as ‘class,’ the workers
could, of course, choose to interpret the
question’s meaning in a number of ways.
As with the preceding question, only replies
which could be regarded as clearly favorable
to the revolution were counted as such:
“the people,” “the humble,” “hardworking,”
“good,” “sincere,” “moral,” “honest,” “de-
fenders of the poor and humble,” “the work-
ing class.” Responses such as “socialists” or
“revolutionaries” which did not clearly com-
mit the worker were not regarded as favor-
able; neither were such equivocal replies as
“Cubans,” “Fidel,” “Communists,” nor re-
plies which were likely meant to be hostile
such as “Russians,” or “Soviets,” or which
were undoubtedly meant to be hostile such
as “shameless,” or “traitors.”

“To me,” an opponent of the revolution
working at the nationalized Texaco oil re-
finery in Santiago said, “they are completely
Communists. All of their accomplishments
have been through the work of others—
including how they think. I have a sister-in-
law and a brother-in-law in prison for speak-
ing against the government—|[sentenced to]
seven years. .. .” Another worker opposed
to the revolution said: “Socialists they say.
The kids say Communists. I don’t know.
Listen, if somebody comes and takes that
pen of yours, and you bought it, what are
you going to think?”

“Well, I’ve never been ‘political,’” a cig-
arette-machine operator said. “For me, they
are all right.” A brewery worker’s reply
was equally equivocal: “My experience so
far is good. I don’t worry about such things
—neither before the revolution nor now.”
A skilled electrician in Santiago committed
himself only so far as to say that the men
in the government are “persons with socialist
ideas, who though they have good intentions
have committed many serious administrative
errors.”

“The truth is,” a carpenter in a sugar
central said, “that now those who govern
here are Cubans. They are honest and hard-
working men.” A 67-year-old maintenance
man at the Nicaro nickel plant who had
been an agricultural worker until recently
said: “Look, before I couldn’t look a boss
in the eye—I looked at my feet. Not now;
now we have liberty and walk where we
wish, and nothing is prohibited to us. It is
a great joy to be alive now. These men
[who govern us] are 100 per cent better
than before. I have known governments
from [Mario Garcia] Menocal [Cuban
President, 1913-1921] until Batista left
three years ago, and I have never seen any
like this government.” Equally articulate in
his support of the revolution was a twenty-
year-old bootmaker in a newly established
factory in Guanajay: “We are the govern-
ment, we run things. Go to a factory or
consolidado anywhere, chico, and see: those
who work govern, those who govern work,
not like the capitalists who lived without
working before the revolution triumphed.
Now, the power of the workers and peasants
has emerged.”

The workers were also asked the following
two questions with fixed alternatives:

(c) “Do you believe that the country
ought to have elections soon?”
Using this index to gauge the differential
appeals of the revolution to the workers we
interviewed, our expectation that the relative
security of their employment before the
revolution would have a significant bearing
on their attitudes toward the revolution now,
is borne out by our findings, as presented
in Table 1. There is a clear relationship be-
tween the average number of months the
workers worked during the year before the

22Ttem analysis of the workers’ answers to the
five questions indicates that the latter form an ac-
ceptable Guttman scale, eighty-eight per cent of the
workers giving answers exactly (67 per cent) or
consistently (21 per cent) in conformity with a
Guttman model of ideal classification of respond-
ents. The coefficient of reproducibility equals 0.95.
See Samuel Stouffer, et al., Measurement and Pre-
diction, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1950, p. 117.
revolution and the probability of their sup-
port for the revolution. The workers with
the least pre-revolutionary economic security
are the ones who are most likely to sup-
port the revolution.

If their relative economic security before
the revolution has been of significant conse-
quence for the workers’ responses to the
revolution, then it should be expected that
their pre-revolutionary situation significantly
affected their pre-revolutionary political ori-
entations as well. We know, for example,
that a major social base of the Communists
in the labor movement was among the work-
ers in the sugar industry, i.e., in the industry
which was itself most economically unstable
and whose workers suffered perhaps the
greatest burden of the seasonal unemploy-
ment cycle. We should, therefore, expect on
both historical and comparative sociological
grounds, that the workers who experienced
the most unemployment and underemploy-
ment before the revolution were the ones
who were most likely to support the Com-
munists,

A simple structured question was asked of
all the workers in our sample in order to
gauge their pre-revolutionary orientation
toward the Communists:

“How would you describe your attitude
toward the Communists before the revolu-
tion: hostile, indifferent, friendly, or sup-
porter?” °3

23 Tt is relevant to note here that, according to
this crude measure of their attitude toward the
Communists before the revolution, twenty-eight
When we compare the workers’ pre-revolu-
tionary views of the Communists with their
pre-revolutionary security of employment,
the evidence indicates that the workers who
experienced the most unemployment before
the revolution were the ones most likely to
be sympathetic to the Communists.*+

This relationship is strengthened when we
view it among only those workers in our
sample who were also workers before the
revolution. There has been a sizable influx

 

per cent of the workers in our sample classified
themselves as pre-revolutionary friends or suppor-
ters of the Communists; and according to the Inter-
national Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Report, written after the Communists had been
officially purged from the labor movement, the
Communists still had “a strong underground influ-
ence in some unions, and some authorities estimate
that perhaps 25 per cent of all Cuban workers are
secretly sympathetic to them.” Report on Cuba, p.
365.

241t may be objected that this relationship be-
tween pre-revolutionary unemployment and pro-
Communism is an artifact of the circumstance that
revolutionary workers are likely to ‘recall’ a favor-
able attitude toward the Communists, because of
their present support for the revolution. The fact
that the proportion favoring the revolution exceeds
the proportion who favored the Communists before
the revolution by more than twice casts doubt on
the validity of this objection. Moreover, when we
view the relationship between pre-revolutionary
employment status and pro-Communist attitudes
among revolutionary workers only, the same rela-
tionship holds: 44 per cent of the recurrently un-
employed (N=68) supported the Communists be-
fore the revolution, compared to 35 per cent of the
regularly employed (N=65).
of formerly salaried or self-employed per-
sons, as well as agricultural laborers and
peasants, in to the working class since the
revolution—and this is reflected in our sam-
ple; these non-workers were less likely to
support the Communists before the revolu-
tion than the workers. When we exclude
those who were not workers before the revo-
lution, we find that the gap between the
proportions pro-Communist among the pre-
revolutionary unemployed and among the
employed workers becomes larger (Table
2a). There is also a slight strengthening of
the relationship between pre-revolutionary
employment insecurity and support for the
cent said they now worked between seven
and nine months a year. Thus, 98 per cent
of the previously most underemployed work-
ers said they were working more regularly
than they had been before the Revolution-
ary Government came to power. It would
seem quite likely that these changes have
had consequences for their response to the
revolution. In order to test the proposition
that the workers whose economic security
has been most enhanced since the revolution
would be the most likely to support it, we
would have to look simultaneously at their
pre-revolutionary and present employment
status.

The optimum test of the hypothesis con-
cerning the relationship between change in
employment status since the revolution and
attitude toward it would require relating
decreased economic security, as well as
maintenance of the same level of security,
to the workers’ attitudes. However, as is
obvious from inspection of Table 3, not all
the necessary types of change in employ-
ment status are represented among the
workers in our sample. We can, nevertheless,
make some useful inferences concerning the
consequences of relative change in economic
security on the workers’ attitudes by com-
paring the available groups of workers.

As can be seen from Table 3, our expecta-
tion is confirmed that those workers whose
economic security is greater than it was in
pre-revolutionary years are more likely than
other workers to support the revolution—
in this case, than those workers who were
employed regularly before and have con-
tinued to be since the revolution.
If it is correct, as our evidence seems to
indicate, that economic insecurity conduces
to revolutionary politics, then it should fol-
low from this that a racial or ethnic group
whose position is comparatively less secure
economically than that of the racial or ethnic
majority should also be more responsive to
the revolution than the latter is. From what
we know about pre-revolutionary Cuba, it
is probably correct to say that Negroes and
Mestizos were in general subject to greater
economic insecurity than whites. (In our
sample, for instance, forty-nine per cent of
the Negroes and Mestizos reported that they
were employed nine months or less before
the revolution, compared to thirty-nine per
cent of the white workers.) While Negroes
were distributed throughout the occupa-
tional structure, they were disproportion-
ately concentrated in the poorest income
groups and the most menial jobs—they were,
as Lowry Nelson put it, “predominantly the
‘hewers of wood and drawers of water’.” ?>
Apparently, there was also a tendency for
Negroes working at the same jobs as whites
to receive less pay,?° although this was pri-
marily true of the workers in the weakest
unions and least organized industries.
Further, in the urban slums, or solares,
Negroes predominated; the better rooms
were commonly rented only to whites. Inso-
far as their economic position was particu-
larly insecure, then, it might be expected
that Negro workers would be more likely to
be revolutionary than white workers.

In fact, some of the most prominent left-
wing leaders in Cuba were Negroes; among
leaders of the Communist Party, as well as
of the non-Communist labor unions, Negroes
were well represented. During the revolution
of the thirties, Realengo 18, the ‘soviet’ of
workers and peasants which withstood the
military forces of Batista the longest, right
into the early months of 1934, was led by a
Negro Communist, Leon Alvarez. Perhaps
the most revered labor leader was the mar-
tyred Jesus Menendez, the Negro head of
the sugar workers’ union, who was murdered
in 1947 by cohorts of the notorious Eusebio
Mujal. Furthermore, Oriente Province, the
province with the highest concentration
of Negroes in the population—perhaps twice
the proportion of other provinces—was the
rebel stronghold?’ during the guerrilla
struggle against Batista; and Santiago, the
province’s capital, was the one major city in
which the otherwise abortive general strike
of April, 1958, was fully supported by the
workers, and the entire city shut down.
However, it must also be emphasized that
the social status of the Negro in pre-revolu-
tionary Cuba differed markedly from the
status of the Negro in the United States.
Largely as a result of social processes char-
acteristic of Negro slavery, and of the
slaves’ emancipation in Cuba—in contrast
to slavery in the United States—the barriers
to social intercourse between Negroes and
whites, well before the revolution, were not
as formidable as those in the United States.
While these early developments are too
complex to explore here,”° it is important to
emphasize that “Jim Crow” laws comparable
to those in America have never existed in
Cuba, nor were there other legal, political,
and social buttresses to Negro exploitation
after emancipation from slavery of the type
in force in the United States. Compared to
the United States, at least, the social history
of Cuba involved a relatively high degree
of racial integration and inter-marriage, espe-
cially in the working class. Nevertheless,
racial discrimination was socially and politi-
cally enforced to a certain extent. “Before
1959, Negroes were excluded from most of
the better hotels, beaches, and places of en-
tertainment patronized by Americans and
upper class Cubans.” *° While not a common
practice, in some cities the public squares
and parks in which Cubans congregate in the
evenings had a promenade plaza reserved for
whites which was a step higher than the
one reserved for Negroes. As the Cuba sur-
vey of the Human Relations Areas Files
states: “Opponents of Castro maintain that
he invented the racial issue. It is, however,
an old problem which has always become
more serious in times of political crisis. . . .
Many wry Negro proverbs commenting on
the relations between Negroes and whites
refer unmistakably to home grown attitudes
of long standing: ‘The black fought the war,
the white enjoys the peace’; ‘If you see a
black and a white together, either the white
man needs the black, or else the black has
won a lottery.’”°° That many Negroes
recognized their social status as a problem
is indicated by the fact that a Negro na-
tional federation was organized against ra-
cial discrimination.

One further element of importance in the
formation of the Negroes’ attitudes toward
the revolution is the fact that they had a
history of experience with broken promises
before the revolution and, for that reason,
were not likely to take too seriously mere
assertions by the Revolutionary Government
that it would eliminate discrimination. “Be-
fore 1959,” as the HRAF survey notes,
“various political leaders gained electoral
support by promising to uphold Negro rights
but subsequently failed to carry out these
promises. The legislative initiative gradu-
ally fell to the Communists and to the
Frente Civico contra la Discrimination Ra-
cial, sponsored by the CTC [Confederation
of Cuban Workers] and incorporated in
Batista’s patronage system. Many Negroes
resented left wing efforts to capitalize on
the issue, and pointed to progress made by
the United States in racial matters as a
commendable example. Others saw signs of
a deliberate imperialist effort to weaken
Cuba by depriving it of part of the resources
of its population.” 3+

Given this complex mix of relative Negro
economic insecurity, a rebel tradition, the
presence of discriminatory practices despite
a relatively high level of social integration,
and the probability of disillusionment with
political programs, prediction of the differ-
ential response to the revolution of Negro
and white workers is not without difficulty
—although one would probably surmise that
Negroes would be more likely than whites
to support the revolution. It is particularly
interesting, therefore, as Table 4 shows, that,
taken as a whole, the Negro workers in our
sample were no more likely than white
workers to sympathize with the Communists
in pre-revolutionary Cuba, and more likely
to be hostile to them. We shall take a closer
look at this relationship after discussing the
differential response of Negro and white
workers to the revolution.

Since the revolution, the Revolutionary
Government has not only conducted a propa-
ganda campaign in behalf of racial equal-
ity, but has also opened all hotels, beaches,
and resorts (previously almost entirely pri-
vately owned and closed to the public) to
all Cubans, regardless of color. “In the
larger cities conspicuous desegregation was
accomplished although the familiar patterns
were to be observed in provincial towns in
1961.” 82 Fidel Castro has sprinkled his
speeches with allusions to the past exploita-
tion and revolutionary traditions of the
Negro, a typical example of which comes
from a speech the writer attended at the
26th of July anniversary celebration in 1962
in Santiago: “In the past when voices were
raised in favor of liberation for the slaves,
the bourgeoisie would say ‘impossible, it
will ruin the country’ and to instill fear,
they spoke of the ‘black terror.’ Today they
speak of the ‘red terror.’ In other words,
in their fight against liberty they spread fear
of the Negro; today they spread fear of
socialism and communism.”

It seems likely that the social barriers
between members of the races were least
among workers; consequently, the impact
on them of non-discriminatory policies alone
should be least, although not necessarily in-
significant. Most beaches, resorts and hotels
were closed to the poor of Cuba—white and
black alike—and not just to the Negro.
Thus, the Negro worker may have felt the
impact of class more than of racial member-
ship. It is unclear whether or not economic
policies of the regime have benefitted Negro
workers more than white workers. While it
is probable that Negroes have felt that their
status has improved, the complexity of
events since the revolution makes the Ne-
gro workers’ responses difficult to predict.
Our data indicate that the Negro workers
in our sample are more likely than their
white fellows to support the revolution.

In the preceding discussion both economic
and status variables were relevant in predict-
ing the differential appeals of the revolu-
tion to Negro and white workers. Perhaps
our finding that Negro workers are more
likely than white workers to support the
revolution indicates only the relatively less
secure position of Negro workers as a group
before the revolution, i.e., that control for
pre-revolutionary employment status would
eliminate the Negro-white difference. How-
ever, this reasoning is not supported by our
evidence. As Table 6 indicates, both among
the workers who were recurrently unem-
ployed before the revolution and among
those who were regularly employed, Negroes
are more likely to support the revolution
than whites. The table also shows that the
original relationship between pre-revolution-
ary employment status and attitude toward
the revolution holds among both Negro and
white workers. The inference is clear that,
given the persistence of the differences be-
tween Negro and white workers—even with
pre-revolutionary economic security con-
trolled—the fact of membership in the Negro
racial group is in itself significant. Indeed,
if we look at the effect on Negro and white
workers of change in employment status
since the revolution, the results are essen-
tially the same as for pre-revolutionary em-
ployment status alone (Table 7). Both
among the workers whose employment status
is higher and those whose employment status
is at the same level since the revolution,
Negroes are more likely than whites to favor
the revolution. Although employment se-
curity is not the only aspect of economic
security, it is certainly among the most sig-
nificant; we might infer that the social status
of the Negro racial group accounts for the
Negro-white differences.

Although the Negro unemployed are more
likely to support the revolution than regu-
larly employed Negro workers, the parallel
result does not hold for pre-revolutionary
attitudes toward the Communists (Table 8).
This finding is especially interesting in the
light of some recent research to be discussed
below. Among white workers we observe the
expected relationship that the workers who
experienced the most pre-revolutionary un-
employment were the most likely to support
2. Why are the Negro pre-revolutionary
unemployed more likely to support the rev-
olution than their regularly employed coun-
terparts, despite the fact that they were
no more likely to be pro-Communist before
the revolution?

Radical politics and “leftist voting,” as
Lipset has noted, are “generally interpreted
as an expression of discontent, an indication
that needs are not being met.” He suggests,
as noted above, that one such central “need”
is “the need for security of income. This is
quite closely related to the desire for higher
income as such; however, the effect of pe-
riodic unemployment or a collapse of prod-
uce prices, for example, seems to be impor-
tant in itself.” °° Positing such a “need” is
not, however, a particularly fruitful formu-
lation, especially as it stands. We know, for
instance, that stable poverty, such as that
of subsistence peasantry, tends to be a
source of political conservatism rather than
radicalism, yet their “need” for security of
income is obviously not being met. One
crucial factor, as Lipset himself indicates
elsewhere, is whether or not individuals are
exposed by their situation to possibilities for
a life better than their present one.4 In fact,
of course, disemployed workers have had a
better life and lost it.

The question remains, nonetheless,
whether such an interpretation is sufficient
to explain what makes unemployed workers
likely to perceive a connection between their
private troubles and the economic structure
—and in class-conscious or politically radical
terms—rather than simply to blame them-
selves and look inward for the source of their
troubles. The answer, it is suggested, lies in
the very fact of their observation that their
troubles are not private but rather ones
which simultaneously affect many of their
fellow workers. Their radical response, that
is, “is especially linked,” in Max Weber’s
phrase, “to the transparency of the connec-
tions between the causes and the conse-
quences” of their situation as unemployed
workers. It is not only the contrast between
their situation and that of employed work-
ers, which makes them amenable to the
appeals of radical politics, but also (perhaps
primarily) the fact that they can so easily
recognize the source of their problems to be
in the “concrete economic order.” “For how-
ever different life chances may be,” as Weber
put it, “this fact in itself, according to all
experience, by no means gives birth to ‘class
action’... The fact of being conditioned
and the results of the class situation must be
distinctly recognizable. For only then the
contrast of life chances can be felt not as an
absolutely given fact to be accepted, but as
a resultant from either (1) the given distri-
bution of property, or (2) the structure of
the concrete economic order.” ®> This rea-
soning, which Weber applied to “the class
situation of the modern proletariat,” is par-
ticularly appropriate to the situation of those
who are unemployed and underemployed.
Especially in Cuba was the connection trans-
parent between the “concrete economic or-
der” and the situation of the unemployed.
For it was precisely from recurrent disem-
ployment that the unemployed suffered. The
relationship between the seasonal nature of
their unemployment, and the misdevelop-
ment of the economy was therefore ‘dis-
tinctly recognizable.” It is understandable
that they should be more likely than em-
ployed workers to want to alter radically
an economic order which is perceived as the
source of their collective troubles and, there-
fore, be more amenable to the appeals of
Communist political agitation.

This same line of interpretation applies
to our contrasting findings on the Negro un-
employed and their political attitudes. Let
us compare, first, what John Leggett re-
ported recently concerning his research into
sources of class consciousness of Negro and
white workers in Detroit. Having found a
general relationship between unemployment
and class consciousness, he noted that it
might be expected that “unemployed Negro
workers should be more class conscious than
their employed counterparts.” His evidence,
however, failed “to support this hypothesis.
If anything, the Negro unemployed are
slightly less class conscious than the em-
ployed, while the whites are distributed as
expected. Clearly, unemployment, consid-
ered by itself, is not a source of class con-
sciousness among Negroes.” *° He did find,
however, that among unionized Negro work-
ers unemployment is related to class con-
sciousness as expected, and that unionized
unemployed Negro workers are far more
likely than their non-union counterparts to
be militantly class conscious. His interpre-
tation of the effects of union membership
on Negro workers was, in brief, that the im-
pact of unions is partly to make Negroes
more likely “to develop and use a class frame
of reference to appraise their circumstances,”
and “partly because of the behavior of these
unions on class and race questions such as
unemployment. . . .” 37

Now, while it is true that class conscious-
ness and left-wing political orientation are
not precisely the same, they are certainly
similar phenomena, and their determinants
have consistently been found to be similar.
There is, in fact, a parallel worth speculating
about between Leggett’s findings and the
present ones. Leggett found that “the com-
bination of unemployment and union mem-
bership clearly heightens class conscious-
ness.” Although on the basis of our data, it
was not possible to gauge the effect of union
membership on the worker’s pre-revolu-
tionary political orientations, we did find, as
noted above, that the combination of unem-
ployment and their experience since the rev-
olution apparently heightened the proba-
bility of revolutionary political orientations
among Negro workers who were unemployed
before the revolution. We might speculate,
then, that living through the revolution has
been an experience for Negro unemployed
workers equivalent in significant respects
to that of union participation for unem-
ployed Negro workers in Detroit. The revo-
lution may have had an impact on the Ne-
gro unemployed in three relevant ways:

First, since the revolution they have been
reached effectively by an ideology which
stresses, as Leggett said regarding industrial
unions, “a class frame of reference to ap-
praise their circumstances.”

Second, the Revolutionary Government’s
“behavior on class and race questions” has
emphasized racial equality both in propa-
ganda and in deed.

Third, to the extent to which revolution-
ary propaganda and deed have, in fact, al-
tered the social status of the Negro racial
group and of the unemployed, the connec-
tion between the racial situation and the pre-
revolutionary class structure and economic
order which the revolution destroyed becomes
distinctly recognizable. This process may
also be likened to the impact of unionization
on unemployed Negroes who may recognize
that their unemployment cannot now be
‘explained’ by (be attributed to) their racial
membership alone, but is also a condition
affecting members of the working class re-
gardless of race.

This third point may deserve amplifica-
tion, especially since it relates to our earlier
interpretation of the radicalizing effects of
unemployment. Class consciousness and po-
litical radicalism may not be meaningful re-
sponses for unemployed, non-unionized Ne-
groes, because the fact of being Negroes is
the significant aspect of their lives, to which
they probably attribute their situation as
unemployed workers. They do not see the
interests of organized workers as relevant
to their lives because in a significant respect
those interests are indeed noé relevant to
them, so long as their racial group does not
necessarily benefit from the furthering of
those interests. Class issues become rele-
vant to Negro workers when, as members
of the organized working class, they benefit
as their class benefits. A class conscious per-
spective or radical political orientation can
then be meaningful to them.

The same reasoning may apply to the
impact of the revolution on unemployed
Negroes. Their response to the revolution
may have its source in the transparency of
the connections between the causes and the
consequences of their pre-revolutionary sit-
uation and that of unemployed white work-
ers. The connection between the pre-revolu-
tionary racial situation, the pre-revolutionary
class structure and economic order, and the
new structure of social relations formed
since the revolution, may now be recogniz-
able. To Negroes who were unemployed
before the revolution, however, the connec-
tion between their situation and that of
white unemployed workers was not trans-
parent. It is, we may surmise, the revolution
which has made the fact of their having
been conditioned by the pre-revolutionary
economic order, as well as by membership
in the Negro racial group, ‘distinctly recog-
nizable’ to Negro workers who were unem-
ployed before the revolution.

Particularly apt in this connection are
the remarks of a Negro worker at the Ni-
caro nickel refinery in Oriente, when asked
what he was most proud of in Cuba. Im-
plicit in his words is the recognition of a
connection between the fate of Negroes who
Generally, sociological studies of political
behavior and of the determinants of ‘class
consciousness’ and political radicalism have
been made within (relatively) stable social
and political contexts. Consequently, it is
difficult on the basis of the findings of such
studies, to place much confidence in predic-
tions of political behavior in times of social
crisis and especially of revolutionary social
change. Therefore, one important aspect of
our own findings, from a theoretical point of
view, is precisely and paradoxically the fact
of how expectable they were on the basis of
prior research and theory. From knowledge
of a significant fact of their lives before the
revolution, namely, their relative economic
security, it was possible to predict more or
less accurately the workers’ differential re-
sponses to the ideological and social content
of the revolution.

The workers who had experienced the
most unemployment during pre-revolution-
ary years were found to be the ones who
were most likely to support the revolution.
Pre-revolutionary unemployment was also
found to be a significant determinant of
pre-revolutionary pro-Communist orienta-
tion. Change in employment status since the
revolution also proved to be significant; it
was found that the workers whose economic
security had been enhanced since the revolu-
tion were more likely to support it than were
the workers who had retained their previously
high level of economic security. Negro work-
ers were more likely than whites to support
the revolution; this relationship was found
to hold even with pre-revolutionary employ-
ment status and change in employment
status since the revolution controlled. Among
Negro and white workers, the original rela-
tionships between (a) pre-revolutionary em-
ployment status and attitude toward the rev-
olution, and (b) change in employment
status and attitude toward the revolution,
also were found to hold. In contrast, it was
found that while unemployed white workers
were more likely to support the Communists
before the revolution than their regularly
employed counterparts, this was not true
among Negroes. In the latter racial group,
unemployed workers were no more likely
before the revolution than the regularly em-
ployed to favor the Communists.

Recurrent unemployment and underem-
ployment led to revolutionary politics among
the Cuban workers in part because of their
exposure to the possibilities of a better life
during periods of regular employment and
in part because the connection between their
situation and the concrete economic order
was so transparent. To the Negro unem-
ployed before the revolution, who very likely
saw their racial membership as the prime
cause of their situation, a class-conscious or
pro-Communist political orientation likely
appeared to be meaningless. The revolution
apparently made distinctly recognizable the
connection between their fate and that of
white members of the working class, and the
pre-revolutionary economic order. Thus, the
combination of their racial membership and
of their pre-revolutionary unemployment
now reinforced each other, making them
more likely than the white pre-revolutionary
unemployed to support the revolution.
