@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
PROBLEM AND PROCEDURE

sTupy of the largest housing project
A in the United States, Vanport City

near Portland, Oregon, was under-
taken in the winter of 1943-44 to ascertain
why families had been moving out of the
project at the rate of 100 a day. Residents,
officials and employees, especially the school
authorities and teachers, and agencies in
Portland were complaining about the high
turn over but could not explain it. Even
when the rate had become stabilized and
only 35 families were leaving per day (in
a population of about 9,500 families), the
administrative procedures and development
of community life still were hindered by
constant change of tenants.? Such quotations
as these, printed in a Portland newspaper in
June 1944, obtained from people leaving the
Project, had been repeated for some time
in Vanport itself,

“We've got lonesome out here. We’ve been
away from the farm and kin folks for so long
we can’t stand it any more.”

“Living out here costs too much. We haven’t
anything left from the paycheck at the end of
the week. It’s too hard to get around with these
crowded busses.”

“A crowded place like this is no place in
which to bring up a family.”

“It rains all the time... .”

“You can’t get any sleep in our place
here... .”
Even such random quotations show three
major categories of reasons for moving: (1)
dissatisfaction with the project; (2) dis-
satisfaction with the area; and (3) change in
family situation. Which of these three af-
fected the most residents and which affected
residents most intensely?

In an attempt to get all the reasons for
migration and the relative importance of
each, a comparison of statements from sampl-
ings of three groups was made: officials
responsible for the administration, present
residents (autumn and winter, 1943), and
former residents.
It had been expected that, at the most, no
more than 20 per cent of the questionnaires
would be returned. Post offices returned 187; of
the remainder which supposedly were all re-
ceived, slightly more than one-third were an-
swered. This unexpectedly high return possibly
indicates that recently-departed tenants had
strong opinions and feelings toward the project.
In any case, they showed interest.?

They showed interest further by their initia-
tive in making comments and suggestions. Fifty-
five per cent of the questionnaires included
volunteered remarks. Obvious difficulty for some
in spelling, grammar and penmanship did not
deter them.

(2) Sixteen “present residents” were inter-
viewed, principally to obtain the range of com-
plaints so that the check-list of the mailed
questionnaire could be made. The residents were
not selected statistically and there was no in-
tention of treating their replies statistically. Des-
pite the small number of interviews and some-
what haphazard method of their choosing, these
people suggested all complaints on housing and
community facilities—such as poor cookstoves
and inadequate shopping centers—that later
appeared as the top 10 complaints in these two
categories in the questionnaire survey. On dis-
agreeable social factors, however, they did
poorly, perhaps because they were less willing
or less able to talk about Vanport people while
The mere statement that Vanport City
was a temporary war housing project consist-
ing of multiple-unit frame buildings does
not tell what the residents were complaining
about, since there has been variation in hous-
ing projects. Vanport was structurally quite
different from most public war housing, hav-
ing been built by the Maritime Commission.
Therefore, we must see what sort of place
Vanport was.

Vanport City, the second largest “city”
in Oregon, was built and occupied in about
11 months. The order to proceed was issued
on September 14, 1942; the first families
moved in December 14 of the same year;
and, except for 1,000 apartments which did
not yet have furniture, the project was
completely filled by the end of August 1943.
(This study was begun two months later.)
The Vanport school system, federally
financed and administered, had opened seven
schools for 4,000 elementary school children
in April 1943. Vanport contained 718 two-
story frame apartment buildings, built in
groups of four around a utility building. All
were the same size and shape, and all were
painted the same light green, although the
monotony was relieved somewhat by a few
curving and diagonal streets, Each building
Vanport was full and had a waiting list
until the spring of 1944. At the time of this
study it was occupied only by shipyard and
other war plant workers. Negroes, Filipinos
and other races were accepted as residents
although the number of non-whites was
restricted. Especially in the early days two
men—but never two girls—were allowed to
occupy a “single.” Most occupants, however,
were families.

The utility building in the center of each
block of four apartment buildings contained
the laundry facilities, with two electric wash-
ing machines for 56 families, and the heat-
ing unit supplying hot-air heat and hot water
to the apartments. Neither of the last two
was provided at night, a hardship for
people going off swing and on graveyard
shifts. There were no telephones, The apart-
ments were supposed to be fireproof and the
walls were found to be so, but not the ceil-
ings. Also ventilation holes from one apart-
ment to another facilitated the spread of
noise at all times and of fire occasionally.

Furniture and blankets were provided, but
not other furnishings. The cookstove, in
the combined living-room and kitchenette,
was a “rangette” with two electric plates and
a small oven. There was no refrigeration
except a cupboard for ice. It must be re-
membered that this was temporary war hous-
ing and that building and furnishing
materials, especially those made of metal,
were hard to get. Nevertheless, people
missed facilities that they were accustomed
to or had expected to receive from a govern-
ment project, For example, they complained
about such regulations as the provision of
only one key for a family and the charge
of $1.25 for unlocking a door when the key
was lost or forgotten.

Although transportation and mail service
had been poor until May, 1943, they were
much improved by autumn. But Vanport re-
mained muddy throughout its first year of
occupancy, having been built on a newly
reclaimed swamp. In regard to most com-
munity facilities, Vanport was inadequately
supplied for nearly two years and never
acquired some of the typical elements of a
community of 38,000 people, for example, a
newspaper. At the time of this study
(winter of 1943-44), the project had only
two shopping centers, operated as conces-
sions with a limited range of goods, one post
office, one cafeteria and a lunch counter, one
motion picture theater, and a library. There
were no skating rinks, bowling alleys, taverns,
or other privately financed recreation and
eating places, except the movie house.*
There were 5 public recreation buildings
with excellent facilities. No church buildings
were provided, but all denominations were
allowed to use the school buildings for meet-
ings.

As there was no high school, boys and
girls were transported to Portland to attend
high school. The elementary schools, with
270 teachers handling 2,000 children on each
of the two shifts, had complete modern
specialized equipment in classrooms, clinics,
and cafeterias, To help the working mothers,
the four nursery schools, with an enrollment
of goo, were open from 5:45 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. seven days a week. Later, they gave
24-hour-a-day service. All meals could be
provided the youngsters if mothers paid
the small fees. Also, on the same basis, their
children of school age could be cared for by
the Extended Service which provided outside
of school hours a service like that of the
nursery schools. Although 500 children were

* By the spring of 1945, Vanport had 5 shopping
centers offering photography, insurance, transfer
and storage, and other services, also a wider range
of goods such as flowers, bakery goods, hardware
and dishes. There were three restaurants in addi-
tion to the cafeteria. Still only one theater and one

post office, but mail deliveries had increased to
two daily,
cared for by the Extended Service, there
still were hundreds of children on the proj-
ect unattended while parents worked or
slept on the day or swing shift. A later study
of the East Vanport project, 52 per cent
of whose tenants came from the older Van-
port, showed that 45 per cent of the
mothers were working out of the home.*
Undoubtedly, the same per cent of Vanport
women, or more, also worked.

The hospital was run privately under the
administration of the Oregon Physicians’
Service, a group prepayment program spon-
sored by the Oregon Medical Society. A
patient could pay for each service separately
or could have medical and hospital coverage
by prepayment of 60 cents a week. For most
of the first year, patients had to prove
ability to pay before being admitted to the
hospital. The County Public Health and
Welfare Departments expanded their service
to include Vanport. At first these two, with
the Sheriff’s Office, had to handle all welfare
problems.® Vanport was outside the corporate
limits of Portland and was itself unin-
corporated.

Organizations started slowly within Van-
port itself. Informal groups and their
activities, such as the parties of teen-agers
and the “sings” of men from the southern
hills, developed here and there on the pro-
ject within a few natural interest groups.
However, at the same time the Recreation
Department and the Project Services Depart-
ment were having great difficulty starting
neighborhood councils and clubs. The
councils were intended to be representative
planning and advisory groups and leaders
in neighborhood activities. As there was no
formal means of electing or otherwise select-
ing council members and as most of the
residents did not know about the councils

‘Lillian Kessler. The Social Structure of a War
Housing Community, East Vanport City; Thesis,
1945, Reed College, Portland.

®Later, the Court of Domestic Relations, chil-
dren’s agencies, Agricultural Extension Service, Vet-
erans’ Administration, Volunteers of America,
YMCA and YWCA, and other agencies assigned
workers to Vanport or otherwise provided for it.
Most of these came after this survey, however.
and did not seem to think of Vanport as a
real community anyway, it was nearly im-
possible to initiate them. (However, by the
third year of project life they were fairly well
organized.) Residents regarded Vanport life
as temporary and Vanport administration as
a large furnished-apartment rental agency,
and in most respects the management func-
tioned as one, although it must be noted that
its 800 employees worked not only in such
departments as Maintenance, Accounting and
Property but also in the Fire Department,
Project Services and other public service jobs.

Compilation of social statistics on the
tenants, made by the project administration,
was not complete when the writers’ original
report on causes of turnover was made. Since
the winter of 1943-44, survey work at both
Vanport and East Vanport has shown that
these projects have had a population of
young people, with very few dependent
elderly people (left at home in Nebraska),
and the white workers had been skilled
workers, operatives, foremen and non-farm
laborers, although many did come from
smaller towns and villages, while the Negroes
had been non-farm laborers, operatives and
a few service workers, a few were farmers.

The residents came from every state and
from Alaska, but mainly from the Pacific
Northwest and Intermountain states and the
Midwest, including the southern plains states
of Oklahoma and Texas. The three principal
reasons for their coming to the Portland-
Vancouver shipyards, according to answers
on the mailed questionnaires, were, in this
order: (1) they thought it their duty to go
into defense work, (2) they thought they
would like such a job better than the old
one, and (3) they sought higher wages.
Only 37 per cent of the 232 answering this
question said that they had been recruited
by shipyard representatives. Of these, 36
per cent (or 40 families) said they had been
disappointed in the housing, which had been
one of the recruiting arguments. Probably
this is not a significantly high proportion
under war circumstances,

There was supposed to be no segregation
of races at Vanport. However, Negro families
were assigned only to certain apartment
buildings grouped in three sections of the
project, and separate waiting lists and
rental files for Negroes and whites were
maintained, a policy which was not openly
admitted by the Housing Authority for many
months. There was, however, no segregation
in public places, Not only were the two
races allowed to use the recreation build-
ings and attend school together, but the
school system hired two Negro women to
teach mixed classes and a Negro assistant
librarian,

The Superintendent of Schools said that
he gave three answers to people from the
south who objected to non-segregation in
the schools: “You are now in the north, and
you cannot expect to impose southern tradi-
tion on the northerners,” “You do not
actively protest against working with
Negroes in the shipyards,” “In the south,
you trust the care of your children to
Negro women,” implying that the Vanport
association with Negroes could not be any
closer than that.

In the autumn of 1943, about seven per
cent of the apartment buildings were oc-
cupied by Negroes. “Discrimination” ap-
peared in the complaints of the Negroes and
“non-segregation” in the complaints of the
whites. Nevertheless, although there were
occasionally harsh words between the races,
there was never violence between them,

Another kind of non-segregation some-
times bothered the residents, namely, the
mixing of the work shifts. Both men and
women worked on each of the three shifts,
hence some people were at home trying to
sleep on each of the three. Since families were
not grouped according to shift and in many
cases could not be effectively segregated, with
various members of the same family work-
ing different shifts, there was almost constant
noise day and night in all neighborhoods.

Vanport residents as a group gave the im-
pression of being small town and rural

*The number of Negro families, under 1000
at this time, was increased until there were, in the
spring of 1945, 1,833 Negro families in a total of
8,302 occupied dwelling units.
The replies to the questionnaire have
most interest in two contexts: former resi-
dents’ complaints against Vanport compared
with the officials’ ideas about such com-
plaints; and the complaints compared with
actual reasons for moving from the project.
In other words, did people really leave Van-
port because of the inadequacies or dis-
agreeable features that they often criticized
or for reasons having nothing to do with
the project? And, did the officials really
know why residents were moving out?

In table 1 are the complaints against
the housing, with some indication of the
intensity of disapproval.” Without consider-
ing the strength of each complaint but taking
only the relative number of people who
checked each one, we find that they appear
in this order: cookstove (many women must
have filled out these questionnaires), fear
of fire, provision of heat, mud, cost of living,®
laundry facilities, and so on down through
less critical complaints,

Even though respondents had a longer
list of complaints about the Vanport com-
munity and its location than about its
housing from which to choose, they agreed
on a few items with surprising frequency.
In 279 replies, the complaints appear in this

™People were asked to check once if “bother-
some,” twice (that is, double check marks) if
“worst.”

*“Cost of living,” as an undefined term, prob-
ably should not have been included. Yet the resi-
dents often spoke of the cost of living at Vanport
and perhaps had among themselves clearer under-
standing and common agreement as to what the
term included than the questioner had.
TABLE 1, COMPLAINTS CONCERNING Housinc Faciities
NuMBER OF SCHEDULES, 279

 

 

 

The Worst (XX) Less Bothersome (X)

Rank No. Per Cent Rank No. Per Cent
1 Cookstove 52 18.6 1 Mud 8r 29.0
2 (Provision of) heat 49 17.6 2 Cookstove 78 27.9

Fear of fire 49 17.6
3 Mud 31 Il.t 3 Fear of fire 71 25.4
4 Cost of living 29 10.4 4 (Provision of) heat 67 24.0
5 Laundry facilities 24 8.6 5 Cost of living 53 18.9
6 Size of apartments 15 564 6 Laundry facilities 37 13.3
7 Lack of phones 14 5-0 7 Furniture 34 12.2
8 Bugs, fleas, rats, roaches 12 4.3 8 Lack of phones 31 11.1
9 Furniture 10 3-6 9 Unattractiveness of Vanport 30 10.7
ro Unattractiveness of Vanport 7 2.5 10 Bugs, fleas, rats, roaches 21 7.5
for organizations in Vanport. They were
homesick; felt that they were living
temporarily, day to day; and wanted only
to “finish the job and go home.” A few
felt that Vanport was all right, ‘as good
as could be expected”; and a very few en-
joyed life there.

Such were the attitudes and complaints;
but which ones actually influenced people
to move from Vanport? The two principal
reasons for moving, in terms of number of
families, had nothing whatever to do with
the project and the third probably had little
to do with it. They were (1) entry of the
head of the family into the armed forces,
(2) conditions of the job, and (3) illness
in the family. (This refers to illness of the
family at Vanport; illness at the old home
was listed separately.) The fifteen most
numerous “reasons” for leaving are listed
in table 3. If all the “illness” entries were
combined, this would be by far the most
TABLE 2. COMPLAINTS ABOUT VANPORT COMMUNITY AND LOCATION

NuMBER OF SCHEDULES, 279

 

 

 

The Worst (XX) Less Bothersome (X)
Rank No. Per Cent Rank No. Per Cent

x Negroes and whites in same 1 Negroes and whites in same

neighborhood 14 26.5 neighborhood 7° 25.1
2 Shopping facilities 48 17.2 2 Noise 65 23.7
3 Negroes and whites in same 3 Children bothering you 63 22.6

school 39 13.9
4 Children bothering you 36 12.9 4 Discrimination against

Noise 36 12.9 Vanport people by Port-
though former residents in their complaints
and in their suggestions had reiterated their
disapproval because Negro and white races
were not segregated, nevertheless, the non-
segregation policy of the Housing Authority
was fifth, and of the school system twelfth,
in the list of reasons for moving. In other
words, there was a difference between talk
and action. The superintendent of schools
TABLE 3. REASONS FOR DEPARTURE*

 

 

Rank

Number

 

AhRwn

Ir

12

13
14

15

Member of family entered armed forces

Conditions of the job

Illness of self and family

Heating system

Noise

Negroes and whites in same neighbor-
hood

Climate

Sickness at home

Illness caused by climate

Size of apartment

Lonely and homesick

Cost of living

Cookstove

Association with undesirable people

Children bothering one

Business to attend to at home

Home in Portland better and more con-
venient

Had moved to Vanport temporarily

Mud

General illness in Vanport

Trouble with neighbor or partner

Crowded conditions

Distance from work

Transportation

Dampness

Negroes and whites in same school

Fear of fire

Furniture provided (or not provided)

One-half day school

No high school

Shopping facilities

Treatment by administration

Insects and rats

Lack of play yard for children

Family bought a home

Provision for refrigeration

Medical facilities

Mail delivery

Suggestion that family move since work-
ing in Vancouver shipyard

28
28
24
20
19

18
18
18
17
17
15
15
15
14
13
10

Io
Io
Io
10
10

°

PRPNUNU AT — 00 HHO HOO

-
the races living at Vanport up to May
1945, at which time the number of Negro
residents was nearly double the number in
the winter of 1943-44 when the erstwhile
residents of Vanport were questioned.

Among the top ro reasons for moving,
the only ones for which the Housing
Authority could be considered fully respon-
sible were the heating system and the
regulation of heat; the cookstove; size of
apartment assigned to each family size,
amount of cupboard space and other space
factors; and the amount of noise. This last
could not be entirely the fault of the project
planning and administration although the
thin walls and other characteristics of the
housing were important. There undoubtedly
are minimum standards of comfort that most
Americans from all parts of the country
(especially those who have lived in town)
insist upon and which must be recognized
in planning, the most important being indoor
warmth,

At the same time, the residents were not
blameless. Some of the physical unpleasant-
ness of the Project was due to them. Although
East Vanport had a full-sized cookstove,
individual heating units, more room per
family size, and a yard for each family
dwelling unit, thus correcting several of the
weaknesses in Vanport planning, and al-
though all families were earning quite good
wages, nevertheless go per cent of the white
families and 100 per cent of the Negro
families were on the lower half of Chapin’s
Living Room Scale. That is, they would be
rated below lower middle class, in the
terminology of the scale.1? The bad appear-
ance of Vanport and East Vanport apart-
ments was due partly to crowding, the
Negroes especially having “boarders,”
partly to out-of-home work by women, and
partly to indifference to care of a temporary
home, as well as to original standards and
social rating. Whatever the “causes,” the
project housing was not improved by its
residents.

Both interviews and questionnaires show
that neither administration nor residents
had adjusted fully to a three-shift life. The
noise, the troubles between neighbors, ir-
ritation caused by children, the heating prob-
lem (heat and hot water not being provided
24 hours a day), the lack of a 24-hour
nursery school (corrected later) were evi-
dence of the conflict between the new night-
time work and the old day-time habits and
regulations, and people left the project be-
cause of them. They could get along without
clubs and churches, but they could not get
along without sleep.

What did the officials know and think
about the turnover? They had received
through the rental department and other
sources about the same range of complaints
from residents as in the preceding tables.
But their explanations of the turnover were
more limited:
The officials overlooked completely the
factors, both outside the project and within
it, affecting most of the families, except
illness; namely, leaving the job to enter the
armed services, and the heating system, The
cookstove also did not get the attention it
deserved.

The greatest divergence of viewpoint from
the attitude of residents appeared in the
problems which the officials considered im-
portant and were trying to solve:

Lack of Vanport newspaper.

Effect of the turnover on development of a

representative council.

Irregularity of attendance at Neighborhood

Council meetings.

Direction of the socially minded individuals

into the right channels.

Effect of the turnover on the morale of the

school staff.

One-half day school.

Control of the unorganized gangs of children.

Tenants who skipped without paying their

rent.
migratory construction workers. Some of the
weaknesses that both residents and officials
recognized were merely expectable transitory
elements of a new, hastily-constructed proj-
ect and of an abnormal, hastily-assembled
society. For example, in this “community”
of construction workers there were many
young adults, apparently too many children
for anyone’s comfort, and few old people.
Also, even though Vanport provided such
urban services as a fire department and
supervised recreation centers, it was an ab-
normal town: there could be no property
ownership, and no private business could
be started without concession and super-
vision from the Housing Authority.

The interesting question as to what does
make a community cannot be discussed here,
but the following conclusions touch upon
the community question.

1. Most people came to Vanport and many
left for reasons not connected with the
facilities and reputation of the project. They
came because they had secured work in the
area, they had to have a place to live and
housing was scarce. They left because they
had to give up, or wanted to give up, the
job and leave the area, or in fewer cases
because they found a home that they liked
better. In other words, Vanport did not draw
them and hold them as an established com-
munity attracts and holds people.

2. The residents came to Vanport and left
it as separate families, for personal reasons.
They had a common feeling, perhaps de-
ceiving themselves a little regarding their
motives, that they wanted to work in the
shipyards to contribute directly to war pro-
duction, but still they did not come to found
a community.

3. Evidence that the residents while in
Vanport also were functioning as separate
families, without regard to others there is
provided by the interest in personal con-
venience and comfort, by the frequent
compaints against neighbors, and by the
weak interest in social organization.

4. At most, residents were interested in
the neighborhood, shown by criticism of
neighbors and concern over racial segrega-
tion in the neighborhood school and play-
grounds,

5. Only when face to face with the larger
nearby community, Portland, and its in-
difference and condescension, did residents
think of Vanport as a social entity rather
than a place to eat and sleep.

6. Each individual complaint against the
project may not be serious by itself; but the
great volume of complaint is to be taken
seriously. The housing was not well planned
for famly living, even for temporary quarters,
and the provisions for social life were made
slowly and without fundamental plan.

Although residents would not take the
initiative in organizing social life and seldom
expressed a need for it, nevertheless the high
incidence of “illness” among those who
moved away from Vanport makes one sus-
pect that they missed it, illness being the
most acceptable cover-up for loneliness or
any other unadjustment. Some undoubtedly
were organically, rather than functionally,
ill; but many simply were unable to adjust
to the hurly-burly of the shipyards and of
Vanport, the anonymity, restlessness, and
disruption of their living habits and living
organization.
