http://www.jstor.org/stable/2087963?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
Youth’ is the third of his books in

constitutional psychology. The two
basic principles of his constitutional psy-
chology are that behavior is a function of
structure, that is, of the organism, and that
the organism and its behavior can best be
described in quantitative terms. His pre-
vious studies resulted in the conclusions
that somatotypes may be classified as endo-
morphic, mesomorphic, and ectomorphic,
that with these are closely correlated three
temperamental types—viscerotonia, somato-
tonia, and cerebrotonia—and also three psy-
chiatric types—manic, paranoid, and heboid.
Each of these—somatotype, temperamental
type, and psychiatric type—is a continuum
with quantitative variations of the three
components, which are described by three
quantitative indexes. The hypothesis im-
plicit in Sheldon’s writings is that all varia-
tions in personality and behavior will be
found to be related to variations in these
basic indexes.

Sheldon shouts dogmatically that this
constitutional psychology is the only way
to study personality and behavior and that
it is the Messiah for a world rushing into
societal chaos. This first report of constitu-
tional psychology in action is presented to
the public presumably as a demonstration
of its value. But constitutional psychology
will be a false Messiah if its saving power

Sr Varieties of Delinquent
in other applications is no greater than in
this application to delinquency. I shall state
in nine propositions the reasons for my
unfavorable appraisal of this study in de-
linquency. In doing so I shall not be con-
cerned with his general philosophical position
on the mind-body problem but only with
his arguments on this question as they refer
to delinquency.

First, his definition of delinquency effec-
tively removes this study from the area of
empirical research and fixes it firmly in the
area of homiletics. He defines delinquency
as “disappointingness” and the feelings of
Dr. Sheldon are obviously the criterion of
disappointment. He is disappointed in the
clients of welfare agencies, college students,
psychologists, psychiatrists, physicians, and
in fact all modern society, and pronounces
them all delinquent. But “the (Sheldon’s
italics) delinquency” is to “teach a child
to feel and express reverence for the word
God.” It is not possible to do empirical
research on the question: Why does a per-
son disappoint Dr. Sheldon? This is the first
reason why his constitutional psychology
is a false Messiah.

Second, his manner of selecting cases for
this study effectively prevents him from
reaching valid general conclusions regarding
delinquency. This book is an analysis of
200 boys who were clients of the Hayden
Goodwill Inn in Boston. This Inn is a
rehabilitation home to which boys are re-
ferred by about fifty social agencies. It is
not possible to determine from his descrip-
tion whether these 200 boys were a random
sample of the population of the Inn. More-
over, we do not know what population is
supposed to be represented by the boys in
the Inn. Although he says the boys at the
Inn were “more or less delinquent,” we do
not know what he means by “delinquent.”
At least 22 of the 200 boys either had no
known violations of law or only a few minor
violations such as practically all of us have
committed. Consequently violations of law
are not his criterion of selection and his
conclusions do not apply to law violations.
While he is generally disappointed in these
200 youths, he might have selected some
other group of persons disappointing to him
and found different varieties of delinquents
and especially a different distribution of the
varieties. His findings, therefore, have no
general significance regarding delinquency
either as law violation or as disappointing
behavior.

Third, his method of scoring delinquency
is subjective and unreliable. He gives a total
delinquency score to each of the 200 boys.
These scores range from 0 to 10. A score of
8 to 10 means that a person’s adjustment is
interfered with to the extent that he should
be permanently confined in an institution,
and at the other extreme a score of 1 means
that interference with adjustment “is not
necessarily serious or permanent.” This total
score is the sum of scores on seven charac-
teristics, namely, mental insufficiency, medi-
cal insufficiency, first-order psychopathy,
second-order psychopathy, alcoholism, homo-
sexuality, and primary criminality. Each of
these items has a score ranging from O to
10 and each is scored by the same criterion
of interference with adjustment. Interference
with adjustment is apparently synonymous
with disappointingness and the score reflects
not only the investigator’s evaluation of
this but also his causal interpretation of the
reasons for the interference. This is not a
matter of observation on which investigators
might agree but involves the systems of
philosophy of the investigators. Many types
of assumptions must be made. For instance,
he assumes that an IQ of 72-78 interferes
with adjustment twice as much as an IQ of
79-85. On data with less standardization
than the IQ no specific instructions for
scoring can be given. No other investigator
with Sheldon’s data and instructions would
be likely to make a close approximation to
his scores and it is doubtful whether he
could duplicate his own scores. He is very
critical of psychiatrists for using many words
with vague meanings, but his methodology
consists essentially of the substitution of
numbers with vague meanings for words
with vague meanings and at the same time
beating his breast as the champion of ob-
jectivity. Finally, one of the most atrocious
errors in logic is in his concept of primary
criminality. He describes primary criminality
as a residual category and from it are ex-
cluded all violations of law which Sheldon
interprets as the natural consequence of
constitutional deficiencies. For instance, to
a feebleminded youth with many serious
violations of law Sheldon might give a score
of O on primary criminality with the ex-
planation that these violations of law were
merely an expression of mental insufficiency
and presented no new problem. This inter-
pretation overlooks the fact that a large pro-
portion of the inmates of institutions for the
feebleminded are extraordinarily observant
of laws and regulations. For generations
scholars have attempted by empirical re-
search to discover the extent to which and
the ways in which mental deficiency and
psychopathies are related to violations of
law, and consensus among them is still
lacking. Sheldon settles the question in a
cavalier manner by the dogmatic assumption
that when a person with a defect commits
a crime he commits the crime because of
the defect. This assumption is obviously
unwarranted.

Fourth, the varieties of delinquent youth
determined by these meaningless scores are
themselves meaningless. A person is classi-
fied by relative scores; if he has a higher
score for mental insufficiency than for any
other item, he is classified as mentally in-
sufficient. Another youth with the same IQ
as this person may be classified in a different
variety. The 36 youths who are classified as
mentally insufficient have IQ’s ranging from
85 to 50, but 62 others among the 200 have
1Q’s ranging from 85 to 50 and are not so
classified. The same thing is true of each of
the other varieties. This overlapping, in
which Sheldon takes great pride, is evidence
of the subjectivity of the classification.

Fifth, the several varieties of delinquent
youth do not differ from each other signifi-
cantly in their somatotypal and psychiatric
indexes. Either these basic measurements
of constitutional psychology are useless for
differentiating varieties of delinquents or the
varieties which Sheldon reports are not real
varieties from the point of view of consti-
tutional psychology, or both are true.

Sixth, the somatotypal and psychiatric
indexes of the 200 youths do not have evalu-
ative meaning, although Sheldon assumes
that they demonstrate the social unfitness of
these youths. His general finding is that the
200 youths are somewhat on the meaty and
hefty side, which means that they are con-
centrated somewhat in the endomorphic
and mesomorphic areas and are underrepre-
sented in the ectomorphic area; and that
they are slightly inclined toward psycho-
neurosis with emphasis on the manic and
paranoid components and with underrepre-
sentation of the heboid component. Sheldon
has not shown that the location of a particu-
lar person or the concentration of a number
of persons in a particular area of his soma-
totypal and psychiatric triangles has any
significance as to social fitness. At times he
seems to assume than an even distribution
over the triangles is desirable in any group,
but in contrast with this he indicates that
military and business leaders and psychia-
trists are concentrated in the same areas as
are these 200 delinquent youths, and that
all of these groups alike are underrepresented
in the ectomorphic and heboid areas in which
psychotic patients are concentrated. At times
he suggests that the somatotype at the center
of his triangle with the index 4—4—4 is the
ideal type, and he shows that college students
are evenly distributed around this center.
However, college students are not apprecia-
bly closer to this center on the average than
are the 200 youths. Consequently, his in-
dexes do not in any way show that the distri-
bution of these 200 youths is worse than
that of any other part of the population.

Seventh, Sheldon’s most general conclu-
sion, which he shouts with religious hysteria,
namely, the necessity of selective breeding,
is completely unrelated to his data. He pre-
tends to arrive at this conclusion from the
study of 200 youths and asserts: “Whatever
else may be true of the delinquency I saw in
Boston, it is mainly in the germ plasm.” (p.
872) The only data in his study that have
a conceivable relationship to inheritance of
criminality are presented in a table which
Sheldon states is the piéce de resistance of
the report. This table merely shows that the
200 youths are much like their parents in
total delinquency scores. Even if we waive
the appraisal that these delinquency scores
are unreliable we have in this table no proof
of inheritance, for similarity of parents and
offspring may be due to social interaction as
well as to inheritance.

Eighth, the variations in the civil delin-
quencies of the 200 youths are not signifi-
cantly related to variations in the somato-
typal and psychiatric indexes. Of the 200
youths 68 were committed before the age
of 19 to correctional institutions. The mean
somatotypal and psychiatric indexes of these
68 youths are not significantly different from
similar indexes of the other 132 youths who
were not committed to correctional institu-
tions. Also, Sheldon uses the symbol “t” to
refer to “thoroughbredness” in contrast
with the mongrel type, and he places much
emphasis on this as another constitutional
indicator. The 68 youths who were social
problems to the extent of being committed
to correctional institutions did not differ
significantly in their scores on primary and
secondary “t” from the youths who were not
so committed.

Because commitment to a correctional
institution is not a very adequate index of
delinquency I have attempted to construct
from Sheldon’s data another classification.
I classified the 200 youths by the serious-
ness and consistency of their civil delin-
quencies, using a five-point scale and taking
the information from the 200 biographies in
Sheldon’s volume. A score of 0 was given
when the biography stated that the youth
had no known civil delinquency or when the
delinquencies reported were minor violations
of law characteristic of practically all col-
lege students. A score of 4 was given to
those youths who were described as gang-
sters engaged progressively in more serious
Criminal Pri-

 

 

Second-

Score Number Somatotypal Index Psychiatric Index mary “t” ary “t”
0 22 3.7-4.3-2.9 2.0-1.7-1.2 2.6 2.6
1 32 3.5-4.4-3.0 2.5-1.9-1.6 2.6 2.7
2 59 3.6-4.5-2.7 2.9-2.0-1.5 2.6 2.5
3 58 3.5-4.6-2.7 2.9-1.9-1.4 2.6 2.3
4 28 3.3-5.3-2.2 3.2-2.1-1.2 2.6 2.3
Total 200 3.5-4.6-2.7 2.8-1.9-1.4 2.6 2.5
and manic components increase consistently
with increasing criminality and the ecto-
morphic and heboid components decrease
almost consistently with increasing crimi-
nality, these trends are very slight and they
are not accompanied by analogous trend in
the other components. The general conclu-
sion is that in this group of 200 youths the
variations in civil delinquencies are not sig-
nificantly related to variations in Sheldon’s
indexes of constitutional psychology. This
conclusion conflicts with Sheldon’s precon-
ceptions and conclusions, but it is based on
his data and it is probably the most impor-
tant result of his study.
