http://www.jstor.org/stable/2093508?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
Reiss, Jr., Occupations and Social Status.
New York: The Free Press.
Duncan, O. D., Ray Cuzzort and Beverley Duncan

1961 Statistical Geography. Glencoe, Illinois:
The Free Press.

Harris, Chauncy and Edward Ullman

1945 “The nature of cities.” The Annals 242:

7-17.
Hatt, Paul K.

1946 “The concept of the natural area.” Amer-
ican Sociological Review 11 (August) :423-
427.

Hawley, Amos and O. D. Duncan

1957 “Social area analysis: A critical appraisal.”

Land Economics 33 (November) :337-344.
Hoiberg, Eric O.

1969 “Status contour analysis: An ecological ap-
proach to social stratification.” Unpub-
lished Masters Thesis, University of Ne-
braska.

Hollingshead, August B.

1949 Elmtown’s Youth. New York: John Wiley

& Sons.
Hoyt, Homer

1939 The Structure and Growth of Residential
Neighborhoods in American Cities. Wash-
ington D.C.: Federal Housing Authority.

Kahl, Joseph and James Davis

1955 “A comparison of indexes of socioeconomic
status.” American Sociological Review 20
(June) :317-325.
Kitagawa, E. M. and Taeuber, K. E. (Eds.)

1963 Local Community Fact Book: Chicago
Metropolitan Area, 1960. Chicago Com-
munity Inventory, University of Chicago.

Laumann, Edward

1966 Prestige and Association in an Urban Com-

munity. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Lazarsfeld, Paul F.

1959 “Problems in methodology.” Pp. 39-78 in
Robert K. Merton et al., (Eds.), Sociology
Today. New York: Basic Books.

Lazerwitz, Bernard

1964 “A sample of a scattered group.” Journal

of Marketing Research (February) :68-72.
Miller, Delbert

1964 Handbook of Research Design and Social
Measurement. New York: David McKay
Company.

Myers, Jerome K.

1953 “Note on the homogeneity of census tracts:
A methodological problem in urban ecolog-
ical research,” Social Forces 32:364-366.

Raisz, Erwin

1938 General Cartography. Pp. 129-139, 243-

244. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Stinchcombe, Arthur L. and Richard Ofshe

1969 “On journal editing as a probablistic pro-
cess.” The American Sociologist 4 (May):
116-118.

Warner, W. Lloyd

1949 Social Class in America, Chicago: Science

Research Associates.
et al., 1968). For example, Sewell, Haller,
and Portes report a zero-order correlation
of .59 between the expectation of a pre-
selected panel of significant others (parents,
teachers, and peers) and the educational
aspirations of Wisconsin farm boys in
their senior year of high school, and pre-
sent evidence which suggests that the influ-
ence of SES on educational aspirations (and
later attainments) is almost wholly mediated
by the expectations of significant others
(Sewell e¢ a/., 1969). This finding has been
confirmed for several other types of samples
(Sewell eé al., 1970).

THE PROBLEM

In spite of the great progress that has been
made, these recent studies have all used mea-
sures of significant other influence which are
in one or more ways unsatisfactory (Haller
and Woelfel, 1969, Chapter 2). Generally,
these studies have either measured the in-
dividual’s statement of his perceptions of the
influence others have had on him (Haller
and Sewell, 1967; Sewell, e¢ al., 1969;
Kemper, 1963) or have dealt with a limited
panel of pre-selected significant others
(Haller and Butterworth, 1960; Duncan
et al., 1968).

One of the main reasons for the inade-
quacy of previous research instrumentation
has been the lack of a close connection be-
twen the measures themselves and attitude
formation theory. Thus, for example, Sewell,
Haller, and Portes reason that parents,
friends, and teachers should be influential
on intuitive as well as theoretical grounds
(Sewell e¢ a/., 1969), and for the same kinds
of reasons, Kemper selects wife, boss, col-
league, and father for his panel of significant
others (Kemper, 1963). In no instance has

We start with the working assumption that
significant others are attitude specific. If it
should turn out that some others transmit
influence over many attitudes, such persons
will be discoverable by accumulation of
spheres of influence. If we assume, however,
that others are general and pervasive in the
sense of Kuhn’s “Orientational Other”
(Kuhn, 1964), we will miss those others
whose influence, although great, may be only
segmental. As a working definition, then, we
assume that significant others are those per-
sons who exercise major influence over the
attitudes of individuals.

The theory basic to this research assumes
that attitudes are relationships between a
person and an object or set of objects (Green,
1954; DeFluer and Westie, 1963). But fol-
lowing from the interactionist postulate that
man’s perception of objects is always medi-
ated by some symbolic structure (Kuhn,
1964), that relationship is assumed to be a
conceptual one, that is, it is the relationship
a person sees between his conception of him-
self and his conception of the objects in ques-
tion. The process of forming a conception,
on a most general level, can be seen as a
process of categorization (Bruner, 1958).
Thus, one may define an occupation (like
doctor, lawyer, professor, etc.) by placing
it into a series of categories such as “good
paying job,” “high status,” “humanitarian,”
etc, Similarly, one defines himself by a proc-
ess of categorization; he places himself into
categories like “intelligent person,” “stu-
dent,” “wife,” etc. These categories—insofar
as they exert a “filtering” effect on one’s per-
ception of the objects classed within them—
once formed, we term “filter categories.”

Following from these premises, then, atti-
tude may be defined as a person’s conception
of the relationship between the filter cate-
sociological theory (Katz and Lazarsfeld,
1955). Recent empirical studies, particularly
in the area of educational and occupational
attainment, have lent fresh support to this
notion (Haller and Sewell, 1967; Alexander
and Campbell, 1964; Haller and Butter-
worth, 1960; Sewell and Shah, 1968) and,
more importantly, have made some progress
toward an assessment of the relative quan-
tity of influence attributable to “significant
others” as opposed to other, noninterper-
sonal, sources (Sewell e¢ al., 1969; Duncan
et al., 1968). For example, Sewell, Haller,
and Portes report a zero-order correlation
of .59 between the expectation of a pre-
selected panel of significant others (parents,
teachers, and peers) and the educational
aspirations of Wisconsin farm boys in
their senior year of high school, and pre-
sent evidence which suggests that the influ-
ence of SES on educational aspirations (and
later attainments) is almost wholly mediated
by the expectations of significant others
(Sewell e¢ a/., 1969). This finding has been
confirmed for several other types of samples
(Sewell eé al., 1970).
gories of which he sees himself to be a mem-
ber and the filter categories of which he sees
the object to be a member.

It follows, then, that the process whereby
attitudes are formed and changed is the same
as the process by which filter categories are
formed and changed. The inclusion of a set
of distinct objects into a ctaegory is basically
a classification based on perceived similarity,
and conversely, exclusion of an object from
a category is a classification based on a per-
ceived difference. Classification is thus a
cognitive act based on the information one
has about objects and self. Information,
therefore, is the basis of filter categories and,
hence, attitudes as we define them here.
Three sources of such information are as-
sumed to be central to filter category forma-
tion:

Interpersonal Influences. Perhaps the
broadest distinction between types of inter-
personal influence noted in the field is that
between others who hold expectations for
ego and those who serve as models for ego’s
behavior (Kelly, 1952). According to the
theory outlined above, those who hold ex-
pectations for ego may do so by (1) com-
municating definitions of ego’s self-filter
categories (and thus one’s self), (2) com-
municating definitions of the object filter
categories, and thus the object of the atti-
tude, or (3) both. Probably both are in-
volved in most expectations one person holds
for another’s behavior. For want of a better
term, these others are here called definers.
By the same reasoning, models may exert
influence by serving as (1) examples for ego
(insofar as ego considers the others to be a
member of the same category as himself, the
other’s actions help define that category and
consequently his conception of himself), (2)
examples of the object or the object filter
categories (as a doctor defines medicine for
ego simply by practicing medicine where ego
can see him), or (3) both. We shall call these
two basic types “models for self” and
“models for objects.”

This is an unorthodox formulation. It
makes no assumptions about affect, about
any emotional ties that may (or may not)
exist between ego and other. Jé assumes that
others are significant in direct proportion to
the amount of information they convey to an
ego about the categories he uses to define ob-
jects and self, either by word (definers) or
examples (models), affective factors not-
withstanding.

Self-Reflexive Activity. Self-reflexive ac-
tivity, as Mead (1934) defined it, refers to
behavior in which an individual confronts
himself in responding to some object and
makes an inference about himself as an ac-
tive self on the basis of that confrontation.
We here take the term in the broadest sense
to refer to any definition a person makes
about his relationship to an object on the
basis of his own observations. We might hy-
pothesize that self-reflexive activity is more
influential (compared to interpersonal in-
fluences and the effect of previous related
attitudes) in the formation of attitudes when
the object of the attitude is unambiguous and
observable; in the event of ambiguous or
nonobservable objects, reliance on interper-
sonal influence and other related attitudes
should increase.

The Effect of Other Attitudes. In the ab-
stract, the two sources mentioned above are
probably exhaustive. In any ongoing per-
sonality, however, new information which a
person receives from whatever source is at
least partly evaluated in terms of its agree-
ment with what ego already believes (Fest-
inger, 1957). Without making any specific
hypotheses about modes of resolution of con-
flicts or other specific results, we here refer
to the more general hypothesis that other
relevant attitudes which ego already holds
exert some influence on the formation or
change of an attitude. Thus, in setting his
occupational aspirations, ego is very likely
influenced by his educational aspirations—
he would be unlikely to aspire to be a doc-
tor without aspiring to be a college graduate
as well.

Essentially, the theory presented here is
an information theory, with attitudes defined
as an individual’s conception of relations to
objects. Structural factors influence the kinds
of significant others to which ego is exposed
and the kinds of information that those sig-
nificant others communicate to ego, and that
information, along with what ego can observe
from his own activities, provides the basic
corpus out of which he sets his attitudes.
That information is evaluated in terms of
its consistency with previously accumulated
information (ie., other related attitudes)
Since the theory assumes significant others
to be influential over attitudes, attitudes are
the true dependent variables in this study.
The attitudes chosen for study here are levels
of educational and occupational aspiration.
The concept of level of aspiration is derived
from the work of Lewin (1944), and refers
to behaviors which may be graded into levels
of difficulty. The level of achievement to
which an individual aspires within this con-
tinuum of difficulty is referred to as his level
of aspiration. In this research, the number
of years of education to which an individual
aspires is considered his level of educational
aspiration (LEA); the level of occupational
prestige to which an individual aspires is
considered his level of occupational aspira-
tion (LOA). Levels of educational and oc-
cupational aspirations are virtually ideal
attitudes for this research, since they are rela-
tively stable, long range, important to the
individual who holds them, virtually uni-
versal in the subject population (high school
students), noncontroversial, and both are
easily measurable with instruments of known
validity and reliability.

Level of occupational aspiration (LOA)
was measured in this research with the Oc-
cupational Aspiration Scale (Haller and
Miller, 1963). Briefly, the Occupational As-
piration Scale assumes that LOA is multi-
dimensional, including both realistic (best
job you are sure you can get) and idealistic
(job you would most like to have), short
range (after your schooling is over) and
The most tedious variable to be measured
in this study is the influence of significant
others. A two-stage procedure is clearly im-
plied: (1) those persons who are influential
for each individual in the sample must be
identified, and (2) whatever it is that they
do or are that renders them influential must
be measured. The process of measurement
used follows directly out of the theory pre-
sented earlier, and the reader is referred to
the theory for a fuller understanding of the
process involved.

A. Identifying significant others. Signifi-
cant others have been defined as those per-
sons who, by word or example, convey sub-
stantial information to an individual about
the filter categories that individual uses to
define himself and/or the objects of his ex-
perience. Since the objects of the attitudes in
question here are education and occupation,
the following procedure was adopted.

Intensive interviews were conducted with
30 high school students in various high
schools in Wisconsin. Although the sampling
procedure is described in detail elsewhere
(Haller and Woelfel, 1968), generally it tried
to locate at least one individual with each
possible combination of race (black and
white); SES (farm, blue-collar, white-collar,
professional, executive) ; rural-urban; proper
age in grade versus over-age in grade; and
male-female. Some of the combinations make
no sense (e.g., urban-farm), and some are
not easily found in Wisconsin (e.g., rural
negro professional), and so the total does not
equal the 64 possible combinations.

These youth were asked to define educa-
tion and occupation, and their orientation
toward each. The resulting list of definitions
were then classified into four generic “filter
categories.”

The original purpose of eliciting filter cate-
gories at all was to use them as cues to re-
mind the subject to think of people who have
indirectly influenced his thinking about oc-
cupation. If an individual did not influence
the subject’s definition of working, or of
being a doctor, perhaps he did influence his
thinking about money or how much money
a person should earn. This would influence
the individual’s occupational choice; income
would be a filter category for occupation.
But after all the filters were coded from the
occupational section of the protocol, there
were far too many to include on a reasonable
questionnaire. Typical responses were “work-
ing with people,” “good pay,” “service to
humanity,” “high status,” “work around
animals,” “a way to make a living,” etc. Al-
though there were many individual responses,
a striking characteristic of the list was the
great similarity of most of the items to each
other. The following actual filters—liveli-
hood, means to support, to buy necessities,
$1.00-$1.70 per hour (or other actual salary
figures) means to support family, make
money, compensation, survive—all involve
earning money, for example. Because the
number of interviews was too small for any
meaningful statistical analysis, all occupa-
tional filters were intuitively classified on
the basis of similarities like those listed
above. Four categories emerged into which
almost all the filter categories seemed easily
placeable: Intrinsic Nature, Extrinsic Na-
ture, Intrinsic Function, and Extrinsic Func-
tion.

Instrinsic Nature—this category is made
up of all those responses indicating activities
contributing directly to the work of a par-
ticular kind of job; for example, installing
pipe is part of the work called “plumbing.”
Some of the more frequent items included in
this class were managing people, selling,
farming, designing houses, singing, writing
theories, etc.

Extrinsic Nature—this category is made
up of all those responses which describe the
environments in which the direct activities
occur; perhaps the best synonym is working
conditions, such as heavy work, work out-
doors, work around animals, work with my
hands, leave free time for travel, not too
strenuous, fun, etc.

Intrinsic Function—this category describes
the purpose of a job; the actual reason for
the job’s existing; e.g., healing people, manu-
facturing houses, bettering humanity. It is
distinguished from Intrinsic Nature in that
it refers to the reason the job is done rather
than the actual activity being done.

Extrinsic Function—this category refers
to those functions which are not inherently
part of a job, but which can be served by
almost any job, e.g., earn money, advance-
ment, high prestige, buy a house, earn the
things you need, support family, etc.

This, of course, is by no means the only
classification schema that could be imposed
on this data. Its usefulness hinges on the
assumption that the mentioning (on a ques-
tionnaire instrument) of these four cate-
gories, along with several sample items of
each, may cue the individual to think of the
actual filter categories he has used to define
occupation and, hopefully, help him remem-
ber who he talks to or sees as examples of
each of them.

Although occupational filter categories are
used as an example, educational filters are
exactly parallel. The initial assumption of
the theory is that persons who provide in-
formation about these filter categories are
significant others for education and occupa-
tion. A questionnaire was then constructed
which (1) listed each filter category; (2)
asked the individual who had talked to him
about each filter category; and (3) asked the
individual who he knew was an example of
each filter category. Those whom ego named
as talking about the filter categories are con-
sidered definers; those listed as examples of
the filter categories are considered models.
Both models and definers together provide
our operational definition of “significant
other.” Thus, the individual is never asked
who influenced him or whom he likes, or to
whom he refers himself for definitions, etc.
The operations conform very closely to the
theory. Because of the complexity of the
process, the reader is referred to Haller and
Woelfel (1969) for a much fuller discussion
of these instruments.

B. Measuring the expectations of signifi-
cant others. Once the significant others for
each individual had been identified by the
above procedure, they were sent by direct
mail a questionnaire which measured the
expectations they held for their focal indi-
vidual. These instruments are exact dupli-
cates of the instruments used to measure the
aspirations of the youth themselves, with
only changes in appropriate personal pro-
nouns; e.g., “How much education are you
really sure you will get?” is changed to read
“How much education are you really sure
he/she will get?” Educational forms, of
course, were sent to educational significant
others and occupational forms to occupa-
tional significant others. The reader must be
cautioned here, however, that only the ex-
pectations of definers are reported in this
article, Although plausible operationaliza-
tions for the information conveyed by models
are included in the data, not all egos have
models, it turns out, although all have de-
finers. The statistical problems caused by
this inherently “missing data” require more
elaborate treatment than can be offered here,
and must await a later article.

The fact that, on the average, each focal
individual had an average of 13.5 significant
others led to another difficulty.

For any individual i, there were N signifi-
cant others, each holding expectations rele-
vant to i’s behavior. We hypothesized that
there should be a relationship between the
aggregate value of the expectations of others
and the aspirations of ego, although the pre-
cise nature of that aggregate was (and is)
a matter for conjecture. For simplicity, the
arithmetic mean of the expectations of all
the N significant others for any individual i
was computed (Mettlin, see References).
Thus for any individual 4, four scores directly
bearing an interpersonal influence are avail-
able: (1) his educational aspirations (Xs);
(2) the mean educational expectations of his
significant others (X5); (3) his own occupa-
tional aspirations (X4); and (4) the mean
occupational expectations of his significant
others (X¢). Test-retest reliability correla-
tions (over a three-month interval) for un-
familiar variables are as follows: mean ex-
pectations of significant others who are
definers: *t1 t2 =.87; mean occupational ex-
pectations of significant others who are de-
finers: "tl ®=.91.

C. Self-reflexive activity. This variable
refers to those elements of phenomenal
reality which ego may use as a basis to judge
his own relationship to the object of the at-
titude under study. In relation to educational
and occupational aspirations, we believe this
set of variables certainly includes ego’s rela-
tive performance level in his academic con-
text. To get a broad picture of ego’s relative
performance in his school setting, an equally
weighted index of (a) ego’s grade point av-
erage in high school to date, (b) the number
of extracurricular activities in which ego
participates, and (c) the extent to which ego
considers himself a “leader” in those activi-
ties was constructed.

However, the effect of this variable is not
assumed to be completely direct, since these
performances may be observed not only by
ego but also by his significant others. Thus,
this variable is presumed to have both a di-
rect effect on ego’s attitude in a self-reflexive
fashion and an indirect effect through its
impact on the expectations of his significant
others.

D. Other related attitudes. The theory
prevading this paper assumes that the in-
fluence of attitudes ego holds toward objects
related to the attitude under study will ex-
ercise independent influence on that depen-
dent attitude. Since there are two principal
dependent attitudes measured in this research
(educational and occupational aspirations)
and since these two attitudes are known to
be related to each other (in this research
their zero-order correlation is .70), we as-
sume that each attitude exerts reciprocal in-
fluence on the other, independently of the
other main variables. Thus, the level of edu-
cational aspiration constitutes our operation-
alization of “other related attitudes” when
dealing with the level of occupational aspira-
tion, and vice versus.

E. Social structural position. We assume
that different locations in the social structure
differentially expose their incumbents to vari-
ous kinds of significant others who take the
structural location of ego into account when
setting their expectations for him. In this
research, structural location is measured by
the SES of ego’s family. This is measured by
the prestige level of ego’s father’s occupation,
rated by the Duncan revision of the NORC
scale (Duncan, 1961).

F. IQ. Although the previous variables
exhaust those thought to be theoretically in-
teresting, the genetic ability of the student
may intrude on the model at the performance
stage. We thus control for the IQ of the stu-
dent as measured by the Otis Quick scoring
test of mental ability (Otis, 1954).

Data we collected from 100 high school
seniors—the entire senior class—from a
small Wisconsin city high school. The Wis-
consin city was selected (a) because its size
(13,000) is about as large as most Wisconsin
cities may be, with only one school; so all
the city’s students could be located in one
place, and (b) because the city itself is based
on a fairly mixed economy and a reasonably
wide SES range might be obtained. More
specific data about the sample is available in
Haller and Woelfel (1969). The instruments
identified 1,358 significant others for this
group of students. A 68% return of question-
naires mailed to those others yielded usable
data from 950 significant others. Figure 1
represents what seems a plausible ordering
of these variables in this context. X7 (SES
of the family) is one of the social structural
factors which may exert influence over sig-
nificant others and their expectations. X, and
Xs are, respectively, the mean occupational
and educational expectations of the student’s
significant others, and represent the interper-
sonal influence variables of the theory. X4
and Xz are respectively the occupational and
educational aspirations of the student repre-
senting the attitude variables (Haller and
Woelfel, 1969: Chapt. 2). X» is measured
mental ability, here presumed to be one of
the outside (nonsocial-psychological) factors
which intrude on the theory. X; is the aca-
demic performance of the student. The ar-
rows marked (A) represent the influence of
structural characteristics over the expecta-
tions others have for ego. Arrows marked
(B) represent the influence the expectations
of others have on the attitudes (educational
and occupational aspirations) of ego. Arrow
(C) represents the influence of ego’s attitude
on his behavior. Arrow (D) represents the
influence of an outside factor (measured
mental ability) on the behavior. Arrows (E)
and (F) are feedback arrows. Arrow (E) rep-
resents self-reflexive activity, or the effect
on ego’s attitudes of his observations of his
own behavior. Arrow (F) represents the ef-
fect on the expectations others hold for ego of
their observation of his behavior. The recip-
rocal arrows (G) between X3 and X, repre-
sent the influence of related attitudes on each
other. It should be emphasized that no arrow
is drawn between X4 and X¢ since it is as-
sumed that the influence of occupational as-
pirations on academic performance is in-
direct. We hypothesize that the role of high
occupational aspirations is to cause a person
to set high educational aspirations, which re-
sult in high academic performance. Sim-
ilarly, no feedback arrow is hypothesized
between academic performance and occupa-
tional aspiration, since we assume that in-
fluence to be indirect; i.e., the academic
performance of the student influences his
judgment of his probable academic achieve-
ment and thus his educational aspirations,
which consequently influence his occupa-
tional aspirations.

Statistics. Beta coefficients are used to
provide rough indications of the degree of
influence of each hypothesized causal varia-
ble, including those in the fedback loops, on
each hypothesized effect variable. This tech-
nique does not provide an exactly accurate
estimate of the amount of causal influence
exerted by each variable. For in a model
which posits “feedback loops” or simultane-
ous variables (two or more variables exerting
reciprocal influence at any given point in
time) as this model does, simply reversing
the positions of the two simultaneous vari-
ables in the regression equations (that is,
allowing each to act as an independent vari-
able on the other in the same regression
equation) does not take into account the
reciprocal influence of the dependent on the
independent variable when estimating the
effect of the independent variable on the
dependent (Duncan e¢ al., 1968:121-124).

No truly satisfactory method other than
actual physical control of the variables has
yet been devised for the solution of these
nonrecursive models. Rather than halting
analysis at this point, we have opted to
estimate solutions for the equations by the
simple expedient of treating the variables
involved in such reciprocal loops as if they
were exogenous (i.e., wholly determined out-
side the system) and reading their values
from the data. The result of such a procedure
is that the presence of substantial beta coeffi-
cients between two such reciprocal variables
yielded by our procedure is clear cut evidence
that a net relationship between the variables
does exist, but the estimates of how much of
that influence travels in each direction is in-
accurate.
tionships are borne out by the beta coeffi-
cients in Figure 1. Not all the possible ar-
rows have been drawn, although most have
been calculated. Of those calculated, none of
those not presented in Figure 1 is higher than
.13 (all the beta coefficients are presented in
Table 2). Occupational expectation and edu-
cational expectation have not been allowed
to regress on one another, for example, since
(a) the educational and occupational sig-
nificant others represent to some extent dif-
ferent persons (the conditional probability
of one significant other being both educa-
tional and occupational is .70), and so the
interpretation of such a relationship would
be problematic; (b) doing so obscures the
relationship between both variables and
SES; and (c) because SES has been an im-
portant variable involved in the educational
and occupational aspiration process, there
is some reason to regress significant other
influence on it, but our major emphasis here
is not on the causal determinants of signifi-
cant other expectations, even though such a
study would be a valuable one. For similar
theoretical reasons, neither occupational ex-
pectations nor educational expectations have
been allowed to regress on educational aspira-
tions or occupational aspirations. Mental
ability and SES are treated as given and are
not regressed on any of the variables. Spe-
cifically, the equations used were:
The main finding is that where substantial
relationships were predicted by the theory,
they were found; and where they were not
predicted, they were not found. In addition,
the present operationalization of the theory
explains 64% of the variance in educational
aspirations and 59% of the variance in oc-
cupational aspirations, which are its true de-
pendent variables. These explained variances
are important, first because they are higher
than the best previously reported (Sewell
et al., 1969), and secondly because they
utilize the direct measure of exact significant
other expectation rather than ego’s percep-
tion of these expectations.

The model hypothesized that structural
characteristics (in this instance represented
by father’s occupational level) exercised their
effect on the individual through the media-
tion of significant others, The beta coeffi-
cients of .25 between father’s occupational
level and occupational expectations, and .20
between father’s occupational level and edu-
cational expectations support the notion that
structural characteristics influence the ex-
pectations of others; the absence of any sub-
stantial direct links between SES and any
subsequent variable (even though there are
zero-order relationships) supports the con-
tention that significant other influence is the
mechanism of mediation (this is consistent
with Sewell e¢ al., 1969). The beta weights
between occupational expectations and occu-
pational aspirations (.32) are consistent with
net effect of the expectations of significant
others on the aspirations of youth. The
strong reciprocal arrows between occupational
aspirations and educational aspirations (.43
and .51) support but do not necesarily con-
firm the hypothesized influence of related at-
titudes on each other (i.e., students take into
account their occupational plans when set-
ting educational goals and vice versa), The
arrow from educational aspirations to aca-
demic performance is consistent with the hy-
pothesis that the attitude variable, educa-
tional aspiration, exercises substantial influ-
ence over the behavioral variable appropriate
to it, academic performance. No direct link
was posited between occupational aspiration
and academic performance, since it was as-
sumed that whatever effect the occupational
aspirations of students may have on their
academic performance would operate indi-
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Tue, 21 Jun 2016 19:25:24 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
*480] PaTTEJ-OMy “CO' 1B JULITURIS x

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

46 46 £6 £6 £6 FP

ov" 9s° 4s v9" 9b° zt

¥#£9° #097 #9L° #08° #89° u

(sas) TeseT

9n°2 02° 88iz #S2° ss* v0" 8b £0° sve v0" e8Tysoig TeUOTIedNd90 ,s1eyIed

(dxqo09) suotjzez.edxg

---- -- ---- -- zo°s 00° s9° 40° 02° £0" Teuotyedns5Q ,S10yIO PURITFTUBTS

(dxgpq) suotzez.0dxq

Siar cre OTT £T'- sT’s ¥7° L2°T £2" TeuoTyeoNpy, ,S10yIO JUBTFTUBTS

(dsyo20) suotieitdsy

were -- ---- -- -- 61'S xfb° 22" z0° Teuotzednd99 ,Sjuepnis

(dsypa) suotieitdsy

eee -- eee -- 61'S #2S* od SI's 485" yeuotzeonpy ,Szuepn7s

o--- -- ---- -- re’ ¢o° So° 00° SS°T st’ (ww) AVTITGy TeqUeW

v9"9 ¥bS° z9°s #80" 22° 20° vrs ¥SZ° alae oo (ay) ecueutosieg DTwopeoy
2 g 2 g 2 g 2 9g 2 g

 

 

soTqerie, JUuopuoedapuy
rectly, by raising or lowering their educa-
tional aspirations. The actual beta weight for
that path is only .025, supportive of the
hypothesis of no direct effect.

The arrow from academic performance to
educational aspiration represents the direct
feedback of academic performance on educa-
tional aspirations. The beta weight of .25 is
consistent with the theoretical hypothesis
that the individual’s own observation of his
academic performance (self-reflexive act) in-
fluences his educational aspirations. No di-
rect link from academic performance to oc-
cupational aspirations had been hypothesized
since we assumed that high or low academic
performance would effect the student’s occu-
pational aspirations indirectly by raising or
lowering his educational aspirations. In fact,
the actual direct link has a beta coefficient
of only .02, supporting the hypothesis of no
direct effect.

It had further been hypothesized that sig-
nificant others would observe the student’s
academic performance and raise or lower
their expectations accordingly. These links
are represented by the direct arrows from
academic performance to educational expec-
tations and occupational expectations. The
hypothesis would predict high beta values
here, and their respective beta values of .54
and .48 are indeed quite high. We also hy-
pothesized that, of the three modes of influ-
ence on attitude, the individual’s reliance on
the self-reflexive act would inrcease as the
object of the attitude in question became
more observable, and conversely the influ-
ence of significant others and related atti-
tudes would increase where the object of the
attitude is less observable. The data bear this
out. Education should be more of an observa-
ble object to a student than occupation, since
he participates in education day by day,
whereas he participates in the occupational
structure only imaginatively if at all. Ac-
cordingly, both significant others and related
attitudes exert more influence over occupa-
tional than educational aspirations (occupa-
tional expectations to occupational aspira-
tions = .40 versus educational expectations to
educational aspirations = .32; educational as-
pirations to occupational aspirations =.51
versus occupational aspirations to educa-
tional aspirations = .43).

Two apparently surprising findings (not
inconsistent with the theory) also emerge
from the diagram. First, there is a substantial
beta weight from the educational expecta-
tions of significant others to the academic
performance of the student (represented by
the dotted arrow between educational expec-
tations and academic performance) which
had not been anticipated in the model. A
plausible explanation may be as follows: aca-
demic performance is not the behavioral
variable ideally to be predicted by educa-
tional aspiration—the variable which the
theory would argue directly depends on edu-
cational aspirations is educational attain-
ment, or number of years of education at-
tained. It may be, then, that in some cases
students feel that their significant others ex-
pect high educational attainment from them
and, to satisfy those others, perform better
in school but do not raise their educational
aspirations accordingly—this is potentially
possible since educational aspirations are re-
sponsive to variables other than the expecta-
tions of significant others.

The second anomaly is the surprisingly
low path from mental ability to academic
performance. This would seem to indicate
that mental ability has little to do with aca-
demic performance. This low coefficient is
misleading because the academic perfor-
mance variable includes not only grade point
average but also extracurricular activities not
so likely to be affected by mental ability.
That this is the case is illustrated by the
following: (1) the zero-order correlation be-
tween mental ability and academic perfor-
mance is .37, while that between mental
ability and grade point average is .60, and
(2) when the weighting of grade point aver-
age in the measure is doubled the beta co-
efficient increases to .21.
coefficient where one was hypothesized is not
an unquestioned confirmation of that hy-
pothesis. Nevertheless, the absence of sub-
stantial paths where they had been predicted,
or the presence of substantial paths where
they had mot been predicted would have con-
stituted a clear refutation of theory. In all,
substantial beta coefficients were predicted in
ten cases and all were found; the absence of
substantial beta coefficients was predicted
in five cases, and all were confirmed. Thus,
15 distinct hypotheses were supported by the
data, while none were disconfirmed.

Bearing these considerations in mind, this
research has nonetheless provided consider-
able evidence consistent with the propo-
sition that all three of the modes of in-
fluence hypothesized by the theory—
interpersonal influence, self-reflexive activity,
and related attitudes—exercise strong causal
influence over the formation of attitudes,
and that once formed, these attitudes exert
independent causal influence over behavior.
Perhaps more important is the recognition
that all three modes are underlain by the
same basic dimension. Both interpersonal in-
fluences and self-reflexive activities, in spite
of obvious differences in dynamics, are essen-
tially processes whereby the individual re-
ceives information about himself—and more
precisely about his relationship to objects.
That information is filtered through past
appropriate information and results in a con-
ception of an appropriate relationship to the
object in question. There is a strong suspi-
cion that this information itself is a motor
toward behavior. Although this is not the
only interpretation the data will bear, it
is an attractive one deserving further re-
search. Based on such psychology, the well-
known effects of social structural factors on
behaviors are plausibly explained by sug-
gesting that structural characteristics at least
partially determine the persons with whom
one will principally interact and what infor-
mation they will principally transmit, and
further that structural factors exercise con-
trol over the situations in which one will
(reflexively) view himself acting. Although
other interpretations are possible, the re-
search will support this construction quite
well.

With specific regard to mobility theory,
several implications should be drawn. First,
the research lends credence to the multi-
stage nature of the mobility process: social
structural factors determine the expectations
of an individual’s significant others, which
in turn exert causal influence over the per-
son’s attitudes. These attitudes themselves
then exert directive forces over both aca-
demic performance and later educational and
occupational attainments (see particularly,
for the latter, Sewell ef al., 1969). But the
process is not simply recursive; feedback
from academic performance (and by im-
plication attainments) exerts influence over
both significant other expectations and in-
dividual attitudes.

The technique used in this research for
detecting significant others and their expec-
tations (the Wisconsin Significant Other
Battery; Haller and Woelfel, 1969) has im-
plications of its own. Insofar as it enables
the researcher to determine the exact edu-
cational and occupational significant others
for any person as well as their expectations
for him, it opens the possibility of experi-
mentally varying either the actual signi-
ficant others or their expectations for any
person or group of persons. Insofar as the
Wisconsin Significant Other Battery is fairly
easy to modify, its use is not restricted to
only educational and occupational attitudes,
but may be directed to other long stand-
ing, nonsituational attitudes such as prej-
udice, religious attitudes, consumptive and
productive attitudes, etc.

Finally, the statistical difficulties encoun-
tered in this study have important metho-
dological implications of their own. The
problem of reciprocal influence among vari-
ables has been approached from several per-
spectives before. Duncan e¢ al. (1968) have
attempted to solve path models involving
two reciprocal variables (educational and
occupational aspirations) by an ingenious
blend of multiple regression and factor ana-
lytic techniques whereby those two recip-
rocals were treated as separate manifesta-
tions of a latent substructure (ambition).
This new variable is then treated as a single
variable in a simple recursive model. While
there is reason for argument about the de-
gree to which educational and occupational
aspirations are separate attitudes or merely
separate manifestations of underlying ambi-
tion, such a technique would seem clearly
inappropriate in the case of obviously dis-
tinct reciprocal variables, such as the aca-
demic performance of a student and the
student’s educational aspirations.

Sewell e¢ al. (1969) have resorted to the
simple expedient of measuring reciprocal
variables at different points in time. Thus,
they measure academic performance at Ty
and aspirations at Ts. Since it is manifestly
impossible for aspirations at Ts to affect
performance at Ty, Sewell e¢ al. do not posit
a reciprocal path. The use of time-lagged
variables, however, in no way alters the
theoretical presumption that at any given
point in time, aspirations and performances
are mutually interdependent. Such inter-
actions are not taken into account in the
Sewell e¢ al. models, and their path coef-
ficients are correspondingly misleading, in-
sofar as they are the mathematically exact
solutions for theoretically inexact state-
ments. The resolution presented in this
paper is technically the least sophisticated
of all, but it has the advantage of preserv-
ing the theory intact rather than modify-
ing it to meet the exigencies of method.

It has become increasingly clear that nu-
merical manipulation of nonexperimental
data is insufficient. Fortunately, the theory
lends itself well to physical controls. What
is clearly needed at his stage of theoretical
development is an experimental design in
which the variables are physically manip-
ulated rather than statistically controlled.
Such a design is not only possible but feasi-
ble since the key variables, the educational
and occupational expectations of significant
others, are themselves amenable to at least
some physical manipulation. Although Wis-
consin Significant Other Battery does not
guarantee such research to be successful,
yet without the capacity to detect signifi-
cant others, one cannot manipulate these
expectations in a direct fashion. While much
research of all kinds can be performed fruit-
fully in this area, the understanding of the
educational and occupational attainment
process and of the attendent level of mea-
surement devices has increased to the point
where field experiments have become a dis-
tinct possibility.
Sociological Review 29 (August) :568-575.
Blau, Peter M. and Otis Dudley Duncan

1967 The American Occupational Structure. New

York, John Wiley and Sons.
Bruner, Jerome S.

1958 “Social psychology and perception.” In
Maccoby, Newcomb and Hartley (eds.),
Readings in Social Psychology. New York:
Holt, Rinehart, Winston.

DeFleur, Melvin L. and Frank R. Westie

1963 “Attitude as a scientific concept.” Social

Forces 42 (October) :17-31.
Duncan, Otis Dudley

1961 “A socioeconomic index for all occupa-
tions.” Pp. 109-138, in Albert J. Reiss, Jr.
(ed.), Occupations and Social Status. New
York: The Free Press.

Duncan, Otis Dudley, A. O. Haller and Alejandro

Portes

1968 “Peer influences on aspirations: A reinter-
pretation.” American Journal of Sociology
74 (September) :119-137.

Festinger, Leon

1957 A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Evans-

ton, Illinois: Row, Peterson and Co.
Green, Bert F.

1954 “Attitude measurement.” In Gardner Lind-
sey (ed.), Handbook of Social Psychology,
Vol. 1. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Addi-
son-Wesley.

Haller, A. O. and C. E. Butterworth

1960 “Peer influences on levels of occupational
and educational aspiration.” Social Forces
38 (May) :289-295.

Haller, A. O. and Irwin W. Miller

1963 The Occupational Aspiration Scale: The-
ory, Structure and Correlates. East Lan-
sing: Michigan Agricultural Experiment
Station Technical Bulletin 288:56-66.

Haller, Archibald O.

1969 “On the concept of aspiration.” Rural

Sociology 33 (December), 1969:484-487.
Haller, Archibald O. and William H. Sewell

1967 “Occupational choices of Wisconsin farm

boys.” Rural Sociology 32 (March) :37-55.
Haller, Archibald O, and Joseph Woelfel

1969 The Wisconsin Significant Other Battery.
US. Office of Education Final Report
(forthcoming) .

Heise, David R.

1968 “Problems in path analysis and causal in-

ference.” Unpublished.
Katz, Elihu and Paul F. Lazarsfeld

1955 Personal Influence. Glencoe, Illinois: The

Free Press.
Kelly, Harold H.

1952 “Two functions of reference groups,” In
Swanson et al., Readings in Social Psy-
chology. New York: Holt.

Kemper, Theodore D.

1963 The Relationship Between Self-concept
and the Characteristics and Expectations
of Significant Others, Ph.D. dissertation,
New York University.

Kuhn, Manford

1964 “The reference group reconsidered.” Socio-

logical Quarterly 5 (Winter) :5-21.
This paper examines disability as a social process. The designation of some forms of excep-
tional behavior as disability provides a means for the normalization of incapacity in terms of
existing role relationships. The requirements for long-term or permanent exemption from
role obligations involve legitimation and adjustment to role maintenance. Behavioral rewards
and punishments are not effective for regulating behavior recognized as beyond the control
of the individual. Agents of social control may, however, influence or regulate behavior
through their ability to provide or withhold alternative sources of gratification. Sanctions
may be applied in the process of recognition of inadequate role performance, the attribution
of responsibility, or the legitimation of performance failure. The accredited disabled individual
is excused from role performance by legitimation and may be provided with alternative
behavioral patterns for obtaining income, care, rehabilitation or other services. Legitimation
may stipulate the behavioral requirements to consolidate modified expectations into a coherent
pattern of adaptation—as normalization of the behavior of the incapacitated individual. This
conceptualization suggests a more concentrated focus on the elaboration of behavioral alterna-
tives within existing role relationships rather than the proliferation of specialized role reper-
toires.
tions for incapacity and obscures important
conceptual distinctions. We view disability
as a form of adaptive behavior provided for
by the norms of role relationships. As with
other forms of social behavior, the adaptive
enactment of disability may take deviant
forms or may follow the expectations for be-
havorial contingencies. This perspective has
ample precedent in the work of Lemert
(1951, 1967); Mechanic (1966a); Davis
(1961) and others (Cohen, 1959, 1966; Nagi
1969; Sykes and Matza, 1957; Levinson,
1959; Goode, 1967; DeLamater, 1968.) We
believe that the conceptual distinctions in-
volved have implications for role theory and
