@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
The Rhetoric of Research! The title im-
poses an obvious contradiction. Research is
Science; the discovery and transmission of a
true state of things. Rhetoric is Art. The
Aristotelian definition defines it as “the facul-
ty of observing in any given case the available
means of persuasion” (Aristotle, 1941:1329).
As such, Rhetoric is an art useful for the poli-
tician, the journalist, the speaker, the artist —
the man or woman who seeks to move people
to action. “It is chiefly involved with bringing
about a condition, rather than discovering or
testing a condition” (Bryant, 1965:18;
Winterowd, 1968:14). It was the skill per-
fected by the Sophists and is associated with
such non-scientific and nefarious processes as
advertising, propaganda and politics. It is the
artist who needs rhetoric to produce a deliber-
ate effect in the audience. Art is Art and Sci-
ence is Science and the twain shall not meet.
Is it not to replace Rhetoric and Art that Sci-
ence has come into the world?
It has been customary to distinguish efforts
to persuade through language — the activity of
the artist — or through logic — the activity of
the scientist. Albert Hofstadter has made this
difference between scientific and literary uses
of language the crux of his distinction be-
tween the two functions of Art and Science.
The literary artist, maintains Hofstadter
(1955), uses language as a significant vehicle
for his or her activity. How objects and events
are described or explained is more important
than the subject matter of the narrative or
poem. For the scientist this is not the case.
Language is only a medium by which the ex-
ternal world is reported. That which is des-
cribed and analyzed is not itself affected by
the language through which it is reported.

“Put generally, the scientist searches for
items which are involved with each other in
patterns of dependence ... the scientist’s lan-
guage is not one of these items ... he must
not allow his language to become part of the
content of his assertion.

“The character of the imaginative object
achieved by the artist depends on the char-
acter of the language he employs, whereas the
language of the scientist does not operate
within the involvement pattern he formu-
lates” (Hofstadter, 1955:294-5).

This is what I call the “windowpane”
theory. It insists on the intrinsic irrelevance of
language to the enterprise of Science. The aim
of presenting ideas and data is to enable the
audience to see the external world as it is. In
keeping with the normative prescriptions of
scientific method, language and style must be
chosen which will approximate, as closely as
possible, a pane of clear glass. As an empirical
reality, the normative order of Science is ap-
proximated in this perspective. Scientists do
express their procedures, findings and general-
izations in “neutral” language. Their words do
not create or construct the very reality they
seek to describe and analyze.

From another standpoint, such a neutralized
use of language is an impossibility. Idealist
philosophy has generally insisted on the im-
portant role of the observer to what is ob-
served, but seldom has attention been drawn
away from theories and concepts to the lan-
guage of presentation, to scientific documents
as communicating devices and cultural
products. For that we have to go to the liter-
ary analysts. A viewpoint directly opposite to
Hofstadter’s is given by Northrop Frye
(1957:331):
paper.

The literary style of Science: (the substance
of Act I). The passage from philosopher Hof-
stadter is testimony to the intuitive hypo-
thesis I’ve alluded to above. That passage im-
plies that to be scientific is to exercise a defin-
ite form over the language in use, to write in a
particular way which shows the audience that
the writer is “doing science.” The writer must
persuade the audience that the results of the
research are not literature, are not a product
of the style of presentation. The style of non-
style is itself the style of science. There is a
literary art involved in scientific presentation.

The literary art in Science: (the substance
of Act II). In this paper I will look through
and look at the content of science in its liter-
ary dimension. Frye (1957:74) maintains that
in literature, unlike non-literary prose, the
“sign-values of symbols are subordinated to
their importance as a structure of intercon-
nected motifs.” Yet if there is a literary char-
acter to scientific documents they will also
display a certain autonomy of language. Ef-
forts to be evocative, interesting, aesthetically
pleasing and to make the work relevant and
significant will contrast with the “window-
pane” functions described by Hofstadter. The
content of the research will itself be, in part, a
result of its presentation. If all communica-
tion entails both an assertive, descriptive level
and an aesthetic, artistic level then the win-
dowpane is never completely clear; there is
always a streak of stained glass to capture our
imagination and wonder.

The relevance of Art in Science: (the sub-
stance of Act III). While there is an aesthetic
joy in the game of analysis, my intents are not
so purely artful. They also include the asser-
tion that such analysis makes a difference,
that the artistic side of science isa significant
part of the scientist’s display of the external
world. Not only will I show the artistic side of
science but I will use that exposition to under-
stand the product—the theory, generalization
or conclusion to which the work of the scien-
tist has led. Most importantly, I will use it to
shed light on the practical actions which
emerge as prescriptive through this process of
artful science.

My attention is not fixed on the Scientific
Enterprise. It is both more modest and more
searching. I narrow my vision at one set of
windows—the research studies in the area of
“driving while under the influence of al-
cohol.” It is in the course of a larger book-
length study of knowledge and policy in this
area of social control that I was drawn to
think about the literary qualities of scientific
presentation. Certain aspects of that work led
me to undertake a more careful reading of 45
major research papers which have been alleged
to be the bases for much political, legal and
medical policy toward “drinking driving” in
the past 23 years, in Europe and the United
States.

While I will allude to several of the papers
in this area, one report has been chosen fora
more thorough analysis. My method, especial-
ly in treating papers as narratives, is such that
I need to analyze the framework of the paper
as a unit. To do this for 45 papers is impossi-
ble in a short paper. Accordingly, I have re-
sorted to a literary device common to sci-
ence—the use of the synecdoche—a literary de-
vice of representation in which a part substi-
tutes for the whole. I selected one article for
thorough concentration, to represent the
system of literary analysis applied to a scien-
tific document. This paper (Waller, 1967),
“Identification of Problem-Drinking among
Drunken Drivers,” was chosen for two con-
scious reasons: (1) It has been influential, fre-
quently cited by other research persons and in
governmental documents as a base for advo-
cating particular policies. (2) It represents a
number of studies and papers which, in recent
years, have operated as persuasive elements in
How does the scientist proceed to establish
his/her claim to be “doing science” and thus
to be read in a “scientific” way by the audi-
ence? In the frame of the windowpane, the
scientist does not ask for that “willing suspen-
sion of disbelief”? with which Coleridge main-
tained the theatre audience accepted a stage in
London as the Italian balcony of Romeo and
Juliet. How does the scientist, however, act as
dramatist, setting a stage and persuading his
readers to treat his/her work as one type of
production rather than another?

In this act of my play, I am developing the
literary genre of the scientific report and my
topic is not its content but its form. I will
make use of two literary modes of analysis.
Following Kenneth Burke (1945), I will ex-
amine the dramatistic keys in use, examining
the use of scene, act, agent, agency and pur-
pose. The objective here is to “uncover” the
placement of responsibility for describing the
action described. With analysts of narrative
fiction such as Henry James, Percy Lubbock
(1957) and Wayne Booth (1961), I will utilize
the concept of voice to explicate the relation
of observer to observed and observer to audi-
ence which influences the point-of-view or
stance of the writer toward his subject and
his/her audience.
What is the action of the paper? I want to
show it as a form of narrative, a “story”
which has movement with a beginning and an
end involving change. The article begins with a
title that describes a category, “drunken driv-
ers,” and an attribute, “problem-drinking,”
which is to involve an action, “indentifica-
tion.” Following the article appears a sum-
mary of the paper to follow. It presents the
paper in a capsule form—the methods used
and “findings’—such as, “High correlation
was found between two or more arrests in-
volving drinking and an impression of problem
drinking” (Waller, 1967:124). This summary
presentation establishes the inference that
what is significant about the paper can be
separated from the larger body of language.
The audience, if it so wishes, can get the crux
of the play from the program. The stage pro-
duction has a quality of embellishment.

Like a narrative, the first paragraph sets up
a tension which the paper will proceed to re-
solve. The audience is told that “it is becom-
ing increasingly apparent that a substantial
proportion of drivers who get into accidents
after drinking or who are arrested for drunken
driving are not social drinkers but rather
persons with a long-standing drinking prob-
lem” (p. 124). This assertion sets up a tension
between this newer perspective toward drink-
ing drivers and an older, conventional one in
which drinking drivers are representative of
the general population of drinkers—the social
drinkers.

Unlike a short story or poem, the paper
reaches out for its material beyond the self-
contained confines of its own product. It re-
fers to other studies, including some of the
author’s as grounds for some of the assertions.
Unlike the artistic product, the author also
gives his denouement in the beginning. “This
finding necessitates the reevaluation of cur-
rent methods for preventing driving after
drinking” (p. 124).

It is in the unfolding of the story that the
action of the paper occurs. Having fore-
shadowed the comment in the first paragraph,
the author does not presume to leave the mat-
ter unexplicated. He follows a pattern: first,
the description of the methods used to identi-
fy problem-drinking among drinking drivers;
second, the results or findings of this method;
last, the comment or significance of the re-
sults is placed at the end. This sequential ar-
rangement places policy significance, what is
to be done, as the outcome of methods which
generate results. The activity supported and/
or rejected appears as the culmination of
method. This centrality of method and exter-
nality of data is the major key to the story.
The resolution of the conflict or tension set
up in the first paragraph involves a change
away from a conventional perspective toward
drinking drivers and toward a new perspective
both in cognitive understanding and in
policies to be espoused. In this sense the flow,
or action, of the paper is dramatic.
ducts, his/her claim to veracity is not an essen-
tial part of the claim to artistic acceptance.
James Joyce need not be accepted as a reliable
producer of accounts of Dublin in the early
1900s in order to appreciate The Portrait of
the Artist as a Young Man. The reader need
not even know the author to appreciate the
novel. But where the author attests to a world
of real properties, his/her integrity and com-
petence to report is a question.

The dilemma between personalizing and re-
moving the agent seems to be solved in all but
one of the 45 papers by a device of identifica-
tion through role. In this paper, following the
title appear the name and credentials of the
author: Julian A. Waller, M.D., M.P.H. At the
bottom of the page, in footnote form, the
author is described as someone connected
with an organization: “From the Bureau of
Occupational Health, California Department
of Public Health. Dr. Waller is now with the
Bureau of Chronic Diseases” (p. 124). Thus
the agent is described in a role (medical and
public health) and in an organization.

Having told the audience about his profes-
sional competence and acceptance, the author
must now move out of the limelight if the
document is to be untainted by the obvious
presence of the observer. The language chosen
performs this function through an emphasis
on the externality of the source of action and
through the passive character of the agent.
Viz: “It was decided to use this latter meth-
od” (Schmidt and Smart, 1959:632); not:
“We decided... .” “The test indicates there is
a significant difference” (Borkenstein et al.,
1964:188); not: “Based on the test, we con-
cluded... .” “Data ... confirm a self-evident
fact” (Holcomb, 1938:1084) and “Recent re-
ports have suggested .. .” (Waller, 1966:532)
are other examples I culled from a variety of
the papers studied.

In Waller’s paper (Vota bene: I have taken
to personalizing the product), such circumlo-
cutions are frequent. The active voice is ab-
sent. In the lead sentence the author (by in-
ference) writes: “It is increasingly becoming
apparent ....” But to whom? Throughout
the paper the conclusion or result is portrayed
as emerging from an external world of data or
What this pattern of rejection of personal
terms or active voice does is to place the
source of action in the agency or method.
Waller’s paper creates a style consistent with
“windowpane”’ theory by establishing a real-
ity outside the observer. The style reinforces
this externality and provides the basic episte-
mological assumption; by use of the same
method different observers must reach the
same conclusions.

Both the identification of the author in the
beginning and the passivity of the style sup-
port the portrayal of a procedure in which the
observer is governed by a method and by the
rules of scientific integrity in relation to the
method. He continues to make this point
throughout the paper by following a regimen
of meticulous attention to details and thereby
avoiding a judgment by the reader that he has
been less than scrupulous in following the
method. Thus the percentages are given in
decimals, such as 19.3% or 6.1% for samples
ranging from 150 to 19 (Table I, p. 125).
Where discretion had to be used, the event is
meticulously described to avoid the implica-
tion of whimsy or bias:
his words a clue to any emotion which might
be aroused in the audience. Beginning with
the title, “Identification of Problem-Drinking
among Drunken Drivers” the language is flat,
prosaic and descriptive without imagery. The
title describes an object, “drunken drivers,”
and a set of attributes — problem-drinking —
along with a process to be performed—
identification. The title is not flamboyant,
puzzling or funny. Contrast a more journalis-
tic title, “He. Couldn’t Help Himself,” or a
more literary one, at once ambiguous and in-
triguing, “The End of the Road.” (The term
“drunken driver” seems a contradiction to
this style and will be discussed in considerable
detail below.)

Let me pull these strands of analysis to-
gether. The style of the paper and its setting
in a medical journal makes it recognizable not
as art but as claiming to be science. The lan-
guage is deliberate, nonevocative, meticulous
and limited in imagery. It informs the reader
that the persuasion is to come from an ex-
ternal reality not from the author or his use of
language. The description is minimally meta-
phorical. The intent is made to seem cognitive
and logical rather than affective or emotional.
We, the audience, are to think and not to feel.
Although the author is not anonymous and is
identified as a scientist in a governmental or-
ganization, the style of writing grounds the ac-
tion of the paper in the agency of method-
ological procedures of data collection and
analysis. The agent is minimized and the
drama of the paper is presented as flowing
from the unfolding of the procedures of meth-
od, not from the interests, biases or language
of the author.
In emphasizing the passive voice of the
author and his absence as a significant mover
of events and conclusions, I described the ob-
server as presenting himself as a “window-
pane” if not a camera. In that sense, the
author does not claim a special vantage point
or viewpoint as compared to his audience. He
is in the same seat, showing the observations
which lead to conclusions. The audience
knows as much and as little as the author.
They are on an equal plane.

One frequently used device to achieve
equality is, of course, the regal or editorial
“we.” I did not find this in Waller’s paper.
The consistent absence of any designation of
the author is also reinforced by the passive
voice by which action is described: “Informa-
tion was obtained ...”; “An impression was
ventured ....” Although we did not find it in
Waller, other authors use the inclusive “we”
to put themselves into the audience: “In acci-
dent research we [italics mine] are now past
the stage . . .” (Hyman, 1968:53).

The style of Waller’s paper is that of an
equivalence ratio between author and audi-
ence. The mode of writing reduces distance
and avoids claims of authority or superior
judgment on the part of the author. He seems
Who is the author in relation to the sub-
jects he studies? Is he one of them? Is he de-
cidedly not among those he describes? What is
his stance and distance toward the object of
study? The endless discussions of objectivity
and political morality in science since Marx
have continuously posed the questions of
point-of-view as a major one for the ethics of
the scientist. Recently Robert Merton has
posed this question in spatial terms by re-
ferring to “insiders” and “outsiders” (Merton,
1972). The problem is analogous to that of
distance in literary analysis.

The clinical style of Waller’s paper pre-
serves the stance of the outsider by looking at
drinking drivers as a group of whom the
author, and thus the audience, is not a part.
He has neither loyalty nor economic interest
in them. They are “objects of study” and not
members of the audience. His paper is not ad-
dressed to drinking drivers. Nowhere are any
of the sampled groups referred to as including
the author or the audience. Both author and
audience are presented as “outsiders.” Not
to say: “I will give you, the reader, all the
knowledge and factual information that I
have. We will reason together and achieve a
consensus through fact and reason. You, as a
rational person, cannot but reach the same
conclusion as I.”

This ratio of author to audience can, of
course, be distinguished from others where
the ratio is more or less than unitary equiva-
lence. When the author tells instead of show-
ing, he claims authority and distance from a
viewpoint above the reader, in command of
greater skill or special knowledge, as a scien-
tist addressing a lay public or as Joseph Field-
ing writing in his novels. When the opposite is
the case, the author shows the reader and
leaves to him or her to make of it what he or
she wishes, as in a Pirandello play or in some
modern forms of ethnography. Even in our
sample of papers, we found one or two in-
stances where the author presented a set of
findings and would not interpret or order
them into a set of conclusions (Gerber, 1963).
Information about previous contact with
community agencies, particularly contact
involving drinking problems, was compared
for 150 drunken drivers, 33 accident-
involved drivers who had been drinking but
were not arrested, 117 sober drivers in-
volved in accidents, 131 drivers with mov-
ing violations, 19 drivers with citations plus
arrest warrants, and 150 incident-free
drivers. Screening criteria for problem-
drinkers were two or more previous arrests
involving drinking or identification by a
community agency as a problem drinker.
These criteria were met by the following:
drunken drivers, 63%; drivers with an ac-
cident after drinking, 50%; drivers with
warrants, 30%; non-drinking drivers with
an accident, 14%; persons with driving vio-
lations, 8%; and drivers with no incidents,
3%. High correlation was found between
two or more arrests involving drinking and
an impression of problem drinking. Eighty-
seven per cent of the drunken drivers were
known to community agencies, most with
multiple contacts starting before age 30.
(p. 124)
general term “drinking.” A “drunken driver”
is not only a more opprobrious figure, it is
also a more visual image joined to the com-
mon-sense experience and imagination of the
audience with drunkenness. It may, as it does
to me, convey the sense of a reeling, inco-
herent, unreasonable and thus unpredictable
and dangerous person. Yet the first sentence
shows the reader a somewhat different object,
less specific and less of a specific image. What
was studied were “. . . drivers who get into ac-
cidents after drinking or who are arrested for
drunken driving” (p. 124). While Waller con-
sistently refers to “drunken drivers,” what he
studies were persons arrested for violating leg-
al restrictions against “driving under the influ-
ence of alcohol.” Generally this is evidenced
by a chemo-mechanical test which measures
the blood-alcohol count. In Oakland, Cali-
fornia, where the study was conducted, the
maximum count considered “legal” is 0.10
milligrams per milliliter of blood. The point of
this is that arrests with or without accidents
are not evidence of “drunkenness” in a com-
mon-sense or lay conception.

With the first sentence and the title, the
author has already converted “fact” into
imagery; he has changed or reduced the data
to something else. He has determined which
aspects of the events—accidents after drink-
ing—shall be highlighted. The issue of reduc-
tionism is crucial, both to Science and to this
paper. It is a major way in which the research
scientist makes sense or relevance out of his
work. “Metonymy,” wrote Kenneth Burke, “is
a device of ‘poetic realism’ but its partner ‘re-
duction’ is a device of ‘scientific realism’ ”
(Burke, 1945:506). The terms in which the
object is described has, in Waller’s paper, al-
ready involved a reduction in one direction
and a rejection of others.

The issue of the object has other levels of
analysis significant for the ultimate conclusions
and policy advised. Here Waller’s usage is simi-
lar to that of most of the work in the field of
“drinking driving.” It attempts to uncover the
substantial attributes of the driver as a rela-
tively permanent component of personality
and/or social habits. In defining and analyzing
the “drinking driver” Waller, like others, nar-
rows the range of matters connected with the
events being studied. The language used leads
toward one particular channel of narrowing
and away from others.

The concept of the “drinking driver” em-
phasizes the agent and minimizes the scene or
the act or the agency as possible elements in
accidents. “Drinking driver” imputes, as I see
it, an attribute of selves. There are drinking
drivers and non-drinking drivers as there are
male and female drivers, old and young
drivers, competent and incompetent drivers.
Both “drinking driver” and ‘drunken driver”
lead to the search for attributes of the person
which exist and extend before, during and af-
ter the action of driving. Even within the
terminology of “driver” other circumlocu-
tions in use, though less frequent, direct atten-
tion toward aspects of the driving situation.
“The alcohol-impaired driver” or the “intoxi-
cated driver” place the driver in a context and
make the extensiveness of the attribute less
certain and more ambiguous.

It is possible also to dispense with the
“driver” as an object and to describe the
“same” phenomena with terms which indicate
placement or scene or act. The phrase “per-
sons engaged in drinking driving” or even
“drinking driving” contrast with “drinking
driver” by underlining the situational charac-
ter of the event being examined.

These differences between “driver” and
“driving” are not random choices of grammar.
They feflect the significant perspectives of
psychology and sociology, respectively—the
difference between a drama of agent and a
drama of scene. In his title and in his opening
sentence, Waller has pulled the audience into
the perspective of psychology and into a
search for abiding characteristics of the per-
sonalities of persons.
tives should be utilized in thinking about
drinking drivers and in developing policies to
minimize drinking driving. These perspectives
are expressed through two central terms or
metaphors: the social drinker and the prob-
lem-drinker. What is happening in this paper
can be expressed as the dramatic re-conceptu-
alization of the drinking driver from the meta-
phor of the social drinker to the metaphor of
the problem-drinker.

I refer to these as “metaphors” because
they are used to extend the meaning of pri-
mary data. They are not descriptions of the
factual information collected but are instead
presentations of that data in a form which
creates linkages to something already known
by the audience. They heighten perception by
extending the primary data into another
realm. Utilizing Max Black’s interaction
theory of metaphor (Black, 1962), Mary
Hesse has stated the view of metaphor I used
here:
sume, he says, that “the erring driver has com-
mitted his act rationally but foolishly” (p.
124). The opposite type, the problem-drinker
as drinking driver, is contrasted with this so-
cial drinker as “psychosocial pathology rather
than social misjudgment.” (Italics mine.)

In this paragraph and throughout the
paper, Waller touches the central issue of
knowledge and policy toward drinking driv-
ing: Are such drivers who threaten to cause
accidents to be seen as ordinary citizens
whose habits of alcohol use are “‘normal” for
American life? Or are they extra-ordinary peo-
ple whose drinking habits are “abnormal” for
American life? If the former is the case, then
the drinking driver can be seen as a generally
conforming person whose occasional lapse is
not a sign of a basic attribute connected with
anti-social behavior. He or she is not a deviant
person. Insofar as the latter is the case, the
drinking driver is less controllable, more com-
pulsive and less amenable to change through
reason and persuasion.

The contrast is continued in the manner of
description. The actions of the ordinary citi-
zen are not venal. He is “social”: conforming
and not compulsive. He may act foolishly, but
there is a basic attribute of rational capacity
and attitude. He is “not likely to repeat his
indiscretion” (p. 126), unlike the problem-
drinking driver who “does not learn from a
punitive experience” (p. 129). He is “engulfed
in the deluge of alcohol-related problems” (p.
12).

The “root metaphor”—the basic metaphor-
ical system around which the distinctions are
drawn—is essentially organic-medical (Bruyn,
1966:137; Brown, 1973). The population of
drinking drivers is seen through the lenses of
medical language. Some are “normal” and
others are “pathological.” Both terms are re-
peated in describing, respectively, the two
types of drivers and the two types of drinkers
in the society. Social drinkers are normal citi-
zens and their drinking driving is not sympto-
matic of deviation from attributes of the
healthy person. Problem-drinkers are un-
healthy and their drinking driving emanates
from a flawed and unhealthy personality.
In order to create theoretical and generaliz-
able knowledge, the author must link the spe-
cific objects of his/her study to more universal
categories of persons and events with which
the audience is already familiar (Gusfield,
1975). Unless he chooses such types, the
knowledge will exist at the level of history or
ethnography descriptive of a particular time, a
particular place, a particular set of people. So-
cial roles, such as “the father” or literary
myths, such as the story of Oedipus, become
conventionalized forms through which the ob-
jects can be described. Such myths and arche-
types bear a distinct relation to scientific
models. The model of a frictionless system en-
ables physicists to “talk about” motion; the
model of a “primary group” enables the so-
ciologist to “talk about” human relationships.
The similarity between this analogical process
in science and in literature led Max Black
(1962:241), in his discussion of models, to
refer to them as “conceptual archetypes.”

It is in the light of types seen as myths that
we can again analyze the major contrasts in
Waller’s paper between drinking drivers and
non-drinking drivers and between “social
drinkers” and ‘“‘problem-drinkers.” All of
these are types with which there is familiarity,
in actual or vicarious experience, or both.
They constitute stock themes in popular liter-
ature and drama as well as in news and com-
mon talk. The idea of the “killer drunk’ is
one such character whose irresponsibility and
commitment to an hedonistic style of life cre-
ates tragedy for others. The very use of the
term “drunken” in the title constitutes an in-
vocation of the theme in the context of per-
sons who have come to official attention
equally through arrest for drinking driving or
through accidents in which the offense is un-
covered. So too, the usage, “social drinker,”
carries an implication of contrast to “drunk-
en.” Suppose Waller had referred to “prob-
lem drinkers” and “social drunks”? In this
alternative usage, he would have referred to
that category of persons who, on occasion,
drink to drunkenness but whose action does
not express an addictive problem. This be-
havior is quite common in a large segment of
Americans (Cahalan et al., 1969).

The typology thus operates to label and
stigmatize the drinking drivers as “problem-
drinkers” and to exonerate and label the
“social drinkers” as responsible citizens who
have slipped but whose dereliction is not a
reflection of a personal flaw. The root term of
“normal” and “pathological” continues to
place these groups in the image of the arche-
typal forms. The drinking drivers are analo-
gized to the problem-drinkers and character-
ized within the terms of the myth of the
drinker as deviant, outcast and stigmatized.
“Engulfed in the deluge of alcohol-related
problems” they are described in the following
way:
Waller has given the audience a strong de-
piction of the stock figure of the drinker as
deviant. Agency workers, whose records
Waller utilized, had found drinking problems
in only one-fourth of the cases and made a
medical judgment of alcoholism in only one-
tenth. Waller explained this contradiction to
his findings by saying that the agency workers
had used the stock image of gross intoxication
and the “skid row bum.” Nevertheless, his
portrayal comes close to that stock figure.
Writing of the sample of persons with arrest
warrants out for failing to answer citations in
non-drinking, moving violations, Waller writes
that they “also [italics mine] represent a pop-
ulation with profound psychosocial pathol-
ogy” (p. 129). In analyzing the drinking
drivers, he refers to a subtype as “socio-
pathic.” Summing up, the author says that “it
is not possible to escape the conclusion that
this group of persons does not learn from a
punitive experience” (p. 129).

If the problem-drinker has been stigma-
tized as responsible for drinking driving and
the drinking driver stigmatized as a deviant
drinker, in this process the “social drinker,”
the “solid citizen’ of conviviality, has been
“taken off the hook” and absolved from devi-
ance. The contrasting archetype—the social
drinker—is an “erring driver” when he strays.
He is a man of rationality and basic good will
who ‘‘can be dissuaded.” Such men are not
very likely to be drinking drivers. When he is
the drinking driver, a “social drinker might
[italics mine] err once in the excessive use of
alcohol sufficient to result in his arrest but he
would not be likely to repeat his indiscretion”
(p. 126). If not exactly heroic, the social
drinker is neither villainous nor venal.

The implicit use of stock forms has enabled
the author to produce a morality play in
which drinking driving is an arena for the ex-
pression of personal and moral character. The
social drinker is Everyman—rational, socially
responsible, given to occasional and human
lapses of conduct but basically law-abiding,
controllable and controlling and responsive
to norms of social cooperation. The Boy
Scout of the highways, he can be trusted to
carry out the dictates of a rational and inter-
The author is not content to stop before
the open window. After showing the audi-
ence, Waller also tells them how the study
changes proscribed behavior. Assuming a
shared interest between himself and his audi-
ence in minimizing the phenomena of drink-
ing driving, he draws implications for how the
audience should now formulate policies to
that end. His message is directed to an audi-
ence of policy-makers or advisors to policy-
makers and not to drinking drivers or to per-
sons who may be drinking drivers. “‘This find-
ing necessitates the reevaluation of current
methods for preventing driving after drinking”
(p. 124).

The policy argument of “Identification of
Problem-Drinking among Drunken Drivers” is
that the apparatus of law enforcement cannot
control drinking driving effectively because
the drinking driver is usually a medical and
not a legal problem. The assumptions of law,
according to Waller, are couched in the image
of the “social drinker”; they expect that the
delinquent or potential delinquent isa ration-
ally motivated person whose behavior and
future behavior can be influenced by fear of
punishment. Instead the drinking driver prob-
lem must confront the “problem-drinker”
who can not exercise sufficient self-control to
permit rational considerations to operate. The
central paragraph reads as follows:
Put in Burke’s terms, Waller has produced a
transformation of scene, from the law courts
to the hospital or clinic. Having reconceptual-
ized the drinking driver from a delinquent to a
patient, he has diminished the significance of
‘legal measures as appropriate policy and in-
creased the importance of medical practice as
a major procedure for solving the problem of
drinking and driving. The audience must now
look to themselves—doctors, alcohol treat-
ment personnel, experts on alcoholism—rather
than to lawyers and police as the effective
agents of social policy in this arena.

It is noteworthy that as the author pro-
ceeds to draw action implications, the
“measured cadence” of the scientific style
gives way to a brisker pace and a more
emotive, imperative language. Phrases like
“‘patent failure,” “pathetic monument,”
“look with utter amazement” appear. As Frye
has pointed out, when the author moves to
persuade the audience to action, the “strategic
withdrawal from action” which characterized
the reporting of methods and findings, gives
way to a faster rhythm and a more emotive
style (Frye, 1957:327). Most of the imagery
alluded to in this paper has come from the
introduction and the final section labeled
“Comment.”

So we bring the second act to an end on an
upbeat. The courts have moved off center and
to the side. In their place the medical and
paramedical practitioners of alcoholism treat-
ment have taken the starring roles. The audi-
ence of the Journal of the American Medical
Association can paraphrase Pogo and say, “We
have found the solution and the solution is

»

us.
The analysis of drinking drivers and their
drinking patterns, as signified by Waller’s
study, has provided the audience with a shift
in the hierarchical character of the major
actors. In this shift the social drinker has been
“upgraded” by being exonerated from the
charge of responsibility for auto accidents.
The “drinking driver” has been “degraded” by
being equated with the ‘“problem-drinker.”
That very equation further stigmatizes the al-
ready labeled deviant status of the “problem-
drinker.” As the play has been acted out,
what was down has come up and what was up
has come down. The social drinker regains the
aura of Everyman while the drinking driver is
now “pathological”—margina] and deviant. In
this fashion the gap between law-abider and
law-avoider has been widened. The social
drinker has moved up the hierarchy of de-
served esteem while the drinking driver has, in
a veritable double entendre, been “‘put down”
(Burke, 1945).

This distinction, and its correlative hier-
archy, is also one that is congruent to social
structure. It is invested with hierarchies of
class, race and ethnic diversities. Akin with
many recent studies of drinking driving,
Waller does more than locate the drinking
driver on a spectrum of drinkers. He also lo-
cates the drinking driver, qua problem-
drinker, in the social structure of American
society. Consistent with other studies of the
drinking driver, Waller’s supports the view of
drinking drivers and problem-drinkers as
resident in the lowest income and status levels
(Cosper and Mozersky, 1968; Hyman, 1968).
He reports that Negroes comprised 49% of the
drunken drivers but only 25% of the driver
population of Oakland, site of the study.
Drivers of Mexican or American Indian
descent were 11% of the drunken drivers, but
2-4% of the total population of drivers. Even
though qualified, the image of the low status
of the drinking driver emerges. In discussing
information about arrest records, Waller
writes:
bottom of the social structure. As one re-
search report states it (Cosper and Mozersky
1968:110), “class differences, although
present, are not great except for the marked
disparity between the poorest, least educated
persons and the rest of the population.” Al-
though the equation of social structure and
problemdrinker is not completely supported by
all investigators (non-class religious and ethnic
differences are also viewed as significant), the
emergence of the problem-drinker as drinking
driver and the location of one major source of
problem-drinkers in the lowest categories of
the social hierarchy does place the problem
outside the scene of the solid citizen problem-
less drinkers. As-long as the social drinker was
the potential source of the problem of auto
accidents due to drink, it constituted an im-
peachment of a prevalent style of stable mid-
dle- and working-class drinking habits. Caught
between pressures and self-imposed demands
for “tough” enforcement and the perception
of drinking driving as a “normal” crime of
“normal” people, police and courts have had
difficulty in response. The findings in Waller’s
paper provide a happy solution to the moral
dilemma posed at the beginning of the paper
by the imputation of dereliction as a general
trait of ordinary, lawful people. The problem
has been shifted to people who are “sick” and
quite likely morally suspect anyway. Thus the
social structure and the legitimacy of social
hierarchy are reinforced and the possibility of
degradation dispelled.
an object of feeling in the original scene, at
the conclusion, I assert, he has been cast as a
comic figure. His is the classic comic drunk: a
figure of stability and established position
who has temporarily lost his balance. He is
not portrayed as being inherently and through
personal makeup a menace to community,
either on the road, in his familial life or in his
roles as worker and citizen. His drinking, and
even his driving after drinking, become comic.
They are neither venal, “sociopathic,”
“pathological” nor recurrent and threatening
to the audience. Drunkenness as an unusual,
episodic event in the life of a stable person is a
comic event, classically introduced in comedic
scenes in drama. When the drunken behavior
is perceived as a constant, compulsive event,
filled with recurrent threat to self and others,
the same event becomes frightening and
“tragic,” in contrast to comic.

But the drinking driver, qua problem drink-
er, is not the tragic figure of literary history.
Victim of his own incapacity to control his
drinking and possibly socialized to a life style
which prevents a change in his habits of leis-
ure, he cannot change himself even under the
sanction of legal punishment and the fear of
death through accident. Yet his is not the
story of the great man fallen from high places
and powerless to regain the seat of power. No
Oedipus he. The source of his own and others’
destruction, he is a powerless figure whose
stigmata are not offset by any ribbons of
glory.
I have now pushed myself into a patent
contradiction. The style of a non-emotive
language has created a whole bucketful of
emotions—comic, tragic, pathetic. But the
language of science is not quite that of litera-
ture and the arousal of feeling is much more
ambiguous here than on the stage. While
Waller describes the problem-drinker he does
not tell us, the audience, how we are to feel
toward that central character. When I call the
drinking driver “pathetic,” I do so by refer-
ence to my feelings aroused by the paper and
those I expect the “ordinary” reader would
have, as indicated by my experience with how
such people as those likely to read Waller’s
paper have responded to the problem-drinker
in other contexts and other places.

It is significant that the language through
which the writer has tried to describe his char-
acters is couched in the non-emotive forms
already described above, rather than the more
direct phrases with which a novelist or play-
wright might try to arouse feeling in his read-
ers. It is the muting of feeling that is itself the
characteristic mood, emotion or feeling of the
paper, viewed as a literary document. In this is
its author’s stance toward the object of
study—the drinking driver—and whatever feel-
ing he might otherwise arouse in the reader.
The drinking driver stands as an object outside
the emotional ambit of the writer and the
reader. In this sense, pathos is to be checked,
limited and even obliterated as a reaction of
the audience.

It is important that the only clear use of
emotional language appears in the paper when
the author describes not the actors—the drink-
ing drivers—but those officials who create
policy toward the actors. In the quotations
above, I the author emerge from hiding to
score past policy as a “‘pathetic monument”
and to view it with “utter amazement.” Here
is anger, scorn and irony.

The avoidance or limitation of feeling pro-
vides the writer, and therefore attempts to
persuade the reader, with the necessary ac-
companiment to his identification with the
“society” as victim. To see the “problem-
drinker” in highly differentiated or individual
terms or to view him as an object of emo-
tional concern would make the problem of
drinking driving less clear and the objective of
social control more problematic. To be puni-
tive, as the law has been according to Waller,
or benevolent, as an “underdog sociology”
might entail (Becker, 1967; Gouldner, 1968),
would be to adopt a very different stance: less
functional, less efficient, less concerned with
rational maximization of benefits and mini-
mization of costs. Waller’s critique of law and
his support of medical therapy is an argument
based on effectiveness for social functioning.
The drinking driver is neither villain nor hero.
He must be helped because he creates
“trouble” for other folks, such as his readers.

Form and substance combine. In placing
the drinking driver downward in the social
structure and in constructing him as a neutral
object, control is enhanced. In order to con-
sider the social costs and benefits, the reader
and the policy-maker are cautioned to mute
their feelings toward the specific and particu-
lar qualities—loathsome or appealing—of
drinking drivers and see them as types and
view them from the stance of the organization
and the society. Both language and feeling,
imagery and emotion, are those of Olympian
hierarchy and organizational logic—sans pas-
sion, sans irae.
Both sets of critics ask me to go beyond
showing that scientific documents can be ex-
amined as if they were works of art. They
want me to fell readers what I conclude from
the performance: to produce a policy. I will
try to do that in this final section.

One possible response is that Waller has
been deficient as a scientist. Indeed, my critics
at Goldsmith’s felt that I myself had, through
irony, taken a tone of moral and intellectual
superiority toward him: that I had been a
“smartass.” Unfortunately, there is no deny-
ing it. The transformation of the author from
competence to unawareness is implicit. in criti-
cism. But that “deficiency” is not a personal
failing, a breach in the author’s operation
within the standards and canons of scientific
method. It is implicit and inherent in the
enterprise of defining, describing and inter-
preting data through verbal or written com-
munication insofar as conclusions and general-
izations imply meanings for action.

This paper is part of a larger study of the
way knowledge relates to policy and to strate-
gies for the solution of public issues. What
interests me in this case is how it is that
knowledge is, and is not, usable and used as a
prescription to action. My concern is with the
transfer of statements of fact into statements
of policy, exactly the procedure used to
produce conclusions of action from descrip-
tions of knowledge.

It is precisely in the acts of developing and
presenting particular data as classified into
general categories, the very nub of theorizing
and/or conclusion-making, that acts of selec-
tion, of nomenclature, artistic presentation
and language emerge. Waller is not accused of
“bad” science. His procedure is normal to the
effort of scientific procedures to make sense
out of the world and to couch that sense in a
form related to activity. To be relevant or
significant, data must not only be selected,
they have to be typified and interpreted. In
doing this, language and thought are them-
selves the vehicles through which such rele-
vance is cast. In Burke’s terms they are
“modes of action” (Burke, 1941; 1945:p.
xxii). They lead us to conclusions and thus to
new perspectives. It is not that Science is “re-
duced” to Rhetoric, and thus rendered cor-
rupt and useless. It is rather that the rhetorical
component seems to be unavoidable if the
work is to have a theoretical or a policy
relevance. Thus an analysis of scientific work
should also include its rhetorical as well as its
empirical component (Gusfield, 1975). Sci-
ence is thus a form of action with meanings
derived from its Art as well as its Science
(Geertz, 1973).

This analysis of Science as literature is by
no means inconsistent with ‘‘normal” science
as a truth-begetting instrument. It points,
however, to the multiple realities in which and
through which it may be construed. Some
years ago I was driving across the country
with a friend who was then a radio announcer.
On hearing a news broadcast with a stirring
news event, I remarked, “Did you hear that?”
My friend answered, “Yes. His diction is terri-
ble.” As Schutz (1970:245-62) and more re-
cently Goffman (1974) have both shown and
told, there are many possible realities within
which an event can be framed. At this level,
the literary criticism of Science is a way of
revealing other processes, other realities at
work besides the “normal” method of scien-
tific discovery and verification. What is im-
portant and significant at least in the analysis
of the drinking-driver literature presented
here, is that such an analysis heightens our
recognition of the ways in which the ob-
jects—in this case drinkers and drivers—are be-
ing transformed in a dramatic presentation.

But at another level, represented by the
sections analyzing the transformations of
meaning in the objects of policy, the drama-
turgical and artistic components of Science
are not so consistent with the view of Science
as positive knowledge. Examined reflexively,
my own words carry a ring of skepticism
toward the policies which are presented by
Waller as flowing from an objective body of
knowledge. It is not that the author is
“wrong” in concluding that drinking drivers
can be seen as problem-drinkers. It is that his
interpretation involves theater—it involves a
performance and a presentation which con-
tains an element of choice and both enlists
and generates a context, a set of meanings
which give content and imagery to his data.
The analysis of the document as a literary per-
formance has revealed the human actions
through which the transformation of the
social drinker into the problem-drinker has oc-
curred. It is not, at least in this analysis, that
the data is challenged. What is at stake, how-
ever, is the necessity of the interpretation and
the close connection between that interpreta-
tion and its form of presentation, its artistic
element. It is in underlining the tenuousness
and ambiguity of conclusions that I cannot
blink at having called into question the cer-
tainty and stability of scientific interpreta-
tion. My perspective here is akin to Peter
Gay’s depiction of the confidence and
“ideological myopia” of the Enlightenment
philosophes:
I bring this paper to a close with three sug-
gestions of what is potentially available
through a development of science as a literary
genre. First, it heightens the self-understand-
ing and awareness of what we, social scien-
tists, do as we transform research into written
reports, into words which have connotations
in action as well as abstract knowledge.
Second, it enables the analyst of social issues
to appreciate and explore how he or she con-
tributes to what Herbert Blumer (1971) calls
“the process of collective definition” through
which objective conditions are transformed
into public problems and policies.

Last, there is a contribution which such anal-
ysis can make to public policy. In being attentive
to the elements of language and choice in-
volved in giving meanings to data, the analyst
calls attention to the singularity and selective
activity through which policy implications are
drawn. In doing this, it becomes more likely
that social scientists and others can create, ex-
plore and develop the potential variety of
other interpretations and policies which
would otherwise remain unnoticed and un-
available. It is this capacity to recognize the
context of unexamined assumptions and ac-
cepted concepts that is among the most valu-
able contributions through which social sci-
ence enables human beings to transcend the
conventional and create new approaches and
policies.
Blumer, Herbert

1971 “Social problems as collective behavior.”

Social Problems 18:298-306.
Booth, Wayne

1961 The Rhetoric of Fiction. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.

1969 “Distance and viewpoint.” Pp. 171-91 inR.
M. Davis (ed.), The Novel: Modern Essays in
Criticism. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.

Borkenstein, R.F., R.F. Crowther, R.P. Shumate
W.B. Ziel and R. Zulman

1964 The Role of the Drinking Driver in Traffic
Accidents. Bloomington, In.: Department of
Police Administration, Indiana University.

Brown, Richard

1973 “An aesthetic for sociology: toward a logic
of discovery for the human sciences.” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of California, San
Diego.

Bruyn, Severyn

1966 The Human Perspective. Englewood Cliffs:

Prentice-Hall.
Bryant, Donald

1965 “Rhetoric: its function and scope.” Pp. 3-36
in J. Schwartz and J. Rycenga (eds.), The
Provinee of Rhetoric. New York: Ronald
Press.

Burke, Kenneth

1941 The Philosophy of Literary Form. New
York: Random House.

1945 A Grammar of Motives. New York: Pren-
tice-Hall.

Cahalan, Don, Ira Cisin and Helen Crossley

1969 American Drinking Practices. New Bruns-
wick, N.J.: Rutgers Center of Alcohol
Studies.

Cosper, Ronald and Kenneth Mozersky

1968 “Social correlates of drinking and driving.”
Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol,
Supplement No. 4:58-117.

Frye, Northrop

1957 Anatomy of Criticism. Princeton, N.J.:

Princeton University Press.
Freidman, Norman

1969 “Point-of-view: the development of a criti-
cal concept.” Pp. 142-70 in R.M. Davis
(ed.), The Novel: Modern Essays in Criti-
cism. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.

Gay, Peter

1966 The Enlightenment: An Interpretation. New

York: Vintage.
Geertz, Clifford

1973 “Thick description: toward an interpretive
theory of culture.” Pp. 38-44 in Clifford
Gertz, The Interpretation of Cultures. New
York: Basic Books.

Gerber, S. R.

1963 “Vehicular fatalities in Cuyahoaga County,
Ohio, 1941-1960.” Pp. 38-44 in Proceedings
of the Third International Conference on
Alcohol and Road Traffic, 1962. London:
British Medical Association.
Goffman, Erving

1974 Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organiza-
tion of Experience. Cambridge, Ma.:
Harvard University Press.

Gouldner, Alvin

1968 “The sociologist as partisan: sociology and
the welfare state.” The American Sociolo-
gist 3:103-16.

Gusfield, Joseph

1973 Utopian Myths and Movements in Modern
Societies. Morristown, N.J.: University Pro-
grams Modular Studies, General Learning
Press.

1975 Community: A Critical Response. London:
Basil Blackwell.

Habermas, Jurgen

1971 “Technology and science as ‘ideology.’ ” Pp.
81-122 in Jurgen Habermas, Toward a
Rational Society. Boston: Beacon.

Hesse, Mary

1965 “The explanatory function of metaphor.”
Pp. 249-59 in Y. Bar-Hillel (ed.), Proceed-
ings of the 1964 International Congress for
Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Sci-
ence. Amsterdam: North Holland Publish-
ing.

1966 Models and Analogies in Science. Notre
Dame, In.: University of Notre Dame Press.

Hofstadter, Albert

1955 “The scientific and literary uses of lan-
guage.” Pp. 291-335 in Lyman Bryson,
Louis Finkelstein, Hudson Hoagland and R.
M. Maclver (eds.), Symbols and Society.
New York: Conference on Science, Philoso-
phy and Religion in their Relation to the
Democratic Way of Life, Inc.

Holcomb, Richard L.

1938 “Alcohol in relation to traffic accidents.”
Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, I11:1076-85.

Hyman, Merton M.

1968 “The social characteristics of persons ar-
rested for driving while intoxicated.” Quar-
terly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, Supple-
ment No. 4:138-77.

Lubbock, Percy
1957 The Craft of Fiction. New York: Viking.
Merton, Robert

1972 “Insiders and outsiders: a chapter in the
sociology of knowledge.” American Journal
of Sociology 78:9-47.

Schutz, Alfred

1970 On Phenomenology and Social Relations.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schmidt, W.S. and R.G. Smart

1959 “Alcohol drinking and traffic accidents.”
Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol
20:631-44.
A distinguishing feature of the black position in advanced capitalism lies in relatively high
unemployment and underemployment, a phenomenon that emerged in the 1930s and became
firmly entrenched in the mid-1950s. To explain this we examined the black/white split labor
market between World War I and the New Deal, showing how blacks were used to undermine
white workers and their unions. The conflict was resolved with New Deal Labor legislation,
protecting the unions and outlawing undercutting. This permitted a coalition to emerge be-
tween black and white workers. But in the long run the rising cost of labor drove capital to seek
cheaper labor overseas, to make use of internal pockets of unprotected labor or to automate.
All three processes hurt black industrial workers disproportionately, leaving a group of hard-
core unemployed in the ghettos.
Unemployment statistics as currently de-
fined were not collected prior to 1940; how-
ever, earlier censuses computed the propor-
tion of the population which was gainfully
employed. The complement of this figure
gives us not only the proportion unemployed
(defined as persons in the labor force who are
out of work) but also those who have not
entered the labor force. As a measure of un-
employment, it has the advantage of not omit-
ting hidden unemployment, and disadvantage
of including those who would genuinely not
be part of the labor force (such as students
and the independently wealthy). Table 1 pre-
sents the census findings on black versus white
proportion not gainfully employed for males
ten years and older. It is evident that black
