@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Tocquevillean analyses of social movements are limited to cases in which
structural opportunities (the vulnerability of the state to popular political
pressure) coincide with perceived opportunities (the public’s awareness of
opportunities for successful protest activity). This alignment may not always
occur, however. I examine the implications of a mismatch between structural
opportunities and perceived opportunities using participant and eyewitness
accounts of the Iranian revolutionary movement of 1977 through 1979. By
several objective measures, the monarchy was not structurally vulnerable.
Yet Iranians appear to have perceived opportunities for successful protest,
basing their perceptions on a shift in the opposition movement, not ona shift
in the structural position of the state. In the conflict between structural con-
ditions and perceived opportunities, the structural conditions gave way. Only
by examining cases in which structural opportunities and perceived oppor-
tunities are out of balance can the relative effect of each be determined.
ville’s analysis lies in its combination of ob-
jective and subjective factors. It is not only
the structural weakness of the state that pre-
cipitates revolution in Tocqueville’s model,
or the subjective sentiments of collective ef-
ficacy, but the combination of the two.!
Social-movement theory has recently re-
vived this combined approach after years of
veering between structuralist and subjectivist
extremes (Foran 1993b; Klandermans, Kriesi,
and Tarrow 1988; Morris and Mueller 1992).
McAdam’s (1982) oft-cited book, Political
Process and the Development of Black Insur-
gency, may be the model for contemporary
social-movement theorizing on structure and
consciousness. McAdam argues that the
“structure of political opportunities” is one
of two major determinants of political pro-
test, the other being organizational strength:
“The opportunities for a challenger to engage
in successful collective action. . . vary great-
ly over time. And it is these variations that
are held to be related to the ebb and flow of
movement activity” (pp. 40-41). The “crucial
point,” he states, is that the political system
can be more open or less open to challenge at
different times (p. 41). But structural condi-
tions, McAdam argues, do not automatically
translate into protest: They are mediated by
“cognitive liberation,” an oppressed people’s
ability to break out of pessimistic and quies-
cent patterns of thought and begin to do
something about their situation (pp. 48-51).
McAdam’s (1982) analysis shows the tight
fit between subjective perceptions and the
structure of opportunities. The optimism of
African Americans in the 1930s (pp. 108-10)
and early 1960s (pp. 161-63) reflected struc-
tural shifts in Federal policies (pp. 83-86,
156-60). Conversely, in the late 1960s, per-
ceptions of diminishing opportunities re-
flected the actual diminishing of opportuni-
ties (p. 202). State structure and subjective
perceptions are treated as closely correlated.
Structural opportunities generally coincide
with perceived opportunities in other recent
studies in the Tocquevillean tradition. Tarrow
(1994), for instance, recognizes the interplay
between the macro- and micro-levels of
analysis. He notes that “early risers”—pro-
test groups at the beginning stages of a cycle
of widespread protest activity—may make
opportunities visible that had not been evi-
dent, and their actions may change the struc-
ture of opportunities (pp. 96-97). However,
over most of the protest cycle, perceptions
closely follow the opening and closing of
objective opportunities (pp. 85-96, 99). “The
main argument of this study,” Tarrow empha-
sizes, “is that people join in social movements
in response to political opportunities” (p. 17).
Goldstone (1991a, 1991b) also combines
aspects of the state’s structure (state break-
down) and subjective factors (ideology and
cultural frameworks) in his analysis of the
early modern revolutions of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. State breakdown,
the result of nonsubjective causes like “ma-
terial and social change” (Goldstone 1991a:
408), is accompanied during revolutions by
subjective perceptions of breakdown, namely
“widespread loss of confidence in, or alle-
giance to, the state” (Goldstone 1991b:10).
Subjective perceptions do not play an inde-
pendent role until after the state has broken
down.
These Tocquevillean analyses recognize
that structural opportunities and perceived
The correlation between subjective percep-
tions and structural conditions may not hold
true for some cases. Two possible mismatch-
es occur when (1) people fail to perceive op-
portunities, or (2) they perceive opportunities
where none exists. The first possibility has
been explored in many works, primarily in
the Marxist tradition, which blame false con-
sciousness and ideological hegemony for
masking opportunities or deflecting attention
from them.

The second mismatch has been raised in
the critical-mass approach to collective ac-
tion, which argues that protestors define op-
portunities primarily with reference to pat-
terns of oppositional activity (Goldstone
1994; Granovetter 1978; Kuran 1989; Mar-
well and Oliver 1993; Oberschall 1994;
Schelling 1978). Individuals are more likely
to participate in the protest movement when
they expect large numbers of people to par-
ticipate.? The critical-mass approach implies
that individuals calculate opportunities, not
simply in terms of changes in the structure
of the state, as Tocqueville argued, but pri-
marily in terms of the strength of the opposi-
tion. They may feel that widespread partici-
pation in protest changes the “balance of
forces”—what Gramsci (1971) calls the “re-
lation of political forces”—between the state,
the opposition, and other interested parties.
State crisis does not precipitate revolution-
ary mobilization, in this view, but “an evalu-
ation of the degree of homogeneity, self-
awareness, and organisation attained by the
various social classes” (Gramsci 1971:181).

The collective-behavior school of analysis,
with its roots in symbolic interactionism, is
a further precursor to critical-mass theory.
Though collective-behavior analyses are of-
ten limited to the study of crowds, the ap-
proach is analogous: The fact that others are
protesting affects potential protestors and.at-
tracts them (Blumer 1969). While critical-
mass theory has relaxed the Gramscian as-
sumption of class actors and the collective-
behavior assumption of social disorganiza-
tion, and has replaced the collective-behav-
ior focus on irrational, emotive protest be-
havior with an assumption of rationality,
these precursors provide an alternative to the
Tocquevillean approach.

Empirical studies have confirmed ele-
ments of the critical-mass approach. Klan-
dermans (1984) and Opp (1988) find a cor-
relation between the expected numerical
strength of a protest movement and the like-
lihood of participation. Other researchers
find that expectations of repression are gen-
erally uncorrelated with protest participa-
tion (Muller, Dietz, and Finkel 1991; Muller
and Opp 1986; Opp 1994; Opp and Gern
1993; Opp and Ruehl 1990).

However, critical-mass studies do not em-
phasize the distinction between their findings
and the state-centered Tocquevillean ap-
proach. For instance, Opp and his collabora-
tors, whose work is increasingly influential
in social-movement theory, write that their
research program “is not in complete dis-
agreement with a structural framework”
(Opp and Gern 1993:661). Elsewhere, Opp
(1994) notes that subjective-perception data
“reflect the real situation” (p. 110) and that
decreases in objective repression, “we as-
sume” (p. 127), result in corresponding shifts
in perceptions. Indeed, Opp’s research on re-
pression is intended to show that opportunity
structure does have an effect, albeit a com-
plex one, on protest activity. On one hand,
he hypothesizes that repression increases the
cost of protest and thereby chills it. On the
other hand, repression may increase discon-
tent and micromobilization processes, there-
by inflaming protest (Opp and Ruehl 1990).
However, instead of the expected negative
effect of repression, regressions consistently
show a positive effect, or at best statistical
nonsignificance, even after controlling for
proxies for micromobilization. Although
Opp and Ruehl (1990:541) recognize that
they were unable to control for all interme-
diary variables, their results show that ex-
pected repression does not deter people from
protesting. If repression represents the struc-
ture of opportunities (as Opp, McAdam, and
others argue), this finding suggests that pro-
testors are either unconcerned about oppor-
tunities (and by extension about whether pro-
test succeeds) or are defining opportunities
in some different way.

I explore this latter possibility through an
examination of the Iranian Revolution of
1979. Protestors were concerned with pros-
pects for success—they did not participate
in large numbers until they felt success was
at hand. However, most Iranians did not feel
that the state had weakened or that struc-
tural opportunities had opened up. Indeed, I
argue that the state was not, by several ob-
jective measures, particularly vulnerable in
1978 when widespread protest emerged. In-
stead, Iranians seem to have based their as-
sessment of the opportunities for protest on
the perceived strength of the opposition. In
other words, Iranians believed the balance
of forces shifted, not because of a changing
state structure, but because of a changing
opposition movement.

Unlike the Tocquevillean cases, then, stru-
ctural opportunities and perceived opportu-
nities may have been at odds. Thus, the Ira-
nian Revolution may constitute a “deviant”
case for social-movement theory, one that al-
lows a comparison between the relative ef-
fects of structural versus subjective factors.
This is a historic issue in sociological theory,
and far too weighty for the imperfectly docu-
mented Iranian case. However, the case at
least raises the historic issue in a new guise
for social-movement theory. In addition to
researching the links between the structural
As this paper is theory-driven, not case-
driven, I will not discuss the many explana-
tions for the Iranian Revolution. However, I
take as measures of state structure four ele-
ments that are often cited in the literature on
Iran: (1) the undermining of the monarchy’s
social support by reforms, (2) international
pressure on the monarchy, (3) overcentraliza-
tion and paralysis of the state, and (4) the
state’s vacillating responses to the protest
movement. I argue that none of these factors
represents a structural weakness of the state.

This is not the usual picture of the Iranian
Revolution. Scholars who argue that the
structure of the Iranian state was conducive
to revolution usually presume that Iranians
must have perceived it as such. Although
some scholars have interviewed expatriate
Iranian elites, no scholar has researched
popular perceptions of the state. This is per-
haps understandable, given the difficulties of
studying a relatively closed society like post-
revolutionary Iran. And, in a way, the past is
also a closed society.

I draw on seven forms of eyewitness ac-
counts of the Iranian revolutionary move-
ment of 1977 to 1979, three of them contem-
poraneous and four of them after-the-fact: (1)
journalists’ accounts, both Iranian and for-
eign; (2) opposition publicists’ i’lamiyih’s, or
pronouncements, some of them distributed
clandestinely as a form of alternative journal-
ism; (3) government documents, especially
U.S. diplomats’ records, some of them seized
and published by the militant students who
occupied the U.S. embassy in Tehran (As-
ndd-i Lanih-yi Jasiist 1980-1991), and some
of them obtained through the Freedom of In-
formation Act and published by a private
nonprofit organization in Washington, D.C.
(National Security Archive 1989); (4) mem-
oirs by Iranians and foreigners resident in
Iran during the revolution; (5) oral histories
of prominent Iranians, mostly expatriates op-
posed to the post-revolutionary regime, con-
ducted by projects at the Foundation for Ira-
nian Studies (1991) and Harvard University
(Harvard Iranian Oral History Collection
1987); (6) interviews with Iranians, again
mostly prominent expatriates, that have been
excerpted in academic and journalistic stud-
ies of the revolution; and (7) supplementary
interviews with nonexpatriate and nonprom-
inent Iranians I conducted in Istanbul, Tur-
key (see the Appendix). Taken together, these
sources corroborate one another. The prepon-
derance of evidence suggests that Iranians
did not perceive the Pahlavi state to be weak;
indeed, they feared a crackdown right
through the regime’s final days. However, in
early September of 1978, they began to con-
sider the revolutionary movement to be
stronger than the state.

Because I do not proceed chronologically,
a brief summary of the events leading to the
fall of the Iranian monarchy in February
1979 is in order. The revolutionary move-
ment is generally dated from mid-1977,
when liberal oppositionists began to speak
out publicly for reforms in the Iranian mon-
archy. Late in 1977, some of Iran’s Islamic
leaders called for the removal of Shah Muh-
ammad Rizé Pahlavi, and their followers em-
barked on a series of small demonstrations
that the regime suppressed with force. Casu-
alties at each incident generated a cycle of
mourning demonstrations throughout the
first half of 1978. The bulk of Iran’s popula-
tion, however, did not participate in these
events. The revolutionary movement attrac-
ted a large following only in September
1978, following a suspicious theater fire and
a massacre of peaceful demonstrators; both
events persuaded many Iranians that the
Pahlavi regime must fall. Beginning in Sep-
tember 1978, strikes began to shake the
country and built up to a virtual general
strike that lasted until the revolution’s suc-
cess in February 1979. By the end of 1978,
the shah was actively seeking a reformist
prime minister. When he finally found an op-
positionist willing to take the position and
left for a “vacation” in mid-January, the
country had become ungovernable. Exiled
religious leader Imam Rohullah Khumein?
returned to Iran to great acclaim at the end
of January and named his own prime minis-
ter. Two weeks later, a mutiny in one of the
air force barracks in Tehran sparked an un-
One alleged weakness of the state is the un-
dermining of the state’s social support, par-
ticularly by the elite, as a result of the mon-
archy’s vigorous efforts at reform. This ar-
gument takes different forms depending on
the affected group. For instance, the shah’s
land reforms of the 1960s threw the landed
oligarchy into the opposition. The shah’s in-
dustrialization policies and punitive price-
control measures threw the traditional ba-
zaari sector into the opposition. Harsh labor
repression threw workers into the opposition.
The overheated oil-boom economy led to the
inflation of urban housing prices, throwing
poor migrants into the opposition. Political
repression threw intellectuals and the middle
classes into the opposition. Secularizing re-
forms threw religious leaders into the oppo-
sition. In sum, the state “destroyed its tradi-
tional class base while failing to generate a
new class base of support” (Moshiri
1991:121; also see Bashiriyeh 1984:94-95;
Foran 1993a:391; McDaniel 1991:103-105).

There are three problems with this argu-
ment. First, the affected groups were not en-
tirely oppositional. Second, even as reforms
created enemies for the state, they also cre-
ated new allies. Third, the shah needed rela-
tively little internal support because of the
state’s oil revenues and international support,
and this internal autonomy may have streng-
thened rather than weakened the state.

The most affected elite group was the Is-
lamic clerics. State reforms took away their
longstanding judicial roles, limited their edu-
cational roles, and challenged their role in
welfare distribution. Clerics had the clearest
reason to resent the Pahlavi state. Yet prior
to the revolution, relatively few clerics fa-
vored Khumeini’s revolutionary proposals.
During the revolutionary movement, senior
clerics tried to dissuade protestors from con-
fronting the state, and one cleric even met
secretly with government representatives to
seek a compromise (Kurzman 1994).

Similarly, leading oppositionist bazaaris
and intellectuals opposed the revolutionary
tide; they favored reforming the monarchy,
not ousting it. Workers’ demands centered on
workplace gains and only switched to revo-
lutionary demands in the fall of 1978, mo-
nths after the revolutionary movement began
(Bayat 1987:86-87). Urban migrants who
suffered the most from the state’s policies
did not participate in large numbers in the
revolutionary movement (Kazemi 1980:88-
95; Bauer 1983:157-60). Indeed, strikers at
one factory blamed recent urban migrants for
being too apolitical (Parsa 1989:5). In sum,
the extent to which the shah’s reform poli-
cies undermined his popular support ‘should
not be exaggerated.

Meanwhile, the state created new classes
dependent on state patronage and therefore
inclined to support the shah. The most im-
portant of these was the military, which ex-
panded greatly during the shah’s decades in
power. The loyalty of the military remained
largely unshaken to the end (see below). An-
other class created by state fiat was the in-
dustrial bourgeoisie, which emerged through
credit subsidies (Salehi-Isfahani 1989) and
royal patronage (Graham 1980:48). This
class allegedly abandoned the shah by trans-
ferring its assets overseas and then emigrat-
ing at the first hint of trouble. Certainly ru-
mors to this effect were circulating during
the fall of 1978 (Naraghi 1994:97). But evi-
dence suggests that some of the bourgeoisie
stayed and actively supported the shah to the
end. Groups of industrialists met in Novem-
ber 1978 and January 1979 to determine
common solutions to strikes and money
shortages; representatives worked with the
prime minister on these matters (Ahanchian
1982:370-85; National Security Archive
1989: Document 2127). Thus, the shah was
not totally abandoned by his allies.

In any case, the shah’s access to oil rev-
enues and foreign support made internal sup-
port less important than it was for most re-
The second alleged weakness of the state is
the widespread impression that international
constraints stayed the monarchy’s hand and
prevented the crackdown that would have
crushed the protest movement. Many aca-
demic analyses have applied Skocpol’s
(1979) structural model to the Iranian Revo-
lution, arguing that international pressures
weakened the state and made it vulnerable to
revolution (Ashraf and Banuazizi 1985:19—
20; Liu 1988:202-203; Milani 1988:30-31).4
However, none of these analysts presents evi-
dence of such pressure.

Jimmy Carter campaigned for President in
1976 on a platform that included the consid-
eration of human rights in U.S. foreign
policy, and he threatened to weaken U:S.
support for the shah. But this threat never
materialized. When the shah visited Wash-
ington in November 1977, Carter’s meetings
with him barely touched the subject of hu-
man rights (Carter 1978:2028-29, 2033). A
month later, Carter made his famous New
Year’s toast to the shah in Tehran: “Iran, be-
cause of the great leadership of the Shah, is
an island of stability in one of the more
troubled areas of the world. This is a great
tribute to you, Your Majesty, and to your
leadership and to the respect and the admira-
tion and love which your people give to you”
(Weekly Compilation of Presidential Docu-
ments, January 2, 1978, p. 1975).

As the revolutionary movement grew dur-
ing 1978, the shah received no international
complaints about his handling of Iranian pro-
tests, even when his troops shot hundreds,
perhaps thousands, of unarmed demonstra-
tors in Tehran on September 8. In fact, Carter
telephoned the shah from Camp David two
days later to express his continuing support
(Carter 1979:1515).5 When the shah installed
a military government on November 6, U.S.
officials voiced their full approval (New York
Times, November 7, 1978, p. 14). National
Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski had
telephoned the shah several days earlier to
encourage him to be firm (Brzezinski
1983:364-65; Carter 1982:439; Pahlavi
1980:165). Riot-control equipment, blocked
for months on human-rights grounds, was
then shipped to Iran (Newsweek, November
20, 1978, p. 43). As late as December 28,
1978, the U.S. Secretary of State cabled to
his ambassador in Tehran the firm statement
“that U.S. support is steady and that it is es-
sential, repeat essential, to terminate the con-
tinuing uncertainty” (National Security
Archive 1989: Document 1972).

Throughout the fall of 1978, the shah met
regularly with the U.S. ambassador, William
Sullivan. The shah’s final autobiography
notes that “the only word I ever received from
Mr. Sullivan was reiteration of Washington’s
complete support for my rule” (Pahlavi 1980:
161). In fact, according to Sullivan (1981),
“the Shah himself in due course told me he
was somewhat embarrassed by the constant
reiteration of our public support, saying it
made him look like a puppet” (p. 204).

The shah was apparently unaware of divi-
sions within the U.S. administration (Pahlavi
1980:165; Sick 1985:345). Carter’s cabinet
was split into hostile camps over the extent
of force the shah should use, the advisability
of a coup d’état, and the desirability of a
nonmonarchical government in Iran—in
short, how to respond to the Iranian revolu-
tionary movement. This debate was never re-
solved. As a result, Washington never sent
detailed recommendations to Iran. Ambassa-
dor Sullivan in Tehran repeatedly told the
shah that he had “no instructions” from his
superiors (Pahlavi 1980:161; Sullivan 1981:
191-92).

This lack of instructions may have deep-
ened the shah’s suspicions about the United
A third alleged weakness focuses on the
structure of the Iranian state. According to
this argument, a concerted crackdown would
have worked, but the state lacked the will to
carry it out. At its basest, this explanation
accuses individual officeholders of treason.
At its most theoretical, this analysis argues
that the Iranian state was structurally suscep-
tible to paralysis because of its overcentral-
ization around the person of the shah. Fat-
emi’s (1982) analysis is perhaps the most
succinct: “Since the raison d’étre of this or-
ganizational structure was mostly to protect
the shah and his throne from potential
threats, such as military coups d’état and
strong political rivals” (p. 49), the state de-
manded loyalty to the monarch, arranged
overlapping responsibilities and rivalries,
and forbade lateral communication. “To op-
erate this system the shah had effectively
made himself the sole decision-making au-
thority in every significant phase of Iran’s
political affairs” (p. 49). Therefore, the sys-
tem depended for its operation on a fully
functioning shah. In 1978, however, the shah
was ill with cancer. According to this thesis,
the state was thereby paralyzed in its re-
sponse to the protest movement (Arjomand
1988:114ff, 189ff; Zonis 1991).

There is abundant evidence of the central-
ization of the state around the person of the
shah. There is also evidence of the shah’s ill-
ness. He was under medication and appeared
at times to be depressed or listless and not
his usual decisive self (Kraft 1978:134; Sick
1985:52-53, 61; Sullivan 1981:156, 195,
196, 198). But evidence of paralysis is much
less convincing. To be sure, the shah repeat-
edly stated his unwillingness to massacre his
subjects in order to save his throne (Maren-
ches 1988:130; Parsons 1984:147; Sullivan
1981:167). “The instructions I gave were al-
ways the same: ‘Do the impossible to avoid
bloodshed’” (Pahlavi 1980:168).° One gen-
eral allegedly offered to kill a hundred thou-
sand protestors to quell the disturbances. An-
other supposedly proposed to bomb the holy
city of Qum. The head of a neighboring
country suggested the execution of 700 mul-
lahs. The shah vetoed all these plans (Mirfa-
khraei 1984:443; Reeves 1986:188; Stempel
1981:280).

However, the refusal to authorize slaugh-
ter does not necessarily indicate lack of will
or structural paralysis. Less extreme mea-
sures were vigorously pursued. Throughout
the fall of 1978, security forces routinely
broke up protests at gunpoint. They arrested
virtually every prominent oppositionist in the
country at least once. At one time or another
they occupied virtually all key economic and
governmental institutions and forced striking
personnel back to work in the oil fields,
power stations, airlines, customs offices, and
telecommunications centers (Kurzman 1992:
194-99). Plans began to be drawn up for a
possible pro-shah military coup (Copeland
1989:252; Yazdi 1984:249-99).

Moreover, the Pahlavi regime—despite its
pretensions—was a Third World state and
not overly efficient in the best of times:
Iran’s intelligence service was hardly more
than a glorified police force, according to the
head of the French secret service (Marenches
1988:121); Tehran had no sewage system
(Graham 1980:22); and industry suffered fre-
quent power shortages (Graham 1980:120-
21). The flurry of state actions in response to
the revolutionary movement hardly repre-
sents paralysis.
A fourth possible weakness concerns the
state’s “vacillating” (Abrahamian 1982:518;
Keddie 1981:255) or “inconsistent” (Arjo-
mand 1988:115; Cottam 1980:18) responses
to the protest movement. The combination of
concession and repression is said to have en-
couraged protestors while providing them
with new reasons to protest. Because of this
vacillation, according to these analyses, the
Iranian revolution grew from a small and
sporadic movement into a massive and con-
tinuous upheaval. The implication is that a
more one-sided policy—either reform or
crackdown—would have been more effective
in stifling protest.

Such a conclusion goes against the advice
of numerous royal advisors. In ancient India,
Kautiliya (1972:414) instructed kings on
how to deal with revolts: “Make use of con-
ciliation, gifts, dissension and force.” In elev-
enth-century Persia, Nizam al-Mulk (1960,
chaps. 40, 44) urged caliphs to imitate the
mercy and liberality of Harun ar-Rashid, but
also the deviousness and repression of Nush-
irwan. In sixteenth-century Italy, Machiavelli
(1980, chaps. 8, 17) advised princes to gain
both the fear of the people and the love of
the people, combining punishment and re-
ward, cruelty and clemency. In the twentieth
century, U.S. State Department analyst W.
Howard Wriggins (1969:258-63) theorized
on the strategic mix between rewarding the
faithful and intimidating the opposition. On
theoretical grounds, then, it is not clear
whether a combined state response consti-
tutes vacillation and vulnerability, or carrot-
and-stick and co-optation.

In any case, the shah had used a similar
strategy for years. The two major pre-revolu-
tionary studies of the Iranian political system
make this point repeatedly. Zonis (1971)
notes that co-optation of the opposition had
become routine, to the extent that the shah
told one foreign visitor not to worry about
youthful subversives. “We know just who
those young men are and will be offering
them high-level jobs as appropriate” (pp.
331-32). Bill (1972:100) describes the state’s
“three-pronged strategy of intimidation, brib-
ery, and selected concessions” toward student
oppositionists. Both authors view the shah’s
repression and his co-optive concessions as
complementary parts of a single coherent sys-
tem of political opportunities.

This combined approach continued
through 1978 (Kurzman 1992:81-91). At
several crucial junctures, the shah cracked
down on protestors, but at the same time of-
fered minor concessions and promised future
reforms. In mid-May, soldiers opened fire on
a demonstration in Tehran, but troops were
removed from the seminary city of Qum and
a ban was announced on pornographic films,
clearly gestures toward religious opposition-
ists. In early August, the shah announced that
free elections were going to be held, but soon
placed the city of Isfahan under martial law.
In late August, the shah placed 11 cities un-
der martial law, but also granted various con-
cessions, including freedom of the press, and
appointed a new prime minister thought to be
more acceptable to the religious opposition.
In November, the shah installed a military
government that flooded Tehran with ar-
mored vehicles and cracked down on the
oilfield strikes. At the same time, the shah
made an apologetic televised speech and pro-
mulgated limits on the royal family’s busi-
Ness activities.

There was a definite logic to these state re-
sponses. The government sent protestors a
mixed but consistent message: Continue pro-
testing and you’ll be killed; stop protesting
and you’ll get reforms. The combination of
crackdowns with promises of future reforms
was intended to defuse the short-term situa-
tion while reaffirming the long-term commit-
ment to liberalization. The shah stuck to the
structure of political opportunities he had
maintained for decades, one that was condu-
cive to co-optive political participation and
inimical to revolutionary street protests.
ous, including the large demonstrations that
were legal, well-organized, and rarely re-
pressed.® For instance, marches on the reli-
gious holidays of Tasfi’a and ’Ashara in De-
cember 1978 were certain to attract millions
of participants, but they still inspired fear.
The leading cleric in Shiraz warned on the
eve of the demonstrations: “Maybe we’ll be
killed tomorrow. We’re facing guns, rifles
and tanks. Whoever is afraid shouldn’t
come” (Hegland 1986:683). One man in
Tehran wrote out his will before heading out
to march (Pishtazdn 1981:173).

Fear of state reprisal lasted through the fi-
nal hours of the Pahlavi regime, as security
forces continued to shoot and arrest protest-
ors. In December 1978, Iranians feared that
hundreds of CIA operatives were being
smuggled into the country to squelch the
revolutionary movement (Khalil? 1981:128).
In early February of 1979, just a few days
before the shah’s regime fell, one newspaper
columnist noted: “In Tehran, conversations
are limited to this: how will the revolution,
which has gone half-way, deal with the fun-
damental power of the government? Will it
resign? Will there be a fight? And how far
would fighting go?” (Ayandigdan, February
6, 1979, p. 12).

But recognition of the state’s coercive
power did not translate into obedience. Fre-
quently, repression led to increased militancy.
In late August, after the immolation of sev-
eral hundred moviegoers in Abadan—a trag-
edy many Iranians blamed on the state—pro-
tests increased from several thousand partici-
pants to hundreds of thousands. In early Sep-
tember, the day after hundreds and perhaps
thousands of peaceful demonstrators were
gunned down in Tehran’s Zhalih Square,
wildcat strikes spread across the country. In
early November, within weeks of the instal-
What was amiss, I propose, was the Iranian
people’s perception of political opportunities.
Iranians continued to recognize and fear the
state’s coercive powers. However, they felt
that these powers were insignificant com-
pared with the strength of the revolutionary
movement. Confirming critical-mass hypoth-
eses, these perceptions caused Iranians to be-
come more active, not to withdraw into free-
rider.status. Popular perceptions are difficult
to identify, particularly during a period of re-
pression and unrest. But this is no excuse for
leaving popular perceptions unexamined. The
bits of evidence that exist show consistently
that Iranians considered the strength of the
protest movement to be a decisive factor in
their decisions to participate.
A year before, I heard news about demonstra-
tions, but I didn’t feel that it was something
very important. That is, I thought, well, some-
thing is happening, but I didn’t think that it
would bring about a basic change in my coun-
try. Later, in September 1978, at the start of
school, when we began classes, everything had
changed. All of a sudden, the feeling arose that
things weren’t that way anymore. (Maryam
Shamlu, from an interview in May 1983)?
He explained candidly that he had put a photo-
graph of the Ayatollah, whom he said he re-
spected, in his store window because he feared
it would be smashed otherwise. “Most of the
people want an Islamic Republic,” he said wea-
rily. “And I want anything that most of the

people want.” (New York Times, February 2,

1979, p. A9)

The fear of violence should not be overes-
timated, however, despite the dark suspicions
of several foreign observers—notably British
Ambassador Anthony Parsons (1984:81),
U.S. military envoy Robert Huyser (1986:22),
and U.S. diplomats (Asndd-i Lanih-yi Jasist
1980-1991, vol. 25, p. 50; vol. 12, part 2, pp.
16, 79-80; vol. 13, part 1, p. 48; vol. 13, part
2, p. 71). The Iranian Revolution exhibited
remarkably little retribution against backslid-
ers, especially when compared with the revo-
lutionary violence reported in South Africa,
Palestine, and the Sikh independence move-
ment in India.

Rather, the fear of violence should prob-
ably be considered part of the overall “band-
wagon effect” (Hirsch 1986:382), whereby
individuals’ willingness to participate in a
protest is correlated with their expectations
of the size and success of the protest. Other
critical-mass studies are better able to delve
into the details of the social-psychological
mechanisms at work here, given their more
accessible research sites. In the Iranian case,
in which random sampling is not possible,
only the broad outlines of the process can be
identified.

Perhaps the best evidence of the band-
wagon effect comes from the reformist oppo-
sitionists who opposed outright revolution.
These liberals are more fully represented than
are other social groups in the government,
journalistic, and oral-history sources avail-
able for this research. Liberals were highly
sensitive to the structure of opportunities—
they had begun to speak out publicly for re-
form in 1977 when the shah allowed such
opposition to be voiced. In late 1977, when
the shah clamped down again after his cor-
dial meetings with Carter, liberals muted their
protests. In the summer of 1978, when the
shah made a few concessions and promised
to hold free elections, liberals were elated and
rushed to take advantage of the new freedoms
(Kurzman 1992:106-109). During the fall of
1978, liberals began to sense that the opposi-
tion movement was larger than they had
imagined, and “out of our hands.”!° This
sense crystallized for some on September 4,
when liberal bazaar oppositionists chased in
vain after a massive revolutionary demonstra-
tion, trying to disperse the crowd and remind-
ing people that they were not supposed to be
demonstrating.!!

In the following months, liberals joined the
revolutionary movement, not because they
now favored revolution, but because they felt
the revolutionary movement was too strong
to oppose. In a memorandum of November
5, 1978, the U.S. embassy reported that one
leading liberal “privately accused Khomeini
of irresponsibility and said he ‘acts like a
false god.’ But we have no sign he or any
other oppositionist dares to attack Khomeini
publicly” (National Security Archive 1989:
Document 1685). In a memorandum dated
December 8, 1978, a U.S. diplomat reported
asking a moderate Iranian religious leader if
he and other clerics would approve a consti-
tutional settlement to the crisis and go again-
st Khumeini. The cleric, “perhaps not want-
ing his followers to understand, replied in
broken English, ‘That would be dangerous
and very difficult’” (Asndd-i Lanih-yi Jasist
1980-1991, vol. 26, p. 61). By the end of
1978, when the shah was casting about for a
prime minister, a series of liberal opposition-
ists turned down the position. Several months
earlier they would have considered the ap-
pointment a dream come true—now they
considered it futile. !?
mass protests against the shah in the final
months of 1978. Yet, at the end of the year,
the shah’s military remained largely intact.
The two sides faced a potentially cataclys-
mic confrontation. But as protestors’ percep-
tion of political opportunities clashed with
the state’s structural position, the structure
of the state gave way.

As late as early December 1978, top gen-
erals still thought they could subdue the pro-
test movement (Kamrava 1990:39). Thus, the
collapse of the military followed, rather than
preceded, mass mobilization of the protest
movement. Like the broad state-breakdown
argument, this suggests that military break-
down may be an outcome of mobilization
rather than a necessary precondition (Chor-
ley 1973; Russell 1974).

During demonstrations, protestors handed
flowers to soldiers and chanted slogans such
as: “Brother soldier, why do you kill your
brothers?” and “The army is part of the na-
tion” (Kamali 1979). On several occasions,
large throngs of protestors persuaded sol-
diers to give up their arms, throw off their
uniforms, and join the demonstration (Simp-
son 1988:33). On other occasions, protestors
attacked security personnel and even military
bases (Parsa 1989:231-37).

Nonetheless, the effectiveness of popular
pressure on the military is unclear. Even in
mid-January 1979, as the shah was about to
leave Iran, desertions remained relatively
low, only about a thousand a day out of sev-
eral hundred thousand troops, according to
the Iranian chief of staff (Gharabaghi 1985:
122). However, authorized leaves may have
been increasing dramatically as soldiers re-
quested furloughs to check on their families
and property after riots and other distur-
bances (Zabih 1988:33). (In a Crisis Meet-
ing on January 23, the chief of staff esti-
mated that the armed forces were only at 55
percent of their strength, although the tone
of his comments suggests that this figure was
picked more for effect than for accuracy
[Misl-i Barf 1987:175].!3) Small mutinies in-
During the largest demonstrations, military
commanders kept their troops well away
from the march routes, guarding “key” sites
and neighborhoods (National Security Ar-
chive 1989: Document 1900; Ayandigan,
January 20, 1979, p. 2). On a few occasions
they ordered the military back to barracks,
twice as a direct result of defections (Los
Angeles Times, December 19, 1978, p. I-22;
Hambastigi, December 24, 1978, p. 2).

In early 1979, Iranian military command-
ers struggled to keep the military intact and
gave up trying to use the military to govern
the country. They had been trained to fear a
Soviet incursion and saw the collapse of the
Iranian military as an invitation to aggression
(Misl-i Barf 1987:118-21). In Mashhad at
the height of the unrest, one commander said
that the military was unable to defend the
I have argued that the Iranian state was not
particularly vulnerable to revolution in 1978,
according to several indicators. The Pahlavi
regime’s domestic support had not withered
away, nor had its international support. State
centralization and the shah’s illness did not
prevent the state from responding actively to
the revolutionary movement, combining car-
rot and stick, cracking down on opposition
activities while promising future reforms, as
it had done for decades.

In terms of popular perceptions, the Iranian
people considered the coercive power of the
state to be intact right up to the end. At the
same time, however, evidence suggests that
the Iranian people considered political oppor-
tunities to have increased as a result of the
growth of the opposition. The strength of the
revolutionary movement induced even non-
revolutionary liberals to join in. Acting on
this perception of opposition strength,
Iranians altered the structure of opportunities
by fraternizing with the military and making
it partially unusable as a coercive force.

In more theoretical terms, there was a mis-
match between the structure of political op-
portunities and popular perceptions of politi-
cal opportunities. Rather than calculate op-
portunities solely on the basis of changes in
the state, as Tocquevillean theory suggests,
Iranians appear to have calculated opportuni-
ties on the basis of changes in the opposition.
Ultimately, their perceptions proved self-ful-
filling: The balance of forces had indeed
tilted toward the opposition, and perceptions
proved stronger than the state structure.

This finding suggests that social-move-
ment theory should reconsider the relation
between “objective” and “subjective” defini-
tions of political opportunity. If opportunity
is like a door, then social-movement theory
generally examines cases in which people re-
alize the door is open and walk on through.
The Iranian Revolution may be a case in
which people saw that the door was closed,
but felt that the opposition was powerful
enough to open it. These people were not
millenarians, masochists, fanatics, or mar-
tyrs—the case is not dismissed so easily. It
turns out that Iranians were able to open the
door on their own.

Thus Iran is a “deviant” case for social-
movement theory, a case suggesting that per-
ceived opportunities may affect the outcome
of revolutionary protest independent of struc-
tural opportunities. This conclusion is hardly
novel. The critical-mass school, drawing on
a long tradition in sociology, has often ex-
amined protestors’ and potential protestors’
perceptions. However, this school has
avoided emphasizing its differences with the
Tocquevillean tradition. The Iranian case
makes these differences clear. However, a
single “deviant” case cannot answer all the
questions that it raises. Are perceptions al-
ways stronger than structures? Under what
conditions do perceptions outweigh struc-
tures? Only through research on additional
cases in which perceived opportunities and
structural opportunities fail to coincide can
the relative weight of each be understood.

Such research will encounter difficulties.
First, the identification of appropriate cases
will not be easy. Many theorists will assume
that if protest occurs, structural conditions
must have been conducive. Therefore, any
case study proffered to the contrary may be
dismissed out of hand. Furthermore, the
Tocquevillean tradition presents a moving
target, as theories of political opportunity in-
crease. Like any research program (Lakatos
1978), Tocquevillean theorists can develop
new corollary analyses to bring seemingly
deviant cases back into alignment. As a re-
sult, it may not be easy to convince these
theorists that cases exist in which structural
opportunities and perceived opportunities do
not coincide.

Second, the measurement of popular per-
ceptions will be difficult. The survey instru-
ments developed by Opp, Muller, and their
collaborators (Muller et al. 1991; Muller and
Opp 1986; Opp 1994; Opp and Gern 1993;
Opp and Ruehl 1990) represent great strides
in identifying the key perceptions involved in
protest behavior. However, systematic sur-
veys are not feasible in the midst of revolu-
tionary turmoil, so the issue of recollected
motivations enters the picture. In addition,
the countries most amenable to survey re-
search may be the least “deviant” cases from
a Tocquevillean point of view. Countries like
Iran, whose regimes are less open to the free
flow of information and thus to independent
survey analysis, may be precisely the coun-
tries in which information about the structure
of opportunities is also not widely dissemi-
nated, so that perceptions of opportunities
may be more out of synch.

Third, identifying a set of “deviant” cases
in which perceived opportunities outweigh
structural ones may be inherently self-defeat-
ing. Take, for instance, the hypothesis that
regimes that block the free flow of informa-
tion are more likely than other regimes to
have mismatched structural opportunities
and perceived opportunities. Haven’t we,
then, identified the structural conditions un-
der which structural conditions are not im-
portant? In other words, haven’t we simply
redefined structure to include the free flow
of information, thereby bringing structure
back into alignment with perceptions?

Fourth, examining perceptions indepen-
dently of structures places social scientists
in an anomalous position because their
privileged position as observers is called
into question. In social-movement theory,
structural opportunity means the social
scientist’s perception of opportunities. This
scientific perception is more informed than
contemporary popular perceptions because
it is after-the-fact and arguably more objec-
tive. However, cases in which perceptions
outweigh structures present the risk that sci-
entific perceptions, for all their rigor and
To corroborate the fragmentary evidence concern-
ing popular perceptions of the Iranian state and the
revolutionary movement, I planned to interview a
representative sample of Iranians in 1989 and 1990.
When I was unable to obtain a visa to Iran, I pur-
sued this research in Istanbul, Turkey, where many
Iranians traveled at that time for tourism and busi-
ness. In six months, I conducted semi-structured in-
terviews in Persian with 83 temporary visitors who
intended to return to Iran. This sample included Ira-
nians from more diverse backgrounds than are found
among expatriates. Nonetheless, this sample was not
representative of the Iranian population at large—it
was far more urban, somewhat more white-collar,
and almost entirely male.

The study of closed societies through interviews
abroad has been successful in several studies (Mill-
ar 1987; Whyte 1983). However, because of a lack
of funds and a way to sample the fluid Iranian visi-
tor population of Istanbul, my interviews could not
be as systematic as in these other works. Although
my interviews may give a “sense” of Iranian popu-
lar perceptions that is more representative than those
of prominent expatriates who have been quoted in
previous analyses of the Iranian Revolution, they
cannot prove what those popular perceptions were.

The bulk of the interviews confirmed that respon-
dents judged political opportunities not in terms of
the power of the state, but in terms of the power of
the opposition. Only a few of my respondents—gen-
erally the better educated ones—made any reference
to the shah’s liberalization reforms, and some of
these references were derisive comments on the re-
forms’ insincerity. One respondent attributed the
shah’s liberalization reforms to pressure from Cart-
er. I asked if he had felt freer as a result. “No, things
were getting worse. But we all had solidarity,” he
responded, clasping his hands together to demon-
strate.’ This impression of worsening political con-
ditions was widespread.

Some of the more devout Muslim respondents
said they worried that Islam was in danger, that the
shah was systematically undermining the religious
establishment.’ Several respondents gave unsolicit-
ed accounts of being “az khud guzashtih” (see p.
161), although none used this term. One man attrib-
uted his revolutionary participation to the shooting
of his brother. “It was this way for everyone,” he
said. “If my brother, or my friend, or my child was
shot, I would get angry and pour out into the
streets.”°

However, the most common explanation for re-
spondents’ participation in the revolutionary move-
ment referred to the strength of the opposition. Con-
trary to the stereotype of Shi’i Islam, most Iranians
were not eager for martyrdom. When religious lead-
ers urged Iranians to sacrifice themselves for Islam
in late 1977 and early 1978, very few responded to
the call. “I was prepared to be killed at that time, for
our goals,” one respondent recalled’—but neither he

4 Respondent 55, a Tehran bazaar worker, inter-
viewed on November 29, 1989. (Occupations and place
of residence are at the time of the revolution.)

6 Especially Respondent 16, an unemployed young
religious activist in east Tehran, interviewed on No-
vember I, 1989.

© Respondent 59, a bank official from Tehran, inter-
viewed on December 3, 1989.

4 Respondent 89, a company official from Khuzistan,
interviewed on February 19, 1990. One of the stock
comments I heard was, “Iranians know no fear.” This
comment was often, paradoxically, accompanied by ac-
counts of how the respondent had run away when secu-
rity forces opened fire.
Abrahamian, Ervand. 1982. Iran Between Two
Revolutions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.

Afkhami, Gholam. 1985. The Iranian Revolution:
Thanatos on a National Scale. Washington,
DC: Middle East Institute.

Ahanchian, Jalal. 1982. Tarh-i Suqiit-i Yik Pa-
disha&h (The Plot to Topple a King). Self-pub-
lished, Mill Valley, CA.

Arjomand, Said Amir. 1988. The Turban for the
Crown: The Islamic Revolution in Iran. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Ashraf, Ahmad and Ali Banuazizi. 1985. “The
State, Classes, and Modes of Mobilization in
the Iranian Revolution.” State, Culture, and
Society 1:3-40.

Asndd-i Lanih-yi Jasist (Spy Nest Documents).
1980-1991. 77 Volumes. Tehran, Iran: Danish-
jayan-i Musalm4n-i Payré-i Khat-i Imam.

Balta, Paul and Claudine Rulleau. 1979. L’Iran
Insurge (Iran Rebels). Paris, France: Sindbad.

Bashiriyeh, Hossein. 1984. State and Revolution
in Iran, 1962-1982. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.

Bauer, Janet. 1983. “Poor Women and Social
Consciousness in Revolutionary Iran.” Pp.
141-69 in Women and Revolution in Iran, ed-
ited by G. Nashat. Boulder, CO: Westview.

Bayat, Assef. 1987. Workers and Revolution in
Tran. London, England: Zed.

Bill, James A. 1972. The Politics of Iran. Colum-
bus, OH: Charles E. Merrill.

. 1988. The Eagle and the Lion: The Trag-
edy of American-Iranian Relations. New Ha-
ven, CT: Yale University Press.

Blumer, Herbert. 1969. “Collective Behavior.”
Pp. 65-121 in Principles of Sociology, 3d. ed.,
edited by A. M. Lee. New York: Barnes and
Noble Books.

Briére, Claire, and Pierre Blanchet. 1979. L’/ran:
La Révolution au Nom de Dieu (The Revolu-
tion in the Name of God). Paris, France: Seuil.

Brzezinski, Zbigniew. 1983. Power and Prin-
ciple: Memoirs of the National Security Advi-
sor, 1977-1981. New York: Farrar, Straus,
Giroux.

Carter, Jimmy. 1978. Public Papers of the Presi-
dents: Jimmy Carter, 1977. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.

. 1979. Public Papers of the Presidents:

Jimmy Carter, 1978. Washington, DC: U.S.

Government Printing Office.

. 1982. Keeping Faith: Memoirs of a Pres-
ident. New York: Bantam Books.

Chorley, Katharine C. 1973. Armies and the Art
of Revolution. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.

Copeland, Miles. 1989. The Game Player: Con-
fessions of the CIA’s Original Political Opera-
tive. London, England: Aurum Press.

Cottam, Richard W. 1980. “The Imperial Regime
of Iran: Why It Collapsed.” Pp. 9-24 in L’Jran
d’Hier et de Demain (Iran of Yesterday
and Tomorrow). Québec, Canada: Collection
Choix.

Farazmand, Ali. 1989. The State, Bureaucracy,
and Revolution in Modern Iran: Agrarian Re-
forms and Regime Politics. New York: Praeger.

Fatemi, Khosrow. 1982. “Leadership by Distrust:
The Shah’s Modus Operandi.” Middle East
Journal 36:48-61.

Foran, John. 1993a. Fragile Resistance: Social
Transformation in Iran from 1500 to the Revo-
lution. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

. 1993b. “Theories of Revolution Revis-
ited: Toward a Fourth Generation?” Sociologi-
cal Theory 11:1-20.

Foundation for Iranian Studies. 1991. The Oral
History Collection of the Foundation for Ira-
nian Studies. Index and Transcripts. Washing-
ton, DC: Foundation for Iranian Studies.

Gharabaghi, Abbas. 1985. Vérités sur la Crise
Tranienne (Truths About the Iranian Crisis).
Paris, France: La Pensée Universelle.

Goldstone, Jack A. 1991a. “Ideology, Cultural
Frameworks, and the Process of Revolution.”
Theory and Society 20:405-53.

. 1991b. Rebellion and Revolution in the

Early Modern World. Berkeley, CA: University

of California Press.

. 1994. “Is Revolution Really Rational?”
Rationality and Society 6:139-66.

Graham, Robert. 1980. Iran: The Illusion of
Power. Rev. ed. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Gramsci, Antonio. 1971, Selections From the
Prison Notebooks. Translated by Q. Hoare and
G. N. Smith. New York: International Publish-
ers.

Granovetter, Mark. 1978. “Threshold Models of
Collective Behavior.” American Journal of So-
ciology 83:1420-43.

Harvard Iranian Oral History Collection. 1987.
Alphabetical Folders and Reference Guide.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Center
for Middle Eastern Studies.

Hegland, Mary Elaine. 1983. “Two Images of
Husain.” Pp. 218-35 in Religion and Politics
in Iran, edited by N. R. Keddie. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.

. 1986. “Imam Khomaini’s Village: Re-
cruitment to Revolution.” Ph.D. dissertation.
Department of Anthropology, State University
of New York, Binghamton, NY.

Hirsch, Eric L. 1986. “The Creation of Political
Solidarity in Social Movement Organizations.”
The Sociological Quarterly 27:373-87.

Huyser, Gen. Robert E. 1986. Mission to Tehran.
New York: Harper and Row.

Kamali, ’ Alf. 1979. Ingilab (Revolution). Tehran,
Iran: Massoud Publishing House.

Kamrava, Mehran. 1990. Revolution in Iran: The
Roots of Turmoil. London, England: Routledge.

Kautilfya. 1972. The Kautiliya ArthaSdstra. Pt. 2,
2d ed. Edited by R. P. Kangle. Bombay, India:
University of Bombay.

Kazemi, Farhad. 1980. Poverty and Revolution in
Tran. New York: New York University Press.
Keddie, Nikki R. 1981. Roots of Revolution: An
Interpretive History of Modern Iran. New Ha-

ven, CT: Yale University Press.

Khalili, Akbar. 1981. Gam bih Gam ba Inqilab
(Step by Step with the Revolution). Tehran,
Iran: Surdsh.

Klandermans, Bert. 1984. ‘Mobilization and Par-
ticipation; Social-Psychological Expansions of
Resource Mobilization Theory.” American So-
ciological Review 49:583-600.

Klandermans, Bert, Hanspeter Kriesi, and Sidney
Tarrow, eds. 1988. International Social Move-
ment Research. Vol. 1. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.

Kraft, Joseph. 1978. “Letter From Iran.” The New
Yorker, vol. 54, December 18, pp. 134-68.

Kuran, Timur. 1989. “Sparks and Prairie Fires: A
Theory of Unanticipated Political Revolution.”
Public Choice 61:41-74.

Kurzman, Charles. 1992. “Structure and Agency
in the Iranian Revolution of 1979.” Ph.D. dis-
sertation. Department of Sociology, University
of California, Berkeley, CA.

. 1994, “A Dynamic View of Resources:
Evidence from the Iranian Revolution.” Re-
search in Social Movements, Conflict and
Change 17:53-84.

Lakatos, Imre. 1978. The Methodology of Scien-
tific Research Programmes. Cambridge, En-
gland: Cambridge University Press.

Lélih’hd-yi Inqilab: Yad-ndmih-yi Shuhada’ (The
Tulips of the Revolution: Memorial for the
Martyrs). Circa 1980. Tehran, Iran: Inti-sharat-i
Anjuman-i Khidmat-i Islami.

Lichbach, Mark I. 1994. “Rethinking Rationality
and Rebellion: Theories of Collective Action
and Problems of Collective Dissent.” Rational-
ity and Society 6:8-39.

Liu, Michael Tien-Lung. 1988. “States and Urban
Revolutions: Explaining the Revolutionary
Outcomes in Iran and Poland.” Theory and So-
ciety 17:179-209.

Machiavelli, Niccold. 1980. The Prince. New
York: New American Library.

Marenches, Count Alexander de. 1988. The Evil
Empire: The Third World War Now. Translated
by S. Lee and J. Marks. London, England:
Sidgwick and Jackson.

Marwell, Gerald and Pamela Oliver. 1993. The
Critical Mass In Collective Action: A Micro-
Social Theory. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press.

McAdam, Doug. 1982. Political Process and the
Development of Black Insurgency, 1930-1970.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

McDaniel, Tim. 1991. Autocracy, Modernization,
and Revolution in Russia and Iran. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

Migdal, Joel. 1988. Strong Societies and Weak
States. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.

Milani, Mohsen. 1988. The Making of Iran’s Is-
lamic Revolution: From Monarchy to Islamic
Republic. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Millar, James, ed. 1987. Politics, Work, and Daily
Life in the Soviet Union. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Mirfakhraei, Hooshmand. 1984. “The Imperial
Iranian Armed Forces and the Revolution of
1978-1979.” Ph.D. dissertation. Department of
Political Science, State University of New
York, Buffalo, NY.

Misl-i Barf Ab Khwahim Shud: Muzékirat-i
“Shiird-yi Farmandihan-i Artish” (Dey-Bah-
man 1357) (We Will Melt Like Snow: Conver-
sations of the “Council of the Army Command-
ers” [January 1979]). 1987. 3d printing. Teh-
ran, Iran: Nashr-i Ney.

Moaddel, Mansour. 1993. Class, Politics, and
Ideology in the Iranian Revolution. New York:
Columbia University Press.

Morris, Aldon D. and Carol McClurg Mueller,
eds. 1992. Frontiers in Social Movement The-
ory. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Moshiri, Farrokh. 1991. “Iran: Islamic Revolution
Against Westernization.” Pp. 116-35 in Revo-
lutions of the Late Twentieth Century, edited by
J. A. Goldstone, T. R. Gurr, and F. Moshiri.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Muller, Edward N., Henry A. Dietz, and Steven
E. Finkel. 1991. “Discontent and the Expected
Utility of Rebellion: The Case of Peru.” Ameri-
can Political Science Review 85:1261-82.

Muller, Edward N. and Karl-Dieter Opp. 1986.
“Rational Choice and Rebellious Collective
Action.” American Political Science Review
80:47 1-87.

Naraghi, Ehsan. 1994. From Palace to Prison:
Inside the Iranian Revolution. Translated by N.
Mobasser. Chicago, IL: Ivan R. Dee.

National Security Archive. 1989. Iran: The Mak-
ing of U.S. Policy, 1977-1980. Microfiche Col-
lection, Index, and Guide. Alexandria, VA:
Chadwyck-Healey.

Nizam al-Mulk. 1960. The Book of Government.
London, England: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Oberschall, Anthony R. 1994. “Rational Choice
in Collective Protests.” Rationality and Society
6:79-100.

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective
Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Opp, Karl-Dieter. 1988. “Community Integration
and Incentives for Political Protest.” Interna-
tional Social Movement Research 1:83-101.

. 1994. “Repression and Revolutionary
Action: East Germany in 1989.” Rationality
and Society 6:101-38.

Opp, Karl-Dieter, and Christiane Gern. 1993.
“Dissident Groups, Personal Networks, and
Spontaneous Cooperation: The East German
Revolution of 1989.” American Sociological
Review 58:659-80.

Opp, Karl-Dieter, and Wolfgang Ruehl. 1990.
“Repression, Micromobilization, and Political
Protest.” Social Forces 69:521-47.

Pahlavi, Mohammad Reza. 1980. Answer to His-
tory. New York: Stein and Day.

Parsa, Misagh. 1989. The Social Origins of the
Tranian Revolution. New Brunswick, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press.

Parsons, Anthony. 1984. The Pride and the Fall:
Tran, 1974-1979. London, England: Jonathan
Cape.

Pishtézan-i Shahddat dar Inqgildb-i Sivvum (The
Front Ranks of Martyrdom in the Third Revo-
lution). 1981. Qum, Iran: Daftar-i Intisharat-i
Islami.

Reeves, Minou. 1986. Behind the Peacock
Throne. London, England: Sidgwick and Jack-
son.

Russell, Diana E. H. 1974. Rebellion, Revolution,
and Armed Force. New York: Academic Press.

Saint-James, Fred. 1983. Au Nom de Dieu Clé-
ment et Miséricordeux (In the Name of God,
Merciful and Compassionate). Paris, France:
Mercure de France.

Salehi-Isfahani, Djavad. 1989. “The Political
Economy of Credit Subsidy in Iran, 1973-
1978.” International Journal of Middle East
Studies 21:359-79.

Schelling, Thomas C. 1978. Micromotives and
Macrobehavior. New York: Norton.

Sick, Gary. 1985. All Fall Down: America’s
Tragic Encounter With Iran. New York: Ran-
dom House.

Simpson, John. 1988. Behind Iranian Lines. Lon-
don, England: Robson Books.

Skocpol, Theda. 1979. States and Social Revolu-
tions. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

. 1982. “Rentier State and Shi’a Islam in
the Iranian Revolution.” Theory and Society
11:265-83.

Sreberny-Mohammadi, Annabelle. 1990. “Small
Media for a Big Revolution.” International
Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society 3:
341-71.

Stempel, John D. 1981. Inside the Iranian Revo-
lution. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.

Sullivan, William. 1981. Mission to Iran. New
York: W.W. Norton.

Tarrow, Sidney. 1994. Power in Movement: So-
cial Movements, Collective Action and Politics.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.

Tocqueville, Alexis de. 1955. The Old Regime
and the French Revolution. Translated by S.
Gilbert. Garden City, NY: Doubleday Anchor.

Tullock, Gordon. 1971. “The Paradox of Revolu-
tion.” Public Choice 11:89-99.

Whyte, Martin. 1983. “On Studying China at a
Distance.” Pp. 63-80 in The Social Sciences
and Fieldwork in China, edited by A. Thurston
and B. Pasternak. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Wriggins, W. Howard. 1969. The Ruler’s Impera-
tive. New York: Columbia University Press.
Yazdi, Ibrahim. 1984. Akharin Talash’ha dar
Akharin Riiz’ha (The Final Efforts in the Final
Days). Tehran, Iran: Intisharat-i Qalam.
Zabih, Sepehr. 1988. The Iranian Military in
