http://www.jstor.org/stable/2085279?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
can come from dealing with symbols rather
than with reality, from a subtle and devious
borrowing from the enemy, from indiscrimi-
nating generalizations and from ignoring the
fact that war makes strange bed-fellows,
and from stimuli to the Fascist pattern in-
herent in postwar maladjustments.

(c) There is need for prompt, clear-cut
decisions and policies to guide ourselves and
the Germans whom we have defeated but
not exterminated. The seeds of future wars
can be sown in the very act of making peace.
The historian of the future will trace the
origins of World War III to the present day
and to precious days and weeks already
past. To be effective as friend or foe requires
promptness and the paying of a price. The
United States is in the best position to experi-
ment with friendliness in its dealings with
the world, but if internationalism proves
a delusion a nationalistic policy should be
prompt and consistent. National survival
depends on friends as well as foes, If man-
kind should achieve the supreme folly of
a war between the United States and Russia
it would be better to have Germans as
friends,

(d) The final conclusion is that sociologi-
cal thinking as defined in this article is part
of the price that must be paid for all things
of value. H. G. Wells, who prophetically
wrote of atomic bombs many years ago,
also wrote of the “race between education
and catastrophe.”’ Such men of clear vision
see mankind not walking but running toward
a precipice and .must shout warnings in a
strange and complicated language. We are
told that the price of the atomic bomb was
two billion dollars. As much or more could
well be spent on the fostering of social sci-
ence, This is the first installment of the price
which must be paid for a peace which is
becoming synonymous with the survival of
the human race.
In ancient Rome, for example, the soldier,
the lawmaker, the prostitute, the slave and
the tutor were common occupational stereo-
types. In medieval Europe the artisan, the
tradesman, the farmer and the monk were
among the more common types, In modern
society occupational stereotypes have in-
creased both in number and in familiarity,
although not necessarily in authenticity, and
even a child is acquainted with popularized
versions of the politician, the physician, the
reporter, the opera singer, the Negro train
porter, the college professor, etc.

The influence of occupational activity
upon the total way of life of individuals
became a major concern when the Industrial
Revolution necessitated widespread changes
in the living habits of millions. Industriali-
zation and urbanization decreed many new
modes of life for masses of people. Inter-
national markets, financial manipulations,
increasing labor reserves and market de-
mands, not the immediate caprices of nature,
determined how much a man would earn
and hence how he would live. Occupation
became more than simply a factor which
affected one’s way of life; for many, it be-
came the predominant factor which deter-
mined whether or not life could be sustained
at all.

The Industrial Revolution also decreed
had become such a major concern in the
lives of most individuals that in many coun-
tries the majority political appeals were
being directed to the “working man” or
“labor.”

This growing concern with occupations
resulted in an increasing knowledge relevant
to various aspects of human behavior. In-
dustrial management (so-called industrial
psychology) began to utilize clinical and
laboratory findings in order to increase work-
ers’ efficiency. Paternalistic programs of
employer-employee relationships were in-
itiated on the basis of tested psychological
principles of suggestion and stimulation. Life,
accident and health companies were able to
further refine death and accident expectancy
tables on the basis of specific occupational
experience; and investigators in this field
soon began to visualize the overall influence
of one’s occupation upon his total way of
life.

Yet in spite of this growing recognition of
the significance of occupational activity in
the lives of individuals, actual studies of
occupational-nonoccupational _ relationships
have been surprisingly few.? Such studies as

1The outstanding workers in this field probably
are Dublin and Lotka. Within the limitations of
their type of data, these writers have concluded
that:

“The work a man does, the conditions under
which his work is done, and the wages he receives
for doing it determine in great measure the cir-
cumstances of his life, the house he lives in, the
clothes he wears, the food he eats, and his recrea-
tion. A man’s occupation is, therefore, one of the
most potent factors in deciding the state of his
health and fixing the length of his life.” L. I.
Dublin and A. J. Lotka, Length of Life, N.Y.,
Ronald Press, 1936, p. 220.

? An analysis and a representative bibliography
of the so-called economic approach to social or-
ganization can be found in P. Sorokin. Contem-
porary Sociological Theories, N.Y., Harper and
Bros., 1928, Chapter X “Economic School,” pp.
514-599. Particularistic theories and studies rela~
tive to occupational influences upon human be-
havior also can be found in Sorokin, Ibid., pp.
717-719. See also E. T. Hiller, Principles of So-
ciology, N.Y., Harper and Bros., 1933, Chapter
X XXIII “Vocation and Personality,” pp. 523-540,
for the more common generalizations in this field
and for a typical bibliography on this subject.
have been either consist largely of general-
ized accounts (usually of personal experi-
ences), or are concerned only with a few
phases of the total relationship. Typical of
the former type are F. R. Donovan’s study
of the waitress as an occupational type,?
and her later studies of the saleslady and
the schoolteacher* as occupational stereo-
types. These studies are interesting auto-
biographical accounts of the author’s expe-
riences in these three specific occupations,®
but although they may be notable as pio-
neers in this field of interest, subsequent
studies of occupational types have utilized
more exacting methods and have yielded
more objective results.®

The second type of studies namely, those
concerned with a few specific aspects of the
total occupational-nonoccupational relation-
ship, have become quite common. The
Russell Sage Foundation, for example, has
sponsored intensive objective studies of a
few professional groups. These studies have
been concerned mainly with an analysis of
the professional associations, the curriculi
and requirements of the approved schools
of training, the number of members within
the profession and their incomes, and social
trends affecting the group as a whole.’ Other
studies somewhat similar to those sponsored
by the Russell Sage Foundation have been
made under the auspices of various medical,
legal and educational associations,

But all the studies of the various types
mentioned have had one essential weakness
in terms of understanding more thoroughly
the total behavior of individuals in modern
society: that weakness has been the employ-
ment of an unidirectional rather than of an
interrelated approach. In other words, the
emphasis has been upon the various ways in
which a specific occupational calling in-
fluences the individual behavior of members,
but not upon the various and interrelated
ways in which one’s characteristic way of
life is reflected in his occupational activities.
Furthermore, such studies have failed to
indicate the relationship of specific ways of
life (induced predominantly by occupational
specialization) in terms of the behavior pat-
terns characteristic of the larger society
within which such groups function.

Both the sociological and the psychological
significance of such an approach as that
suggested here have long been indicated. As
early as the middle of the eighteenth century,
Adam Smith had contended that the division
of labor was a cause, not an effect, of social
differentiation. Not until more than a cen-
tury later did another writer seriously con-
sider this problem of the relationship between
occupational specialization and social dif-
ferentiation. At that time, Emile Durkheim
offered the hypothesis that occupational
specialization served to free individuals from
the “standardization of personality” which
resulted from “collective action and heredi-
tary influences.”® Although these two points

 

particular group has reached its present degree of
effectiveness.”

* Adam Smith’s own words are: “The difference
of natural talent in different men is, in reality, much
less than we are aware of; and the very different
genius which appears to distinguish men of different
professions, when grown up to maturity, is not
upon many occasions so much the cause as the
effect of the division of labor.” An Inquiry Into the
Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, N.Y.,
Dutton and Co., Everyman’s Edition No. 412 (2
vols.), Vol. 1, p. 14.

° Durkeim’s remarks in this regard, according to
of view are not identical nor have they ever
been tested empirically, they do indicate
the first significant recognition of the fact
that occupational and nonoccupational
activity may be closely and significantly
interrelated.

But in spite of the obviously significant
questions raised by Adam Smith and Emile
Durkheim, the total problem was not at-
tacked except in the specific fields mentioned
above; yet generalizations about the impor-
tance of this occupational-nonoccupational
relationship consistently increased. Text-
books in sociology, for example, abounded in
such generalizations;?° but significant is the
fact that such generalizations failed to stimu-
late further research in this field. Needless
to say, such generalizations have usually
been supported only by meager and often
unconvincing data.

Approaching this problem from the point
of view expressed by Durkheim, E. C.
Hughes published in 1928 what is probably
the first scientific article in which the inter-
relation between occupational and nonoc-
cupational activity was formulated into a
specific sociological problem of major in-

 

the translation by G. Simpson, are; “. . . far
from being trammelled by the progress of speciali-
zation, individual personality develops with the
division of labor . . . for individual natures, while
specializing, become more complex, and by that
are in part freed from collective action and heredi-
tary influences which can only enforce themselves
upon simple, general things.” Emile Durkheim on
the Division of Labor in Society, N.Y., Macmillan,
1933, PP. 403-404.

According to Sorokin, op. cit., pp. 467-471,
Durkheim considered the division of labor, itself
a variable, as the cause of social differentiation. The
division of labor evidently was a result of the
increased density of population. See also F. B.
Karpf, American Social Psychology, N.Y., McGraw-
Hill, 1932, p. 118, for an extensive treatment of
Durkheim’s view.

* The following is an example of such gen-
eralizations: “We may mention finally the in-
fluence of the occupational group he [the child]
joins. The facts, habits, and attitudes he acquires
if he becomes a soldier will not be those he would
add (sic) if he became a priest, or an engineer,
or a farmer, or a teacher.” W. F. Ogburn and
M. F. Nimkoff, Sociology, N.Y., Houghton Mifflin,
1940, p. 208. See also Hiller, of. cit., p. 523.
terest. Borrowing his concepts and argu-
ments from Durkheim’s classical treatment,
Hughes contended that initial studies of this
problem have been significantly fruitful; but
his conclusions and references do not sub-
stantiate his claim.1! In 1934, R. Bell re-
defined the problem formulated by Hughes
and indicated certain specific aspects which
would need to be investigated. Like Hughes,
Bell was primarily concerned with the in-
fluence of specific occupational activity upon
the personality of an individual (not with
the complete interrelation between occupa-
tional specialization and social differentia-
tion); but unlike Hughes, Bell admitted
that no significant studies in this field had
ever been made.’?

In recent years three well-executed studies
of selected aspects of the total occupational-
nonoccupational interrelationship have ap-
peared. The first was P. E, Davidson and
H. D. Anderson’s study of occupational
mobility and of the relationship between
specific occupations and the vertical and
horizontal mobility of individuals in a small
Western city.1? The second was L. C. Ros-
ten’s study of the influence of the social,
economic and educational background of
Washington correspondents upon the news
they write.1* The third was W. F. Cottrell’s
study of the way of life of railroaders, with
special attention given to the technological
aspects of railroading as they affect the eco-
nomic interests of the employees.1® None of
these three studies, however, purports to be
comprehensive,

One of the more recent developments in
this field has been the construction (largely
by psychologists) of “occupational profiles.”
These profiles are an attempt to characterize
specific occupational types in terms of certain
personality traits and groups of traits in con-
junction with life-history factors. Initial
studies of salesgirls, clerical workers,
garage mechanics, and nurses and police-
men—by the use of batteries of tests
which attempt to measure formal educa-
tion, 1.Q., clerical ability, spatial re-
lations, self-sufficiency, extroversion, domi-
nance, etc.—have become quite numerous.
Conclusions from initial studies of this type,
however, have as yet tended to avoid con-
sideration of causal factors and have been
limited largely to description.1¢

Another recent development has been the
attempt to determine and measure “job satis-
faction.” Since the pioneer title by Hoppock’”
suggested the vast potentialities of this field

 

U. S., Palo Alto, Stanford University Press, 1940.

*L. C. Rosten, The Washington Correspond-
ents, N.Y., Harcourt Brace, 1937.

* Ww. F. Cottrell, loc. cit.

* The following indicates the type of conclu-
sions reached from such studies: “. .. we may say
that generally (1) different occupational groups
differ in general intelligence, in special abilities,
and interests, and (2) the members of a given
vocation resemble one another in these respects . . .
present indications are that an occupational profile
shows characteristic deviations from the profile of
the population at large and also from the profiles of
other occupations.” L. W. Crafts, T. C. Schneirla,
E. E. Robinson, and R. W. Gilbert, Recent Ex-
periments in Psychology, N.Y., McGraw-Hill, 1938,
Chapter XVI “The Abilities and Personality Traits
of Different Occupational Groups,” pp. 233-242.

**R, Hoppock, Job Satisfaction, N.Y., Harpers,
1935. Cf. N. F. Daugherty, Occupational Planning
for Tomorrow, N.Y., R. R. Smith, 1944.
of research, a wide variety of studies have
been made in the attempt to learn why some
workers like (but usually dislike) their vo-
cations. Most of these studies, however, are
admittedly interested in a narrow problem;
and cannot pretend to be concerned with the
myriad and complex problems inherent in
a study of the total interrelationship be-
tween a specific occupation and the total way
of life of its members."*

One writer finally has grasped the signifi-
cance of the problem originally raised by
Adam Smith, In 1939, A. B. Hollingshead
stated in an article that “the sociologist and
anthropologist should include within the
focus of their attention the behavior systems
of definable functional groups.” He went on
to stress the apparently obvious albeit un-
exploited fact that individuals in modern
societies necessarily function in restricted
“behavior systems” (ways of life); hence
it is no longer reliable scientifically to speak
of social or individual behavior in generalized
terms and in reference to the totality of the
culture. (The ethnologists had long ago
come to this conclusion.)

He further pointed out that of all the
factors and forces which influence the various
general and specific “reaction systems” found
in any given culture occupational activities
undoubtedly are the most significant in our
society. In closing, Hollingshead warned
that “. . . until a considerable number of
these action systems have been studied, the
sociologist’s knowledge of the reciprocal na-
ture of culture, society, and the person per-
force must remain vague and at best
highly fragmentary.’?®

According to Hollingshead, analyses of
behavior systems should concentrate on three
problems: definition of the system, its
life history, and its relation to the larger
society. He goes on to specify various de-
tailed aspects of these three major problems
and then hypothesizes two major objectives
of this type of research: (1) the formula-
tion of general propositions indispensable
to sociological theory about behavior sys-
tems; and (2) the discovery of the relation
of the behavior system to the person in his
interactional group. His illustration of the
behavior system of professional cooks in-
dicates the wealth of significant data which
is inherent in this type of research. To date,
however, the writer knows of only one study
of the type suggested by Hollingshead: a
Pioneer study of the behavior system of
professional dance musicians with emphasis
upon the interrelation between the work
situations and the way of life of this unique
occupational group.”°

The significant aspects of occupational
research are threefold: (1) This type of
analysis appears to be the most fruitful in
understanding the reciprocal interactions of
individuals and their cultural configurations.
The time for generalizations about individual
and social behavior has long passed. By
now, attention should be concentrated on
specific “arcs” or segments (as the ethnolo-
gists would put it) of the total culture pat-
tern; and the functional behavior system
seems to be the most vital and fruitful area
of research in our society. (2) The adjust-
ment of an individual to his vocation has
been and is being studied, but only in the
narrow sense of selecting the most efficient
workers for specific tasks. The larger prob-
lem (as Bell?? suggested but which has been
ignored), should include the adjustment of
the occupation to the individual. This re-
quires detailed studies of the influence of
specific occupations upon the total way
of life of their members, (3) The third phase
concerns the interrelationship of the various
occupational behavior systems in terms of
the American culture pattern as a totality,
so that (as Hollingshead suggests) social
scientists can formulate basic principles of
predictable behavior based upon a thorough
knowledge of all causal relationships.

Even within a rapidly changing occupa-
tional scene, large bodies of co-ordinated
data relevant to specific occupations would
greatly facilitate the adjustment problems of
countless individuals, All those concerned
with trying to fit people into desired occupa-
tions would have at their disposal detailed
analyses of what—financially, socially, psy-
chologically, intellectually, morally and
physically—specific occupations have to of-
fer the neophyte, Instead of the present
clumsy tools employed to “screen” persons
into specific tasks, sociologists could offer
to the occupational counselor a vast body
of facts which would permit the prediction
of job satisfaction to a highly reliable degree.

As the writer has found in the case of
professional dance musicians, and the same
would undoubtedly be true in many other
skilled occupations, a thorough occupational
analysis reveals the various factors inherent
in a specific occupational calling which: (a)
attract members into it; (2) determine their
personal and professional adjustment within
it; (3) determine both success and job
satisfaction; (4) influence their way of life
outside of it; and (5) explain the complex
interrelation of the various behavior systems
which together make up the American cul-
ture pattern.

It is now possible to predict statistically,
for example, in the case of professional dance
musicians, such a wide variety of factors
as the following: why young persons are
attracted to it; the relationship between
technical and/or academic training and
financial success; the probable age at mar-
riage and the probable type of woman chosen
for a wife; the average size of family and
reasons for its limitation; the degree and
type of job and residential mobility; the
average income, savings, investment in life
insurance, and purchase of stocks, bonds
and real property; the type and extent of
leisure-time activities; the probabilities of
divorce, venereal disease, and addiction to
alcohol or narcotics; the probable occupa-
tional-life span and the degree of job dis-
satisfaction at various ages. Such a study
also answers such vital questions as: how
and why did this particular occupation
evolve as it has? How is it related to other
allied occupations in terms of the type and
degree of atypicalness of its members? What
are the trends within it? What chances does
a newcomer have to deviate, if he should
be so inclined, and what price does he pay
for his deviation from the occupational way-
of-life norm? What influence does the school
have upon the adjustment problems of this
group? and the church? and society at large?
In other words, what is actually in store
for a person when he decides, for example,
that he would like to become a professional
dance musician???

This problem is not one which concerns
simply the workers in the field of vocational
guidance, although even that field still op-
erates within a highly limited range of em-
pirical data. Nor does it concern the mental
hygienists alone, although they are continu-
ally required to answer many problems aris-
ing from occupational adjustment. It is not

2C_ L. Lastrucci, loc. cit.
limited to industrial psychologists who must
select efficient employees and then try to
keep them happy (i.e., efficient), although
they could well utilize such material, It is
not limited to educators, who today more
than ever before are faced with the immense
task of both vocational and social education.
It actually concerns every individual in
modern society, for all individuals must
make an occupational choice and then must
adapt themselves to a way of life which
has been in many cases largely predeter-
mined for them. In this sense, the problem
of understanding the interrelation between
specific occupations and social differentia-
tion is one of the outstanding problems which
confront the sociologist today. Since all the
preliminary work has been done, it is hoped
that this problem will be attacked on a
wide scale.?*

7A future article on this subject will outline
the methods utilized and problems experienced by
the writer in his study of dance musicians. Perhaps
it would be helpful to mention at this point that
a variety of research technics are indicated by the
complex nature of the task; and that the methods
used would probably need to be modified for each
specific occupational group. Some degree of stand-
ardization of problems and results, however, could
easily be achieved even with diverse occupational
groups.
