@SAGE As)A
Sage Publications, Inc., American Sociological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
Using data on 197 large Japanese firms over a 24-year period, we study
how profitability is affected by firm integration in big-six horizontal keiretsu
networks. Combining measures of financial and commercial dependence on
a keiretsu group with the governance ties of equity ownership, director trans-
fers, and shacho-kai (presidents’ council) membership, we replicate previous
studies showing that group firms have lower average profitability than inde-
pendents. Such findings, however, cannot be taken at face value, because the
group effect varies with the prior performance of the firm. Weak companies
benefit from group affiliation (they recover faster), while strong ones do not
(they are subsequently outperformed by independent firms). Thus, there is
much less variability in the performance of keiretsu firms as compared with
independents. However, this redistribution effect decays in the second half of
the 1980’s during a period spanning deep structural changes in the Japa-
nese economy. Before then the effect is evident for all five measures of firm
ties to big-six keiretsu groups. Yet one such tie, shacho-kai membership, dis-
tinctively shapes the intervention process. Shacho-kai standing appears to
be a near-sufficient condition for redistribution. For shacho-kai firms, ad hoc
business and governance ties (with one exception) add nothing to the odds
of intervention. For firms lacking shacho-kai seats, however, ad hoc ties
strongly condition those odds. Moreover, redistribution is a pervasive and
continuous process that touches all shacho-kai participants. When the inter-
vention target is an independent firm, by contrast, the redistribution process
affects the weakest and the strongest group members; average performers
are left alone. These and other findings, we argue, run counter to a simple
main bank model of keiretsu organization and action, and favor instead a
model of the big-six groups as complex network structures.
matic dealings and the academics who study
them. These complex interfirm networks re-
veal the embeddedness of the Japanese econ-
omy: the infusion of market exchange with
rich social relations of a noneconomic nature
(Fruin 1992; Granovetter 1985). Embedded
transactions of the kind keiretsu represent dis-
tort the operation of market mechanisms, pro-
ducing patterns of allocation and return that
appear suboptimal by traditional economic
criteria. Yet few current observers are at ease
with the claim that Japanese companies
evolved into world-class competitors despite
rather than because of their keiretsu entangle-
ments. The issue is all the more frustrating to
conventional economic thought because the
hypotheses most congenial to it—that
keiretsu clusterings promote joint profit
maximization by dint of monopoly/mon-
opsony rents or greater transactional effi-
ciency—are seemingly at odds with the avail-
able empirical evidence.

Much research to date on keiretsu net-
works in Japan deals with structure: the
composition of interfirm groupings, the ties
binding companies to one another (cross-
shareholding, interlocking directorates), and
the transformation of these relations over
time (Gerlach 1992; Lincoln, Gerlach, and
Takahashi 1992; Okumura 1983). The con-
sequences of these networks, for individual
firms embedded in them and for the Japa-
nese economy as a whole, are less studied,
and firm conclusions are scarce. What dif-
ference, if any, do the keiretsu make in the
behavior and performance of Japanese com-
panies? Are they, particularly the big-six
horizontal or intermarket groups on which
our inquiry focuses, best cast as dinosaurs—
survivors from a prior stage of Japanese in-
dustrialization that have scant significance
today beyond the sharing of some familiar
corporate names and logos? This position
has been widely held in recent years, for ex-
ample, by Japanese business and govern-
ment spokespersons eager to play down the
role of keiretsu in Japan’s hard-to-penetrate
markets and huge trade surpluses.

We find that keiretsu networks have a sub-
stantial impact, although it is not the “joint
profit maximization” that economists usually
attribute to coalitions of firms. Our evidence,
building on that of other recent work, testi-
fies that keiretsu groupings yield the conse-
quences associated with a variety of forms of
collective action: They enhance the viability
of the group as a whole by realigning its
members’ prospects and resources. The
keiretsu, it appears, equalize the fortunes of
their members, smoothing inequality in fi-
nancial returns across participating firms at
any given time, and perhaps over time as
well, for any given company. These adjust-
ments amount to “taxing” prosperous mem-
bers to guarantee the survival and hasten the
recovery of financially troubled affiliates.

Our purpose is to demonstrate these claims
using a panel data set for the years 1965 to
' We selected 1980 as the benchmark year for
defining our sample of top 200 firms because it
fell near the middle of our 1967 to 1988 series.
Also, 1980 was a time of relative stability in the
Japanese economy, in contrast with the Nixon and
oil shocks of the early 1970’s and the endaka
(high yen) and bubble economy turbulence of the
late 1980's.

2? The “big-six” horizontal groups include the
reincarnation of the prewar zaibatsu (family-cen-
tered holding companies)—Mitsui, Mitsubishi,
Sumitomo—and the postwar bank-centered,
groups—Fuyo, Dai-Ichi Kangyo, and Sanwa.
These highly diversified clusterings often share
names and logos (Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, etc.)
and include major financial institutions, trading
companies, and industrial producers (Gerlach
1992; Orru, Hamilton, and Suzuki 1989). The
vertical keiretsu are in turn formed by large com-
panies (often affiliated with the big-six horizon-
tal groups) leading their own networks of suppli-
ers, distributors, and other affiliates (e.g., Hitachi
or Toyota; see Ahmadjian 1995; Aoki 1988;
Asanuma 1989).
Later analysts have been less enamored of
market domination arguments and more in-
clined to stress the potential advantages of
cost reduction and coordination that groups
confer on their members (Goto 1982; Imai
1988; Okumura 1983). Such research has
drawn heavily on recent developments in or-
ganizational economics (transaction cost and
agency models) arguing that groups econo-
mize on information and control through
regularized communication and exchange
(Williamson 1985). Yet keiretsu groupings
are also claimed to avert the pitfall of over-
organization by keeping their contractual ar-
rangements implicit and their modes of mon-
itoring and intervention informal and flex-
ible. As Nakatani (1984) observed, while
transaction cost and agency theory offer ar-
guments regarding interfirm clusterings quite
different in substance from the claims of
market power theories, their assessment of
the economic impact on any given firm is ul-
timately the same: grouping raises profits.
The presumed causal mechanism, however,
is enhanced efficiency, not inefficient mo-
nopoly/monopsony rents.

Although agency and transaction cost ac-
counts of Japanese business groupings re-
main fashionable in studies of the vertical
keiretsu (e.g., the Toyota supply network),
where the case for an efficiency payoff is
prima facie more compelling (see Asanuma
1989; Sako 1992), the evidence for the big-
six horizontal groups disputes the joint profit
maximization claim (Aoki 1988:225).
Econometric analyses of financial perfor-
mance data on large Japanese manufacturing
firms, conducted first by Caves and Uekusa
(1976) and later by Nakatani (1984), yielded
consistently significant negative effects of
big-six affiliation on profits.> Moreover, to
measure variations among firms in strength
of ties to a group, Caves and Uekusa
(1976:75) included in their analysis the share
of a company’s equity held by fellow group
members. This, too, bore negatively on cor-
porate profitability. Caves and Uekusa’s
early acknowledgment that group alignment
is a continuous variable, not the sharp di-
chotomy of affiliate and independent as-
sumed in most other studies, is an important
precedent that we follow and extend.

The difficulty with the claim that keiretsu
alliances maximize joint profit is that it
frames the question of how groups affect per-
formance in overly simplistic terms: Affilia-
tion is thought to raise or lower the profit-
ability of an average firm. The reality is more
complex. What group membership does to or
for a Japanese company depends on the cir-
cumstances peculiar to that firm, the circum-
stances of other firms with whom it has
strong ties, the broader state of the economy,
the strategic concerns of the industry or
group, the policies and actions of govern-
ment ministries such as the Ministry of Fi-
nance or the Ministry of International Trade
and Industry, and a host of other related con-
straints (Schaede 1995).

Keiretsu groupings, spearheaded by the
main banks and principal firms that are cen-
tral nodes in the interorganizational network,
effectively smooth out shocks and disloca-
tions in those sectors of the economy they
dominate. Such practices highlight the em-
bedded character of Japanese economic ex-
change. Financial and commercial transac-
tions mesh with social relations in a “thick
and complex skein” (Caves and Uekusa
1976:59, italics added). Companies adjust
their terms of trade according to their bonds
with transaction partners, factoring into price
and contracting decisions such nonmarket
considerations as equity norms or the well-
being of the immediate partner and other
stakeholders. Thus, prices, wages, and rates
of return are set, not so much by what the
market will bear, but according to what
seems fair and proper given the identities of
the transacting parties and the needs of the
multi-firm community as a whole.
economy at large is not easily observed. But
the responses of keiretsu partners when a
member company encounters major adver-
sity—financial distress or scandal—brings
that adaptation process into high relief. The
events that unfold in such crises have been
dramatically recounted in a number of im-
portant case studies.4 What generally hap-
pens is that the group, typically led by the
target company’s main bank, engineers a
bailout and turnaround. Loans are rolled
over, and new financing is arranged. Mem-
ber companies maintain or increase their eq-
uity in the troubled firm. Directors are dis-
patched from the main bank and major trad-
ing partners to the firm’s board. Group sup-
pliers and customers adjust their terms to fa-
vor the target firm and transfer technical per-
sonnel to its operating divisions. The group
may in addition mandate exclusive purchases
from the target firm’s product line until the
crisis has passed (e.g., Sumitomo purchased
Mazda cars during Mazda’s collapse follow-
ing the oil crisis).

How effective are these interventions in re-
versing the fortunes of troubled firms? The
anecdotal reports suggest that they often suc-
ceed, but hard evidence was scarce until an
important study by Hoshi, Kashyap, and
Scharfstein (1991). From the population of
Tokyo Stock Exchange-listed manufacturing
firms, Hoshi et al. selected companies that
had experienced severe financial distress—
firms whose operating income was greater
than their interest payments in one year but
less in the following two. This selection cri-
terion produced a sample of 167 firms that
had undergone distress during the period of
observation (1965 through 1988), although
data problems reduced the final sample to
121. Their regression analyses showed that
firms with group ties invested more than in-
dependent firms in the period following the
onset of difficulty and subsequently enjoyed
stronger sales growth.

The work of Hoshi et al. (1991) was a ma-
jor advance in research on the economic
consequences of keiretsu groups. Combined
with the case study literature on bank-led
bailouts and other interventions aimed at al-
tering the fates of troubled companies, it
makes clear that the Caves and Uekusa
(1976) and Nakatani (1984) analyses of the
economic effects of big-six keiretsu affilia-
tion, pioneering as they may have been,
were seriously misspecified. As we argue
above, the economic impact of a keiretsu af-
filiation is highly firm- and sector-specific.
For distressed firms, dependence on a group
yields real benefits: Bankruptcy risk is at-
tenuated, normal operation (e.g., ongoing
investment) continues and recovery acceler-
ates. What Hoshi et al. do not directly ad-
dress is the cost to the group, and particu-
larly its leaders (the main bank, major cus-
tomers, strong performers), incurred by the
intervention. In the long run, the successful
rescue and turnaround of a business partner
may pay for itself, for example, in loans and
contracts otherwise lost to failure, but in the
near term the burden on the rescue team
may be severe. Seen in this light, the appar-
ent lackluster financial performance of big-
six firms starts to make sense. Group mem-
bers pay an insurance premium for the
safety net that insulates each of them from
the never-too-distant spectre of business ad-
versity.

Yet groups may place ceilings on the per-
formance of their strongest members for rea-
sons other than the implicit insurance con-
tract that diverts assets to their kindred in
need. Affiliates whose earnings are sharply
up in one accounting period may find them-
selves reined in the next as partners respond
to high earnings as a signal that the company
is extracting rents from its purchase and sup-
ply relationships. Such norms governing
rates of return may be set by the group as a
whole or, particularly in the case of the ver-
tical keiretsu, imposed by a dominant “par-
ent” firm. Discussing T. Boone Pickens’s°
abortive attempt to secure a seat on the board
While T. Boone Pickens is not a particu-
larly credible authority on Japanese supply
relations, his highly publicized effort to gain
a seat on Koito’s board focused attention on
the web of constraints that keiretsu networks
place on their member firms. It is a reason-
able proposition that groups not only pool
risks to safeguard one another’s survival pros-
pects, but that they also act on norms of eq-
uity and common welfare to cap the successes
of their strongest members. In industrial
goods markets, high margins for any one firm
are attainable only at the expense of trading
partners. When these partners are large com-
panies organized in keiretsu groups, the pres-
sures in the wake of an extraordinarily good
year to adjust parts and materials prices in a
direction favorable to suppliers or customers
are likely to be strong. Moreover, trading
partners acting in concert can dictate the
profit margins of target firms dependent on
those transactions simply by adjusting the
prices of their own purchases and sales.
Of the governance ties, two have Western
counterparts: partial equity ownership by
group financial institutions and commercial
corporations, and keiretsu representation on
the board of the targeted company (Mintz
and Schwartz 1985). The resemblance to
Western patterns, however, is superficial. The
structure of stable corporate cross-share-
holdings and the transfer or dispatch of man-
agers to insider director positions (as op-
posed to Western style outside director inter-
locks) are distinctively Japanese maneuvers
(Lincoln et al. 1992). Moreover, a third gov-
ernance structure—the keiretsu presidents’
council, or shacho-kai—has no counterpart
in the Western economies. The shacho-kai is
a regularly convening association (e.g., the
Mitsubishi kinyo-kai or Friday Club) of the
shacho (presidents) of the keiretsu member
firms. While what precisely transpires in
council meetings is shrouded in secrecy,
most knowledgeable observers characterize
the shacho-kai as a loose, voluntary associa-
tion that symbolizes and supports the iden-
tity of the group as a whole, but involves it-
self sparingly in the decision-making of in-
dividual companies (Gerlach 1992). By no
account is the shacho-kai a keiretsu “board
of directors,” and Japanese managers are
quick to point out that behaving like one
would place a council in direct violation of
Japan’s antimonopoly law.

In our view, the significance of the shacho-
kai lies less in what such councils actually
do than in its designation of the core mem-
bership of the keiretsu network. Shacho-kai
companies typically have a longer and closer
association with the keiretsu group and are
more likely to use the group name and logo
(e.g., the Mitsubishi three diamonds or the
Sumitomo igeta or well-frame). Beyond this
inner circle, however, numerous firms lack-
ing shacho-kai seats are tied to the group
through their financial and commercial trans-
actions and through various forms of moni-
toring and governance. Similar ties, of
course, connect companies that occupy seats
on the same shacho-kai. Many observers feel
that such business relations play a larger part
in the cohesion and coordination of the
keiretsu than does the generally passive
presidents’ council itself.

If the shacho-kai does not serve the “head-
quarters” function for the group as a whole,
what, if anything, does? Only in the case of
the vertical manufacturing keiretsu—the py-
ramidal webs of suppliers or distributors at
whose apex stands a Toyota, Toshiba, Mat-
sushita, or Nippon Steel—is there no ambi-
guity as to which company is the central
node in the network or its monitoring and
disciplining agent. Within the big-six hori-
zontal groups, however, the issues of central-
ity and agency are less clear. One school of
thought, embraced by financial economists,
dispenses with the other possibilities and
singles out a key player—the main bank.
This is typically one of Japan’s 11 large com-
mercial or “city” banks (toshi ginko). In the
simplest version of this story, no “keiretsu
network” exists: only sets of stable financial
transactions between an array of corpora-
tions and the large banks on whose financing
they depend (see Flaherty and Itami 1984).
Owing to the high leveraging of large Japa-
nese manufacturing firms, the banks are ex-
posed to risk and therefore seek to monitor
the management of their client firms. Secur-
ing an equity stake (limited to 5 percent un-
der Japanese law since 1987) and represen-
tation on a company’s board are natural re-
sponses to that risk exposure, and such
moves position the bank for intervention
should the client firm fall on bad times.
This model of a big-six keiretsu grouping
as reducible to a set of bank-client depen-
dencies is less interesting sociologically
than that we favor of a. far-flung web of
overlapping financial, commercial, and gov-
ernance relations issuing from a central core
to pull in large segments of the Japanese
economy. In our view, the main-bank model
is an extreme simplification that molds real-
ity to the stark and simplistically dyadic
agency-theoretic perspectives of corporate
finance economics (Perrow 1986). Curi-
ously, there is an analogous argument in the
Marxist tradition on the role of financial in-
stitutions in advanced capitalist economies
that Mintz and Schwartz (1985) label “bank
control theory.” Despite the sharply differ-
ent ideological cast, this Marxist frame-
work, too, treats large financial institutions
as central nodes in the economy, using eq-
uity ownership and director interlocks to in-
fluence corporate decision-making in dra-
matic and forceful ways when a client com-
pany runs into trouble. Also noteworthy is
that bank control theory “posits the segrega-
tion of the economy into financial groups,
each composed of companies that remain
under the control of a financial institution”
(Mintz and Schwartz 1985: 73).

As a factual matter, the pure main-bank
model cannot withstand strong scrutiny as a
description of keiretsu organization and ac-
tion. The histories of the big-six keiretsu—
from their prewar origins as family-con-
trolled zaibatsu, through the postwar breakup
of their holding companies, to their reunifi-
cation through cross-shareholding and mutu-
alistic business dealings—belie the sugges-
tion that, aside from banks and corporations
managing their reciprocal resource depen-
dencies, there is nothing here of note. More-
over, ample evidence exists that trading com-
panies and large manufacturers have occa-
sionally played key roles in orchestrating
bailouts and other forms of keiretsu interven-
tion (Sheard 1989).

Bank monitoring and control figure impor-
tantly in the keiretsu intervention story, but
they do not explain the whole of it. We do
not question that group banks typically take
the lead in rescuing and restructuring
troubled member firms. Indeed, we attribute
the decay of the redistribution pattern after
1985 (later in Table 3) mainly to the collapse
of bank borrowing as a source of corporate
finance from 1986 to 1989. At issue is
whether the bank is a delegated monitor, or-
chestrating an effort to rescue a company to
whom the group as a whole is committed
through a slew of obligations and dependen-
cies, or whether the bank acts in its own self
interest to prop up a client whose failure
might put at risk its own financial health.®

Kester’s (1991) comments on_ the
Mitsubishi Bank-led reorganization of Akai
Electric, a Mitsubishi Electric affiliate
For a deeply troubled company like Akai, the
lion’s share of credit must go to the overall ef-
fectiveness of the rescue effort mounted by the
Mitsubishi group. And it was a group effort in
every sense of the word. Although the bank
may have been the prime mover at the outset,
the actual execution of the rescue plan was cus-
tomer/vendor led. Consequently, the funda-
mental thrust of the restructuring was less that
of generating cash in the short run to satisfy
creditor demands than one of preserving Akai’s
role in the Mitsubishi group’s global network
of trading relationships. Rather than restructur-
ing financial claims against the firm, effort was
focused on restructuring Akai’s function as a
purchaser, supplier, and owner of assets used
to support transactions occurring in a vertical
chain of electronics production and marketing
inside the Mitsubishi group. (Pp. 72-73)
group boost the fortunes of a troubled Japa-
nese company. For this segment of the Japa-
nese economy, the Caves and Uekusa (1976)
and Nakatani (1984) studies clearly miss the
mark: Group ties enhance, not impair, finan-
cial performance. Yet interventions on behalf
of a failing partner are not cost free. Banks
tolerate lower returns on their capital; pur-
chasers buy at higher prices while suppliers
sell at lower; valuable know-how, capital,
and labor are diverted from the helping firms
to the target firm. Thus we advance the fol-
lowing hypothesis: The impact of big-six
keiretsu affiliation on a Japanese firm’s prof-
itability is conditioned on the prior perfor-
mance of that firm: Weaker firms do better,
but stronger firms do worse.

For our analysis of keiretsu effects on cor-
porate profitability, this hypothesis suggests
a negative interaction between keiretsu group
affiliation and prior performance, conditional
on prior performance being lagged a length
of time sufficient for an intervention to oc-
cur and its economic impact to become ap-
parent.

Figure 1 shows how such a negative inter-
action connotes redistribution. The regres-
sion line of return on assets for firm i at time
t (ROA;,) on that firm’s ROA at time t-k is
Thus, the slope of current profitability on
prior profitability is flatter for group firms
than for independents and the intercept is
larger. At values of ROA;,, exceeding 0, in-
dependents go on to outperform their
keiretsu-affiliated counterparts.”

For a set of large Japanese firms, we search
over a 24-year period for systematic evi-
dence that keiretsu groups orchestrate redis-
tributions of the sort our model describes.
Upon finding such evidence for the sample
as a whole, we then investigate whether dis-
tinct dimensions of affiliation with a group
(governance ties versus transactional depen-
dencies, main bank debt versus trading part-
8 Our chief data sources are the NEEDS tape,
which contains financial information on Tokyo
Stock Exchange-listed firms (Nikkei Databank
Bureau 1989), Keiretsu no kenkyu (various
years), and Kaisha nenkan (various years). The
largest 200 industrial firms in Japan in terms of
company sales were identified from a list in
Nihon kigy shudan bunseki (various years).
Kaisha nenkan provided information on the affili-
ations of a firm’s outside directors and the former
affiliations of current directors who were trans-
ferred by other companies. Jinji koshin roku
(various years) provided additional biographical
data on the backgrounds of directors. The top 10
shareholders in each industrial firm and the
amount of their holdings were coded from
Keiretsu no kenkyu. Similar information on each
financial firm was coded from Kaisha nenkan.
Each industrial firm’s leading lenders and the
amounts of their loans were also coded from
Keiretsu no kenkyu. Trading ties were also coded
from Kaisha nenkan, which gives the names of
each firm’s leading suppliers and customers.
Shacho-kai membership was coded from Indus-
trial Groupings in Japan (Dodwell Marketing
1982). Information on assets in 1980 and age of
each company (years since founding) were taken
from the 1989 Nikkei source. Three firms were
eliminated from the sample: (1) Lion, which was
formed by a merger in 1980 that greatly increased
its size; (2) Daikyo Oil, which merged with
Maruzen to form Cosmo in 1986; and Sumitomo
Forestry, for which some critical information was
missing from Keiretsu no kenkyu.
endaka shock years, when the yen doubled
against the dollar and precipitated a decline
from which Japan rebounded into the “bub-
ble” economy phase of explosive growth and
asset inflation (1987 to 1990). This was also
a period of major institutional change: rapid
deregulation of financial markets, a massive
shift from debt to equity financing of invest-
ment brought on by a soaring stock market,
movement of low value-added production to
other countries, and increased job mobility in
labor markets.

These and other developments (in particu-
lar, intensifying U.S. pressure to make Japa-
nese markets more open and transparent)
prompted much speculation that the end was
at hand for such traditional and exotic Japa-
nese economic institutions as permanent em-
ployment and the keiretsu. Indeed, although
we present some analyses from the entire
1965 to 1988 period, most of our results are
limited to 1985 and earlier. We truncate our
panel at 1985 because of strong evidence that
the pattern of keiretsu intervention decayed
after 1985. Inclusion of the post—1985 years
markedly weakens the evidence favoring our
arguments. We plan a subsequent investiga-
tion to determine whether, in the aftermath
of boom and recession, restoration of the his-
torical intervention pattern is underway.
sample, 87 are council members and 110 are
independents. Shacho-kai affiliations have
been remarkably stable in postwar Japan, and
few additions or deletions transpired over the
1965 to 1988 period.

Keiretsu ties through “ad hoc” transac-
tions and control. Shacho-kai affiliation pro-
vides the only unambiguous criterion for
classifying Japanese firms as big-six affili-
ates. Yet by no means does it exhaust the big-
six sphere of influence. In addition, we ex-
amine four distinct ad hoc!® keiretsu ties that
signal affiliation, but with less certainty and
formality than does shacho-kai seating: (1)
the selection of keiretsu group firms as trad-
ing partners, (2) the amount of borrowing
from group banks, (3) the extent of share-
holding by group banks and corporations,
and (4) the selection of board members from
the management of big-six firms. Purchase
and supply and lending relations represent
economic transactions with group compa-
nies. We view equity and director interlock-
ing as keiretsu control relations that are su-
perimposed on the network of business deal-
ings but do not entirely conform to it (Lin-
coln et al. 1992).

We measure a firm’s ad hoc ties to a keiret-
su group as the proportions of the firm’s trad-
ing partners, equity, debt, and directors held
by the shacho-kai member companies of its
dominant group. For shacho-kai firms, in no
instance was the group with the largest share
not also the group on whose council the com-
pany was represented. In these cases, this
measure taps a firm’s centrality in the ex-
change and control relations within a single
group’s shacho-kai elite. But the measure
also has meaning for shacho-kai indepen-
dents: It assesses their degree of economic
integration in and administrative control by
a dominant big-six group.!!

Unlike shacho-kai membership, which has
been essentially constant over our period of
observation, big-six involvement in the trade,
lending, equity, and boards of the firms in
our sample varies by time. Because these
data are fairly easily computed from the
Nikkei NEEDS tape and similar sources (see
note 8), we have measurements on the equity
and debt variables at two- to three-year in-
tervals from 1965 to 1988. The trade and di-
rector data are much more difficult to obtain
with accuracy, and we have these measures
for just two years: 1978 and 1987.!2
'3 The numerator of ROA is net income from
operations before taxes. The ROE results display
a strongly similar pattern to those for ROA and
are in some instances stronger. However, because
ROE and the debt/equity ratio share a common
denominator, we obtain less plausible coefficients
for debt/equity and total assets as compared with
the ROA regression. The pattern of group effects
on sales growth is similar to that for ROA and
ROE, but is substantially weaker.

'4 Tn other analyses, we used total sales instead
of sales growth. The results were quite similar,
although symptoms of multicollinearity arose
with total sales and asset size in the same regres-
sion. The credibility of our evidence for keiretsu
effects depends heavily on our ability to control
scale and growth differences between group and
nongroup firms. Although the effects of keiretsu
interventions might indeed show up in sales
growth figures as well as profitability (we find
such effects but they are small), many of the
mechanisms through which groups assist their
members (e.g., price reductions by keiretsu sup-
pliers or the sale of cross-held shares) benefit the
troubled company without affecting its sales.

'S Shacho-kai firms comprise 8 of 15 steel
companies, 4 of 7 oil companies, 8 of 14 nonfer-
rous metals companies, 5 of 7 shipbuilders, 17 of
32 chemicals firms, but only 9 of 24 electrical and
precision machinery firms and 4 of 17 automo-
bile producers.
observation to control for trends over this
period. Finally, dummies are entered for
1973, 1974, 1975 (the first oil shock years),
and for the 1985, 1986, 1987 endaka period.

The means, standard deviations, and zero-
order correlations for all variables are given
in Table 1. Particularly noteworthy are the
correlations with the five measures of keiretsu
ties. Consistent with our arguments for the
distinctiveness of the shacho-kai core, we
find shacho-kai firms differing from compa-
nies with high levels of ad hoc group attach-
ment. Shacho-kai seating is associated with
large asset size and early founding, but firms
with ad hoc attachments are relatively smaller
and (with the exception of debt) younger. Not
surprisingly, then, the correlations between
the dummy for shacho-kai and the measures
of ad hoc ties are rather weak. Consistent with
a theme that cross-shareholdings best map the
web of keiretsu relations, the strongest such
correlation is with equity holding. Evidence
that shacho-kai memberships are a poor guide
to big-six debt and trade relations is often
cited by Japanese spokespersons eager to re-
but foreign claims that keiretsu business rela-
tionships are particularistic and exclusionary.
In keeping with the notion that equity ties and
director ties map governance networks that
overlay financial and commercial resource
dependencies, both bear moderate positive
relationships to the debt and trade variables,
and are themselves correlated at .592. With
the puzzling exception of debt, the keiretsu
measures are positively related to the debt/
equity ratio, and, as prior studies show, in-
versely related to ROA.
LU £90" so" €r0" o10- sor 0001 = = = 7800" rr00" ones Aunbapqeq

 

LST- I@l- 9ST — sso 180° 09” 6£0— 000°T —_ _ €78° 77 8Is9s ase WI
ole £10" 800° sso 710" oso’— 110- OIl- 000°T _ 6bbl Ori YIMOIS soyes UDdI0q
£€o— £0l- 0LO"— 760°— €Lt- See” vil 9Ec vec 000°T O19‘ I bb TENLLTE SJOSSE [BIOL
Sa]QDIADA JOLIUOD
syassy-uo OL aL aL OL wy = oney Aynbg = a8 y yMoln sjossy uoneIAsg = uvay ayquiie
-uinjey = toyvariq «= Auinby opel 199 -oyoDys Aged WILY soyeg uso1ag = [RIO piepuris

 

 

S86I-S96T ‘SULLA [eLISNpUy asaudel /6] :sesdTeUY oy) UI Pasy SoTqeIIeA I0J SUOTEI2110D 19p1Q-0197, pue ‘sUOTeIAIG prepuRys ‘suRII, “T P1q2L
Table 2 reports five separate regressions of
ROA, rotating the measures of big-six affili-
ation (the dummy variable for shacho-kai
seating and the four ad hoc indices), but re-
taining the same control variables. The pat-
tern is strong: Indexed by all five big-six ties,
affiliation is associated with lower profit
margins. The negative influence of calendar
year taps the slowing of growth in the Japa-
nese economy and the corresponding secular
decline in corporate profitability. Older firms
are less profitable, as are firms that have
large assets (although asset size in the de-
nominator of the dependent variable, ROA,
cautions against strong conclusions in this
regard). Recent sales growth, by contrast,
drives profits sharply up. Finally, the ratio of
'6 This negative association between ROA and
the debt-equity ratio is typical of Western firms
as well and is sometimes thought to signal fiscal
difficulty. That interpretation is much less justi-
fied in Japan. The high debt loads of Japanese
firms with strong main bank relationships be-
speak a strategy of high investment and growth at
the expense of short-term net earnings. Of course,
by loaning more, the bank’s own interests are bet-
ter served by a long-term growth strategy.
Early on, our analyses of these data revealed
that the evidence for keiretsu intervention ef-
fects became more pronounced if the three
years following 1985 were deleted from the
panel. Table 3 therefore presents GLS regres-
sions for the full 1967 to 1988 period and for
1967 to 1985 only. Despite the considerable
increment in degrees of freedom, fewer of
the relevant effects in the longer series are
significant and their absolute magnitude is
smaller. The contrast between the longer and
shorter periods is especially pronounced in
the case of big-six debt dependence: Adding
the post-1985 years attenuates that effect far
more sharply than is true of the other four
measures of keiretsu ties. As we discuss be-
low, this pattern accords with the view that
the salient institutional changes in the keiret-
su environment were financial deregulation
and the abandonment of debt for equity fi-
nancing.

Two years seems like a reasonable interval
for an enterprise group to monitor falling
profitability and other signs of trouble in a
member firm. Therefore, we took the aver-
age of the one- and two-year lags in ROA to
represent our lagged dependent variable
(ROA;j,_,). We use random effects generalized
least-squares to estimate models of the form
of equation 1 over the panel of 197 firms by
22 (19) years (Judge et al. 1985).'7 As be-
fore, the shacho-kai dummy appears in ev-
ery equation reported in each table, but the
other ties measures are rotated.

Model | shows a predictably strong main
effect of lagged ROA. Of greater interest is
its negative interaction with the shacho-kai
dummy variable. Note also that the main ef-
fect of shacho-kai, with the interaction in-
cluded in the model, is now positive. These
empirical estimates generated Figure 1: For
shacho-kai firms, the effect of lagged profit-
ability (the inertia in the system) is just half
that for independent firms. Moreover, the
positive main effect (the shift in the inter-
cept) retells the Hoshi et al. (1991) story: For
firms whose prior profitability lies in the re-
gion of zero and below, a shacho-kai seat is
a definite net plus.!8

The remaining regressions in Table 3 re-
tain the shacho-kai terms, but include as well
the main and interaction terms for each of the
four continuous big-six tie measures. The re-
sults are unambiguous: the shacho-kai ef-
fects are preserved (if in general diminished)
while the same configuration of positive
main effects and negative interactions with
lagged ROA ( 65> 0; A < 0) appears for each
of the measures of ad hoc keiretsu tie. Of par-
ticular importance to a theory of the big-six
groups is that the redistributive effect of
keiretsu trading partnerships is larger judged
by the f-statistics) than is that of debt ties,
although in the 1967-1985 panel both are
significant. In the 1967-1988 panel, the re-
Table 3. GLS Regressions of Return-on-Assets (ROA) on Measures of Big-Six Keiretsu Ties and Con-
trol Variables: 197 Japanese Industrial Firms, 1967-1988 and 1967-1985

 

 

 

 

Model |
Explanatory 1967— 1967-
Variable 1988 = 1985
Intercept -.017 -.038"
(1.14) (2.19)

Model 4 Model 5
1967— 1967- 1967—- 1967-
1988 1985 1988 1985
-.016 -.037° -.017 -.039"

(1.04) (2.16) (1.14) (2.22)
Adjusted R? 816 854 818 856 819 857 818 855 818 855

 

Notes: Table entries are GLS estimates of metric regression coefficients; absolute f-statistics are in parentheses.
Included in the regression (but not in the table) are 14 dummy variables for industry classification, 3 dummies for
the oil shock years of 1973, 1974, and 1975, and one dummy for the first endaka year (1985).
distributive effect of a big-six debt tie is not
significant while that of trade, while weaker
than in the 1967 to 1985 data series, remains
strong. This evidence, we argue, disputes a
simple main bank model of the keiretsu
while favoring instead a complex network
model, wherein commercial alliances are as
powerful as banking ties in creating a social
infrastructure for keiretsu intervention in an
affiliated firm’s affairs. The redistributive ef-
fect of equity linkage to a big-six group is
also strong, whereas that for director trans-
fer appears somewhat less so. Because equity
and director networks are heavily determined
by the matrix of business transactions, a
plausible conjecture is that keiretsu interven-
tion is conditioned less on the surface gover-
nance relations and more on the underlying
economic exchange (Lincoln et al. 1992). In-
deed, although not presented here, a regres-
sion for ROA that simultaneously includes all
five measures of big-six ties and their inter-
actions with prior performance suggests this
is so: The redistributive effects of the gover-
nance ties are attenuated, whereas those of
business exchange remain strong.

Our findings for the late 1980’s fit a com-
mon view that in this period the structure and
functioning of keiretsu networks—particu-
larly their financial dimension—began
breaking down, a process that has continued
in subsequent years.!° Some important struc-
tural changes took place in the mid-1980’s
Japanese economy. Deregulation of the stock
market was accelerated and a corporate bond
market was established (Zielinski and
Holloway 1991), making it easier for firms
to finance investment without reliance on
group banks and insurance companies.

During the 1986 to 1989 period, Japanese
corporations radically reduced their depen-
dence on bank borrowing, even though total
investment during this period doubled over
the previous time interval (Kobayashi, Endo,
and Ogishima 1993:8). The greatly dimin-
ished role of banks in corporate finance from
1986 to 1989 is very likely a factor in the dis-
appearance in that period of the redistribu-
tion pattern among big-six affiliated firms.

Another conjecture is that the economic
slowdown in the endaka aftermath explains
the change revealed in our results for the
post-1985 period. In reaction to the currency
revaluation, Japanese economic growth fell
from 4.9 percent in 1985 to 2.5 percent in
1986, its lowest rate since the oil shock re-
cession of 1974. With many firms struggling
to survive, it may have been more difficult to
reverse the declines of companies experienc-
ing severe distress. Yet Japanese growth was
back to 4.6 percent in 1987, and the longer
and deeper oil shock slowdown in 1974 does
not similarly disturb our findings. Our best
speculation is that the combination of de-
regulation, structural change, and macroeco-
nomic shock explains the fast decay of the
redistribution pattern among the big-six
keiretsu after 1985.
sure, the variability in financial performance
across independent firms proves to be five
times that of shacho-kai companies.

Also argued as a rationale for the big-six
keiretsu groups’ adjustment of member firms’
performance toward an acceptable average
level is that the smoothing of peaks and
troughs from each firm’s business cycle
yields smaller annual fluctuations and steady
incremental earnings growth. Large, diversi-
fied American corporations commonly “‘man-
age” their earnings through transfer pricing,
the strategic timing of asset sales, and other
devices that avoid surprises and keep Wall
Street expectations in check.?° General Elec-
tric, for example, times any write-off of
losses and charges to coincide with spikes in
operating earnings, thus avoiding reported
income too high to be surpassed the follow-
ing year (Smith, Lipin, and Kumar 1994).
Although Japanese companies are subject to
less pressure from the investment banking
community, they nonetheless take great pains
to avoid losses and maintain steady growth.
The keiretsu network may, in this and other
things, be a functional substitute for the ver-
tically integrated and diversified American
corporation. The perplexing difference, of
course, is that a keiretsu has no visible
overarching headquarters function managing
interdivision relations and financial flows.
Nor, again, is it altogether clear who has

“rights to participation in a keiretsu commu-
nity and who does not.

The evidence for the hypothesis that
keiretsu groups dampen temporal fluctua-
tions in their members’ earnings is, however,
mixed. With the coefficient of variation in
return-on-equity as their dependent variable,
Caves and Uekusa (1976:80) observed nega-
tive effects for the three ex-zaibatsu groups
(Mitsui, Mitsubishi, and Sumitomo) and
positive effects for the three bank-centered
groups (Fuyo, Dai-Ichi Kangyo, and Sanwa),
none of which reached statistical signifi-
cance. Yet Nakatani (1984) reported fairly
strong and significant evidence that big-six
membership tempers ROA variability. This
was the basis for his conclusion regarding the
risk-sharing function of Japanese enterprise
groups: that they assure financial stability
over long spans of time, thus enabling
Japan’s large corporations to honor their life-
time commitments to employees.

Our own evidence on this point, like that
of Caves and Uekusa (1976), is decidedly
mixed. Using two forms of the dependent
variable—a five-year moving variance in a
panel analysis and a stationary variance com-
puted over the entire 1967 to 1985 period in
a cross-sectional analysis—we obtain strong
and significant negative effects of the
shacho-kai dummy and the four measures of
big-six ties. Yet when we substitute a coeffi-
cient of variation (which Caves and Uekusa
used) or include mean ROA;, as a right-hand
side regressor (the Nakatani method), the
pattern disappears—the shacho-kai effects
flip to positive as do the director and equity
effects. The other effects stay negative.
While our inability to replicate Nakatani’s
findings is perplexing, we see some incon-
sistency between the hypothesis that group
intervention lowers cross-firm inequality and
the complementary one that it confers long-
term stability on individual firms. Except for
bailout targets, who thereby avert disastrous
crashes, how groups compress variance in
earnings across their member companies is
easier seen than is their role in reducing un-
certainty for any given firm. Consistent
strong performers, for example, may experi-
ence more financial volatility if the price of
group affiliation is absorption of the shocks
of unpredictable and episodic rescues.
noncouncil company is in trouble. Indeed, a
plausible hypothesis is that the shacho-kai
affiliation of a troubled firm has no net im-
pact on the likelihood of intervention. From
this perspective, the only noteworthy feature
of shacho-kai companies is that they are
more central in the keiretsu web of interfirm
exchange and control relations.

Yet we propose that shacho-kai firms are
qualitatively, not simply quantitatively, dis-
tinct. They represent the nerve center and in-
ner circle of the keiretsu network. They are
the dominant players and permanent mem-
bers of a mutual aid society, and that status
guarantees them help in time of trouble as
well as ongoing scrutiny of their affairs. The
actual business they do with one another at
any given time may not condition the group’s
commitment or support the way it does in the
case of a noncouncil firm.

This reasoning is at odds with a theory of
groups as reducible to bank monitoring and
control. Since big-six banks are only slightly
more likely to lend funds within than outside
the group, evidence for a unique shacho-kai
effect suggests that something other than fi-
nancial dependencies is at work—that the
shacho-kai forms a self-conscious clique of
firms whose reciprocal commitments stem
from long association and strong collective
identity. Such evidence emerges from our
Tables 2 and 3, which show that the interven-
tion effect of shacho-kai affiliation holds up
under numerous controls..

But there is another, stronger test of the
proposition that shacho-kai membership in
and of itself entitles a firm to intervention: If
a council seat guarantees assistance to a firm
in distress, the presence or absence of other
ties should make no additional difference.
For firms lacking formal council status, how-
ever, their day-to-day involvement with the
group through borrowing, trading, equity,
and director transfer relations should be criti-
cal to whether the group will claim them as
its “own” and regard them as eligible for in-
tervention.

Our data strongly favor these arguments:
The roles of ad hoc big-six ties in interven-
tion diverge sharply for shacho-kai and inde-
pendent firms. Specifically, shacho-kai com-
panies, as we suggest, enjoy automatic en-
titlement. Independent firms qualify only if
their business dealings with the group are
extensive. Table 4 gives GLS estimates com-
puted separately for the subsamples of 87
shacho-kai and 110 nonshacho-kai firms.
With one exception—director ties—the re-
distribution effects of the ad hoc ties are
weak to nonexistent in the shacho-kai set and
notably stronger in the set of independents.

Why does the measure of keiretsu director
control behave differently? It is likely that
the placement of managers from one com-
pany on the board of another is integral to
the process of intervention. Shacho-kai,
trade, debt, and equity ties are stable rela-
tions that increase the odds of assistance
when a partner firm encounters trouble; di-
rector dispatch, as the analysis by Kaplan
and Minton (1994) shows, is typically a
present or past response to that trouble (also
see Kester 1991:71). The fact that big-six
representation on a company’s board has the
same implications for intervention among
shacho-kai and independent firms may tes-
tify that this is less a condition for targeting
than it is the instrument whereby the group
works its will on problem partners.

One other issue bearing on the contrast be-
tween shacho-kai-based intervention effects
and those associated with ad hoc ties deserves
mention in this section. Although the form of
redistribution as we have modeled it is linear
(see equation 1), we have also done analyses
relaxing that assumption. While space con-
straints preclude our presenting those results
in detail, we find that the function relating
ROA;, to ROA;,_, takes a pronounced S- or lo-
gistic-shape among firms with strong ad hoc
ties. In other words, on these dimensions of
big-six affiliation, group and independent
firms differ only at the extremes of ROA;_;
(e.g., below 0 percent and above 20 percent).
Short of these thresholds there is very little
evidence that group ties make a difference.
The clearest example is that of trade partner-
ships, which we present as Figure 2.7!
Table 4. GLS Regressions of Return-on-Assets (ROA) on Measures of Big-Six Keiretsu Ties and Con-
trol Variables: 87 Shacho-kai Firms and 110 Independent Firms, 1967-1985

 

 

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4

Explanatory Shacho- Indepen- Shacho- Indepen- Shacho- Indepen- Shacho- Indepen-
Variable kai dent kai dent kai dent kai dent
Notes: Table entries are GLS estimates of metric regression coefficients; absolute t-statistics are in parenthe-
ses. Included in the regression (but not in the table) are 14 dummy variables for industry classification, 3 dum-
mies for the oil shock years of 1973, 1974, and 1975, and one dummy for the first endaka year (1985).
We have built on a diverse body of prior evi-
dence that Japanese corporations with ties to
the big-six horizontal keiretsu are, on the one
hand, less profitable than unaffiliated firms
and, on the other hand, more likely to recover
rapidly from financial distress. We have pro-
duced a set of strong empirical results docu-
menting the strength and form of keiretsu in-
terventions and their significance for the
structure and functioning of the big-six
groups. The oft-cited finding that big-six
firms are weaker financial performers than
are comparable independents has been of-
fered as testimony for their “dinosaur” sta-
tus—that such groups are a declining struc-
tural form and hold few attractions for
younger, nimble, and aggressive firms on the
leading edge of the modern Japanese
economy. But the implication that group af-
filiation is a cultural-historical residue serv-
ing no current economic function and a dead-
weight drag on the performance of the aver-
age Japanese firm is flat wrong—or if true at
all applies only since 1985, when the onset
of deregulation and asset inflation set the
stage for the heady and chaotic “bubble
economy” and the subsequent recession and
stagnation from which Japan has yet fully to
emerge. The fact is that some Japanese firms
derive substantial benefit from their keiretsu
affiliations and others pay a price. Groups al-
locate resources among their members ac-
cording to a long-term vision of collective
welfare. They provide a safety net for their
weak members, police profiteering by impos-
ing penalties when a member firm does too
well, and insulate their membership from the
harsh scrutiny of tax authorities and invest-
ment analysts by managing the reporting of
profits and losses to show steady, incremen-
tal growth.

Establishing that Japan’s horizontal
keiretsu fine-tune and align the performance
of their member firms was the starting point
for our analysis. From there we sought to an-
swer a central question about the structure
and behavior of the big-six groups: Are the
groups true interorganizational networks
bundling together financial institutions and
industrial firms in a web of direct and indi-
rect, commercial and financial, control and
exchange relations, or are they merely hub-
and-spoke pairings of industrial firms with
leading banks who help their clients through
rough patches chiefly to safeguard their own
investment interests? The preponderance of
our evidence favors the complex network
model. The strong effects we find of group-
based purchase and supply transactions, plus
the evidence that interventions within the
shacho-kai elite require no supplementary
business ties and are linear in form (i.e., in-
cremental and pervasive) dispute a reduction-
ist model of big-six interventionism as
simple bank control.

We see the big-six keiretsu groups as far-
flung, richly coupled networks, and we inter-
pret their economic role as one of collective
action maximizing the joint welfare (or util-
ity) of the membership by restraining both
the bearing of risks and appropriation of re-
turns by individual firms and substituting
what appears to be a group-administered al-
location plan. The actions of groups in this
regard are collectively “rational” for the ex-
isting membership as a whole, though not
necessarily rational for its strongest mem-
bers. Indeed, why the best-performing corpo-
rations in a big-six group maintain their
membership is, at least to economists view-
ing firms as rational utility maximizers, per-
haps the greatest puzzle posed by the keiretsu
phenomenon. The argument that today’s
strongest firms keep their membership as a
hedge against tomorrow’s failure is one an-
swer that accords with the common view that
Japanese business, if not the Japanese as a
people, are risk-averse (Aoki 1988:280). But
this reasoning assumes a degree of corporate
self-interest seeking, unconstrained by social
commitments and normative rules, that is
scarce in Japan. The network structures
within which Japanese economic action is
embedded allow corporations limited degrees
of freedom to chart their own course, to
freely pick and choose alliances (or whether
to align at all) on the basis of unilateral cal-
culations of advantage. There is a collective
logic to the keiretsu phenomenon that, in our
view, is not reducible to rational optimizing
on the part of individual firms.

How keiretsu networks structure the be-
havior and performance of Japanese compa-
nies is a question of some current policy and
theoretical importance. The implications for
policy are clear: If stable intercorporate rela-
tions of the kind typical of the big-six hori-
zontal groups are linked to the competitive
strategies, performance, and openness of the
Japanese economy they bear strong scrutiny
from international trading partners disturbed
by Japan’s trade surplus and the unofficial
but pervasive barriers to penetration of Japa-
nese markets. Policy relevance of a very dif-
ferent kind is posed by the question of
whether keiretsu structures like those so
common in Japan should be copied by
Japan’s leading competitors and trading part-
ners. Whether they generate genuine efficien-
cies by economizing on information and con-
tracting costs or whether (by absorbing risk
and excluding competitors) they simply give
Japanese firms an advantage over Western
competitors, there is much talk currently in
North America and Europe of the need to es-
tablish similar arrangements to enhance com-
petitiveness with the Japanese (Ferguson
1988). Such discussions tend not to be in-
formed by systematic research and would
benefit, we believe, from further investiga-
tion and a better understanding of the past
and present roles of keiretsu networks in the
Japanese economy.
Ahmadjian, Christina L. 1995. Japanese Supply
Networks and Corporate Performance. Unpub-
lished Ph.D. dissertation, Haas School of Busi-
ness, University of California, Berkeley, CA.

Aoki, Masahiko. 1988. Information Incentives
and Bargaining in the Japanese Economy.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press,

Asanuma, Banri. 1989. “Manufacturer-Supplier
Relationships in Japan and the Concept of Re-
lation-Specific Skill.” Journal of the Japanese
and International Economies 3:1-30.

Brauchli, Marcus W. 1991. “Ousted Executive in
Japan Accuses Nissan of Meddling.” Wall
Street Journal, May 15, pp. | ff.

Caves, Richard and Masu Uekusa. 1976. Indus-
trial Organization in Japan. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.

Dodwell Marketing Consultants. 1982. Industrial
Groupings in Japan. Rev. ed. Tokyo, Japan:
Dodwell Marketing Consultants.

Ferguson, Charles H. 1988. “Computers and the
Coming of the U.S. Keiretsu.” Harvard Busi-
ness Review 68:55-70.

Flaherty, M. Therese and Hiroyuki Itami. 1984.
“Finance.” Pp. 134-76 in Competitive Edge,
edited by D. I. Okimoto, T. Sugano, and F. B.
Weinstein. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.

Fruin, W. Mark. 1992. The Japanese Enterprise
System. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gerlach, Michael. 1992. Alliance Capitalism: The
Social Organization of Japanese Business.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Goto, Akira. 1982. “Business Groups in a Market
Economy.” European Economic Review 19:53-
70.

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. “Economic Action and
Social Structure: The Problem of Embedded-
ness.” American Journal of Sociology 91:481—
510.

Hadley, Eleanor. 1970. Antitrust in’ Japan.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hausman, Jerry A. and William E. Taylor. 1981.
“Panel Data and Unobservable Individual Ef-
fects.” Econometrica 49:1377-98.

Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharf-
stein. 1991. “The Role of Banks in Reducing
the Costs of Financial Distress in Japan.” Jour-
nal of Financial Economics 27:67-88.

Imai, Ken’ichi. 1987-88. “The Corporate Net-
work in Japan.” Japanese Economic Studies
(Winter):3-37.

Jinji koshin roku (Personnel Inquiry Record).
Various years. Tokyo, Japan: Jinji Koshin
Roku-Sho.

Judge, George G., William E. Griffiths, R. Carter
Hill, Helmut Lutkepohl, and Tsoung-Chao Lee.
1985. The Theory and Practice of Economet-
rics. 2d ed. New York: Wiley.

Kaisha nenkan (Company annual). Various years.
Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Keizai Shimbun-sha.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Bernadette A. Minton.
1994. “Appointment of Outsiders to Japanese
Boards: Determinants and Implications for
Managers. Journal of Financial Economics 36:
225-58.

Keiretsu no kenkyu (Research on Industrial
Groups). Various years. Tokyo, Japan: Keizai
Chosa Kyokai.

Kester, W. Carl. 1991. Japanese Takeovers: The
Global Contest for Corporate Control. Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Kobayashi, Hiroshi, Yukihiko Endo, and Seiji
Ogishima. 1993. “New Directions in Japanese
Banking Relationships.” Nomura Research In-
stitute Quarterly 11:2-27.

Lincoln, James R., Michael Gerlach, and Peggy
Takahashi. 1992. “Keiretsu Networks in the
Japanese Economy: A Dyad Analysis of Inter-
corporate Ties.” American Sociological Review
57:561-85.

Mintz, Beth and Michael Schwartz. 1985. The
Power Structure of American Business. Chi-
cago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Nakatani, Iwao. 1984. “The Economic Role of
Financial Corporate Grouping.” Pp. 227-58 in
The Economic Analysis of the Japanese Firm,
edited by M. Aoki. Amsterdam, The Nether-
lands: North Holland.

Nihon kigyo shudan bunseki (Analysis of Japa-
nese Enterprise Groups). Various years. Tokyo,
Japan: Sangyo Doko Chosa-Kai.

Nikkei Databank Bureau. 1989. NEEDS MT Fi-
nancial Data. Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Keizai
Shimbun, Inc.

Okumura, Hiroshi. 1983. Shin Nihon no Rokudai
Kigyo Shudan (A New Look at Japan’s Six
Major Enterprise Groups). Tokyo, Japan:
Daiyamondo-sha.

Orru, Marco, Gary G. Hamilton, and Mariko
Suzuki. 1989. “Patterns of inter-firm control in
Japanese business.” Organization Studies
10:549-74.

Pascale, Richard T. and Thomas Rohlen. 1983.
“The Mazda turnaround.” Journal of Japanese
Studies 9:219-63.

Perrow, Charles. 1986. Complex Organizations:
A Critical Essay. 3d ed. Glenview, IL: Scott,
Foresman.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey and Gerald Salancik. 1978. The
External Control of Organizations. New York:
Harper and Row.

Roehl, Thomas. 1988. “Japanese Industrial
Groupings: A Strategic Response to Rapid In-
dustrial Growth.” School of Business Admin-
istration, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA. Unpublished manuscript.

Sako, Mari. 1992. Prices, Quality, and Trust: In-
ter-Firm Relations in Britain and Japan. Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Schaede, Ulrike. 1995. “The Old-Boy Network
and Government Business Relationships in Ja-
pan.” Journal of Japanese Studies 21:293-317.
Sheard, Paul. 1989. “The Main Bank System and
Corporate Monitoring and Control in Japan.”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organiza-
tion 11:399-422.

. 1991. “The Role of Firm Organization
in the Adjustment of a Declining Industry in
Japan: The Case of Aluminum.” Journal of the
Japanese and International Economies. 5:14—
40.

Smith, Randall, Steven Lipin, and Amal Kumar.
1994. “Managing Profits; How General Elec-
tric Damps Fluctuations in Its Annual Earn-
ings: It Offsets One-Time Gains With Write-
Offs, Times Asset Purchases and Sales.” Wall
Street Journal, October 3, 1994, pp. | ff.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1985. The Economic Insti-
tutions of Capitalism. New York: Free Press.

Zielinski, Robert and Nigel Holloway. 1991. Un-
equal Equities: Power and Risk in Japan’s
Stock Market. Tokyo, Japan: Kodansha Inter-
national.
