@SAGE As)A
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2090509?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
vidual and a bureaucratic organization is
inversely related to the organization’s use of
the interchangeability principle within an
employee (or member) generation.

The explanation of the change-absence
pattern could be improved by introducing
other aspects of social structure and person-
ality as intervening variables. This would
carry further the account of leaving as
an expression of fit, or poor fit, between the
two systems. Such analysis demands, as
Inkeles points out, “. . . a knowledge not
only of the main facts about the social struc-
ture . . . but also of the main facts about
the personalities operating in that structure.
What is required, therefore, is an integration
or coordination of two basic sets of data in
a larger explanatory scheme—not a reduction
of either mode of analysis to the allegedly
more fundamental level of the other.” ©

To enlarge upon Inkeles’ suggestion, the
type of variable most useful for refining the
explanation of the pattern would be one
which is both: a dominant characteristic of
its own system, hence operating powerfully;

15 Alex Inkeles, “Personality and Social Structure,”
in R. K. Merton et al., editors, Sociology Today,
New York: Basic Books, 1959, p. 273.
and a characteristic which is salient 1* to
dominant aspects of the other system, hence
a point of articulation between the two. In
the present case, the aide’s affiliative needs
and the hospital’s treatment program may
meet these criteria. An aide with strong
needs, for example, would more likely suffer
from a ward transfer than an individual not
so concerned—#f personal relationships be-
tween aides and patients are stressed in the
treatment program. At the other extreme,
the change-absence pattern should be least
affected in aides with low affiliative needs
working in a hospital setting that disregards
such relationships. But the combinations of
personality modes and social structural types
are mediating screens through which actions
—not static characteristics—of the organiza-
tion affect individuals and actions of the in-
dividuals affect the organization.
lar, the coordination of activities is alleged
to become relatively more difficult (requir-
ing a more than proportionately greater ex-
penditure of time or energy or both) with
an increased number of personnel and with
a greater variety of role activities or tasks.

For example, Durkheim asserted that
growing density of population in a society
results in increasingly complex forms of
organization? Similarly, both Spencer and
Simmel propose that an increase of size ne-
cessitates more complex forms of communi-
cation. It is commonly claimed that, in
addition to its effect on organizational com-
plexity, growth also brings about a dispropor-
tionate increase in the size of the administra-
tive component. Finally, more and more
complex tasks may require that the coordi-
nation of an organization’s differentiated
components be accomplished by an increas-
ingly larger administration.*

Despite the apparently widespread interest
in the concomitants of organizational size
and complexity, few systematic researches
have been undertaken to test the basic hy-
potheses. There are not many comparative
studies of several large-scale organizations,
presumably because of the expense of gather-
ing data on such organizations. The tend-
ency in research has been, instead, to focus
attention upon one or at most a very few
organizations. These studies present illustra-
tive material and, at times, suggestive con-
clusions, but they do not represent tests of
the hypotheses or conclusions.

Terrien and Mills provide one of the two
systematic empirical studies in this general
area. They make the Parkinsonian proposal
that “the relationship between the size of
the administrative component and the total
size of Ms containing organization is such
that the larger the size of the containing or-
ganization, the greater will be the proportion
given over to its administrative compo-
nent.” 5 Data on school districts of California
support this hypothesis in that the admin-
istrative component contained a higher mean
percentage of the total staff in large than in
small school districts. Bendix, in the other
systematic study, presents evidence pointing
in the opposite direction. Using data drawn
from German industrial experience between
1907 and 1933, he shows that the percentage
of administrative salary workers (of all em-
ployees) declines with increasing size of
establishment for concerns with at least six
employees. On the other hand, the per cent
of salaried technicians increases with grow-
ing size. This paper presents further data
bearing upon these contrasting hypotheses
and upon the hypothesis relating organiza-
tional complexity to the relative size of the
administrative component.
nated for technical reasons.® Thus 49 Vet-
erans Administration hospitals, each with a
substantial number of tuberculous patients,
make up the final sample.

The dependent variable, the relative size
of the administrative component, was meas-
ured by the per cent of all employees classi-
fied in the category, ‘“‘General Hospital Ad-
ministration.” This component includes the
Manager’s Office, the Registrar’s Office, and
the Fiscal, Personnel, and Supply units.!°
The first independent variable, organiza-
tional size, was measured by the Annual
Average Daily Patient Load (hereafter called
ADPL) and was estimated for 1956 from
the three months of February, May, and
October. An alternative measure of organiza-
tional size is the total hospital labor force—
that is, the denominator of the dependent
variable. For the two groups of hospitals
studied here (see below) these two measures
of size are essentially equivalent. The corre-
lations between these measures within each
group of hospitals being .966 and .977, only
one measure of size, namely, ADPL, was
utilized in the main analysis.

The second independent variable, organ-
izational complexity, was inferred from struc-
tural characteristics of the hospitals in the
sample, which were divided into two distinct
groups. Nineteen were classified as Tuber-
culosis Hospitals by the Veterans Adminis-
tration. The percentages of the ADPL in
these hospitals with pulmonary tuberculosis
ranged from a low of 44 to a high of 100,
with a median of 91.5 per cent. The other
30 hospitals were classified as General Medi-
cine and Surgery Hospitals (hereafter called
GM&S). A wide range of diseases are regu-
larly treated in these hospitals, including in-
ternal diseases and psychiatric illness as well
as tuberculosis. The percentages of the ADPL
with pulmonary tuberculosis in this second
group ranged from a low of three to a high
of 41, with a median of 16.5 per cent. It is
assumed in this paper that the TB hospitals
are less complex organizationally than are
the GM&S hospitals in that fewer types of
diseases are treated on a regular basis.

The concept of organizational complexity
poses serious methodological and measure-
ment problems. Udy’s recent attempt to
clarify the concept and to measure the de-
gree of complexity suggests that it comprises
three elements: the number of tasks per-
formed, the maximum number of specialized
operations ever performed at the same time,
and the existence or non-existence of com-
bined effort.11 Using these criteria, it is
reasonable to consider the GM&S hospitals
as more complex because, not only are all
tasks performed in the TB hospitals also
carried out in the GM&S hospitals, but many
other services that are regularly rendered in
the GM&S hospitals are not provided in the
TB hospitals. Of course, these two groups of
hospitals also differ in many ways other than
in complexity. For this reason, conclusions
about complexity should be interpreted with
caution.

It is important to note that the design
used here permits the influence of size to
be studied independently of the influence of
complexity. All of the TB hospitals have
about the same complexity. Furthermore, all
of the GM&S hospitals have at least approxi-
mately the same degree of complexity, al-
though some variation probably exists among
them. Thus, within each category, complexity
is sufficiently constant so that any relation-
ship between size and proportion of personnel
in administration is not substantially influ-
enced by complexity. Other hospitals were
excluded from the analysis because their in-
clusion would tend to confound the effects
of complexity and size. The size of the
sample used here is sufficient to demonstrate
statistically the impact of the data upon the
hypotheses; it is believed that the avoidance
of a confounding effect is more important for
the purpose at hand than an increase in
sample size.
a relationship between type of hospital and
organizational size? The data indicate that
the GM&S hospitals are significantly and
substantially larger than are the TB hos-
pitals. In 1956, the mean ADPL (or size)
of the GM&S hospitals was 770 and only
335 for the TB hospitals.

Second, do GM&S and TB hospitals differ
with respect to the proportion of personnel
in administration? The fact that about 12.5
per cent of the employees were in administra-
tion in both types of hospitals is clearly in-
consistent with previous research findings
and speculations. According to existing the-
ory, larger, more complex hospitals have a
higher proportion of staff in administration.
The interpretation of this contrary finding
is deferred for the moment.

Third, is there a relationship between hos-
pital size and percentage of personnel in ad-
ministration? Since the GM&S hospitals were
so much larger than the TB hospitals it
seemed unreasonable to treat them as a single
homogeneous group. Hence, this question
was asked of each hospital type.

The TB hospitals were divided into three
categories, with roughly one-third of them in
each. The mean per cent of employees in
administration within each category is shown
by the following figures:
Again, the larger the hospital the smaller
the per cent of all personnel in administra-
tion. These results are also significant beyond
the .01 level, and Eta? is .556, almost identi-
cal to the figure for the TB hospitals. This
divergent finding, then, has some degree of
generality, applying at least to two quite
different types of Federal hospitals.1?

Fourth, is the relationship between size of
hospital and proportion of personnel in ad-
ministration linear? The fact that within
each type of hospital Eta? proved to
be significantly greater than r? provides a
negative answer. A scatter diagram of these
data (not presented here) suggests that the
slope of the regression line becomes more
horizontal as size increases. It is possible
that the slope might actually become posi-
tive with sufficiently large hospitals, but this
is only a speculation, in view of the limita-
tions of the present data.

Finally, if size is controlled or held con-
stant, do the hospital types differ in per cent
of employees in administration? This is in
fact the case, but the hospital types differ so
much in size that all of the observations
cannot be brought to bear upon the question
(especially because the size regressions are
not linear). In particular, only one size cate-
gory (between 300 and 600) included an
appreciable number of each type of hospital.
Furthermore, within this reasonably narrow
range, the GM&S and TB hospitals had
roughly the same size distribution. In this
range, the 11 TB hospitals averaged only
11.1 per cent of personnel in administration;
the corresponding figure is 14 per cent for
the 12 GM&S hospitals. This difference is
significant at the .01 level. Thus, the earlier
finding of no overall difference in the average
per cent of employees in administration ap-
pears to be entirely a function of the size
differential between the two types of hos-
pital. In general, if GM&S hospitals may be
considered to be more complex than TB
hospital, then these data tend to confirm the
hypothesis that organizational complexity
and the relative size of the administrative
component are positively related, as expected.
However, the data refute, at least for these
On the surface, at least, the findings re-
ported in this paper are in direct contradic-
tion to those reported by Terrien and Mills.
Moreover, these results are substantially at
variance with what is apparently the com-
mon conception (among sociologists and
others) of the relationship between organiza-
tional size and the relative size of the ad-
ministrative component. There appear to be,
in general, two ways to resolve these dis-
crepancies. First, either or both sets of data
may be inadequate in some way to test the
hypothesis under discussion. Second, these
two sets of data may not, in fact, be directly
comparable. In the latter case, it should be
possible to develop theoretical statements
consistent with both sets of findings.

Both sets of data are derived from rela-
tively straightforward enumeration proce-
dures conducted by state and federal agen-
cies. For fiscal and other reasons the
accuracy of these data is important within
the agencies concerned. There is no reason
to suspect that either set of basic data is in
substantial error, certainly not to the degree
necessary to eliminate the conclusion in con-
tradiction to the earlier study.

Another possible explanation of this find-
ing is that the administrative component was
incorrectly identified or categorized in at
least one of the two studies. There is no
doubt that some administrative activities are
performed by personnel who are not so classi-
fied. However, there is no reason to be-
lieve that the proportion of such person-
nel is substantially greater (or lesser)
in large than in small organizations, which
have a specialized, designated administrative
component. Accordingly, it is reasonable to
conclude that both the findings of Terrien
and Mills and of the present investigation
accurately reflect organizational processes
which are (therefore) not directly compar-
able. If so, an explanation is called for which
renders these findings mutually consistent.

The following propositions are offered as
one possible resolution of the apparent dis-
crepancy between the two sets of findings.
The propositions are based upon the fact
that some of the school districts studied by
Terrien and Mills include more than one
school and upon the assumption that the
larger school districts incorporate more
schools than do the smaller districts. In con-
trast, each of the organizations in the present
study has a single location. Thus:

1. The relative size of the administrative
component decreases as the number of per-
sons performing identical tasks in the same
place increases.1*

2. The relative size of the administrative
component increases as the number of places
at which work is performed increases.

3. The relative size of the administrative
component increases as the number of tasks
performed at the same place increases (or
as roles become increasingly specialized and
differentiated).

If these propositions are correct, then Ter-
rien and Mills’ findings may be interpreted
as confirming the second proposition and
not as nullifying the first proposition. Our
findings, on the other hand, support the first
and third propositions but do not bear upon
the second one. Given this interpretation,
the relative size of the administrative compo-
nent in a single school should decline as
school size increases, provided that the or-
ganizational complexity of the schools is held
constant. In practice, it might prove difficult
to devise an effective measure of organiza-
tional complexity within schools. These prop-
ositions are presented tentatively, of course,
pending further investigation of these and
other types of organizations.

At least one alternative means of rectify-
ing the two sets of findings is available. The
school districts and hospitals may differ in
the extent to which they are subject to cen-
tralized authority. Where the central author-
ity is powerful, special constaints may
inhibit the emergence of the relationship
HO observes whom, when, where, and

\V) how must be more or less established
and therefore roughly predictable if

a social structure is to operate with a certain
amount of stability. Regulation of observa-
bility, of the “extent to which the norms and
role performances within a group are readily
open to observation by others (status-inferi-
ors, peers, and status-superiors),”+ is a

*This paper attempts a beginning formulation
of a series of hypotheses, some of which will be
further refined in field research now conducted
under a grant by the National Institute of Mental
Health, grant No. M-3534,

I wish to acknowledge my debt to Robert K.
Merton whose extended critical comments on earlier
drafts have helped me immensely in formulating the
final version.

1 Robert K. Merton, Social Theory and Social
Structure, Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press, 1957, p.
structural requirement. The limitations and
restrictions concerning the presence of others
makes it possible for status-occupants to pre-
sent themselves in different ways with differ-
ent persons. Since the form as well as the
content of communication defines the nature
of the relationship, one communicates some
things to some people at some time, other
things to other people at other times, neither
merely to follow convention, nor only to pre-
serve autonomy and the right to privacy.
What Radcliffe-Brown has called “avoidance
rituals” * is part of sets of prescriptions for

 

319. The concept of observability has been dealt
with by Merton in various contexts. See esp. ibid.,
pp. 247, 319-22, 336-87, 374-77.

2A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, Structure and Function
in Primative Society, London: Cohen and West,
Ltd., 1952, pp. 108 ff. and 135 ff.
