http://www.jstor.org/stable/208797 1 ?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
and social work is most unfortunate,

but it can be closed at the level of
both theory and practice to their mutual
benefit. The reestablishment of the section
of Sociology and Social Work augurs for
better cooperation in the future. Since the
scope of social work is too large to handle
in a brief paper, my chief emphasis will be
on the relations of social psychology to social
casework.

As a basis for improving the communica-
tion between these two areas of interest and
activity, it will be well to delimit each field.
Social psychology is concerned with person-
ality acting and reacting in a matrix of so-
ciety and its culture. The key concept is
interaction and the central theme is the
individual’s role and status in the situation
or “field” of interacting individuals. One
aim of social psychology, as of like sciences,
is an understanding and analysis of events
with an eye either to the reconstruction of
the past or to the making of predictions of
varying probability regarding future events.
The statement that one purpose of science is
prediction and control is not quite accurate.
The functions of control rest not with the
scientist per se but with the policy makers in
regard to public and private action.

This comment regarding control gives the
cue to an examination of the nature of social
work. Broadly conceived the theory and
practice of social work fall definitely within
the scope of social control and social action.
Social workers may or may not employ the
findings of science as a means to their ends,
but their central concern is welfare.

The history of social work reveals some
shift from the philanthropic, “Lady Bounti-
ful,” and religiously oriented philosophy to
a more secular theory and practice. Yet the

T= hiatus between social psychology

*Paper read at the annual meeting of the
American Sociological Society held in Denver, Sep-
tember 7-9, 1950.
In recent decades the secularization of
social work has been accompanied by certain
shifts in the proximate aims and techniques
of social work agencies. The most striking of
these changes is the increasingly heavy stress
on psychological factors which enter into the
relations of agency-workers and clients. Es-
pecially is this true in casework, although it
is evident in group work, and even in the
more or less straight relief-giving agencies,
now largely under public support.

A good picture of these alterations may be
obtained by examining the curricula of de-
partments or schools of social work of an
earlier date. In the 1910’s, when more or less
formal professional training began, the stress
was on “organized charity and different
forms of children’s work, including placing
out, institutional care, and the protection of
childhood.”? While the 1920’s saw an exten-

1 From Announcement of the Philadelphia Train-
ing School for Social Work, 1910-1911.
sion of professional work, including gradu-
ate training, courses were still directed to-
ward services for “the destitute, sick, aged,
dependent children, and the groups mentally
and physically defective.”

Although the 1930’s saw the largest frac-
tion of our unemployed population on relief
during our history, it had also become in-
creasingly clear in social work that matters
of interpersonal adjustment were likewise
crucial. By 1940 the day of psychiatry and
psychology had arrived.

This is apparent from even a casual in-
spection of recent catalogues of the leading
graduate professional schools of social work.
On the basis of a rough set of 15 categories
of fields covered, the writer tabulated the
present course offerings of 13 schools, exclud-
ing the field work courses. Altogether 650
courses were listed.* Of these nearly 15 per
cent dealt directly with psychology and psy-
chiatry, while slightly less than 16 per cent
had to do with social casework and super-
vision, many of which, however, had a
definite psychological emphasis. About 12
per cent dealt with group work; a bit more
than 10 per cent with training in research
methods; medical and health courses made
up nine per cent; and the community, in-
cluding legal aspects, and public welfare had
slightly more than seven per cent each.
These seven categories account for more
than three-fourths of all the offerings. By
way of contrast, courses on immigration and
on institutional care have practically dis-
appeared. Also the relative attention to the
topic of delinquency seems to have declined.

As a means of providing a larger view of
the place of social work in our own cultural
scene, there are scattered courses on plan-
ning, democracy, and philosophy of social
work. Yet judging from this sample of insti-
tutions, there is nowhere any concerted ef-
fort to place the field of social work in any
larger theoretical and systematic frame.
Before social work was secularized, workers
in the field did not hesitate to admit its
broader rationale to be that of Judaistic-
Christian ethics. While this is not common
today, the strong moral component in social
work remains, if not in direct relationship
to the courses, certainly as a backdrop to
the entire program.

Looked at in broader perspective, the
particular theory or set of assumptions of
social casework in the United States must be
understood in terms of the broad cultural
setting from which it grows. An examination
of the more or less well-known definitions of
casework, though varying somewhat in em-
phasis, show that all stress the factor of
assistance to individuals with a view to
helping them, by various ways, to get on
their own feet.* The basic center of attention
is the individual although the social or group
setting is by no means neglected. More spe-
cifically, the American Association of Social
Workers recently set down their objectives
so far as community services are concerned
in the following terms:
on personal initiative in this country, the
whole pattern of upward striving for status,
the growing heterogeneity of our culture,
and the extreme mobility and impersonality
which characterize mass society have pro-
duced, among other effects, considerable per-
sonal anxiety, a sense of anomie which, in
turn, induces a strong need “to belong,” and
an equally strong urge for emotional secu-
rity. When these emotional conditions be-
come sufficiently acute to oblige individuals
to seek the help of caseworkers, the latter
undertake to deal with their clients under the
old proverb of helping people to help them-
selves. There is an interesting connection
between assistance on the part of an agent
or representative of the community and the
stress on the need for the client to develop
self-reliance.

This linkage of helping and self-reliance
is part of our larger moral expectancies. It
is my impression that most social workers
prefer the client to show self-reliance be-
cause it fits into our individualistic, upward
striving value system. The relationship of the
worker to the client is one of aiding the
latter to plan and carry out a program which
will make him an independent, self-determin-
ing unit in our society.

In this connection let me cite an interest-
ing letter from one Dr. W. Polligkeit, Execu-
tive Director of the National Association for
Public and Private Welfare, Germany, with
regard to an article by Hertha Kraus, en-
titled, “The role of social casework in Ameri-
can social work.” Prepared for a symposium
on casework in the United States for dis-
tribution in Germany, Miss Kraus presents
a very competent statement of the more or
less generally accepted view of casework in
this country. Among other comments on this
article Dr. Polligkeit remarks:
Most students of German culture, at least
as it relates to the modal personality struc-
ture of middle class Germans, would detect
in these remarks evidences, not merely of a
temporary demand for conformity because of
present-day economic and political difficul-
ties, but a more fundamental reflection of an
authoritarian culture.

Not only must our casework theory and
practice be interpreted in terms of our par-
ticular value system, but the student of
human conduct who has a cross-cultural
orientation will realize that we have as yet
no proof of there being anything necessarily
superior in our interpretation of social be-
havior. One of the most needed things in
social work, and especially in casework, is a
broader understanding of cultural differ-
ences.’ That there is some slight inclination
in this direction is seen in the fact that six
of the thirteen institutions examined above
report having a course which tries to link up
concepts and materials of cultural anthro-

6 See “Readers’ Comments,” Social Casework,
31 (1950), 34-35. Italics not in original. Kraus’s
article appears in this same number, pp. 3-11.

7In this connection see H. H. Stroup, “The
Contribution of Anthropology to Social Work Edu-
cation,” Social Casework, 31 (1950), 189-194. For
other evidences of the need to understand the
cultural setting of the client, see Maurine Boie,
“The Case Worker’s need for Orientation to the
Culture of the Client,” The Family, 18 (1937),
197-204; Katharine N. Handley, “Social Casework
and Intercultural Problems,” Journal of Social
Casework, 28 (1947), 43-50; and Peter I. Sandi,
“The Psychocultural Approach in Social Casework,”
ibid., 28 (1947), 377-381.
pology with those of social work. From my
own observations I doubt that this injection
of anti-ethnocentrism has, so far, had much
beneficial effect.

Both social psychology and casework have
drawn heavily upon psychoanalysis. Case-
work reports are more and more filled with
references to.the so-called Freudian mech-
anisms, such as identification, projection,
repression, reaction-formation, transference,
and all the rest. Moreover, the literature of
casework is replete with such cliches as
“drawing on the person’s strengths,” “the
development of inner resources,” “the devel-
opment of the fullest capacity of life,” and
“relationship therapy.” Just what this jargon
means is not always made clear. It is likely
that such glittering generalities really dis-
guise a good deal of ignorance as to just
what the social worker and his client together
are accomplishing.

Certainly writers in the field of casework,
as is also true of psychiatrists and analysts
themselves, do not seem aware of the large
number of scientifically untested hypotheses
found in traditional psychoanalytic literature
and now in increasing amount in that of
casework itself. While social psychology, in
company with general psychology, has taken
over many psychoanalytic concepts and in-
terpretations of behavior, on the whole, they
have done so with a much more critical
awareness of the need to put the psycho-
analytic postulates, hypotheses, and findings
to a critical test.®

As an art of helping people out of trouble,
casework and psychoanalysis have, of course,
much in common. While few caseworkers
are qualified to undertake even a modified
psychoanalysis, there is no doubt that the
well-trained and well-experienced worker
knows a great deal about handling trans-
ference, projection, and other manifestations
of the client’s frustrations, anxieties, and
other internalized difficulties.

Before going on to the next section, one
further comment may be made. As impor-
tant as social psychology is for casework,
there is much evidence to the effect that
social workers have gone to an extreme in
their present heavy stress on the psychologi-
cal components of adjustment. Not only do
they need the information, balance, and
humility which should accompany knowl-
edge of cultural anthropology, but, among
all too many caseworkers, there is consider-
able ignorance of the nature and importance
of economic, political, and sociological fac-
tors in human adjustment. To note but one
illustration: Young workers, fresh from a
plethora of psychologically oriented courses,
often find themselves unable to deal ade-
quately with members of a minority group
or another race because of their almost com-
plete ignorance of the daily habits and
attitudes of members of such groups.

In an earlier day people aiming at a pro-
fession in social work often combined courses
in sociology, economics, government, and
history with their special training courses.
Today the curricula are so filled with courses
considered absolutely essential to adequate
attainment of skills in handling clients or
administrative routine that well-recognized
social science courses have no place. While a
good many students who take professional
graduate work have previously had some
social science courses, a considerable frac-
tion lack an adequate foundation in sociol-
ogy, economics, and related fields. One way
to remedy this would be to bring the psy-
chiatrists and psychologists themselves into
closer relation at both the teaching and re-
search level with men in the academic social
sciences.
judgments, helping, and service, let us men-
tion some of the minimal factors which must
be taken into account in stimulating research
in casework itself or research on some prob-
lem wherein social worker and social psychol-
ogist might collaborate.

A knowledge of the nature of the universe
with which the caseworker deals and of pos-
sible ways of selecting a proper random and
representative sample is a first requisite. For
instance, assuming that casework deals with
deviants who need help or service—on the
basis of some consciously or unconsciously
assumed standard—we would want to know
how many apply for aid from the casework
agency. How many, on the other hand, go to
fortune tellers, medical quacks, or to some
revivalistic religious organization? The more
competent agencies do record the number
who apply and who are accepted, but the
basis of selection is not always as clear as it
should be. Certainly agencies tend to select
(a) those cases that its facilities permit in
terms of staff and cost, and (b) those cases
that it thinks its workers are qualified to
handle. Where there are evident restrictions
of staff, agencies unwittingly or otherwise
may reject cases which are thought to be too
difficult or else uninteresting. It might be
scientifically worthwhile to uncover such
procedures as a means of checking on the
nature of the sample and as regards subse-
quent outcome.

Of those persons who do get into the
agency, what relation is there between the
number of visits or “contacts” between client
and worker and the solution, that is, attain-
ment of the goal? The loss of members of
this universe by spontaneous recovery, resi-
dential mobility, or for other reasons is
seldom, if ever, taken into consideration.

If social workers are to contribute to
building an objective foundation to their
own work as well as to add to systematic
social psychology, attention must also be
paid to the matter of adequate and sound
facts. Among other things the following
seem to me to be crucially important:

(1) Some standard and comparable units
to be counted and/or measured must be
determined. This may be an individual, or a
group such as the family. Objective data
can not be obtained unless the workers have
some consensus as to the nature of the basic
unit with which they are dealing. In terms
of art and therapy the caseworker may
plead that he handles unique cases, each one
different, but this is no answer if he wants
to contribute to the science of human
behavior.

Having defined some unit or standard
item, it is then possible, at least, to count
the frequency of said unit or item, and there
may be data in social work operations of
considerable importance which cannot be
dealt with except at the enumerative level.
For example, the proportions considered
successes or failures in follow-up studies,
even if the criteria of success or failure be
only the crudest approximations, are better
than subjective impressions.

(2) In line with good practice in science
caseworkers might develop taxonomic cate-
gories. Among other things they might (a)
improve their records by agreeing generally
on a more objective scheme for classifying
so-called pathological conditions or environ-
ment from which cases derive. (b) They
might work out a more satisfactory means
of classifying diagnostically the individuals
and/or families who are the basic unit.
These should provide details about the inter-
personal matrix in which the individual or
individuals operate and indicate also the
dynamics of habits, ideas, attitudes, and
values of those concerned. (c) An effort
should be made to improve the descriptive
categories of the kinds of help given. Much
more difficult and yet also essential is (d)
the determination of goals and an objective
way of recording the same and (e) the deci-
sion or judgment as to the place the case-
work had in the attainment of the goal. As
Blenkner well says in regard to establishing
a criterion of success, one must “relate it to
the goal of the caseworker and to the original
status of the client at intake, for the criteria
of success in any operation must be relevant
to the circumstances and the purpose. . . . If
this is not done, one can never be sure that
goals and diagnoses are not being defined in
terms of results—a circular sort of procedure
guaranteed to make conclusions question-
able, if not altogether meaningless.”®

(3) In this connection we must not over-
look the fact that behind casework are cer-
tain assumptions of personal disorganization
or maladjustment. Frequently this, in turn,
is regarded as an individual reflection of
something called social disorganization,
meaning thereby some low level of efficiency,
poverty, ill-health, criminality, etc., in a
number of individuals who are together
regarded as a group.

Whether made explicit or not, social work
always implies a norm. For the most part
this norm is stated in vague humanitarian
terms. But as social work draws upon social
science and as it essays to develop some
measures of success or failure, it must de-
velop indices of personal and social malad-
justment. Care must be taken, however, that
the indices of such maladjustment are not
confused with the “indicators of treatment.”
Burgess pointed out this danger years ago
in commenting on “Social Breakdown: A
Plan for Measurement and Control,” a docu-
ment prepared by the Community Chests
and Councils in 1939.1° For example, divorce
is often considered an index of a maladjusted
family. Yet in practice, on the basis of facts
elicited from the client and others, the social
worker may advise divorce as a solution to

n “intolerable domestic situation.” As such
it is an index of “good” not “bad” adjust-
ment.

We are on very uncertain ground in these
matters because the value system which
underlies the determination of norms is so
difficult to define. Certainly norms cannot
be stated outside the particular cultural
frame. Nonetheless an effort should be made
to develop some kind of indices against
which one may measure success or failure.

(4) A further step in the use of science
will follow the development of some kind of
measuring instrument. In the field of social

® Margaret Blenkner, “Obstacles to Evaluative
Research in Casework: Part II,” Social Casework,
31 (1950), 97.

10See E. W. Burgess, “Symposium on ‘Social
Breakdown’: V. The sociologist’s point of view,”
The Family, 21 (1941), 296-298.
work only the barest beginnings have been
made. We have nothing comparable in meas-
uring social work to the measures of intelli-
gence or emotionality and temperament found
in psychology. In recent years, however,
various attempts have been made. Only the
most suggestive of these, that of J. McV.
Hunt and collaborators, will be noted.1?
Hunt and his co-workers have developed
what they call a “Movement Scale,” aimed
at the standardization of caseworker judg-
ment of change in a given case. This is
essentially a rating scheme in which the
judges report on a seven-point scale their
decisions as to the direction and degree of
change or movement “in the individual
and/or his situation between the opening
and closing of his case” as this change “has
been associated with his receiving casework
help.”!? This change may be in the direction
of “deterioration” or of “improvement.”
(The scale runs from —2, maximum degree
of deterioration, through —1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
maximum improvement.) The raters are pro-
vided with definitions of the kinds of evi-
dence “that constitute movement” as being
“changes in the client’s adaptive efficiency,
disabling habits and conditions, attitudes
and understanding, and environmental situa-
tions.”!8 The scale further delimits its mean-
ing by asking the raters or judges “to
consider separately those factors” ruled out
by the scale-makers as being “not move-
ment.” Among others these included, “(a)
the degree to which treatment goals are
achieved, (b) the degree to which casework
is responsible for change, and (c) the diffi-
culty of the client’s problem.””"* Finally the
instructions provide the raters with anchor-
points which aid them in making judgments.
These take the form of brief case summaries
that illustrate the “key steps” on the scale.

While it is too early to say whether this
device, developed from a sample of cases
from the Community Service Society of
New York, will have general applicability, it
represents a genuine step in the direction of
much-needed objectivity. If it does nothing
else it may serve an educational purpose of
helping caseworkers to think in more scien-
tific terms.

While we may expect improvements in the
Movement Scale and in other devices to
evaluate success or failure, these cannot be
very greatly extended until social workers
are trained to regard sampling and the use
of objective units and categories, not as
instruments of personal torture but as gen-
uine aids in making their own data more
scientific and hence a more valid base from
which to predict the future of the given
client or family. Moreover, on the larger
front, such data would contribute to social
psychology by adding to our systematic
knowledge of personality and group dy-
namics.

(5) Efforts to determine success or failure
are important because they point the way
to working out some means of prediction,
which is essential to the development of
those social controls that provide a balance
between individual independence and social
solidarity. As noted above, casework is es-
sentially concerned with social action in one
form or another, hence attempts at improv-
ing predictability should help in developing
the practical arts of sound control.

Yet the task is not an easy one. We are
back to the problem of ends. We ask, did
the job attain the goal? But we ask further,
whose goals? The social worker’s, the cli-
ent’s, or that of society at large, or at least
of that segment of society which supports
private agencies.° In any case, efforts at
determining success or failure must define
the goals and identify whose goals they are.
We should always know the context in which
the helping and controlling functions occur.

(6) Because it is central to the collection
and interpretation of their data, caseworkers
give much attention to the nature of the
interview. In like manner much important
research in social psychology also depends
on the interview for its data. What can
workers in the two fields learn from each
other on this matter?

First, the intent of the caseworker inter-
view is different from that of the research
interviewer. The former aims at eliciting in-
formation which will enable him to develop
with the client some plan of action. This
latter aims at getting facts which will help
him to prove or disprove a given hypothesis.
As a scientist he is not interested in the
welfare of the interviewee.

There are obvious differences in interview
usage. The quick polling type which requires
only relatively simple answers is quite differ-
ent from prolonged and repeated interviews
which are common in casework. However,
some types of research in social psychology
call for the extended and often repeated
interview and it is here that casework prac-
tice may be helpful. The well-trained case-
worker has assets which are often lacking in
the naive and relatively untrained inter-
viewer in social psychology. One of the most
important of these assets is the insight into
one’s own biases and mental processes which
may arise during the interview. Another is
an understanding of the operation of mental
processes in the client or subject. For in-
stance, the well-trained caseworker is alert
to projection of her own wishes and anxieties
on to the client or vice versa. She is alert to
the emergence of transference on the part of
the client, and of the operation of other
interpersonal mechanisms which may or may
In closing this paper we need but briefly
restate the fundamental considerations. So-
cial casework is concerned with social action
which must of necessity involve moral judg-
ments. The latter, in turn, are rooted in the
cultural matrix of our society. In contrast,
social psychology has to do with the collec-
tion and generalization of facts with a view
to the systematic formulation of laws of
social behavior. Yet both fields may and do
contribute to each other. The contribution
of casework to social psychology would be
greatly enhanced by further development of
objective measures of their operations. On
the other hand, social psychology may learn
much from casework, not only of facts
regarding behavior, but in many techniques
of securing data.
Significantly, also, foundation interest has
been directed with emphasis to this problem.
In 1947-1948 the Trustees of the Russell
Sage Foundation decided to devote particu-
lar attention to the need for a closer relation-
ship between social practice and the behavior
sciences. This was not the formulation of a
completely new policy because some efforts
of the Foundation had been directed at this
goal from the beginning of its work.? The
strengthening of emphasis in this direction,
however, was pronounced and its timing
fortunate. It came at a moment when social
practitioners and social scientists were ready
to react positively to its stimulation.
During 1948-1949 the Foundation initi-
ated several projects in line with this policy

 

“What Can Social Case Work Contribute to the
Social Sciences?” American Sociological Review, 15
(1950), 66-73.

2 Russell Sage Foundation, Annual Report 1948-
1949, pp. 8-9.
