http://www.jstor.org/stable/208527 4?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
tion and the Society for the Advancement
of Management should focus attention on
the problem. Seminars and forums should
develop the field. Above all, there should be
an active effort to advance the scientific as-
pects of the field by research of the kind
which current sociologists could not do with-
out increased participation. There should be
much greater circulation between industry
and departments of sociology similar to the
exchange which accelerated after 1932 be-
tween government and universities. Joint
committees of sociologists and of professional
managers should sketch concrete details of
courses of action.

A greater emphasis upon industrialism as
the dynamic core of our society would help to
reorient and integrate much of the scientific
materials of social pathology, criminology,
employment, class, social power, folklore and
personality, and would revitalize the roles
sociologists play. It would encourage a
heartier interest among sociologists in par-
ticipation in the work of the world, which
is so largely industrial and commercial in
our society, The risk of loss of objectivity
could and should be protected by close fra-
ternity between the detached and the par-
ticipating sociologists, and by circulation
between the two roles. The current frustra-
tion easily observable among sociologists
that they are not being consulted about
matters they have spent their lives studying
would respound to this therapy. A scientific
understanding of relevant human affairs, and
the citizen’s ability to cope with the great
current issues may both be increased, and
less disasterous results than have been evi-
dent in recent decades may be expected to
follow.

Perhaps, a little later, sociologists and
other social scientists may have added
enough to their own professional stature
and to the public’s estimate of that stature
that they may be entrusted with a role in
such great affairs as the relations between
states, where quite patently the course of
history is made by the visible acts of men
or more often by the failure to act.
* New Ways in Psychoanalysis (W. W. Norton
& Co., N.Y., 1939, 313 pp.), pp. 75-76. Fromm’s
position remains more theoretically consistent. In
Escape from Freedom (Farrar & Rinehart, Inc.,
N.Y., 1941, ix and 305 pp.) institutional authority
as developed in a historical framework is desig-
nated as the cause of both neurosis and “normal
escapes” in modern western culture; as for the
individual etiology of neurosis and “pathological
normalcy,” Fromm points to the experience of
irrational authority in the family of orientation:
see “Individual and Social Origins of Neurosis,”
Amer. Sociol. Rev. (1944) 9 :380-384.

‘This seems to conform to Robert M. Mac-
Iver’s dictum: “. . . any effective causal enquiry
should be addressed to a specific difference between
comparable situations.” Page 85 of Social Causa-
tion (Ginn & Co., 1942, x and 414 pp.) The ques-
tion might be raised that “comparable situations”
are not being dealt with here, but both Fromm and
Horney use “the family” and “the modern family”
as generic terms, without differentiation according
to class, ethnic group, etc.

* Arnold W. Green, “The ‘Cult of Personality’
This is also true of parent-child relationships.

The local Polish parents emigrated before
marriage from farm villages and small towns
in Poland. While the old familistic tradition
has been slowly deteriorating in rural Poland
for several decades, enough of that tradition
was brought with them so that their expecta-
tions of their American-born children’s con-
duct reflected an alien peasant system of
values.

An outstanding feature of peasant family
life, in contradistinction to that of modern
middle-class family organization, is the stress
placed upon rules and work-functions rather
than personal sentiment; and parental au-
thority is excessive by the standards of any
comparable segment of the American popu-
lation.® These rules of conduct and this
parental authority are out of place in the
American industrial slum. Second-generation
Poles participate in a social world outside
the home which their parents, because of
language difficulties and previous condition-

 

and Sexual Relations,” Psychiatry (1941) 4:343-
348.

*“Ty all the relations between parents and chil-
dren the familial organization leaves no place for
merely personal affection, Certainly this affection
exists, but it cannot express itself in socially sanc-
tioned acts. The behavior of the parents toward
the children and the contrary must be determined
exclusively by their situations as family members,
not by individual merits or preferences.” (W. I.
Thomas and Florian Znaniecki, The Polish Peasant
in Europe and America (Knopf, N.Y.: 1927, Vol. 1,
p. 94). In other words, parental authority, while
usually unleavened with “love,” is based not so
much on personal caprice (Fromm’s “irrational
authority”) but mutual respect for common rules
of behavior and labor functions within the house-
hold unit.

Respect, not love, is the tie that binds in the
peasant family. And within a rigid set of rules,
parental authority is almost absolute: “. . . a
rebellious child finds nowhere any help, not even
in the younger generation, for every member of
the family will side with the child’s parents if
he considers them right, and everyone will feel
the familial will behind him and will play the
part of a representative of the group” (Ibid., Vol. I,
pp. 91-92). If the male child’s will is considered,
it is not because of respect for his individual per-
sonality, but because of the increasing power and
control the child will assume; he will finally assume
the father’s place as head of the household.
ing, are incapable of sharing or even of
understanding. As bewildered parents at-
tempt to enforce old-world standards they
are met with the anger and ridicule of their
children, In answer to this, the parents have
final recourse to a kind of authority which
was unsanctioned in Poland: a vengeful, per-
sonal, irrational authority, which no longer
finds support in the future hopes and ambi-
tions of the children; and this new authority
is no longer controlled by both parents’
families and a cohesive community. But this
personal authority will not suffice to curb
their wayward progeny, who have little re-
spect for their parents as persons, and who
soon come to learn that their “American”
playmates are not subjected to anything like
it in their homes,

It is through this tragically antagonistic,
mutually distrustful clash of wills that the
relations of parents and children tend to be
lacking in “love” (which is alien to the
peasant mores anyway). At the same time,
there is plenty of “irrational authority.” In
exasperation and fear of losing all control
over their Americanized youngsters, parents
apply the fist and whip rather indiscrimi-
nately. The sounds of blows, screams, howls,
vexatious wails of torment and hatred are
so commonplace along the rows of dilapi-
dated mill-houses that the passerby pays
them scant attention.

But those children do not become neu-
rotic.” Why? Because parental authority,
however harsh and brutal, is, in a sense,
casual and external to the “core of the self.”
The Polish parents do not have the tech-
niques and opportunity to absorb the per-
sonality of the child. In the first place, the
child has many models of behavior to adopt
both within the family (five to eight children
are, in estimate, modal in the Polish section
of the village) and outside. Siblings present
a more or less united front in their rebellion
against their parents, Parent-avoidance tech-
niques are easily acquired because of the
parents’ halting use of English and the fact
that both parents, typically, work in the
local factory, leaving the younger children
to the daytime supervision of older children,
which frequently results in no supervision at
all. The open woods and fields are close at
hand and the children roam far, The homes

 

is no adequate answer to the orthodox Freudian’s
charge that only a Freudian can criticize classical
psychonanalysis because only a Freudian can un-
derstand it. Admittedly, this is no water-tight
rebuttal; about all that can be said here is that
the total description of the socialization process
taking place in the local Polish community at least
leaves open the door to the possibility that many
who experienced it did not become neurotic. And
it is pertinent to remember that analysts have
knowledge of only upper middle-class and upper-
class behavior,

According to Horney the neurotic develops one
of three trends, or. some combination of them:
masochistic (making the self small and insignificant),
narcissistic (appearing unduly significant to one’s
self and insatiably craving admiration from others)
and perfectionistic (need for others’ recognition of
the self’s infallibility, particularly moral infalli-
bility), These trends are all accessible to direct ob-
servation within a field of personal interaction, with-
out psychoanalytic techniques. The only personality-
trend in these Polish youngsters which resembles
any of Horney’s formulations is the narcissistic; it
is not so much “neurotic,” however, as sheer crass
egocentrism. According to middle-class standards
the socialization process has simply been left un-
completed, with but an elementary self- and social-
awareness resulting. And it is because these young-
sters remain egocentric, with little identification of
self with others, that they are spared such neurotic
symptoms as anxiety and guilt-feelings. This does
not mean they are never unhappy and miserable;
far from it, but these feeling-states have nothing
in common with the neurotic trends and symptoms
described by psychoanalysts, which are all de-
pendent upon intensive identification.
are not particularly clean, nor do they con-
tain bric-a-brac or furniture of any value, so
that the local Polish child is spared the end-
less admonitions which bedevil the middle-
class child not to touch this or that.

The children also develop a tolerant or
openly malicious contempt for their parents
as stupid, unknowing of American ways,
concerning which the children regard them-
selves authorities. By and large, the parents
are obstacles to be avoided, or circumvented
wherever possible. And while the resulting
lack of identification with the parents virtu-
ally obviates demonstrations of affection, it
also saves the children from feelings of guilt
and repressed hostility. The training of the

* Demonstrations of affection are not altogether
lacking, but they have little in common with the
definitions: of parent-child love found in the
middle-class women’s magazines. A fairly common
Positive attitude is a fleeting, rather grimly hu-
morous appreciation of the other’s alleged short-
comings. On occasions where an expression of
sentiment would seem to be appropriate, such as a
funeral within the family, parents and children are
clumsy, awkward, embarrassed with one another.
Too many avenues of approach have been sealed off
in the past. Relations with parents tend to improve
as the children become economically independent;
while extremely rare, it does happen occasionally
that a father and his grown son may be observed
drinking beer together at one of the tables in the
Polish Club. It must be remembered that while
the local Polish community is an industrial slum, it
is also a rural community, and there is sufficient
cohesiveness within it to enforce at least the out-
ward appearance of intra-family solidarity; this
is not experienced to any great degree, however,
until the children reach young adulthood, and
only if they take up residence within the com-
munity,

No claim is being made that the early training
of all Polish youth in this community is exactly
alike, nor that the attitudes of parents and children
toward one another are exactly duplicated from
family to family. It is here that the “subjective
element” in insight (where the observer himself
constructs patterns of behavior, at least in part, or
merely interprets field-conjuncture?) and in the
participant-observer technique becomes potentially
dangerous: a single description of a behavior-type
or development is applied to various individual
personalities, families, situations, And so, in the local
Polish community, there is the boy who cripples his
father in a fist-fight, runs away from home never
to return; another lad, married and raising a
The claim has been made that “lack of
love” and “irrational authority” do not, in
and of themselves, cause the development
of neurotic symptoms. These phenomena do
operate, however, in individual etiologies
of neurosis, but only within a certain con-
text. The term “personality absorption” has
already been used. Personality absorption
is the physical and emotional blanketing of
the child, bringing about a slavish depend-
ence upon the parents, It is personality
absorption, in conjunction with factors other
than lack of love or irrational authority, that
produces a certain type of neurosis.

To delineate the kind of socialization
which maximizes personality absorption, it
will be necessary to conceive of a parental
type which simultaneously occupies several
population segments: native-white, Protes-
tant urban, college-educated, middle-class.®

 

family of his own, wistfully wishes he “had gotten
to know the old folks better.” One girl leaves home
at sixteen to become a prostitute; another delays
marriage to care for an ailing mother. Thus reality,
compressed into a single formulation, become dis-
torted.

This is not the place for justification of abstrac-
tion. I am convinced, however, that if another
observer could spend many years in the village,
and find some means of participating in the life
of a large number of families representing all
groups, as did the author, he would agree that
the training of any second-generation Polish child
would deviate but slightly from the above general
description, while the training of any lower middle-
class Protestant child would deviate from that de-
scription to a marked degree.

*The problem here is defining “middle class” in
such a way as to maximize psychological relevance.
Robert S. Lynd has defined middle class as that
class which is off the economic floor (objective) and
conceives of itself as going places (subjective). For
present purposes this can be revised as follows: the
middle class is that class whose members have
welded their attitudes and value into a life-long
striving toward an improvement of personal socio-
economic position within the class-structure, By this
The training of children born to parents who
can thus be characterized, is so experientially
consistent it has a certain range of predictive
value,

Now, how can we define the middle-class
child’s situation??° It has already been said
that his personality is “absorbed,” and to
the extent that it has been absorbed, he is in
danger of developing neurotic symptoms. But
why is it absorbed?

Perhaps the best way to view his social
conditioning is to consider his parents, and
their position in relation to him.’? The
father’s work takes him far from the place
of residence, where most of his associates
are only slightly less strangers to him than
they are to his family. He is a white-collar.
worker. As a salesman, office worker, minor

 

definition the lower class then becomes made up
of those who acquiesce to inferior status and the
upper class those with an assured superior status.
The only “objective criterion” which can be ad-
mitted in conjunction with the foregoing definition
of middle class is that a given person not be per-
manently blocked in his striving by reason of
race, color, ethnic-group, which are essentially
caste elements.

Not only has “middle class” been loosely
defined, but also the claim is not being made that
all middle-class children are equally affected by
the ideal-type conditioning described, which is a
deliberate exaggeration of the factor-conjunction
which maximizes personality-absorption. In indi-
vidual cases there will be different combinations of
the factors enumerated, as well as deviations from
individual factors.

“¥Fromm’s formulation of the “pseudo self”
must not be confused with “personality absorption.”
Fromm views the self as having a dynamism of
its own, apart from its social context: the pseudo
self arises when the self accepts the ideas, values,
and goals of others as its own. The present author
accepts no such demarcation of self and social:
the self is derived within the given social context;
personality absorption occurs when that context
is narrowed for the child to include little more
than one or two adults.

 Peculiarly enough, parents are viewed either
as constant factors or as the villains in the piece
in most discussions of “individual factors’ in
neurosis. But it is rather important to find out
what there is to being a modern middle-class parent
that fertilizes the soil of the child’s neurosis, how-
ever, the individual seed may be planted. It will
not suffice to dismiss the matter with “the parents’
own neuroses,” as does Horney.
bureaucrat, or professional man, his job-
techniques revolve around manipulating the
personalities of others, instead of tools. Since
he has internalized the supreme middle-class
value, individual success, he tries to use his
associates as means to further his career;
in fact, he has himself been conditioned to
view his associates, education, hobbies, in-
tellectual interests, in terms of their possible
value to his career.1? On the job he views
himself not so much as functionally as-
sociated with others in a common purpose,
as a self-contained unit establishing ‘“con-
tacts” with others. His work relations are
not defined in fixed terms of status and role
to the extent that they were in the past for
he is on the move, or views himself in that
way. He has, then, a well-developed tendency
to view his relations with others in terms of
what he, as a mobile, displaced person, can
get out of them.

Yet the modern middle-class father can-
not use his child either in the new sense of
manipulating others to his own advantage,
nor, be it noted, in the ways available in
the past. In the old rural-familistic system,
the child served well three predominant in-
terests of the father: he would soon work
on the farm, or during the earlier days of
the industrial revolution, in the factory, be-
come an economic asset to the father in
other words; he would provide economic
security in the father’s old age;7* and finally,
he would provide psychological security by
preserving the family name, a form of this-
worldly immortality in a society which made
the family the primary repository of most
social values.

In terms of dollars alone, the cost of
raising a modern middle-class child repre-
sents a serious threat to the personal ambi-
tion of the father.15 At the very time when,
in terms of his primary success-goal, he
should have time and money available for
further study if a professional man, money
for clothes, entertaining, household furniture
and an automobile for purposes of present-
ing a “front” in any event; at this time
when his career is in its initial and hence
its crucial stage, the presence of the child
represents a diversion of energy and funds,
so long, of course, as the career remains his
primary goal. A certain degree of ambiva-
lence directed toward the child is inevitable.
Not the depth, but the present height of
the middle-class birth-rate is the noteworthy
phenomenon, indicating an amazing vitality
of the old rural-familistic values which find
little support in modern social structure.

With the advancing individuation of mod-
ern society, not only has individual success
become a supreme value, but also individual,
hedonistic enjoyment. The child again pre-
sents an interference with most of the rec-
reation available to the middle-class father,
for whether commercialized (movies, sports
events, plays) or social (golf, bridge, tennis,
dinner parties), these are designed not for
family-wide participation, but individual- or
couple-participation.

In conjunction with the above factors, the
growing middle-class emphasis upon “sci-
entific child care’® and the child’s higher
education, further increase the father’s duties
and obligations, while his rights steadily

* Basing their estimates on a family income of
$2,500, Dublin and Lotka figure that the parents
spend between $9,180 and $10,485 in rearing a
child through the age of 18. (Quoted in Kingsley
Davis, “Reproductive Institutions and the Pres-
sure for Population,” Sociological Rev. (1937) 29:
1-18—a British publication).

*The child must not be spanked, parents should
be “patient” with him, his ego-growth must not
be curbed, etc. The assumption of much of the
child-care literature seems to be that the parents
have a combined culinary, nursing, and psychiatric
function, and nothing more. But note that in a
mobile, industrial, specialized job-world, with its
emphasis upon contractual relations, that cooks,
nurses, and psychiatrists are paid for what they do.
diminish. What emerges from his total situa-
tion is an ambivalence toward his child which
is more or less widespread, though very
rarely admitted, even with confidantes.?7
Finally, children interfere with the com-
panion and partner roles of husband and
wife, which are more and more displacing
the traditional patriarchal and housewife-
and-mother roles.’®

And how about the mother? She enters
marriage and perhaps bears a child with
no definite role and series of functions, as
formerly, Her old role within the patriarchal
family, with its many functions, its economic
and emotional security, its round of com-
munity participations, is lost, but no well-de-
fined role has taken its place. She feels
inferior to men because comparatively she
has been and is more restricted.?® If she
works after marriage she faces sex discrimi-
nation on the job and perhaps her husband’s
criticism if his traditional role of bread-win-
ner is important to him.

Half-seriously she prepared for a career
prior to marriage, half-seriously because a
career is regarded by most middle-class girls
as insurance against the grim possibility
they will not be married; through a ‘“‘good”
marriage (the folk phrase “she married well”
refers not to personality adjustment but to
the bank balance and career prospects of
the husband) the middle-class girl attains
far more status than is possible through a
career of her own. But the period of phantasy
dalliance with a career, or an embarkation
upon one, leave her ill-fitted for the drudgery
of housecleaning, diapers, and the prepara-
tion of meals. The freedom which the urban
apartment and modern household devices
have brought the middle-class housewife has
been commonly misinterpreted as well as ex-
aggerated. While the Victorian housewife
had more work to do, that work was part
of a well-integrated system of household
and community activities. While the modern
middle-class housewife has more leisure-time
than either her mother or grandmother, she
must still work at a number of household
jobs for which she has not been trained,
which are usually not an essential part of
her value-system, and which are isolated
from her social activities. One sociologist has
expressed this dilemma facetiously: half her
working day is spent doing something she
does not like, the rest is spent thinking up
ways of getting even with her husband. The
resulting boredom frequently leads to a
period of indecision early in the marriage
over whether to have children or resume the
career. This internal conflict has been well-
expressed by Thompson:
And so it is inevitable that the child shall
be viewed with some degree of ambivalence
by both father and mother, for he represents
a direct interference with most of the domi-
nant values and compulsions of the modern
middle class: career, social and economic
success, hedonistic enjoyment. There is some
doubt that under modern middle-class con-
ditions, children automatically bring hus-
band and wife closer together.?+

To return to the consideration of the
middle-class child. Personality absorption
takes place against a background of parental
ambivalence. The mother has little to do, in
or out of the home; she is her single child’s
sole companion.?? Modern “scientific child

*Clara Thompson, “The Role of Women in
This Culture,” Psychiatry (1941) 4:1-8, p. 6.

See Ernest W. Burgess and Leonard S. Cot-
trell, Jr., Predicting Success or Failure in Marriage
(Prentice-Hall, Inc., N.Y., 1939, xxiii and 472 pp.),
esp. page 413. In their sample they found a slight
negative correlation between number of children
and self-rating of marital adjustment. Lewis M.
Terman, et. al., Psychological Factors in Marital
Happiness (McGraw-Hill, N.Y., 1938, xiv and 474
pp.) apparently remain unaware that their charac-
terization of “Happily married women,” derived
from statistical manipulations, is a classic statement
of the middle-class Victorian housewife-and-mother
role. If “happiness” for married women must be
something founded in a fading tradition the future
looks black. Fortunately, Terman and associates
have probably not established isolable unit-factors;
instead, sifted elements out of a total middle-class
cultural setting which is rapidly changing, i.e., their
“factors” may not be applicable in the immediate
future.

=The addition of one more child, which is
the outside limit in most middle-class homes, prob-
ably does nothing to diminish the possibility of the
first child’s developing a neurosis if there is an
appreciable gap in their ages, because of the like-
lihood of sibling rivalry. See David M. Levy,
Maternal Overprotection, (Columbia University
Press, N.Y. 1943, ix and 417 pp.) Levy’s valuable
monograph has not been used in the present dis-
cussion because Levy conceives of the overpro-
tective mother as a person who has voluntarily
care” enforces a constant supervision and
diffused worrying over the child’s health,
eating spinach, and ego-development; this
is complicated by the fact that much energy
is spent forcing early walking, toilet-train-
ing, talking, because in an intensively com-
petitive milieu middle-class parents from
the day of birth on are constantly comparing
their own child’s development with that of
the neighbors’ children. The child must also
be constantly guarded from the danger of
contacting various electrical gadgets and
from kicking valuable furniture. The middle-
class child’s discovery that the living-room
furniture is more important to his mother
than his impulse to crawl over it, unquestion-
ably finds a place in the background of the
etiology of a certain type of neurosis, how-
ever absurd it may appear.

Under constant supervision, with limited
play-area in a house touching other homes
on all sides, or in an apartment, and lacking
companions, the child’s physiological ex-
pansiveness, fed by his boredom, persists
in getting him into trouble: screaming, run-
ning around the apartment, upsetting
daddy’s shaving mug, rending teddy-bear
in two, emptying his milk on the rug to
observe what pattern will be formed. This
“trouble” is all a matter of definition, Similar
behavior, in modified form, would not be
interpreted in primitive society as “trouble,”
and neither would it be by Polish parents
in the community above described.

Already the parents have made “love” of
supreme importance in their relation to the
child, theirs for him and his for them, partly
because of the love-complex of our time,
which is particularly ramified within the
middle class,”* and partly as a compensation

renounced the world and all its works to devote
her entire life to the sacred cause of her own
child; the “middle-class mother” is here conceived
as a type which has not resolved a conflict between
“duty” and individualism. The latter is much more
common,

* Children are being more and more regarded by
young middle-class couples as a symbol of ro-
mantic consummation. “And soon we'll be three,”
the popular song goes; the child is, then, con-
sidered more in terms of being a product of
for the many sacrifices they have made for
the child, long debated before and after its
arrival. The child’s need for love is experi-
enced precisely because he has been condi-
tioned to need it. That the need is biological
seems unlikely.”* Now, the more ambivalent

 

wedded egos than of having an integral place of
his own in a family unit, Also, as parents no
longer secure economic good and security from
children, the affectional element is stepped up to
give the parents a reason for having children. In
fact, William F. Ogburn has made affection his
only hope for preserving our present family form.

™Margarethe Ribble, in “Disorganizing Factors
of Infant Personality,” American Journal of Psy-
chiatry (1941) 98:459-463; says: “There is a ne-
cessity for a long and uninterrupted period of
consistent and skillful ‘psychological mothering’ by
one individual. This must continue at least until
speech is well-developed and the child has acquired
a feeling of self-security and voluntary control of
his body equilibrium. . . . It seems that the tone
of the gastro-intestinal tract in this early period
depends in some special way on reflex stimulation
from the periphery. Thus the touch of the mother
has a definite, biological implication in the regula-
tion of the breathing and nutritive functions of
the child” (Page 463). Two things should be
noted here: while a certain amount of handling
during infancy by one person may be necessary,
that person need not be the biological mother;
and it would be difficult to measure the extent of
the need.

There are several excellent empirical studies of
the socialization process now available and in all
of them a great deal is made of the child’s need
for love and affection. But in every single instance
studied the child had either been early conditioned
to regard love as the most important thing in the
world, or had had the opportunity of observing
other youngsters receiving something which he
did not have. This is not to deny that some
affirmation of personal ties to others in primary-
group relationships, if not a biological need, is
at least universal, but it is doubtful that it need
be the type of parent-child love discussed in such
studies. Primitive children, brought up in large
dwelling-units among many kinsmen, in a sense
spread thin their affection over a wide area, and
this affection is relatively less in total intensity as
well, Polish children, in the village above described,
receive short shrift from their mothers when they
begin to walk, and even during infancy there is little
dandling and cooing; in fact, after weaning, the
child is most frequently literally handed over to the
eldest daughter who gives the child the strictest
minimum of attention. Among the siblings there is
little demonstrativeness: there is, however, the
the parents are toward the child, the more
seriously is the “trouble” he causes them
interpreted. He should not act in such a way
because of the sacrifices they have made in
his behalf, and the least he can do is show
his gratitude by “loving” them in turn, i.e.,
keeping out of “trouble.” When the trouble
inevitably occurs, the most effective punish-
ment imaginable is the threat to withdraw
their love from him. He “needs” that love
because his personality has been absorbed
by these two persons, because he has been
conditioned to have a slavish-emotional de-
pendence upon them, Not the need for
parental love, but the constant threat of
its withdrawal after the child has been con-
ditioned to the need, lies at the root of the
most characteristic modern neurosis. Mamma
won’t like you if you don’t eat your spinach,
or stop dribbling your milk, or get down
from that davenport. To the extent that a
child’s personality has been absorbed, he will
be thrown into a panic by this sort of treat-
ment, and develop guilt-feelings to help pre-
vent himself from getting into further
trouble. In such a child a disapproving glance
may produce more terror than a twenty-
minute lashing in little Stanislaus Wojcik.
The threat of love-withdrawal is usually
the mother’s technique for controlling the
child. At first the father may threaten to
withdraw love, but as the child grows older
the father finds a more subtle control—the
expression of disapproval. The child is
limited to his parents for modelling his be-
havior. While very young, he wants to set the
table and sweep the floor “like mummy.” In
a few years standards of manly conduct are
imposed and he wants to do things “like
daddy.” The father now controls him
through the child’s new self-conception, and
it is not so much the use of “authority” as
threatening the child’s self-respect.2> The
child is not a person who amounts to very
much, how does he ever expect to get along
when he gets old enough to go to school, or
join the Boy Scouts, or go to college, or get a
job? Again, to the extent that the child’s per-
sonality has been absorbed, he will be made to
feel small, insignificant, unworthy, And, feel-
ing absorbed, caught and helpless, must
Ppropitiate these combined god-monsters that
he needs so desperately. Hence anxiety, guilt-
feelings, the sense of inferiority; seek se-
curity at all costs for he is living alone and
afraid, in a world he never made.”¢

As for authority, its exercise generates
neurotic symptoms only under two condi-
tions, both of which must be present;
close identification of the child with at least
one parent; the effective blocking-off of all
avenues of authority-avoidance for twenty-
four hours of the day. Neither of these con-
ditions is met in the Polish homes described,
and thus while the authority wielded by
Polish parents is far more “irrational” (as
defined by Fromm) than that likely to be
encountered in many middle-class homes,
neuroses are not developed. Indeed, it seems
unlikely that Fromm’s differentiation be-
tween rational and irrational authority has
much psychological relevance. The child is
hardly in a position to understand when
authority is “. . . based on the competency

 

J. Shaw, for long stimulating conversations about
his work at the University of New Hampshire
Psychological Clinic. He states that male students
seeking psychotherapy invariably recall ridicule and
ego-attacks by the father during the period of
first testing male roles.

As for the “authority” formulation, is it not
possible that it may be subsumed under “love
withdrawal”? From the child’s point of view, even
corporal punishment becomes unbearable primarily
because it represents the father’s withdrawal of love
and support. During adolescence, authority as such
does become a problem for the child, but the
“normal” child suffers from it then as much, and
oftentimes more, than does the neurotic.

** All middle-class children certainly do not be-
come neurotic. But to the extent that their ex-
perience approaches the polar type described, they
will tend to. This picture is often exaggerated by
the parents’ own unacknowledged hostile impulses
toward the child, stemming from the individualistic
values and strivings described.
of the person in authority to function
properly with respect to the task of guidance
he has to perform . . .”?7 and when it is
««_, . based on the power which the authority
has over those subjected to it and on the
fear and awe with which the latter recipro-
cate.”*8 Perhaps the Polish children do not
experience irrational authority exactly as
defined by Fromm, for while they fear
parental authority they also are hostile to-
ward and contemptuous of their parents,
and thus are not in awe of them. Neverthe-
less, the important differentiation is not be-
tween rational and irrational authority but
the extent to which any parental authority
succeeds in absorbing the child’s personality,
which is itself dependent upon factors other
than the imposition of arbitrary authority.

Yet when we have used the term
“personality absorption” we have not by
any means explained a neurosis etiology.
The personality of the middle-class girl of
the late nineteenth century was “absorbed”
by her parents, she was subjected to the
demands of “love” and unquestioning
obedience, at least ideally; nevertheless, the
rate of neurosis under those conditions was
probably not too high, as nearly as can be
judged at this later date, Why? Because she
was not faced with inconsistent expecta-
tions of conduct on the part of others and
herself. Because love and obedience were
integrated within a role which changed
relatively slightly from childhood into
adolescence, courtship, and finally into marri-
age. In other words, her initial goals and
self-conceptions were constantly re-enforced
with each new life experience.

The modern middle-class child on the
other hand, particularly the boy, who has
found surcease from anxiety and guilt by
blind obedience and “love” for his parents,
is not allowed to stabilize his relationships
with others on that basis. His play-group,
which may be denied him until he has
reached school age, makes him feel a certain
shame and inadequacy in attempting to
approach its members with familiar tech-
niques.”® He also early discovers that he is
involved in competition with others, as an
individual with his contemporaries, and as a
representative of his family unit with other
families,

If the abstraction “ours is a competitive
society” is translated into terms of what
happens to the child born to modern middle-
class parents, it becomes quite relevant to
the present discussion. Before the child has
developed a real self-awareness he becomes
part of a process of invidious comparison
with other families: he uttered his first word:
two months earlier than the Jones’ boy; he
weighed so many pounds at the end of his
first year. At Sunday School he received the
Bible for perfect attendance; at public school
his grades in arithmetic were higher than
two-thirds of the other members of the class.
He may take piano lessons in view of the
day when Mrs. Smythe’s pupils will be on
public exhibition before the parents of the
neighborhood. Everything he accomplishes or
fails to accomplish becomes an inevitable
part of the family’s attempt to maintain or
improve its standing in the community,

But effective competition demands a cer-
tain degree of independence, firmness of
purpose, perhaps aggressiveness. Even for
the “normal” middle-class child the transi-
tion from submission to some degree of
independent behavior is made difficult.° And

The play-group has immeasurable sociological
significance for it is secondary in importance only
to the family of orientation in the socialization
process. Unfortunately, the only good empirical
studies of the play-group available are of institu-
tionalized children or slum children whose gang
behavior is regarded as a social problem.

See Ruth Benedict, “Continuities and Discon-
tinuities in Cultural Conditioning,” Psychiatry
(1938) 1:161-167. On page 161 appears this state-
ment:

“From a comparative point of view our culture
goes to great extremes in emphasizing contrasts be-
tween the child and the adult. The child is sexless,
the adult estimates his virility by his sexual ac-
tivities; the child must be protected from the ugly
facts of life, the adult must meet them without
psychic catastrophe; the child must obey, the adult
must command this obedience.”
for the child whose personality has been
absorbed, an especially exacerbated conflict
arises. He is expected to “do things,” to
accomplish, perhaps to lead in some en-
deavor, like other children, but his earliest
social conditioning was dependence, sub-
mission, inferiority; his accomplishments, if
any, are on a god-scale—in phantasy. He is
desperately attempting to stabilize all later
relationships on the basis of his earliest
conditioning. Any pressure to compete only
exaggerates his anxiety, guilt, and feelings of
inadequacy. Life in the modern middle-class
home insures that he shall feel that pressure.

There are, then, three elements in the etiol-
ogy of what has been called the most charac-
teristic neurosis of modern society; personal-
ity absorption; the reiterated threat to with-
draw a love which has been made of
paramount importance; a conflict between
the resulting initial adjustment of submissive
propitiation and the later assumption of
goals of achievement and roles of independ-
ent action.

The child is not able to establish an
integrated self-conception. Propitiation has
meant obedience and “love” for the parents,
leading to a compulsive repression of self-
will, But he soon discovers that propitiation,
in the sense of meeting new parental expect-
ancies, means exhibiting independence, self-
assertiveness, aggressiveness, outside the
home. The father, as the child’s mediator of
the outside male world, rather than the
mother, makes this demand uncompromis-
ingly which may, incidentally, be one of
the unsuspected sources of the so-called
oedipus complex, This seems more than likely
since male neurotics often recall facing the
father’s ridicule of their first fumbling efforts
to meet the father’s expectations of “manly”
conduct.

With the new conflicting expectations, on
the part of parents and contemporaries, the
child’s anxiety reaches new heights, a
double set of guilt-feelings appear where
previously there was only one: at first he
felt guilty only if he failed to love and obey,
and this guilt could be assuaged by the
propitiation of submission; now, however, the
god-monsters will be appeased only by a
combination of submission in his role of
child-in-family, and assertiveness in his play-
group, school-pupil, and other roles enacted
outside of home. An integration of these
conflicting roles is impossible. His conception
of himself becomes one of abject failure. Any
striving is painful for it violates the initial
submissive adjustment. But he feels equally
guilty for not making the effort to achieve.
This is a key to much of his contradictory
and self-blocking behavior: his desire to be
the last man in the last regiment and his
desire to conquer the world; his demand that
everyone shall love him, and his settled
conviction that no one could love a person
as base as he; his inability to erect a
hierarchy of values; his endless debate over
the value of his own goals. He is damned if
he does and damned if he doesn’t. He is
embraced by a psychological Iron Maiden:
any lunge forward or backward only impales
him more securely on the spikes.
