http://www.jstor.org/stable/2095676?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
itle II of the 1964 Civil Rights Act stipu-

lates that “all persons shall be entitled to the
full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommo-
dations of any place of public accommodation . . .
without discrimination or segregation on the
ground of race, color, religion, or national ori-
gin.” The public places emphasized in the act are
restaurants, hotels, and motels, although racial
discrimination occurs in many other public plac-
es. Those black Americans who would make the
greatest use of these public accommodations and
certain other public places would be middle-class,
ie., those with the requisite resources.

White public opinion and many scholars have
accented the great progress against traditional
discrimination recently made by the black mid-
dle class. A National Research Council report on
black Americans noted that by the mid-1970s
many Americans “believed that . . . the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 had led to broad-scale elimi-
nation of discrimination against blacks in public
accommodations” (Jaynes and Williams 1989,
p. 84). In interviews with whites in the late 1970s
and early 1980s, Blauner (1989, p. 197) found
that all but one viewed the 1970s as an era of
great racial progress for American race relations.

“Direct all correspondence to Joe R. Feagin, Depart-
ment of Sociology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32611. I am indebted to Melvin Sikes, Nijole
Benokraitis, John Goering, Christine Williams, Janice
Allen-Kelsey, Raphael Allen, Charles Tilly, John
Butler, Nestor Rodriguez, Sharon Collins, Tony Orum,
and Suzanne Harper for their insightful comments on
earlier drafts of this manuscript, and to Nijole Beno-
kraitis, Beth Anne Shelton, Bob Parker, Diane Smith,
Robert Adams, Yanick Crosse, Bob Bullard, Charles
With some exceptions (see Willie 1983; Collins
1983; Landry 1987), much recent analysis of
middle-class blacks by social scientists has em-
phasized the massive progress made since 1964
in areas where there had been substantial barri-
ers, including public accommodations. Racial
discrimination as a continuing and major prob-
lem for middle-class blacks has been downplayed
as analysts have turned to the various problems
of the “underclass.” For example, Wilson (1978,
pp. 110-1) has argued that the growth of the black
middle class since the 1960s is the result of im-
proving economic conditions and of government
civil rights laws, which virtually eliminated overt
discrimination in the workplace and public ac-
commodations. According to Wilson, the major
problem of the 1964 Civil Rights Act is its fail-
ure to meet the problems of the black underclass
(Wilson 1987, pp. 146-7).

Here I treat these assertions as problematic. Do
middle-class black Americans still face hostile
treatment in public accommodations and other
public places? If so, what form does this discrim-
ination take? Who are the perpetrators of this
discrimination? What is the impact of the dis-
crimination on its middle-class victims? How do
middle-class blacks cope with such discrimination?
There is a spatial dimension to discrimination.
The probability of experiencing racial hostility
varies from the most private to the most public
sites. If a black person is in a relatively protected
site, such as with friends at home, the probability
of experiencing hostility and discrimination is
low. The probability increases as one moves from
friendship settings to such outside sites as the
workplace, where a black person typically has
contacts with both acquaintances and strangers,
providing an interactive context with greater po-
tential for discrimination.

In most workplaces, middle-class status and
its organizational resources provide some pro-
tection against certain categories of discrimina-
tion. This protection probably weakens as a black
person moves from those work and school set-
tings where he or she is well-known into public
accommodations such as large stores and city
restaurants where contacts are mainly with white
strangers. On public streets blacks have the
greatest public exposure to strangers and the least
protection against overt discriminatory behavior,
including violence. A key feature of these more
public settings is that they often involve contacts
with white strangers who react primarily on the
basis of one ascribed characteristic. The study of
the micro-life of interaction between strangers in
public was pioneered by Goffman (1963; 1971)
and his students, but few of their analyses have
treated hostile discriminatory interaction in pub-
lic places. A rare exception is the research by
Gardner (1980; see also Gardner 1988), who
documented the character and danger of passing
remarks by men directed against women in un-
In his classic study, The Nature of Prejudice,
Allport (1958, pp. 14-5) noted that prejudice can
be expressed in a series of progressively more
serious actions, ranging from antilocution to
avoidance, exclusion, physical attack, and exter-
mination. Allport’s work suggests a continuum
of actions from avoidance, to exclusion or rejec-
tion, to attack. In his travels in the South in the
1950s a white journalist who changed his skin
color to black encountered discrimination in each
of these categories (Griffin 1961). In my data,
discrimination against middle-class blacks still
ranges across this continuum: (1) avoidance ac-
tions, such as a white couple crossing the street
when a black male approaches; (2) rejection ac-
tions, such as poor service in public accommo-
dations; (3) verbal attacks, such as shouting ra-
cial epithets in the street; (4) physical threats and
harassment by white police officers; and (5)
physical threats and attacks by other whites, such
as attacks by white supremacists in the street.
Changing relations between blacks and whites in
recent decades have expanded the repertoire of
discrimination to include more subtle forms and
to encompass discrimination in arenas from which
blacks were formerly excluded, such as formerly
all-white public accommodations.
dents reported acquaintances reacting aggres-
sively to discrimination prior to the 1960s.
Deference rituals can still be found today be-
tween some lower-income blacks and their white
employers. In her northeastern study Rollins
(1985, p. 157) found black maids regularly de-
ferring to white employers. Today, most dis-
criminatory interaction no longer involves much
asymmetrical deference, at least for middle-class
blacks. Even where whites expect substantial
deference, most middle-class blacks do not oblige.
For middle-class blacks contemporary discrimi-
nation has evolved beyond the asymmetrical
deference rituals and “No Negroes served” type
of exclusion to patterns of black-contested dis-
crimination. Discussing race and gender dis-
crimination in Great Britain, Brittan and May-
nard (1984) have suggested that today “the terms
of oppression are not only dictated by history,
culture, and the sexual and social division of la-
bor. They are also profoundly shaped at the site
of the oppression, and by the way in which op-
pressors and oppressed continuously have to re-
negotiate, reconstruct, and re-establish their rela-
tive positions in respect to benefits and power’(p.
7). Similarly, white mistreatment of black Amer-
icans today frequently encounters new coping
strategies by blacks in the ongoing process of
reconstructing patterns of racial interaction.
Middle-class strategies for coping with dis-
crimination range from careful assessment to
withdrawal, resigned acceptance, verbal con-
frontation, or physical confrontation. Later ac-
tion might include a court suit. Assessing the
situation is a first step. Some white observers
have suggested that many middle-class blacks
are paranoid about white discrimination and rush
too quickly to charges of racism (Wieseltier 1989,
June 5; for male views of female “paranoia” see
Gardner 1988). But the daily reality may be just
the opposite, as middle-class black Americans
often evaluate a situation carefully before judg-
ing it discriminatory and taking additional action.
This careful evaluation, based on past experiences
(real or vicarious), not only prevents jumping to
conclusions, but also reflects the hope that white
behavior is not based on race, because an act not
based on race is easier to endure. After evalua-
tion one strategy is to leave the site of discrimi-
nation rather than to create a disturbance. Anoth-
er is to ignore the discrimination and continue
with the interaction, a “blocking” strategy similar
to that Gardner (1980, p. 345) reported for women
dealing with street remarks. In many situations
resigned acceptance is the only realistic response.
To examine discrimination, I draw primarily on
37 in-depth interviews from a larger study of 135
middle-class black Americans in Boston, Buffa-
lo, Baltimore, Washington, D.C., Detroit, Hous-
ton, Dallas, Austin, San Antonio, Marshall, Las
Vegas, and Los Angeles. The interviewing was
done in 1988-1990; black interviewers were used.
I began with respondents known as members of
the black middle class to knowledgeable con-
sultants in key cities. Snowball sampling from
these multiple starting points was used to maxi-
mize diversity.

The questions in the research instrument were
primarily designed to elicit detailed information
on the general situations of the respondents and
on the barriers encountered and managed in em-
ployment, education, and housing. There were
no specific questions in the interview schedule
on public accommodations or other public-place
discrimination; the discussions of that discrimi-
nation were volunteered in answer to general
questions about barriers to personal goals and
coping strategies or in digressions in answers to
specific questions on employment, education, and
housing. These volunteered responses signal the
importance of such events. While I report below
mainly on the responses of the 37 respondents
who detailed specific incidents of public dis-
crimination, in interpreting the character and
meaning of modern discrimination I also draw
on some discussions in the larger sample of 135
interviews and in five supplementary and fol-
low-up interviews of middle-class blacks con-
ducted by the author and two black consultants.

“Middle class” was defined broadly as those
holding a white-collar job (including those in
professional, managerial, and clerical jobs), col-
lege students preparing for white-collar jobs, and
owners of successful businesses. This definition
is consistent with recent analyses of the black
middle class (Landry 1987). The subsample of
37 middle-class blacks reporting public discrim-
ination is fairly representative of the demograph-
ic character of the larger sample. The subsam-
ple’s occupational distribution is broadly similar
to the larger sample and includes nine corporate
managers and executives, nine health care or other
professionals, eight government officials, four
college students, three journalists or broadcast-
ers, two clerical or sales workers, one entrepre-
neur, and one retired person. The subsample is
somewhat younger than the overall sample, with
35 percent under age 35 vs. 25 percent in the
‘larger sample, 52 percent in the 35-50 bracket vs.
57 percent, and 11 percent over 50 years of age
vs. 18 percent. The subsample is broadly compa-
rable to the larger sample in income: 14 had in-
comes under $36,000, seven in the $36,000-
55,000 range, and 16 in the $56,000 or more
range. All respondents had at least a high school
degree, and more than 90 percent had some col-
lege work. The subsample has a somewhat lower
percentage of people with graduate work: 39
percent vs. 50 percent for the larger sample. Both
samples have roughly equal proportions of men
and women, and more than sixty percent of both
samples reported residing in cities in the South
or Southwest — 37 percent of the overall sample
and 34 percent of the subsample resided in the
North or West.
Although all types of mistreatment are report-
ed, there is a strong relationship between type of
discrimination and site, with rejection/poor-ser-
vice discrimination being most common in pub-
lic accommodations and verbal or physical threat
discrimination by white citizens or police offic-
ers most likely in the street.

The reactions of these middle-class blacks re-
flect the site and type of discrimination. The im-
portant steps taken beyond careful assessments
of the situation are shown in Table 2. (A dual
response is recorded for one accommodations
incident.)

The most common black responses to racial
hostility in the street are withdrawal or a verbal
reply. In many avoidance situations (e.g., a white
couple crossing a street to avoid walking past a
black college student) or attack situations (e.g.,
whites throwing beer cans from a passing car), a
verbal response is difficult because of the danger
or the fleeting character of the hostility. A black
victim often withdraws, endures this treatment
with resigned acceptance, or replies with a quick
verbal retort. In the case of police harassment,
the response is limited by the danger, and re-
signed acceptance or mild verbal protests are
likely responses. Rejection (poor service) in
public accommodations provides an opportunity
to fight back verbally — the most common re-
sponses to public accommodations discrimina-
tion are verbal counterattacks or resigned accep-
tance. Some black victims correct whites quietly,
while others respond aggressively and lecture the
assailant about the discrimination or threaten court
action. A few retaliate physically. Examining
materials in these 37 interviews and those in the
larger sample, we will see that the depth and
complexity of contemporary black middle-class
He [her boyfriend] was waiting to be seated. ... He
said, “You go to the bathroom and I’ll get the ta-
ble. . . ”” He was standing there when I came back;
he continued to stand there. The restaurant was
almost empty. There were waiters, waitresses, and
no one seated. And when I got back to him, he was
ready to leave, and said, “Let’s go.” I said, “What
happened to our table?” He wasn’t seated. So I
said, “‘No, we’re not leaving, please.” And he said,
“No, I’m leaving.” So we went outside, and we
talked about it. And what I said to him was, you
have to be aware of the possibilities that this is not
the first time that this has happened at this restau-
rant or at other restaurants, but this is the first time
it has happened to a black news director here or
someone who could make an issue of it, or some-
one who is prepared to make an issue of it.

So we went back inside after I talked him into it
and, to make a long story short, I had the manager
come. I made most of the people who were there
(while conducting myself professionally the whole
time) aware that I was incensed at being treated this
way. ... Isaid, “Why do you think we weren’t seat-
ed?” And the manager said, “Well, I don’t really
know.” And I said, “Guess.” He said, “Well I don’t
know, because you’re black?” I said, “Bingo. Now
isn’t it funny that you didn’t guess that I didn’t have
any money (and I opened up my purse) and I said,
“because I certainly have money. And isn’t it odd
that you didn’t guess that it’s because I couldn’t pay
for it because I’ ve got two American Express cards
and a Master Card right here. I think it’s just funny
that you would have assumed that it’s because I’m
black.” ... And then I took out my card and gave it
to him and said, “If this happens again, or if I hear
of this happening again, I will bring the full wrath of
an entire news department down on this restau-
rant.” And he just kind of looked at me. “‘Not [just]
because am personally offended. Iam. But because
This example provides insight into the character
of modern discrimination. The discrimination was
not the “No Negroes” exclusion of the recent
past, but rejection in the form of poor service by
restaurant personnel. The black response indi-
cates the change in black-white interaction since
the 1950s and 1960s, for discrimination is han-
dled with vigorous confrontation rather than def-
erence. The aggressive black response and the
white backtracking underscore Brittan and May-
nard’s (1984, p. 7) point that black-white inter-
action today is being renegotiated. It is possible
that the white personnel defined the couple as
“poor blacks” because of their jeans, although
the jeans were fashionable and white patrons wear
jeans. In comments not quoted here the news
director rejects such an explanation. She force-
fully articulates a theory of rights — a response
that signals the critical impact of civil rights laws
on the thinking of middle-class blacks. The news
director articulates the American dream: she has
worked hard, earned the money and credit cards,
developed the appropriate middle-class behav-
ior, and thus has under the law a right to be served.
There is defensiveness in her actions too, for she
feels a need to legitimate her status by showing
her purse and credit cards. One important factor
that enabled her to take such assertive action was
her power to bring a TV news team to the restau-
rant. This power marks a change from a few
decades ago when very few black Americans
had the social or economic resources to fight
back successfully.
I took the staff here to a restaurant that had recently
opened in the prestigious section of the city, and
we waited while other people got waited on. And
decided that after about a half hour that these peo-
ple don’t want to wait on us. I happened to have
been in the same restaurant a couple of evenings
earlier, and it took them about forty-five minutes
before they came to wait on me and my guest. So,
on the second incident, I said, this is not an isolated
incident, this is a pattern, because I had spoken
with some other people who had not been warmly
received in the restaurant. So, I wrote a letter to the
owners. I researched and found out who the own-
ers were, wrote a letter to the owners and sent cop-
ies to the city papers. That’s my way of expressing
myself, and letting the world know. You have to let
people, other than you and the owner, know. You
have to let others know you’re expressing your
dismay at the discrimination, or the barrier that’s
presented to you. I met with the owners. Of course,
they wanted to meet with their attorneys with me,
because they wanted to sue me. I told them they’re
welcome to do so, I don’t have a thing, but fine
they can do it. It just happens that I knew their
white attorney. And he more or less vouched that if
I had some concern that it must have been legiti-
mate in some form. When the principals came in
— one of the people who didn’t wait on me was
one of the owners, who happened to be waiting on
everybody else — we resolved the issue by them
inviting me to come again. And if I was fairly treat-
ed, or if I would come on several occasions and if I
was fairly treated I would write a statement of re-
traction. I told them I would not write a retraction,
I would write a statement with regard to how I was
treated. Which I ultimately did. And I still go there
today, and they speak to me, and I think the pattern
is changed to a great degree.
community, including the legal community, this
respondent used his resources not only to bring
discrimination to public ‘attention but also to
pressure a major change in behavior. He had the
means to proceed beyond the local management
to both the restaurant owners and the local news-
papers. The detailed account provides additional
insight into the black-white bargaining process.
At first the white managers and owners, probably
accustomed to acquiescence or withdrawal, vig-
orously resisted ending the blatant discrimina-
tion. But the verbal and other resources available
to the respondent forced them to capitulate and
participate in a negotiation process. The cost to
the victor was substantial. As in the first incident,
we see the time-consuming and energy-con-
suming nature of grappling with poor-service
discrimination. Compared to whites entering the
same places, black Americans face an extra bur-
den when going into public accommodations
putatively made hospitable by three decades of
civil rights law protection.

The confrontation response is generally socostly
in terms of time and energy that acquiescence or
withdrawal are common options. An example of
the exitresponse was provided by autility compa-
ny executive in an east coast city:
[I have faced] harassment in stores, being followed
around, being questioned about what are you going
to purchase here. . . . I was in an elite department
store just this past Saturday and felt that I was
being observed while I was window shopping. I in
fact actually ended up purchasing something, but
felt the entire time I was there — I was in blue
jeans and sneakers, that’s how I dress on a Satur-
day — I felt that I was being watched in the store as
I was walking through the store, what business did
I have there, what was I going to purchase, that
kind of thing. . ... There are a few of those white
people that won’t put change in your hand, touch
your skin — that doesn’t need to go on. [Do you
tell them that?] Oh, I do, I do. That is just so obvi-
ous. I usually [speak to them] if they’re rude in the
manner in which they deal with people. [What do
they say about that?] Oh, stuff like, “Oh, excuse
me.” And some are really unconscious about it, say
“Excuse me,” and put the change in your hand,
that’s happened. But I’ve watched other people be
rude, and I’ve been told to mind my own busi-
ness. . . . [But you still do it?] Oh, sure, because for
the most part I think that people do have to learn to
think for themselves, and demand respect for
themselves. .. . I find my best weapon of defense is
to educate them, whether it’s in the store, in a line
at the bank, any situation, I teach them. And you
take them by surprise because you tell them and
show them what they should be doing, and what
they should be saying and how they should be
thinking. And they look at you because they don’t
know how to process you. They can’t process it
because you’ ve just shown them how they should
be living, and the fact that they are cheating them-
selves, really, because the racism is from fear. The
racism is from lack of education.
fluent and influential, a black person cannot es-
cape the stigma of being black, even while relax-
ing or shopping. There is the recurring strain of
having to craft strategies for a broad range of
discriminatory situations. Tailoring her confron-
tation to fit the particular discrimination, this re-
spondent interrupted the normal flow of the in-
teraction to call the whites to intersubjective ac-
count and make a one-way experience into a two-
way experience. Forced into new situations, of-
fending whites frequently do not know how “to
process” such an aggressive response. Again we
see how middle-class blacks can force a recon-
struction of traditional responses by whites to
blacks. The intensity of her discussion suggests
that the attempt to “educate” whites comes with
aheavy personal cost, for it is stressful to “psych”
oneself up for such incidents.

The problem of burdensome visibility and the
inescapable racial stereotyping by whites was
underscored in the reply of a physician in an east
coast city to a question about whether she had
encountered barriers:
Taking his daughter back the next day, he ob-
served from behind a fence to make certain the
lifeguard protected her. For many decades black
adults and children were excluded from public
pools in the South and Southwest, and many pools
were closed during the early desegregation peri-
od. These accommodations have special signifi-
cance for middle-class black Americans, and this
may be one reason the father’s reaction was so
decisive. Perhaps the major reason for his swift
action was because this was the first time that his
daughter had been the victim of racial slurs. She
was the victim of cutting racist epithets that for
this black father, as doubtless for most black
Americans, connote segregated institutions and
violence against blacks. Children also face hos-
tility in public accommodations and may never
shake this kind of experience. At a rather early
point, many black parents find it necessary to
teach their children how to handle discriminato-
ty incidents.

The verbal responses of middle-class blacks to
stigmatization can take more subtle forms. An
80-year-old retired schoolteacher in a southern
city recounted her response to a recent experi-
ence at a drapery shop:

The last time I had some draperies done and asked
about them at the drapery shop, a young man at that
shop — when they called [to him], he asked, and I
heard him — he said, “The job for that nigger
woman.” And I said to the person who was serving
me, “Oh my goodness, I feel so sorry for that young
man. I didn’t know people were still using that sort
of language and saying those sorts of things.” And
that’s the way I deal with it. I don’t know what you
call that. Is that sarcasm? Sarcasm is pretty good. . . .
Welll’ ve done that several times. This being 1989 . . .
I’m surprised that I find it in this day and time.
If you’re in a store — and let’s say the person
behind the counter is white — and you walk up to
the counter, and a white person walks up to the
counter, and you know you were there before the
white customer, the person behind the counter
knows you were there first, and it never fails, they
always go, “Who’s next.” Ok. And what I’ve done,
if they go ahead and serve the white person first,
then I will immediately say, “Excuse me, I was
here first, and we both know I was here first.” . . . If
they get away with it once, they’re going to get
away with it more than once, and then it’s going to
become something else. And you have to, you want
to make sure that folks know that you’ re not being
naive, that you really see through what’s happen-
ing. Or if it’s a job opportunity or something like
that, too, [we should do the] same thing. You first
try to get a clear assessment of what’s really going
on and sift through that information, and then. . .
go from there.
When you’ re in a restaurant and... you notice that
blacks get seated near the kitchen. You notice that
if it’s a hotel, your room is near the elevator, or
your room is always way down in a corner some-
where. You find that you are getting the undesir-
able rooms. And you come there early in the day
and you don’t see very many cars on the lot and
they’ll tell you that this is all we’ ve got. Or you get
the room that’s got a bad television set. You know
that you’re being discriminated against. And of
course you have to act accordingly. You have to
tell them, “Okay, the room is fine, [but] this televi-
sion set has got to go. Bring me another television
set.” So in my personal experience, I simply cannot
sit and let them get away with it [discrimination]
and not let them know that I know that that’s what
they are doing... .

When I face discrimination, first I take a long
look at myself and try to determine whether or not
Iam seeing what I think I’m seeing in 1989, and if
it’s something that I have an option [about]. In
other words, if I’m at a store making a purchase,
T’ll simply walk away from it. If it’s at a restaurant
where I’m not getting good service, I first of all let
the people know that I’m not getting good service,
then I [may] walk away from it. But the thing that I
have to do is to let people know that I know that
I’m being singled out for a separate treatment. And
then I might react in any number of ways — de-
pending on where I am and how badly I want what-
ever it is that I’m there for.
If I’m in those areas that are fairly protected, within
gatherings of my own group, other African Ameri-
cans, or if I’m in the university where my status as
a professor mediates against the way I might be
perceived, mediates against the hostile perception,
then it’s fairly comfortable. . .. When I divide my
life into encounters with the outside world, and of
course that’s ninety percent of my life, it’s fairly
consistently unpleasant at those sites where there’s
nothing that mediates between my race and what I
have to do. For example, if I’m in a grocery store, if
I’m in my car, which is a 1970 Chevrolet, a real old
ugly car, all those things — being in a grocery store
in casual clothes, or being in the car — sort of
advertises something that doesn’t have anything to
do with my status as far as people I run into are
concerned.

Because I’m a large black woman, and I don’t
wear whatever class status I have, or whatever pro-
fessional status [I have] in my appearance when I’m
in the grocery store, I’m part of the mass of large
black women shopping. For most whites, and even
for some blacks, that translates into negative status.
That means that they are free to treat me the way
they treat most poor black people, because they
can’t tell by looking at me that I differ from that.
And if I was seeking out a service, like renting a
car, or buying something, I could get a wonderful,
enthusiastic reaction to what I was doing. I would
work that up to such a point that this person would
probably shower me with roses once they got to
see me. And then when I would show up, and they’ re
surprised to see that I’m black, I sort of remind
them in conversation how welcome my service was,
to put the embarrassment on them, and I go through
with my dealings. In fact, once my sister criticized
me for putting [what] she calls my “‘white-on-white
voice” on to get a rental car. But I needed a rental
car and I knew that I could get it. I knew if I could
get this guy to think that he was talking to some
blonde, rather than, you know, so, but that’s what
he has to deal with. I don’t have to deal with that, I
want to get the car.
Stigmatized and physically attacked solely be-
cause of his color; this man faced verbal hostility
and threats of death with courage. Cautiously
drawing on his middle-class resources, he told
the attackers his death would bring television
crews to the town. This resource utilization is
similar to that of the news director in the restau-
rant incident. Beyond this verbal threat his re-
sponse had to be one of caution. For most whites
threatened on the street, the police are a sought-
after source of protection, but for black men this
is often not the case.

At the other end of the street continuum is
nonverbal harassment such as the “hate stare”
that so traumatized Griffin (1961). In her research
on street remarks, Gardner (1980) considered
women and blacks particularly vulnerable tar-
gets for harassment. For the segregation years
Henley (1978) has documented the ways in which
many blacks regularly deferred to whites in
public-place communications. Today obsequious
deference is no longer a common response to
harassment. A middle-class student with dark skin
reported that on her way to university classes she
had stopped at a bakery in a white residential
area where very few blacks live or shop. A white
couple in front of the store stared intently and
hatefully at her as she crossed the sidewalk and
entered and left the bakery. She reported that she
had experienced this hate stare many times. The
incident angered her for some days thereafter, in
part because she had been unable to respond more
actively to it.

In between the hate stare and violence are many
other hostile actions. Most happen so fast that
withdrawal, resigned acceptance, or an immedi-
ate verbal retort are the reasonable responses.
The female professor quoted earlier described
the fleeting character of harassment:
This incident illustrates the seldom-noted prob-
lem of “cross discrimination” — a black person
may suffer from discrimination aimed at other
people of color by whites unable to distinguish.
The white hostility was guided by certain signals
—an old car and dark skin — of minority-group
status. The nighttime setting, by assuring ano-
nymity, facilitated the hurling of racist epithets
and heightened the negative impact on this
woman, who found the harassment especially
dangerous and repulsive because she was with
her son. She drove away without replying. Later
in the interview she notes angrily. that in such
incidents her ascribed characteristic of “black-
ness” takes precedence over her achieved middle-
class characteristics and that the grouped thinking
of racism obscures anything about her that is
individual and unique.

For young middle-class blacks street harass-
ment can generate shock and disbelief, as in the
case of this college student who recounted a street
encounter near her university in the Southwest:
The respondent’s first coping response was to
think the assailants were not speaking to her and
her friends. Again we see the tendency for mid-
dle-class blacks to assess situations carefully and
to give whites the benefit of the doubt. Her sub-
sequent response was tearful acquiescence, but
her friends were ready to react in a more aggres-
sive way. The discriminators may have moved
on before a considered response was possible.
This episode points up the impact of destructive
racial coding on young people and hints at the
difficulty black parents face in socializing chil-
dren for coping with white hostility. When I dis-
cussed these street incidents involving younger
blacks with two older black respondents, one a
southern civil rights activist and the other an Ivy-
League professor, both noted the problem creat-
ed for some middle-class black children by their
well-intentioned parents trying to shelter them
from racism.

It seems likely that for middle-class blacks the
street is the site of recurring encounters with var-
ious types of white malevolence. A vivid exam-
ple of the cumulative character and impact of
this discrimination was given by another black
student at a white university, who recounted his
experiences walking home at night from a cam-
pus job to his apartment in a predominantly white
residential area:
In a subsequent comment this respondent men-
tioned that he also endured white men hurling
beer cans and epithets at him as he walked home.
Again the cumulation of incidents is evident.
Everyday street travel for young black middle-
class males does not mean one isolated incident
every few years.

Unable to “see” his middle-class symbols of
college dress and books, white couples (as well
as individuals) have crossed the street in front of
cars to avoid walking near this modest-build black
student, in a predominantly white neighborhood.
Couples moving into defensive postures are
doubtless reacting to the stigma of “black male-
ness.” The student perceives such avoidance as
racist, however, not because he is paranoid, but
because he has previously encountered numer-
ous examples of whites taking such defensive
measures. Many whites view typical “street”
criminals as black or minority males and proba-
bly see young black males as potentially danger-
ous (Graber 1980, p. 55). This would seem to be
the motivation for some hostile treatment black
males experience in public places. Some schol-
ars have discussed white perceptions of black
males as threatening and the justifiability of that
perception (Warr forthcoming), but to my
knowledge there has been no discussion in the
literature of the negative impact of such percep-
tions on black males. This student reports that
being treated as a pariah (in his words, a “crimi-
nal and a rapist”) has caused him severe psycho-
logical problems. When I discussed this student’s
experiences with a prominent black journalist in
a northeastern city, he reported that whites
sometimes stop talking — and white women grab
their purses — on downtown office-building ele-
vators when he enters. These two men had some-
what different responses to such discrimination,
one relatively passive and the other aggressive.
Ina follow-up interview the student reported that
he rarely responded aggressively to the street
encounters, apart from the occasional quick curse,
because they happened too quickly. Echoing the
black graduate student’s comments about pro-
cessing input and missed opportunities, he add-
ed: “I was basically analyzing and thinking too
much about the incident.” However, the journal-
ist reacts more assertively; he described how he
turns to whites in elevators and informs them,
Here we see how some whites perceive blacks,
including middle-class blacks, in interracial situ-
ations. The verbal attack by the whites was laced
with the stereotype about blacks as welfare chis-
elers. This brought forth an angry response from
the black couple, which probably came as a sur-
prise to the whites. This is another example of
Brittan and Maynard’s (1984, p.7) point that
discriminatory interaction is shaped today by the
way in which oppressors and oppressed mediate
their relative positions. Note too the role of the
off-duty police officer. The respondent does not
say whether the officer was white or black, but
this detail suggests that certain contexts of dis-
crimination have changed — in the past a (white)
police officer would have sided with the whites.
This respondent also underscores her and her
husband’s occupational achievements, high-
lighting her view that she has attained the Amer-
ican middle-class ideal. She is incensed that her
obvious middle-class symbols did not protect her
from verbal abuse.

The importance of middle-class resources in
street encounters was dramatized in the comments
of a parole officer in a major West Coast city. He
recounted how he dealt with a racial epithet:
“What are you doing here?” I tell them what I’m
doing here. ... And so me spread on top of my car.
[What had you done?] Because I was in the neigh-
borhood. I left this note on these peoples’ house:
“Here’s who I am. You weren’t here, and I will
come back in thirty minutes.” [Why were they
searching you?] They don’t know. To me, they’re
searching, I remember at that particular moment
when this all was going down, there was a lot of
reports about police crime on civilians. . . . It took
four cops to shake me down, two police cars, so
they had me up there spread out. I had a friend of
mine with me who was making the call with me,
because we were going to have dinner together, and
he was black, and they had me up, and they had him
outside. .. . They said, “Well, let’s check you out.”
... And I’m talking to myself, and I’m not thinking
about being at attention, with my arms spread on
my Ford [a company car], and I’m sitting there
talking to myself, “Man, this is crazy, this is crazy.”

[How are you feeling inside?] Scared, I mean
real scared. [What did you think was going to hap-
pen to you?] I was going to go to jail. . . . Just
because they picked me. Why would they stop me?
It’s like, if they can stop me, why wouldn’t I go to
jail, and I could sit in there for ten days before the
judge sees me. I’m thinking all this crazy stuff. . . .
Again, I’m talking to myself. And the guy takes his
stick. And he doesn’t whack me hard, but he does it
with enough authority to let me know they mean
business. “I told you stand still; now put your arms
back out.” And I’ve got this suit on, and the car’s
wet. And my friend’s hysterical. He’s outside the
car. And they’re checking him out. And he’s like,
“Man, just be cool, man.” And he had tears in his
eyes. And I’m like, oh, man, this is a nightmare.
This is not supposed to happen to me. This is not
my style! And so finally, this other cop comes up
and says, “What have we got here Charlie?” “Oh,
we’ve got a guy here. He’s running through the
neighborhood, and he doesn’t want to do what we
tell him. We might have to run him in.” [You’re
“running through” the neighborhood?] Yeah, ex-
actly, in a suit in the rain?! After they got through
doing their thing and harassing me, I just said, “Man
this has been a hell of a week.”

And I had tears in my eyes, but it wasn’t tears of
upset. It was tears of anger; it was tears of wanting
to lash back. . .. What I thought to myself was,
man, blacks have it real hard down here. I don’t
care if they’re a broadcaster; I don’t care if they’re
a businessman or a banker. . . . They don’t have it
any easier than the persons on skid row who get
harassed by the police on a Friday or Saturday night.

It seems likely that most black men — including
middle-class black men — see white police of-
ficers as a major source of danger and death (See
“Mood of Ghetto America” 1980, June 2, pp. 32-
34; Louis Harris and Associates 1989; Roddy
1990, August 26). Scattered evidence suggests
that by the time they are in their twenties, most
black males, regardless of socioeconomic status,
have been stopped by the police because “black-
ness” is considered a sign of possible criminality
by police officers (Moss 1990; Roddy 1990, Au-
gust 26). This treatment probably marks a dra-
matic contrast with the experiences of young
white middle-class males. In the incident above
the respondent and a friend experienced severe
police maltreatment — detention for a lengthy
period, threat of arrest, and the reality of physical
violence. The coping response of the respondent
was resigned acceptance somewhat similar to the
deference rituals highlighted by Goffman. The
middle-class suits and obvious corporate creden-
tials (for example, survey questionnaires and
company car) did not protect the two black men.
The final comment suggests a disappointment
that middle-class status brought no reprieve from
police stigmatization and harassment.
[One problem with ] being black in America is that
you have to spend so much time thinking about
stuff that most white people just don’t even have to
think about. I worry when I get pulled over by a
cop. I worry because the person that I live with is a
black male, and I have a teen-aged son. I worry
what some white cop is going to think when he
walks over to our car, because he’s holding on to a
gun. And I’m very aware of how many black folks
accidentally get shot by cops. I worry when I walk
into a store, that someone’s going to think I’m in
there shoplifting. And I have to worry about that
because I’m not free to ignore it. And so, that thing
that’s supposed to be guaranteed to all Americans,
the freedom to just be yourself is a fallacious idea.
And I get resentful that I have to think about things
that a lot of people, even my very close white friends
whose politics are similar to mine, simply don’t
have to worry about.
This commentary about a number of encounters
underscores the pyramiding character of dis-
crimination. This prominent scholar has faced
excessive surveillance by white police officers,
who presumably view blacks as likely criminals.
As in the previous example, there is great fear of
white officers, but her response is somewhat dif-
ferent: She draws on her middle-class resources
for protection; she cautiously interposes her mid-
dle-class status by pulling out a university LD.
card. In the verbal exchange her articulateness as
a professor probably helps protect her. This as-
sertive use of middle-class credentials in dealing
with police marks a difference from the old
asymmetrical deference rituals, in which high-
lighting middle-class status would be considered
arrogant by white officers and increase the dan-
ger. Note, too, the explicit theory of rights that
she, like many other middle-class blacks, holds
as part of her American dream.
I have examined the sites of discrimination, the
types of discriminatory acts, and the responses of
the victims and have found the color stigma still
to be very important in the public lives of afflu-
ent black Americans. The sites of racial discrim-
ination range from relatively protected home sites,
to less protected workplace and educational sites,
to the even less protected public places. The 1964
Civil Rights Act guarantees that black Ameri-
cans are “entitled to the full and equal enjoyment
of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, ad-
vantages, and accommodations” in public ac-
commodations. Yet the interviews indicate that
deprivation of full enjoyment of public facilities
is not a relic of the past; deprivation and discrim-
ination in public accommodations persist. Mid-
dle-class black Americans remain vulnerable
targets in public places. Prejudice-generated ag-
gression in public places is, of course, not limit-
ed to black men and women — gay men and
white women are also targets of street harassment
(Benokraitis and Feagin 1986). Nonetheless,
black women and men face an unusually broad
range of discrimination on the street and in pub-
lic accommodations.

The interviews highlight two significant as-
pects of the additive discrimination faced by black
Americans in public places and elsewhere: (1)
the cumulative character of an individual's ex-
periences with discrimination; and (2) the group’s
accumulated historical experiences as perceived
by the individual. A retired psychology profes-
sor who has worked in the Midwest and South-
west commented on the pyramiding of incidents:
Particular acts, even antilocution that might seem
minor to white observers, are freighted not only
with one’s past experience of discrimination but
also with centuries of racial discrimination di-
rected at the entire group, vicarious oppression
that still includes racially translated violence and
denial of access to the American dream. Anti-
black discrimination is a matter of racial-power
inequality institutionalized in a variety of eco-
nomic and social institutions over a long period
of time. The microlevel events of public accom-
modations and public streets are not just rare and
isolated encounters by individuals; they are re-
curring events reflecting an invasion of the mi-
croworld by the macroworld of historical racial
subordination.

The cumulative impact of racial discrimina-
tion accounts for the special way that blacks have
of looking at and evaluating interracial incidents.
One respondent, a clerical employee at an adop-
tion agency, described the “‘second eye” she uses:
many whites see as black “paranoia” (e.g., Wie-
seltier 1989, June 5) is simply a realistic sensitiv-
ity to white-black interaction created and con-
stantly reinforced by the two types of cumulative
discrimination cited above.

Blacks must be constantly aware of the reper-
toire of possible responses to chronic and bur-
densome discrimination. One older respondent
spoke of having to put on her “shield” just before
she leaves the house each morning. When
quizzed, she said that for more than six decades,
as she leaves her home, she has tried to be pre-
pared for insults and discrimination in public
places, even if nothing happens that day. This
extraordinary burden of discrimination, evident
in most of the 135 interviews in the larger sam-
ple, was eloquently described by the female pro-
fessor who resented having to worry about life-
threatening incidents that her “very close white
friends . . . simply don’t have to worry about.”
Another respondent was articulate on this point:
Allport, Gordon. 1958. The Nature of Prejudice.
Abridged. New York: Doubleday Anchor Books.

Benokraitis, Nijole and Joe R. Feagin. 1986. Modern
Sexism:Blatant, Subtle and Covert Discrimination.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.

Blauner, Bob. 1989. Black Lives, White Lives. Ber-
keley: University of California Press.

Brittan, Arthur and Mary Maynard. 1984. Sexism,
Racism and Oppression. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Collins, Sheila M. 1983. “The Making of the Black
Middle Class.” Social Problems 30:369-81.

Doyle, Betram W. 1937. The Etiquette of Race Rela-
tions in the South. Port Washington, NY: Kennikat
Press.

Feagin, Joe R. and Douglas Eckberg. 1980. “Prejudice
and Discrimination.” Annual Review of Sociology
6:1-20.

Feagin, Joe R. and Clairece Booher Feagin. 1986.
Discrimination American Style (rev. ed). Mel-
bourne, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.

Gardner, Carol Brooks. 1980. “Passing By:Street Re-
marks, Address Rights, and the Urban Female.”
Sociological Inquiry 50:328-56.

. 1988. ‘Access Information:Public Lies and
Private Peril.” Social Problems 35:384-97.

Goffman, Erving. 1956. “The Nature of Deference
and Demeanor.” American Anthropologist 58:473-
502.
Henley, Nancy M. 1978. Body Politics. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.:Prentice-Hall.

Jaynes, Gerald D. and Robin Williams, Jr. (eds.). 1989.
A Common Destiny:Blacks and American Society.
Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.

Landry, Bart. 1987. The New Black Middle Class.
Berkeley:University of California Press.

Louis Harris and Associates. 1989. The Unfinished
Agenda on Race in America. New York:NAACP
Legal Defense and Educational Fund.

“The Mood of Ghetto America.” 1980, June 2. New-
sweek, pp. 32-4.

Moss, E. Yvonne. 1990. “African Americans and the
Administration of Justice.” Pp. 79-86 in Assessment
of the Status of African-Americans, edited by
Wornie L. Reed. Boston: University of Massachu-
setts, William Monroe Trotter Institute.

Perry, David C. and Paula A. Sornoff. 1973. Politics at
the Street Level. Beverly Hills: Sage.

Raper, Arthur F. 1933. The Tragedy of Lynching.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Roddy, Dennis B. 1990, August 26. “Perceptions Still
Segregate Police, Black Community.” The Pitts-

burgh Press, p. B1.

Rollins, Judith 1985. Between Women. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.

Warr, Mark. Forthcoming. “Dangerous Situations:
Social Context and Fear of Victimization.” Social
Forces.

Wieseltier, Leon. 1989, June 5. “Scar Tissue.” New
Republic, pp. 19-20.

Willie, Charles. 1983. Race, Ethnicity, and Socioeco-
nomic Status. Bayside: General Hall.

Wilson, William J. 1978. The Declining Significance
of Race. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged:The Inner
City, the Underclass, and Public Policy. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
