American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
sirability scale and the continuum of socio-
economic status, not only reveals certain
linkages between the physical and social
order, but also provides an estimate of the
predictive value of aerial photographic data
for delimiting the social areas of the city.
This relationship, testing the third under-
lying hypothesis of the study, was deter-
mined by the product moment correlation
between the census tract scores on the two
scale continua. The coefficient was found to
be +.88, representing a high positive rela-
tionship significant at less than the .001 level
of confidence. This means that for the city
of Birmingham 78-per cent of the variation
in socio-economic status distributions is ac-
counted for by the variation in residential
desirability as defined herein.12 The nature

11The term “high” is used in describing the
degree of association because of the absolute size
of the coefficient and because of its relative size in
comparison with social data and ecological corre-
lations in general. Moreover, although the absolute
size of the sample N of 28 is small, it represents
50 per cent of the city “universe” of such units
and is, therefore, substantially high. The Fisher
“Z” transformation was used to determine the
significance of the coefficient. The 95-per cent con-
fidence limits employing “t” distribution revealed
a reliability of r= +.95 to +.75.

12Tt should be noted that the residential de-
sirability scale, by the nature of its content, places
most emphasis on “economic ecology” or the ability
to pay for preferred residential sites. A study of
deviant cases, represented by the “errors” on the
scale permits the interpretation that ecological
variables of lesser magnitude such as “sentiment
and symbolism” constitute locational forces ac-
URBAN STRUCTURE AND SOCIAL PARTICIPATION 13

» and the continuum of socio-
us, not only reveals certain
een the physical and social
0 provides an estimate of the
1e of aerial photographic data
the social areas of the city.

nship, testing the third under-
sis of the study, was deter-
: product moment correlation
ensus tract scores on the two
. The coefficient was found to
resenting a high positive rela-
icant at less than the .001 level
'1 This means that for the city
n 78-per cent of the variation
mic status distributions is ac-
yy the variation in residential
; defined herein. The nature

“high” is used in describing the
ation because of the absolute size
t and because of its relative size in
1 social data and ecological corre-
il. Moreover, although the absolute
ple N of 28 is small, it represents
the city “universe” of such units
re, substantially high. The Fisher
tion was used to determine the
he coefficient. The 95-per cent con-
mploying “t” distribution revealed
= +.95 to +.75.

be noted that the residential de-
by the nature of its content, places
n' “economic ecology” or the ability
ferred residential sites. A study of
epresented by the “errors” on the

of the association between the two patterns
is more precisely described by the regression
equation, Yo==2.8027+-1.20883(X).

It is quite clear that the residential de-
sirability scale, comprising the type of data
obtainable by aerial photographic interpre-
tation, has an important predictive power for
determining the ecological basis of the urban
social stratification system. The content of
the two scales is such that the variable Y,
socio-economic status rank, combines a series
of social characteristics associated with X,
which in turn reflects the joint relationships
of many physical structural features of the
city. For this reason the regression equation
may be described as a mathematical model
of this city considered as a complex socio-
physical system.

In summary, these findings, related to
both theory and method in urban sociology,
indicate that aerial photographic information
may be profitably utilized to supplement and
substitute for other data collection sources.
Furthermore, it is clearly indicated that the
Guttman scalogram method provides an ex-
cellent analytical model for research in urban
structure. Finally, there appears to be some
promise that further investigation of tech-
niques and relationships suggested herein
may help clarify and elaborate contemporary
theory in urban ecology within a more com-
prehensive structure-function system frame-
work.
2Some recent works which reflect this point of
view include: W. F. Whyte, Street Corner Society:
The Social Structure of an Italian Slum, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1943; Floyd Dotson,
“Patterns of Voluntary Association Among Urban
Working Families,” American Sociological Review,
16 (October, 1951), pp. 687-93; Donald L. Foley,
Neighbors or Urbanites, Rochester, New York:
Department of Sociology, The University of
Rochester; Morris Janowitz, The Community Press
in an Urban Setting, Glencoe, Illinois: The Free
Press, 1952.

3 This paper is based on work more fully reported
in, Morris Axelrod, A Study of Formal and Informal
Group Participation in a Large Urban Community,
University of Michigan: Doctoral Dissertation,
1953.

4The Detroit Area Study is a graduate training
program and research facility which at the time
was supported by the Committee on Individual
Behavior and Human Relations of the University
FORMAL GROUP ASSOCIATION ®

Nearly two-thirds (63 per cent) of the
population are members of formal groups.
Thus it is seen that membership in formal
groups is widespread in this urban commu-
nity, but far from inclusive of the whole
adult population. The number of member-
ships is shown in Table 1. One-half of all the
members belong to only one group, and
three-quarters to one or two groups. Al-
though membership is widespread, compara-
tively few people belong to more than one
group.

of Michigan out of funds granted to the University
by the Ford Foundation for the development of
training in the behavioral sciences. The project is
associated with the Department of Sociology and
the Survey Research Center of the University.

5A detailed description of the sample design
may be found in Leslie Kish and Lysle Sommers,
Selection of a Sample of Dwelling Units for the
Detroit Metropolitan Area, mimeographed Report
of the Survey Research Center, University of
Michigan, 1952.

6 In general, the sense in which “formal organiza-
tion” is used corresponds to that of “voluntary as-
sociation” in the following quotation: “The term
‘voluntary association’ is used in this report to de-
note those groups which are private (as dis-
tinguished from public or governmental bodies)
and entrance into which rests on the choice of the
individual (as distinguished from involuntary for-
mations such as family, church, and nation into
which the individual is born). The term ‘voluntary
association’ is also restricted in this report to non-
profit voluntary associations (as distinguished from
profit making corporations, partnerships, etc.).
More specifically, then, this section deals with such
groups as fraternal orders, civic and reform socie-
ties, cooperatives, trade unions, trade associations,
youth associations, and recreation and leasure-time
groups.” [Our Cities, Their Role in the National
Economy (June, 1937), Report of the Urbanism
Committee to the National Resources Committee,
Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing
Office, 1937, p. 24.]
Grand Total 100 100
Number of cases 749 471

 

* Includes members who had attended no meet-
ings in the three month period preceding the inter-
view.

} Includes members who reported attending one
or two meetings in the three month period preced-
ing the interview.

tIncludes members who reported attending at
least three meetings in the three month period pre-
ceding the interview.

§ Includes members who reported attending at
least three meetings in the three month period pre-
ceding the interview and were additionally active
in one of the following ways: holding office, having
committee membership, participating outside of
regular meetings on at least two occasions during
the three month period.
committee members, or are active in other
ways.

The extent of participation in formal
groups was found to vary for different sub-
groups in the population. The greatest dif-
ference occurred between groups varying in
amount of education, family head’s occupa-
tion and in family income. These, of course,
are all highly interrelated as measures of
socio-economic status apart from their in-
dependent effects.

Table 3a demonstrates that extent of in-
volvement varies with income: higher in-
come is associated with a greater probability
of membership and higher activity. Less than
one-half of those whose family income is
under $3000 have formal group membership,
while twice this proportion among those
whose family earnings exceed $7000 are
group members.

The effect of education is shown in Table
3b. Education is quite strikingly related to
the extent of formal group participation.
More than three-quarters of all persons with
some college experience have formal group
membership, while only half of those with
grade school have formal group membership.

The relationship between formal group
participation and occupation of the head of
the family is shown in Table 3c. This table
suggests that where the head is engaged in a
white-collar occupation, the family member
is somewhat more likely to belong to a formal
group.

Social status as inferred from income, oc-
cupation, and education may be viewed as
an index to a person’s power position in the
social structure. We expect the high status
person to join with others, who are in a
similar position, in such organizations as will
safeguard his position. In addition, high
status represents a convergence of many
kinds of interests arising in part from higher
education, more and more varied contacts,
and interaction arising from demands of the
occupational role. The factory worker at the
conclusion of his day’s work may dismiss
his work from his mind. The professional or
the executive finds the dividing line between
his work and his other activities a tenuous
one.

Apart from these specifics which contrib-
ute and are related to status, status once
achieved becomes a value which must be
maintained. Exclusive clubs, rather than in-
clusive clubs, are instruments for maintain-
ing this status. Higher status roles carry the
obligation of participation in various kinds
of community activity. Community Chest
activities are almost obligatory on the part of
the junior executive. Some memberships such
as the country club are the conspicuous
trappings of status. In this connection Svend
Riemer has observed, “The social assets of
belonging to the right country club, the right
church, and the right service club, and par-
ticipating in charities are ignored only at
the cost of economic loss.” 7

It was found that a large proportion of
the whole population are members of formal
organizations, although not many are active.
It is not surprising this should be true for a
large complex population such as we are
concerned with here. The secondary groups
link together the various roles necessary to
maintain the routine activities of the com-
munity in meeting its daily needs. As noted
earlier, in the view of traditional sociology,
this was considered the main way in which
a large urban community is integrated.
A principal function of informal associa-
tion seems to be that of creating cohesive
and common values in the population. Apart
from the functional integration of specialized
roles into working relationships through the
specification of proper role behaviors associ-
ated with the various socio-economic roles,
there are universal norms in the society
which must regulate behavior. These have to
do with the relations among all people and
not some circumscribed segment. There are
rules, standards, norms, and behaviors which
all members of a given society share and
that have to do with “common decency,”
and etiquette. An important source of such
norms is the intimate informal group, such
as the family and the peer group. To the
extent that these assumptions are true, the
question of the extent of participation in in-
formal groups in this community is an im-
portant one.

Table 4 reports the frequency with which
the general population associates with each
type of informal group. More people get
together frequently with their relatives out-
side of the immediate family than they do
with friends, neighbors, and co-workers.
About one-half of the population report that
they see these relatives at least once a week.
Nearly three-quarters see relatives about once
a month or more often. This is in sharp
contrast to the stereotype which pictures the
city dweller as devoid of kinship associations.
than on ceremonial occasions such as chris-
tenings, marriages, and wakes.

Of the remaining types of informal asso-
ciation, more people report getting together
with friends (other than friends among their
neighbors or work associates). Nearly two-
thirds of all people see their friends at least
once a month, and nearly one-half get to-
gether with their neighbors at least once a
month. About one-third associate with co-
workers at least once a month.

Perhaps a better picture of the total
amount of such informal participation is af-
forded by the composite of the frequency of
each of these contacts as shown in Table 5.
Nearly two-thirds of the whole population
get together with such groups more than
once a week. About one-sixth have such
informal association once a week, and nearly
all of the remaining one-sixth of the popula-
tion do have some informal association, if
not so frequent.
Co- No.
Rela- Neigh- Work- of
tives Friends bors ers Cases

 

a. Social Status +

1 (low) 60 34 37 18 = 104
2 64 50 48 19 108
3 62 47 37 20 97
4 74 55 28 22 111
5 65 54 37 23 87
6 (high) 58 62 41 28 = 106

b. Family Income
Under $3000 52 37 37 12 106

$3000-3999 63 50 39 19 164
$4000-4999 67 48 40 22 138
$5000-5999 74 43 35 25 102
$6000-6999 64 44 29 23 77

$7000 and over 54 57 44 28 116
c. Education

0-6 years 53 24 26 8 92
7-8 years 59 42 40 13 158
9-12 years 69 61 39 25 402

some college 50 61 37 25 95

* “Frequent association” is defined as getting to-
gether with the specified type of informal group at
least a few times a month.

{The measure of “social status” used was an
index constructed by Gerhard E. Lenski and
Werner Landecker. Its components are education,
income, occupation, and ethnic background of the
head of the family. These components were
weighted equally, and each individual’s score was
based on the percentile rank in the population of
each of his component characteristics. Thus the
status score is an average of the percentile ranks
for each person.
This consistency in pattern of association
with relatives, friends, neighbors, and co-
workers does not hold for the small group
with exceptionally high status, high income,
or some college education. Within each of the
highest categories, friends tend to replace
relatives as the group seen frequently by
most persons. Even among these exceptional
groups, however, from one-half to three-
quarters get together with their relatives
frequently.

One may speculate that education and
sophistication give the higher status indi-
vidual resources for integration which are
more frequently provided by the family in
the general population.

No substantiation of the view that formal
association substitutes for informal associa-
tion was found in this study. On the con-
trary, there is some suggestion, in Table 7,
that they vary directly. Although there are
no sharp differences, the relationship is in a
positive direction.
Formally organized associations have un-
questionably an important role in the urban
community. The ultimate logic of urban life
might conceivably still be towards a uni-
versal and intensive membership in such
groups. However, in the present scene their
direct influence does not touch a large part of
the population. The less than massive char-
acter of participation in formal organizations
suggests that insofar as such organizations
exercise any pervasive influence in the urban
community, it may be through the links be-
tween its minority of active members and the
underlying network of informal association
in the community at large.
