American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Since the 1980s, public policy analysts and sociologists of education have
increasingly focused on differences in school performance between public
and private schools, but ignored the effect on public school student perfor-
mance of the wide variation among states in the size of the private school
sector. I demonstrate that public school students in states with large private
school sectors have improved educational outcomes. Contrary to assump-
tions underlying the school-choice movement, however, the improved perfor-
mance of public school students is not the result of increased organizational
efficiency, but instead is the product of increased resources provided to pub-
lic schools. The state thus takes an active role in protecting public sector
providers. Institutional forces of inertia are less salient predictors of organi-
zational behavior than are dynamic political processes and public school
resource dependency on state financial sources of support.
cent in the size of the state’s private school
sector has no appreciable impact on public
schools.

I demonstrate that private schools’ market
share has a significant impact on the perfor-
mance of public schools: In states with large
private school sectors, public school students
have improved educational outcomes, as
school-choice advocates predict. Contrary to
assumptions underlying the privatization
movement, though, improved public school
student performance is not the result of in-
creased organizational efficiency generated
to strengthen competitiveness in the market
for students. Rather, improved performance
in states with large private school sectors is
obtained by increasing resources provided to
public schools: The state takes an active role
in protecting the position of public sector
providers. Increased resources at the school
level, not organizational changes caused by
increased competition, affect student out-
Sociologists of education have focused on
school-level effects since the significance of
peers was highlighted in the work of Cole-
man et al. (1966). Although a consensus has
emerged as to the general existence of
school-level effects, debate continues con-
cerning the magnitude of their influence, re-
searchers’ ability to accurately measure these
effects, and the particular types of school-
level differences that predict school out-
comes (Jencks and Brown 1975). The effects
of peer influences have been most clearly ac-
cepted (Kerckhoff 1986).

Measures of school effects involving the
quantity or quality of resources have been
less consistent in predicting student out-
comes. Other indicators that have been ex-
amined include expenditures per student,
teachers’ salaries, and percentages of teach-
ers with advanced degrees. Analyses of the
influences of these measures, however, has
often been limited by the lack of controls for
variation among states. Because the costs of
operating a school, the cost of living, and the
educational attainment of the labor pool vary
by state, the meaning of these school-level
measures is ambiguous when one does analy-
sis on a national sample. School-level effects
are also mediated by within-school stratifi-
cation, such as curricular tracking, that pro-
vides unequal access to school resources and
structures peer interactions (Gamoran and
Mare 1989). Even with these methodologi-
cal problems, research has generally demon-
strated the influence of class size and stu-
dent/teacher ratio on student achievement in
a variety of educational settings (Robinson
1990).!
Other research has focused on explaining
the difference in student achievement be-
tween public and private schools. The influ-
ential study by Coleman et al. (1982) docu-
mented a higher level of student achievement
(as measured by cognitive test scores) in pri-
vate schools relative to that in public schools,
even after controlling for many school selec-
tion and background characteristics. Al-
though their results were challenged by other
sociologists who included additional statisti-
cal controls in their models (Alexander and
Pallas 1985), their study nevertheless pointed
to student behavior and the disciplinary cli-
mate of the school—peer effects—as ac-
counting for “the greatest difference between
private and public schools” (Coleman et al.
1982:178). Other researchers have viewed
school-level effects largely as the product of
the internal organization of the school
(Chubb and Moe 1990).
direct relationship between organizational
behavior and efficiency does not necessarily
exist; rather institutional norms, values, and
behaviors resist small changes in the exter-
nal environment and do not respond to com-
petitive pressures. These theorists highlight
an institutional inertia that dampens effective
organizational adaptation to changing envi-
ronmental conditions.

School-choice advocates have appropri-
ated portions of this theoretical framework to
argue that public schools are by nature im-
pervious to reform efforts. Chubb and Moe
(1990) contended that public schools are
“highly bureaucratic and systematically lack-
ing in the requisites of effective perfor-
mance” because they are “governed by insti-
tutions of direct democratic control” (p. 67).

Institutional approaches, like those ad-
vanced by Scott and Meyer (1988) or Chubb
and Moe (1990), generally do not expect any
positive changes in public school perfor-
mance because of external environmental
changes, such as changes in the size of the
private school sector. Changes in private
schools’ market share thus should have little
effect on the norms, values, and practices of
the institution. In fact, institutional theorists
might predict a decline in public school out-
comes as the size of the private school sector
increases, because public schools would
probably be left with a student body of lower
socioeconomic origins and thus less benefi-
cial peer effects (also see Hirschman 1970).

Contrary to these pessimistic predictions,
positive effects of competition from the pri-
vate school sector have been found in empiri-
cal investigations of institutions of higher
education. Positive effects would also be pre-
dicted, though for different reasons, by other
sociological and economic perspectives on
organizations. Several studies have demon-
strated that institutions of higher education
are responsive to changes in competitive
pressures. Zajac and Kraatz (1993) proposed
a “diametric forces model” to explain the be-
havior of institutions of higher education that
are subjected to contradictory institutional
and environmental pressures. Competitive
market pressures have also been shown to
produce organizational changes in public
community colleges (Brint and Karabel
1989). Furthermore, a study of interstate
variation in public post-secondary enroll-
ments demonstrated a positive correlation
between the size of the private sector and tu-
ition rates at public two- and four-year col-
leges (Quigley and Rubinfeld 1993).

Positive effects of competitive pressures
would also be predicted from two mecha-
nisms highlighted in organizational theory:
efficiency and resource dependency. Effi-
ciency-based arguments have been promoted
by school-choice advocates who argue for
expanding the private school sector in order
to increase competitive market forces that
they believe will create greater organiza-
tional efficiency. Examining the school-
choice movement, Cookson (1994) noted
that supporters often look to the unfettering
of market forces as a panacea for problems
in the public schools. As an example of this
“market messiah” mentality, Cookson cited
the National Governors’ Conference 1986 re-
port Time for Results, which concluded that
“schools that compete for students, teachers
and dollars will, by virtue of their environ-
ment, make those changes that will allow
them to succeed” (Cookson 1994: 34).

The general success of private schools
relative to public schools has often been ex-
plained by this narrow interpretation of the
neoclassical economic model. Thus private
school supporters often attribute low public
school performance to an absence of ‘“‘com-
petitive markets.” Thus, public schools are
argued to have insulated themselves by
achieving a “monopoly position” and to have
flourished only by creating a “non-competi-
tive environment” (Peterson 1990).

A more sophisticated application of neo-
classical theory, however, would also empha-
size the role of resource dependency (Pfeffer
and Salancik 1978). According to this ap-
proach, public schools, when faced with in-
creased competition from the private sector,
would seek additional support from govern-
ment sources to ensure survival.

Positive responses to competitive pressures
would also be predicted by political ap-
proaches that developed out of earlier insti-
tutional models. Although institutional ap-
proaches, like those of Scott and Meyer
(1988) and Chubb and Moe (1990), often in-
corporate the state into organizational analy-
ses, they do so in a static and limited way.
Although an institutional framework in-
cludes an appreciation for the state’s role in
legitimating organizational behavior and es-
tablishing and participating in governance
structures, there is little recognition that the
state is a dynamic actor that responds to
changes in markets and organizational fields.
In a critique of nonpolitical institutional ap-
proaches, DiMaggio (1988) noted that insti-
tutional reproduction is a process that re-
quires organizational and individual agency.
This institutionalization process is “pro-
foundly political and reflects the relative
power of organized interests and the actors
who mobilize around them” (Dimaggio
1988:13). Thus, a political approach recog-
nizes that the state not only legitimizes orga-
nizational behavior and participates in gov-
ernance structures, but also actively and con-
tinuously intervenes to maintain the stability
of organizational fields.

The dynamic nature of the state’s role in
maintaining organizational and market sta-
bility has been highlighted in recent political
approaches within the sociology of organiza-
tions. Fligstein (1990) demonstrated that the
state has continuously interacted with eco-
nomic actors over the past century and a half
to define the rules of competition leading to
corporate “conceptions of control” and sta-
bility within organizational fields. In the lit-
erature that addresses the educational sys-
tem, however, the state has usually been
characterized either as a force that simply
expands its level of influence (Peterson
1990), or as a static and uniform force that
thwarts meaningful reform (Chubb and Moe
1990). I adopt the wider conception of a dy-
namic state that works to maintain the stabil-
ity of organizational fields.” Thus, a political
approach would expect the state to respond
to threats to organizations in the public sec-
tor by actively intervening to limit the desta-
bilizing influences of strong competition
from the private sector on the overall organi-
zational field.

Organizational theory thus provides con-
trasting predictions about the effects on pub-

2 By focusing on state intervention, I do not in-
tend to suggest an autonomous state. Rather, the
state largely operates to mediate conflict. Thus its
actions are the product of complex political pro-
cesses. In this paper, I focus on the state’s final
determination of school resource levels; the po-
litical roles of various interest groups in affecting
these outcomes is only speculated upon.
lic school outcomes of variation in size of the
private school sector. Free market advocates
predict that as the private school market
share increases, public schools will become
more “efficient” and improve performance
using existing organizational resources. In-
stitutional approaches emphasize the forces
of inertia within a set of multidirectional en-
vironmental forces, and thus predict a negli-
gible change or an actual decline in public
school outcomes as the private school sector
increases (because of the less beneficial peer
effects associated with those students re-
maining in the public schools).

Finally, political approaches or approaches
that emphasize organizational resource de-
pendency do not predict that school organi-
zations would become more “efficient” using
existing resources, but look for evidence that
the state actively intervened to maintain the
stability of the organizational field. These
approaches recognize that school outcomes
are part of a political process in which pub-
lic schools have organizational and political
allies that can provide support to combat
competition from the private sector. Al-
though the state is also subject to competing
political forces and actors, political activities
by unions, educational bureaucrats, teachers,
parents, students, and community members
historically have been influential in deter-
mining state levels of support for the public
schools. Thus a political approach focuses on
identifying evidence that the state worked to
maintain the position of the public school
sector. Although this intervention could in-
volve changes in legislation that would dis-
courage private school enrollment, a more
likely response would be to increase re-
sources to those public schools threatened by
the private school sector. A political or re-
source dependency model recognizes that an
organization’s environment and the structure
of competition—‘“the rules of the game”—
are open to manipulation in the context of a
dynamic political process.
Although private school competition could
affect the behavior of public schools in many
ways, I focus on the relationship between the
size of the private school sector and public
school resources, particularly student/teacher
ratios. Both political and resource depen-
dency approaches suggest that school re-
sources should increase in the face of in-
creased competitive pressures. Institutional
approaches, which highlight organizational
inertia, expect no variation in resource levels
or only effects resulting from ineffective or-
ganizational adaptation—for example,
schools may be slow to adjust resource lev-
els in response to changes in the public
schools’ share of student enrollments. Per-
student educational expenditures and the ra-
tio of teachers to total school staff are also
examined to determine if schools receive ad-
ditional funds to decrease student/teacher ra-
tios or are simply devoting additional re-
sources to instruction. Only in the latter case
are they responding to competitive pressures
by altering the schools’ organizational struc-
ture to become more efficient deliverers of
instructional inputs.
sources as measured by the student/teacher
ratios. Certain features of student/teacher ra-
tios make them an ideal measure of school
resources. First, the student/teacher ratio is a
good indicator of what Sgrenson and
Hallinan (1977) termed “opportunities for
learning’—the smaller the student/teacher
ratio, the more opportunities a student has to
receive direct instruction from the teacher.
Second, the ratio can be calculated at the
school level as a measure of site resources or
at the state level as a measure of a state’s
commitment to the public school sector.
Third, the ratio partially controls for varia-
tion among states in cost of living and related
costs of operating a school, because dollars
spent on teacher salaries are internally ad-
justed for local labor costs and living costs.

Second, with students as the units of analy-
sis, I determine whether being in a state with
a smaller student/teacher ratio helps stu-
dents’ cognitive outcomes. In particular, the
analysis focuses on the most reliable and fre-
quently used measure of student and school
outcomes: performance on standardized
tests. I use 12th-grade test scores, controlling
for 10th-grade test scores—a widely used ap-
proach to assessing school-level effects (see
Coleman et al. 1982; Alexander and Pallas
1985; Gamoran and Mare 1989).

The results from these sets of regressions
will help adjudicate between competing or-
ganizational explanations of variation in
school-level performance. Although the
analysis cannot identify the theoretical ap-
proach that best explains school behavior in
general, it is designed to identify those orga-
nizational forces that are the most salient
predictors of the overall pattern of effects. As
Zajac and Kraatz (1993) noted in their study
of higher education, environmental and insti-
tutional forces can operate simultaneously.
Although institutional forces may exist, their
presence, rather than making schools imper-
vious to change, might function only to
dampen the effects of competitive environ-
mental forces.
Federal support, 1980 10.82 4.21 Percent of state educational revenues that
are federal funds (C).

Church members, 1980 50.45 11.59 Percent of state residents that are church
members (A).

Percent metropolitan 62.13 23.25 Percent of state population living in a
metropolitan area (A).
Percent African American, 14.26 17.01 African American enrollment as percent of
public schools, 1980 all public school enrollment (C).
Percent Catholic school 55.65 19.96 Catholic enrollment as percent of all private
enrollment school enrollment (C).

 

* All variables based on data from SO states and the District of Columbia, except change in private school
sector, which omits Alaska and Hawaii.

> Data Sources: A = Statistical Abstract of the United States 1982-1983 (U.S. Bureau of the Census
1983); B = Biennial Survey of Education in the United States 1948-1950 (U.S. Department of Health, Edu-
cation, and Welfare 1954); C = Digest of Educational Statistics 1982 (National Center for Education Statis-
tics 1982).
© Calculation is based on attendance rather than enrollment because the former is the basis for educa-
tional funding. Student/teacher ratio does not consider noninstructional duties, and the mean is thus lower
than the actual ratio of students to teachers in an average classroom.

4 Both public and private ratios calculated on the basis of enrollment information because private schools
do not report attendance figures.

© Variation in state school costs were measured as average public school teacher salaries in the state
because public school teacher salaries are not strongly correlated with private sector market share (Pearson
correlation coefficient = .24, p > .05); payrolls, even without including other employee benefits, make up
more than half of the school district costs (Rafuse 1990); and no other appropriate nonsalary based measure
of costs of living is available at the state level.
Table 2. Definitions and Descriptive Statistics for Variables Used in the Student-Level Analysis

 

 

Variable Mean S.D. N Definition
Hispanic public school 12 33 10,673 Over-—sampled schools originally identi-
fied as having more than 30 percent
Hispanic students = 1,otherwise 0.°

 

4 Educational expectations were coded as follows: Less than high school = 0; high school graduate = 1;
less than two years of post high school vocational training = 2; less than two years of college = 3; two or
more years of vocational training = 4; two or more years of college = 5; college graduate = 6; Master’s
degree = 7; Doctorate or other advanced degree = 8.

> On average there were 12.6 students per school surveyed; this measure had a .532 correlation with the
student S.E.S. variable.

© In the actual realized sample 66.0 percent of the students from these schools were Hispanic compared to
7.6 percent in the regular sample of public schools (official educational statistics report 8.0 percent of the
public school students in 1980 as Hispanic). The correlation between the Hispanic student variable and the
Hispanic public school variable was .526. The alternative public school and Hispanic public school catego-
ries were highly concentrated in a small number of states: 65.6 percent of all students sampled in alternative
public schools were from Louisiana, Michigan, New York, or Pennsylvania; 72.9percent of all students
sampled in Hispanic public schools were from California, Florida, or Texas.
more, states currently are responsible for the
largest share of public school funding, and
this share has been increasing. In 1980, states
provided 46.8 percent of public school fund-
ing compared to 9.8 percent from federal
sources and 43.4 percent from local and
other sources (National Center for Education
Statistics 1982).

The Appendix indicates that although the
private school sector tends to be largest in the
mid-Atlantic states (which have high levels
of income, urbanization, unionization, and
percentage of African Americans in the pub-
lic schools), growth in the private school sec-
tor since 1950 was largest in the South,
where fundamentalist schools have served as
a refuge for White students leaving inte-
grated public schools (see Erikson 1986).
The states with the biggest decline in private
school sector from 1950 to 1980 also high-
light the declining role of Catholic schools
(see Greeley, McCready, and McCourt
1976).3

The state-level analysis examines the ef-
fect of the size of the private school sector
on public school resources as measured by
the student/teacher ratio, controlling for state
income per student, percent metropolitan,
federal support, Catholic school enrollment
in the private sector, and change in the size
of the private sector. The analysis also iden-
tifies the effects of the size of the private
school sector on “organizational efficiency,”
as measured by the ratio of teachers to total
staff employed in a state’s public school sys-
tem, and on state expenditures per-student in
the public schools. These analyses control
for income per student, federal support, per-
cent metropolitan, and teacher salary. Thus,
the research determines whether an increase
in the size of the private school sector is as-
sociated with changes in school resources at
the state level. Forces that generate increased
efficiency (emphasized by school-choice ad-
vocates) will be identified if the relationship
between size of the private school sector and
student/teacher ratios is simply a result of
schools using existing resources to hire more
teachers. Institutional inertia will be high-
lighted if the variation in student/teacher ra-
tios is the result of changes over time in the
size of the private school sector rather than
the absolute size of the private school sector.
The mechanisms of resource dependency and
political processes are suggested if school
resource levels are affected not only by eco-
nomic and demographic factors, like state in-
come levels, but also by the size of the pri-
vate school sector.

The state-level analysis is conducted on
1950 and 1980 data compiled from several
Statistical sources. Education data for 1980
are from the Digest of Education Statistics
(National Center for Education Statistics
1982); education data for 1950 are from the
Biennial Survey of Education in the United
States 1948-1950 (U.S. Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare 1954); demo-
graphic data for 1980 are from the Statistical
Abstract of the United States (U.S. Bureau
of the Census 1983). Regressions are con-
ducted on the 50 states and the District of
Columbia, except those that require informa-
tion on private school enrollment in 1950,
which was unavailable for Hawaii and
Alaska. Analysis is conducted on data
unweighted for the state’s population size.
schools (i.e., alternative public schools and
public high schools with a high percentage
of Hispanics). Three models are run with
these standard student-level control vari-
ables. These three models are run again add-
ing three state-level controls (income per stu-
dent, federal support, and percent metropoli-
tan) that are shown in the state-level analysis
to affect school resource levels net of the size
of the private school sector. Because these
models include extensive individual- and
school-level controls, these state-level vari-
ables do not have significant effects and do
not affect the earlier results.4

Model 1 includes the size of the private
school sector in the state in which the
student’s school is located. Model 1 thus ad-
dresses the question: Does the size of the pri-
vate school sector affect student performance
in the public schools? To control for changes
in the peer environment produced by an in-
crease in the size of the private school sec-
tor, Model 2 adds to Model | the average so-
cioeconomic background of students in a
respondent’s school. Finally, to test for the
effect of the private school sector on public
school resources, Model 3 adds to Model 2 a
measure of the average student-teacher ratio
of the state. Thus Models 2 and 3 address the
question: Are the effects on student outcomes
a result of changes in the peer climate,
changes in school resources, or simply vary-
ing rates of organizational efficiency brought
about by market competition? Free market
advocates argue that competition itself can
lead to more productive use of existing re-
sources, and thus the size of the private
school sector variable should remain signifi-

4 Originally, the likelihood of high school
graduation was used as a second measure of stu-
dent outcomes. In a logistic regression, the pat-
tern of significant effects was similar to that
found using test scores if state-level variables
were not included in the model. When state con-
trols were included, the effects of the key inde-
pendent variables were highly unstable, depend-
ing on which state variables were included. In
particular, the student/teacher ratio was a weak
predictor of the likelihood of high school gradua-
tion, and state-level measures, like percent met-
ropolitan and state laws mandating school atten-
dance, were strong predictors. The analysis pre-
sented here focuses on the traditional measure of
gain in test scores, where results are relatively
unaffected by extraneous state-level variations.
cantly positive even after peer effects and
school resources are incorporated in the
model. Organizational “efficiency” is identi-
fied if increases in the size of the private
school sector (i.e., net of changes in peer ef-
fects and school resources) have a positive
effect on public school students’ test scores.
Institutional inertia is identified if there are
no changes in public school students’ test
scores other than those related to changes in
peer climate. Resource dependency and po-
litical forces that indicate the state’s role in
maintaining stable organizational environ-
ments are highlighted if changes in public
school students’ test scores are a result of in-
creased material resources as reflected in stu-
dent/teacher ratios.

The student-level analysis is conducted on
a sample of 10,673 public school students
from the HSB dataset. The HSB study was a
two-stage stratified probability sample. In
the first stage, 1,015 schools were selected. I
eliminated 29 of these schools from the
analysis because fewer than five students re-
sponded to the survey, making estimates of
the school-level socioeconomic status unre-
liable. In the second stage, students at each
school were randomly sampled. HSB over-
sampled alternative schools and schools with
a high percentage of Hispanics (Carroll
1987). Estimates are based on unweighted
data; the stratifying variables of race and
oversampled public high schools are in-
cluded as independent variables in the equa-
tions.

I transferred state-level data to the student-
level data file by generating state locations
for schools in the HSB dataset. The state lo-
cation for each school was determined by
comparing the 1980, 1981, and 1982 unem-
ployment rates provided in the HSB Local
Labor Market file with those same figures as
reported in the Employment and Earnings
May 1983 and Employment and Earnings
June 1982 (U.S. Department of Labor 1983,
1982). For each school, a state match could
be made. The 1980, 1981, and 1982 state un-
employment rates were compiled by the Na-
tional Opinion Research Center staff and
based on the zip code of the school.

The HSB survey includes students from all
50 states and the District of Columbia. Al-
though the survey was not designed to gen-
erate representative data at the state level, in
Number of states 51 49 49 51 49 49 51 49
R? 37 AT 49 37 46 66 81 719

 

* Public school student/teacher ratio minus private school student/teacher ratio.

> Income per student in Models 1 through 3 predicting public school student/teacher ratio and public—
private student/teacher ratio gap use the adjusted z-scored measure; Models 1 and 2, which predict the
public school expenditures per student, use the unadjusted income per student measure because the depen-
dent variable is also in terms of.dollars and public school teacher salary is further used as a control.

<.05 “p< .01 (two-tailed tests)
lic and private schools, and per-student ex-
penditures in public schools.
Student/teacher ratio. Three models are
estimated for the regressions predicting stu-
dent/teacher ratios. Model | tests the effects
of size of the private school sector, income
per student, federal support, and percent met-
ropolitan on public school student/teacher
ratios and on the difference between public
and private school student/teacher ratios
(unionization was not included in these mod-
els as it did not have statistically significant
effects). Model 2 adds the percentage-point
change in the size of the private sector mar-
ket from 1950 to 1980 to Model 1 to deter-
mine if student/teacher ratios are related to
size of the private school sector or simply in-
dicate that states are slow to adjust resource
levels to adapt to changing enrollments.
Model 3 adds the percentage of Catholic
school enrollment in the state’s private
school sector. Catholic schools have tended
to adopt the pedagogical philosophy and
practices of the “common school,” which is
associated with larger class sizes. Competi-
tion from Catholic private schools character-
ized by large class sizes might affect the type
of adjustments that public schools make (or
could affect the difference between private
and public school student/teacher ratios in
the state).

For predicting student/teacher ratios, the
results for Model | show that as 1980 private
sector share increases, the number of stu-
dents per teacher in the public sector signifi-
cantly decreases. The estimate indicates that
for each increase of five percentage points in
the private school sector, public schools
would be expected to operate with one less
student per classroom teacher (after control-
ling for statewide income per student, federal
support, and percent metropolitan).> The re-
sults from Models 2 and 3 indicate that the
change in the size of the private school sec-
tor and the percentage of Catholic school en-
rollments in the private school sector do not
significantly affect this outcome. The size of
the private school sector, not the inability of
states to adjust to changes in student popula-
tions, or the presence of competition from
Catholic schools, accounts for a significant
portion of the variation in public school stu-
dent/teacher ratios.

In the second set of regressions in Table
3, the dependent variable is the public
school student/teacher ratio minus the pri-
vate school student/teacher ratio in each
state (i.e., the gap in educational resources
between public and private schools). The re-
sults from these regressions largely replicate
the findings for student/teacher ratios in the
public schools. After controlling for income
per student, federal support and percent
metropolitan, the larger the private school
sector in a state, the smaller the gap be-
tween the public and private school student/
teacher ratios with private schools having
smaller classes than public schools. Models
2 and 3 indicate that change in the size of
the private school sector and the percentage
Catholic enrollment in the state’s private
school sector are also each significant pre-
dictors of the state-level differences be-
tween public and private student/teacher ra-
tios. Thus, although the change in the size
of the private school sector did not affect
public school student/teacher ratios, it af-
fects the gap in student/teacher ratios be-
tween public and private schools, indicating
that the slowness of private schools to adjust
to changes in student enrollment levels is
partially responsible for the size of the gaps
in student/teacher ratios between the two
school sectors. Controlling for the percent-
age of Catholic school enrollments in the
private sector dampens the magnitude of
this difference, but the effect remains sig-
nificant.

The larger the private school sector, there-
fore, the smaller the private school advan-
tage in the “opportunities for learning” rep-
resented by the student/teacher ratio. An ex-
amination of predicted values based on
Model 3 in the second set of regressions
shows this dramatically. Assuming 1980
state means on income per student, federal
support, percent metropolitan, change in the
size of the private school sector, and per-
centage of Catholic school enrollments in
private schools, the difference in student/
teacher ratios between private schools and
public schools in a state would be 3.4 stu-
dents per teacher when the private school
sector is 1 percent, and 1.7 students per
teacher when the private school sector is 10
percent. When the private school sector
reaches 19 percent, the expected value for a
state with mean values on the other vari-
ables is 0 (i.e., public and private schools
would have identical student/teacher ra-
tios).®

Public school expenditures. The final set
of regressions in Table 3 examines per-stu-
dent public school expenditures. Results are
similar to those for student/teacher ratios. (In
these two models, unadjusted measures for
income per student are used because both
dependent and independent variables appear
in the equations in dollar amounts and
teacher salaries are included as a statistical
control.) The results confirm findings from
previous research that have shown up to 85
percent of the state-level variation in per stu-
dent expenditures is explained by teacher
salaries and student/teacher ratios (U.S. Ad-
visory Commission on Intergovernmental
Relations 1990). The results also show that
after controlling for income per student, fed-
eral support, percent metropolitan, and aver-
age teacher salary, per-student expenditures
increase significantly with the size of the pri-
vate school sector in the state. This effect is
unaffected by the 1950-1980 change in the
private school sector (Model 2). The results
from this regression predict increases of
slightly over $100 per student (in 1980 dol-
lars) for each 4 percentage point increase in
private school sector.

An examination of the relationship be-
tween size of the private school sector and
“organizational efficiency,” as measured by
the ratio of teachers to total staff employed
in the public schools, provides additional
evidence identifying the organizational pro-
cess whereby private sector competition af-
fects student/teacher ratios. The zero-order
correlation between size of the private school
sector and “organizational efficiency,” de-
fined as the ratio of teachers to total staff
employed in the public schools, is not sig-
nificant (r = .20). Thus, contrary to “market
messiah” predictions of increased efficiency,
the low student/teacher ratios in states with
large private school sectors are not a result
of schools devoting a greater portion of or-
ganizational resources to increase the num-
ber of teachers relative to other school staff.
As is demonstrated in Models 1 and 2, the
lower student/teacher ratios are largely the
result of higher levels of public school ex-
penditures per-student in these states.

The results in Table 3 indicate that public
school systems respond to challenges from
the private sector by devoting additional re-
sources to increasing the “opportunities for
learning” and thus increasing the competi-
tiveness of the public schools. The results
also suggest that more than just institutional
inertia (e.g., public school bureaucracies that
are slow to adjust staffing levels in response
to changes in the number of public school
students) is responsible for changes in stu-
dent/teacher ratios.’ Public schools have had
a great deal of time to adjust staffing require-
ments to the gradual changes in the private
school sector that occurred between 1950
and 1980, and the results in Table 3 suggest
that the change in the size of the private
school sector is not a significant factor pro-
ducing these outcomes. (Change in the size
of the private school sector is significant only
in predicting the difference in student/
teacher ratios between public and private
schools). The results thus suggest that state
educational budgets cannot be understood as
a simple reflection of the number of students
that share a fixed level of resources, but are
the product of a complex annual political
process that occurs in state legislatures (Kirst
and Garms 1980). Although the precise
mechanisms remain unclear, the results from
Table 3 suggest that the size of the private
school sector affects these political deci-
sions. Do these differences in state resources
affect student outcomes? Does the effect of
size of the private school sector operate on
student outcomes other than through the
mechanism of change in school resource lev-
els (e.g., in increased “efficiency” or an in-
crease in negative peer effects)? To address
these questions requires a student-level
analysis.
Table 4. OLS Coefficients for Regression of 12th-Grade Test Scores on Selected Independent Vari-
ables: Student-Level Analysis

 

 

Independent Variable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6
Private school sector .057"* .056"*
(.020) (.020)

Student/teacher ratio, — _—
public schools

Income per student _— —_—
(adjusted)

Federal support — —

Percent metropolitan _ _

038
(.021)
118°
(.046)

047"
(.023)

~.040
(.086)
-.079"*
(.030)
-.006
(.006)

.050°
(.023)

~.047
(.086)
-.069°
(.030)
-.007
(.006)

.026
(.026)
-.117"
(.055)
-.098
(.090)
-.046
(.032)

.001
(.007)

 

Note: For all six models, N = 6,910 and R?=.79.

“p< .05 ** b < .O1 (two-tailed tests)
8 An examination of the mean school socioeco-
nomic status for schools in states in the upper and
lower quartiles on size of private school sector
states demonstrates this tendency. Public schools
in states that fall in the lowest quartile on size of
the private school sector (less than 6.5 percent)
had a mean school socioeconomic status of —.29
compared to +.38 for private schools and -.21 for
all schools in those states. Public schools in states
that fall in the highest quartile on size of the pri-
vate school sector (more than 12.5 percent) had a
mean school socioeconomic status of —.15 com-
pared to +.13 for private schools and —.07 for all
schools in those states.

Two other estimates of the control variables in
this set of regressions are worth discussing.
Asians have lower than expected 12th-grade per-
formance (relative to the omitted White category)
because of Asian students’ higher mean educa-
tional expectations (5.44 compared to 4.01 for
Whites). Regressions run without controlling for
educational expectations showed no significant
difference in outcomes between Whites and
Asians. Public schools with a high percentage of
Hispanics also perform better than regular public
high schools, possibly because of the large num-
bers of “voluntary” immigrants who, ceteris pari-
bus, have higher than expected school outcomes
(Ogbu 1987).

9 Similar results are obtained using a school-
level student/teacher ratio taken from school ad-
ministrator reports of the number of students di-
able is added, the effect of the size of the pri-
vate school sector is greatly diminished and
loses significance. The student/teacher ratio
measure shows that the more students per
teacher, the less students learn as measured
by standardized test scores. Overall, results
indicate that public school students have
greater gains on test scores in states with a
large competing private sector, and this re-
sult is largely explained by the increased re-
sources available to public schools facing
greater competition from the private sector.

These findings are largely replicated in a
second set of regressions, which controls for
other state level variables shown to influence
school resource levels (Models 4-6 in Table
4) in Table 3 above. Adding controls for
state-level income per student, federal sup-
port, and percent metropolitan produces little
change in coefficients for key variables (size
of private school sector, school socioeco-
nomic status, and public school student/
teacher ratio). In Models 4 and 5, federal
support is associated with low test scores
(predictably, as much federal aid is targeted
to poorly performing schools in economi-
cally disadvantaged areas), but this effect
disappears after state-level student/teacher
ratios are considered.!°

In sum, results from the student-level
analyses demonstrate that, although size of
the private school sector has a positive influ-
ence on student outcomes, this effect is
largely a result of greater resources provided
to schools in these states.
I have focused on how public schools are af-
fected by the size of the private school sec-
tor. I have demonstrated that state-level stu-
dent/teacher ratios differ substantially be-
tween public and private school sectors in
states with relatively few private schools, and
are closer to equality in states with a larger
private school sector. Furthermore, these stu-
dent/teacher ratios affect student outcomes
and are responsible for much of the differ-
ence in public school student performance
related to competition from the private
school sector.

I have not examined the effects of the size
of the private school sector on within-school
stratification and organization. Future re-
search should examine how the structure of
tracking varies with size of the private school
sector. Public schools may respond to com-
petition by allocating additional state funds
to increase specialized vocational programs.
For example, Brint and Karabel (1989) have
shown that public community colleges his-
torically have adopted this market niche
strategy. Public schools may also respond to
competition by using additional resources to
increase the size of the academic track in or-
der to challenge the private schools’ empha-
sis in this curricular area.

I have not examined the effect of size of
the private school sector on the organization
and behavior of private schools (with the ex-
ception of a comparison of student-teacher
ratios between sectors in Table 2). Future re-
search should compare the performance of
public and private schools in states with
varying sizes of the private school sector. As
Levin (1989) suggested, this will require not
only a comparison of “private good” out-
comes (e.g., individual test scores), but also
“public good” outcomes (e.g., citizenship,
social responsibility, and multicultural un-
derstanding). One prediction can be made on
the basis of this research: Because of the ef-
fect of school-level resources, the perfor-
mance of students in private and public
schools on standardized tests should be most
similar in states with large private school
sectors.

On a theoretical level, the results suggest
that competitive forces do change the behav-
ior of public secondary schools, but they im-
prove public schools through increased fund-
ing, not increased efficiency. Theoretical ap-
proaches that highlight resource dependency
and dynamic political processes provide the
best framework for understanding why pub-
lic schools threatened by competition from
private schools can rely on organizational and
political allies for additional resources. Al-
though institutional inertia may exist, its ef-
fect is not to eliminate, but simply to dampen,
the response of the public schools to market
pressures. To understand variation among
states in levels of educational funding, how-
ever, research is needed to document the spe-
cific actions and interests of actors in local
political arenas. By 1980, public school fi-
nancing had become increasingly dependent
on state sources, and “elite political activity”
to pressure state governments had increased
(Kirst and Garms 1980). Competition from
the private sector may stimulate such politi-
cal activity. Public school advocates would
be expected to mobilize support to increase
funding in the state legislature, while simul-
taneously pursuing legal strategies to ensure
increased funding for economically or devel-
opmentally disadvantaged students. Courts
and legislatures may be more sympathetic to
defending the quality of public schools when
private schools are a significant threat.
Another mechanism whereby the size of
the private school sector may affect school
resource levels is suggested by Romer and
Rosenthal (1984). Examining school district
referenda in Oregon, they noted that voter
decisions were made on the basis of “fiscal
illusions”—voters were unaware of actual
levels of federal and state support for local
school districts—and political “agenda con-
trol” inflated locally-financed per-student ex-
penditures by between 15 and 40 percent. I
speculate that voters in areas with a large pri-
vate school sector may be unaware of the
savings to their public schools brought about
by the absence of substantial numbers of pri-
vate school students. In such states, public
school. advocates may be more effective at
using the challenge from the private sector
to control the political agenda and ensure
higher funding levels for public schools.
This study has policy implications con-
cerning the role of the private sector in el-
ementary and secondary education. First, a
large private school sector does not act as
simply as school-choice advocates have pre-
dicted: Problems in the public schools can-
not be magically corrected through the invis-
ible hand of an expanded competitive market
system without additional funding. Second,
the results highlight the effects of school re-
sources on student performance in the public
schools, reasserting the primacy of material
resources for student outcomes. Finally, be-
cause the primary benefit to public schools
of an expanding private sector is the indirect
effect through resource allocation, a more ef-
fective strategy for improving performance
Appendix. Selected Variables by State

 

 

. Student/
Private School Teacher Student/
Sector (Percent) Ratio, Public Teacher
Change Schools, Ratio Gap,
State 1980 1950-1980 1980 1980

High School
and
Beyond?

Sample Representativeness

Department
of
Education®
Alexander, Karl and Aaron Pallas. 1985. “School
Sector and Cognitive Performance: When Is a
Little a Little?” Sociology of Education 58:
115-28.

Brint, Steven and Jerome Karabel. 1989. The Di-
verted Dream: Community Colleges and the
Promise of Educational Opportunity in
America, 1900-1985. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Card, David and Alan Krueger. 1992. “Does
School Quality Matter? Returns to Education
and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the
United States.” Journal of Political Economy
100: 1-40.

Carroll, C. Dennis. 1987. High School and Be-
yond 1980 Sophomore Cohort Third Follow-
Up (1986): Data File User’s Manual. Wash-
ington, DC: Center for Educational Statistics.
Chubb, John and Terry Moe. 1990. Politics, Mar-
kets and American Schools. Washington, DC:

The Brookings Institute.

Coleman, James et al. 1966. Equality of Educa-
tional Opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S. De-
partment of Health, Education, and Welfare.

Coleman, James, Thomas Hoffer, and Sally
Kilgore. 1982. High School Achievement: Pub-
lic, Catholic, and Private Schools Compared.
New York: Basic Books.

Cookson, Peter. 1994. School Choice: the
Struggle for the Soul of American Education.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

DiMaggio, Paul. 1988. “Interest and Agency in
Institutional Theory.” Pp. 3-22 in Institutional
Patterns and Organizations: Culture and En-
vironment, edited by L. Zucker. Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger Publishing Company.

Erikson, Donald. 1986. “Choice and Private
Schools: Dynamics of Supply and Demand.”
Pp. 82-109 in Private Education: Studies in
Choice and Public Policy, edited by D. Levy.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Fligstein, Neil. 1990. The Transformation of Cor-
porate Control. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

Gamoran, Adam and Robert Mare. 1989. “Sec-
ondary School Tracking and Educational In-
equality: Compensation, Reinforcement or
Neutrality?” American Journal of Sociology
94:1146-83.

Greeley, Andrew M., William McCready, and
Kathleen McCourt. 1976. Catholic Schools in
a Declining Church. Kansas City, MO: Sheed
and Ward Inc.

Hanushek, Eric et al. 1994. Making Schools
Work: Improving Performance and Controlling
Costs. Washington, DC: The Brookings Insti-
tute.

Hanushek, Eric. 1989. “The Impact of Differen-
tial Expenditures on School Performance.”
Educational Researcher 18:45-65.

Hedges, Larry, Richard Laine, and Rob Green-
wald. 1994. “Does Money Matter? A Meta-
Analysis of Studies of the Effects of Differen-
tial School Inputs on School Outcomes.” Edu-
cational Researcher 23:5-14.

Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, Voice and Loy-
alty. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Jencks, Christopher and Marsha Brown. 1975.
“Effects of High Schools on their Students.”
Harvard Educational Review 45:273-324.

Kerckhoff, Alan. 1986. “Family Position, Peer
Influences and Schooling.” Journal of Youth
and Adolescence 15:93-111.

Kirst, Michael and Walter Garms. 1980. “The
Political Environment of School Finance
Policy in the 1980’s.” Pp. 47-78 in School Fi-
nance Policies and Practices: The 1980’s A
Decade of Conflict, edited by J. Guthrie. Cam-
bridge, MA: Ballenger Publishing Company.

Levin, Henry. 1989. “Education as a Public and

_ Private Good.” Pp. 215-32 in Public Values,
Private Schools, edited by N. Devins. New
York: The Falmer Press.

Meyer, John and Brian Rowan. [1977] 1983. “In-
stitutionalized Organizations: Formal Structure
as Myth and Ceremony.” Pp. 21-44 in Organi-
zational Environments: Ritual and Rationality,
edited by J. Meyer and R. Scott. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.

National Center for Education Statistics. 1982.
Digest of Education Statistics 1982. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Ogbu, John. 1987. “Variability in Minority
School Performance: A Problem in Search of
an Explanation.” Anthropology and Education
Quarterly 18:312-34.

Peterson, Paul. 1990. “Monopoly and Competi-
tion in American Education.” Pp. 47-79 in
Choice and Control in American Education,
edited by W. Clune and J. Witte. New York:
The Falmer Press.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey and Gerald Salancik. 1978. The
External Control of Organizations. New York:
Harper and Row.

Quigley, John M. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1993.
“Public Choices in Higher Education.” Pp.
243-83 in Studies of Supply and Demand in
Education, edited by C. Clotfelter and M.
Rothschild. Chicago, IL: The University of
Chicago Press.

Rafuse, Robert W. 1990. Representative Expen-
ditures: Addressing the Neglected Dimension
of Fiscal Capacity. Washington, DC: U.S. Ad-
visory Commission on Intergovernmental Re-
lations.

Robinson, Glen. 1990. “Synthesis of Research on
the Effects of Class Size.” Educational Lead-
ership 47:80-90.

Romer, Thomas and Howard Rosenthal. 1984.
Dynamic Analysis of School Spending Refer-
enda, Washington, DC: National Institute of
Education.

Scott, W. Richard and John W. Meyer. 1988.
“Environmental Linkages and Organizational
Complexity.” Pp. 128-160 in Comparing Pub-
lic and Private Schools, edited by T. James and
H. Levin. New York: The Falmer Press.

Sgrenson, Aage and Maureen Hallinan. 1977. “A
Reconceptualization of School Effects.” Soci-
ology of Education 50:273-89.

U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmen-
tal Relations. 1990. The Structure of State Aid
to Elementary and Secondary Education.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1953 and 1983. Sta-
tistical Abstract of the United States. Washing-
ton, DC: Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1982 and. 1983. Em-
ployment and Earnings May 1983 and June
1982. Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office.

U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Wel-
fare. 1954. Biennial Survey of Education in the
United States 1948-1950. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.

Zajac, Edward and Matthew Kraatz. 1993. “A
Diametric Forces Model of Strategic Change:
Assessing the Antecedents and Consequences
of Restructuring in the Higher Education In-
dustry.” Strategic Management Journal 14:83-
102.
