http://www.jstor.org/stable/208797 2?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
SSAGE
In closing this paper we need but briefly
restate the fundamental considerations. So-
cial casework is concerned with social action
which must of necessity involve moral judg-
ments. The latter, in turn, are rooted in the
cultural matrix of our society. In contrast,
social psychology has to do with the collec-
tion and generalization of facts with a view
to the systematic formulation of laws of
social behavior. Yet both fields may and do
contribute to each other. The contribution
of casework to social psychology would be
greatly enhanced by further development of
objective measures of their operations. On
the other hand, social psychology may learn
much from casework, not only of facts
regarding behavior, but in many techniques
of securing data.
Significantly, also, foundation interest has
been directed with emphasis to this problem.
In 1947-1948 the Trustees of the Russell
Sage Foundation decided to devote particu-
lar attention to the need for a closer relation-
ship between social practice and the behavior
sciences. This was not the formulation of a
completely new policy because some efforts
of the Foundation had been directed at this
goal from the beginning of its work.? The
strengthening of emphasis in this direction,
however, was pronounced and its timing
fortunate. It came at a moment when social
practitioners and social scientists were ready
to react positively to its stimulation.
During 1948-1949 the Foundation initi-
ated several projects in line with this policy

 

“What Can Social Case Work Contribute to the
Social Sciences?” American Sociological Review, 15
(1950), 66-73.

2 Russell Sage Foundation, Annual Report 1948-
1949, pp. 8-9.
decision. It secured the services of Professor
Leo W. Simmons of the Sociology Depart-
ment of Yale University for two years’ work
with the Department of Medicine of Cornell
Medical College and the School of Nursing.
In cooperation with the New York School of
Social Work, Columbia University, it pro-
vided the services of a social anthropologist,
Dr. Katherine Spencer from Harvard Uni-
versity, for a one-year period of work in
relation to the professional education of so-
cial workers. It arranged with Lloyd E.
Ohlin, Sociologist of the Illinois Parole
Board, to have him prepare a manual on
parole selection. Finally, it made an agree-
ment with the Jewish Board of Guardians of
New York City for a joint project to im-
prove cooperation between social scientists
and specialists in child guidance?

The Jewish Board of Guardians is a psy-
choanalytically oriented multiple service
agency which, among its various depart-
ments, has a large child-guidance institute.
The leadership of the agency is recognized in
the professional training of psychotherapists.
It is an accredited training center for child
psychiatrists as well as social case workers.

The cooperative project between the
Foundation and the agency was designed as
an exploration of the contribution potential
of the existing funds of social science knowl-
edge to child guidance practice and of the
research needs experienced by child guidance
workers. Under the arrangement, the writer
was appointed consultant sociologist on the
staff of the agency in order to perform these
two exploratory tasks for the year 1949-
1950. After its expiration, his appointment
was renewed for the year 1950-1951. The
impressions gained and the tentative findings
made in the course of this project so far are
here presented for purposes of indicating
what liaison service between social scientists
and social practitioners in one specific area
may involve and may produce.

According to the experience of the writer,
it is helpful for a social science consultant
called into an organization of practitioners
to have certain attitudes toward his own
equipment for the task, toward the equip-
ment of the personnel enabling them to use
what he may have to give, and toward those
areas of knowledge that are currently applied
by the organization.

One attitude which the writer found not
only useful but necessary is a readiness to
learn before engaging in consultation. This
required first of all getting acquainted with
the nature of child guidance work to such a
degree as to enable him to perceive practice
needs as experienced by the workers. It
further required the acquisition of new
equipment for communication in terms of the
technical language used in the agency be-
cause a consultant removes considerable
obstacles to his effectiveness if he is able
to communicate with those who wish his
opinion in their universe of discourse.

The second attitude which the writer has
found to be useful is that of the interpreter.
A consultant who is asked to come into an
organization because of his own specialty
frequently is being taken in on the basis of
faith or perhaps on the basis of a gambling
spirit rather than on the basis of actual
information about what he has to give. In
consequence he has to be ready to interpret
his specialty in reference to the task per-
formed by the organization which he is to
serve.

Finally, another attitude which a con-
sultant might find useful in such work is
that of cooperation rather than dictation. If
the funds of information at his disposal are
to be used constructively in a new setting,
it will be advantageous if he is free of what
could be called a spirit of replacement. The
attitude of a sociologist in a psychoanalyti-
cally oriented child-guidance clinic would be
doomed to failure if he would enter into his
task with the conviction that his knowledge
would make the application of psychoana-
lytic concepts unnecessary.

Actually this writer has found that by
spending months receptively in the agency,
learning rather than performing as a con-
sultant, interpreting rather than teaching,
and adding ideas rather than fighting ideas,
the project between the Foundation and the
Jewish Board of Guardians has advanced to
such a stage that an amount of synthesis
between sociological and psychonalytic ori-
entation in child guidance work can be
expected.

In order to initiate such a synthesis the
writer and the line officials of the agency are
currently engaged in an analysis of the use-
fulness of certain social science concepts to
child guidance practice. The concepts which
at present are considered in this work are
the family of orientation as distinguished
from the family of procreation, along the
lines worked out by James H. S. Bossard;*
the concept of culture conflict in its various
ramifications as analyzed by Thorsten Sel-
lin;5 the concept of the family as a group of
interacting personalities as developed by
Willard Waller;® and the concept of social
interaction as discussed by Robert Ezra Park
and Ernest W. Burgess’ and others.

The usefulness of the concept of the fam-
ily of orientation to child guidance work is
easy to demonstrate. One of the outstanding
characteristics of child guidance as practiced
in the agency is the emphasis on the mother
of the child. She is practically the only fac-
tor besides the child’s personality structure
to which attention is paid in treatment, if
not in diagnosis. Only occasionally are
fathers also seen as part of the diagnostic,
and even less frequently as part of the
therapeutic, contact. Still greater than the
relative disregard of the father in diagnostic
and therapeutic contacts is the disregard
of parent substitutes such as uncles and
grandfathers where fathers are missing or
grandmothers and aunts where the mother is
working or simply emotionally absent and
therefore not in sufficient contact with the
child. To the person trained in sociology, it
would suggest itself that child guidance
practice should take greater and more direct
note of fathers and in cases in which father
and mother substitutes have come into ac-
tion also of these persons. This would permit
better understanding of the personality of
the child as well as correctly focused thera-
peutic effort in many instances.

In individual discussions with child ther-
apists, this is almost always admitted. It is,
therefore, puzzling that in spite of the ap-
parent intellectual awareness which exists in
this respect, child guidance practice in the
agency has remained concentrated upon the
child and his biological mother. In conse-
quence, where a mother is emotionally ab-
sent and a grandmother, for instance, exerts
a harmful influence upon the behavior of the
child, great effort is expended to bring the
biological mother to fulfill her mother func-
tion while the grandmother’s continued
harmful influence on the child is not directly
attacked. This is the more surprising, since
a disregard of important interpersonal rela-
tionships in the life situation of the child
has been pointed out as a possible source of
therapeutic failure by two psychiatrists
prominently connected with the agency;
namely by Dr. Nathan W. Ackerman and
Dr. Peter B. Neubauer more than three
years ago.’ Nobody, however, who has had
an opportunity to observe the painstaking
efforts at diagnosis and treatment which
characterize the workers of the agency and
their readiness to try new approaches could
be tempted to explain this phenomenon sim-
ply as an instance of failures in practice
which could have been avoided with the
present professional tools available to them.

The explanation seems to lie rather in a
lack of necessary conceptual equipment for
taking these factors into account. Phenom-
ena for which technological terminology is
not available to the practitioner tend to
remain unconsidered. This is a point at
which the results of the sociological study of
the family could be helpful to the agency’s

8 Nathan W. Ackerman and Peter B. Neubauer,
“Failures in the Psychotherapy of Children,” in
Failures in Psychiatric Treatment (Paul H. Hoch,
editor), New York: Grune and Stratton, 1948, pp.
86-87, 90.
practice. The concept of family of orienta-
tion as distinguished from the concept of
family of procreation could strengthen the
perceptional equipment of the therapists re-
garding interpersonal relationships affecting
the child other than the biological mother-
child relationship. Over and beyond that,
these concepts could provide them with an
inventory approach to the child’s surround-
ings which would work as a check and safe-
guard against their perceiving only those
interpersonal relationships affecting the
child in which they have become selectively
interested in the course of their exposure to
current training practices or their own per-
sonal psychoanalysis.

The concept of the family as a group of
interacting personalities and the concept of
social interaction designating the phenome-
non that the behavior of one group member
is simultaneously cause and effect of the
behavior of other members seem also of
great potential usefulness to child guidance
practice as well as to psychotherapy in gen-
eral. Psychoanalysts have perceived this
phenomenon on a case by case basis without,
however, having arrived at a conceptualiza-
tion sufficient to influence child guidance
practice. It was pointed out by Anna Freud
as early as the late Twenties that “where
analysis of the child cannot be organically
one with other living conditions, but, like a
foreign body is injected into other relation-
ships which are thereby disordered, one will
probably create for the child more conflicts
than treatment in the other direction will be
able to dissolve.’””®

In the realm of adult analysis similar
observations have been reported by Bela
Mittelman, who drew attention to the com-
plementary reactions of neurotic partners in
marriage and to the necessity of evaluating
the effect of treatment on the partner of the
patient. He suggested that where such reac-
tions of the partner are not severe, their
interpretation to the patient may be suffi-
cient; that where they are more serious,
therapeutic sessions with the partner of the

9 Anna Freud, Introduction to the Technic of
Child Analysis, New York: Nervous and Mental
Disease Publishing Company, 1928, p. 56.
patient may be necessary; and that in cases
of very great severity the partner should
also be analyzed.1°

Dr. Ackerman and Dr. Neubauer in their
penetrating analysis of failures in the psy-
chotherapy of children have reported the
observation that frequently “as a child im-
proves in response to therapy, the parent
becomes noticeably worse.”

These citations are introduced here in
order to show that, apparently, therapists of
children and adults come up against phe-
nomena of reaction on the part of persons
in the patient’s environment which may
result in treatment failure, but that they
identify these phenomena without concep-
tualization. They report them only on the
basis of individual therapeutic experience and
as occasional obstacles to therapy rather
than recognizing them as expressions of the
normal environmental framework in which
every therapy has to run its course.

Here again we see a difficulty of thera-
peutic work which sociological concepts could
be helpful in combating. Emphasis on social
interaction as one of the key concepts of
the study of human relationships and on the
family as a group in which “the behavior
of each family member is cause and effect
in relation to the behavior of other family
members,”!* leads to the conclusion that
every therapeutic effort directed at one
member of a family will have its repercus-
sions in the behavior of the other members
of the family. Logically these repercussions
will have to be considered in the formulation
of every treatment plan. Once this is realized,
treatment planning, as well as treatment
outcome, will be freed from many perplexities
and it will become possible to avoid much
wasted, because counteracted, effort. As long
as this is not done, psychotherapists and
psychoanalysts will be faced frequently with
the disappointing experience of having cre-
ated problems by problem solution.
This is particularly important in child
therapy because of the social dependency
of the child. In consequence of the depend-
ency situation of the client in such cases,
interaction on the part of other family mem-
bers, and particularly of those who are adults,
will be more powerful than the new behavior
of the child. The child, therefore, will be
less able to defend his therapeutic gains than
an adult patient, and the probability of
treatment failure based on the disregard of
this phenomenon may be even higher than
in adult situations.

A concept which has become a by-word of
sociological research, but does not seem to
have crossed the inter-professional barrier
between sociology and child guidance prac-
tice, is culture conflict. It is true that re-
search workers in sociology have been con-
cerned with this phenomenon mostly in terms
of the mental conflict which may be created
in an individual who strives for acceptance
in two groups with different values and
attitudes. Perhaps in its most generally
recognized form culture conflict has been
studied from the angle of a conflict between
the values and attitudes of immigrant parents
and the values and attitudes to which their
children are exposed in their wider environ-
ment.13

From the point of view of child guidance
practitioners, however, there may be another
implication of this concept which also should
be considered, i.e., conflict between their
own values and attitudes and those which
surround the child ouside the therapeutic
situation. Differences in the sub-cultural
backgrounds of child and therapist may,
first of all, lead to a misinterpretation of
symptoms. What represents normality to the
therapist may not be normality to the per-
sons with whom the child has lived, is living,
and will also have to live-after treatment.
From them the child may have learned be-
havior patterns which may seem abnormal
to the therapist. A therapist from a middle-
class background may interpret voracity of
a child from a financially under-privileged
home as a symptom of orality. Allison Davis’
studies of the conditions of learning and
socialization in the class structure of Ameri-
can society suggest, however, that slum
people accustomed to small and uncertain
income, do not take a regular food supply
for granted as do middle- and upper-class
people, and therefore are not concerned
about overeating. Outward aggressiveness of
an adolescent boy may be evaluated dif-
ferently by a middle-class therapist and the
age mates of the boy in the neighborhood
in which he has to live. Seen by the therapist,
it may present an expression of pathology.
Seen from the angle of the boys in the
neighborhood, it may be a condition of his
remaining unmolested. Early sex relations in
middle-class children are a point of concern
in the framework of their class culture; in
children of poor neighborhoods they may
be less apt to raise anxieties.1*

Another contribution which the concept
of culture conflict may be able to make to
the practice of child guidance is to bring
recognition of the relativity of behavior
norms not only to diagnosis but also to the
planning of the treatment goal. The present
practice framework of the agency has no
special category under this heading at all.
It foresees only the formation of a treatment
plan. In consequence the worker in planning
for the future is absorbed by the considera-
tion of treatment techniques, of methods
rather than of goals. Due to the amount of
insight which psychotherapists have gained
into the danger of dealing with symptoms
rather than with disorders, there is under-
standable reluctance to formulate a treat-
ment goal in terms of those symptoms which
formed the basis for agency contact with the
patient. In consequence the treatment goal
remains unspecified. Apparently it is the
disappearance of the mental disorder which
has been recognized on the basis of diagnostic
perception. However, this may lead to dif-
ficulties because of the possibility that under
certain cultural conditions which prevail in
his environment the child may be penalized
for the disappearance of his disorder more
severely than he was penalized for its ex-
pression. In this respect a cleavage can arise
between the values of the psychotherapist
and the values that dominate the culture in
which the patient has to live. The persons
in the cultural surroundings of the child
may put attainment in school work on a
higher level of desirability than personal
adjustment if it expresses itself in a certain
detachment from outward success. The thera-
pist may put freedom from the push and
pull of an anxiety neurosis, which drives the
child into scholastic endeavor, on a higher
level of desirability than success in school
work. The therapist may be able to free the
child from the discomforts accompanying
his neurotic drive and the school success of
the child may go down, but in his environ-
ment that may be considered as even more
undesirable than the child’s former night-
mares. Reactions of dissatisfaction on the
part of the parents and teachers then may
threaten the personality gain achieved in
therapy.

One aspect of our general culture which
may be stronger in some of its sub-cultures
than in that to which many psychotherapists
belong, would have to be particularly con-
sidered in the planning of the treatment goal,
namely sex repression. Since psychoanalysis
has attached such great importance to ar-
rested psycho-sexual development in the
formation of mental disorders, therapeutic
efforts are often directed at freeing the de-
velopmental process in this regard. Results
may backfire, however, particularly where
adolescents are the patients. Hardly any-
thing could be more disheartening to the
therapist, and more damaging to society’s
acceptance of child guidance, than a de-
velopment of personality change that would
lead to sexual behavior on the part of the
patient which from the point of view of
psychodynamics may represent progress but
from the point of view of society should
appear as sexual misconduct. In this respect
it should be pointed out that an adult has
much more power to arrange or rearrange his
sex life without suffering from societal reac-
tions than an adolescent. Consideration of
social repercussions therefore is particularly
important in the definition of the treatment
goals for this age group.

Something which always should be realized
in the treatment of adolescents is that they
are characterized by a behavior pattern,
which Talcott Parsons has termed youth
culture. The outstanding criteria of this be-
havior pattern lie in their relative irresponsi-
bility and recalcitrance to adult expectations
and disciplines.1> To work into these atti-
tudes with unconcern about the behavior
expression of antagonism and released hos-
tility which may result from the therapeutic
process, at least in its beginning stages, may
lead to reactions on the part of the family
and school authorities which in the end can
cause the breaking up of therapy and thereby
treatment failure.

Space does not permit discussion of other
concepts currently in use in social science
research which could be adapted to child
guidance practice. Even less so is it possible
to give here as much as a bare outline of the
research needs of child therapists which
could be met by social science research.
Still, some indication of this aspect of a
liaison service between social science research
and child welfare practice may be given. It
is increasingly noticed among social welfare
practitioners that certain of their assump-
tions are actually untested by research. The
very nature of social welfare work, however,
makes the application of controls extremely
difficult. The difficulties lie partly in the
ethics of the profession which do not permit
the exclusion of any person requesting help
from the services of the agency. They lie also
partly in the lack of acquaintance on the
part of social practitioners with the idea of
controlled investigation. Yet, the situation
is not hopeless. Research based on compari-
sons between the effects of social welfare
practice on clients and the effect of lack of
social welfare practice on non-clients suf-
fering from the same maladjustments may
be extremely difficult. But comparisons be-
tween the effect of one type of service versus
the effect of another type of service are not
without the realm of possibility.

Dr. Joe McV. Hunt of the Institute of
Welfare Research of the Community Service
Society of New York and his staff have
prepared valuable tools for such effectiveness
measurements through their work in con-
structing and testing the so-called movement
scale in case work.!° The application of this
tool to different types of service based on
different assumptions seems to be one of the
most promising areas of research stimulation
resulting from the increasing contact be-
tween social science and social practice and
in the opinion of the writer may well exercise
its influence also in child guidance practice.

If once it should become apparent on the
basis of such research that therapeutic
techniques based on certain assumptions are
less effective than techniques based on other
assumptions, practitioners probably will show
increased readiness to accept investigations
by social scientists of the validity of the
beliefs under which such practices are carried
out. Such research will require a procedure
of at least two steps: identification and vali-
dation. Spadework for such identification
research has been started by Jules Henry
in his proposal and demonstration of an

16 J, McV. Hunt and Leonard S. Kogan, Meas-
uring Results in Casework: A Manual on Judging
Movement, New York: Family Service Association
of America, 1950, 79 pp.; J. McV. Hunt, Margaret
Blenkner, Leonard S. Kogan, Testing Results in
Social Casework: A Field Test of the Movement
Scale, New York: Family Service Association of
America, 1050, 64 pp.
anthropological research approach to studies
of the cultural beliefs on which child guid-
ance practices are based.!7

Again, however, a word of attitudinal
advice may be in order. The social research
scientist will do well to use his tools of
measurement only on the basis of full under-
standing of social welfare practice. Other-
wise he may attempt too much and thereby
measure without sufficient differentiation. To
measure, for instance, the effectiveness of
child guidance work or case work as a
whole would be similar to measuring the
effectiveness of medical services as a whole.
Nobody would dream of undertaking such
a project and no member of the medical pro-
fession would be willing to accept the results
of such measurement. However, medical men
are interested in the measurement of the
effect of one drug as compared with another,
or of one dosage of a drug versus another
dosage of the same drug. Similarly, social
welfare workers probably would welcome the
measurement of one type of therapeutic effort
versus another. Once this is recognized, the
problem of establishing controls in social
welfare research and the acceptance of its
findings will become much simpler than they
appear now.

In summary, liaison service between social
science and social practice may open up wide
areas of potential fruitful operation by social
scientists if they are willing to approach
the task with humility as well as with imagi-
nation. There seems to exist a new frontier
which requires a new type of pioneer.

417 Jules Henry, “Cultural Objectification of the
Case History,” American Journal of Orthopsychia-
try, 19 (1949), 655-673.
