American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
Perrow, C.

1961 “The analysis of goals in complex organiza-
tions.’? American Sociological Review
26:854-66.

Pugh, D., D.J. Hickson, C.R. Hinings and C. Turner

1969 “The context of organizational structures.”
Administrative Science Quarterly
14:91-114.

Reimann, B.

1973 “On the dimensions of bureaucratic struc-
ture.” Administrative Science Quarterly
18:462-76.

1974 “Organizational ‘Public Values’ and struc-
ture: an exploratory study.” Presented at
the sixth annual meeting of the American
Institute of Decision Making Sciences, At-
lanta, Georgia.

Reeves, T. and J. Woodward

1970 “Technology and organizational behavior.”

Pp. 37-56 in Joan Woodward (ed.), Indus-
Analysis of a 1964 national survey reveals that residents of the South displayed a much higher
level of anti-black prejudice than residents of the non-South, but the regions differed only
slightly on measures of anti-Semitism and anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant prejudice and on
certain psychological measures—authoritarianism, anomia and psychic distress. Though the
mean level of anti-black prejudice was higher in the South, the variation of individuals around
the mean in each region can be explained by roughly the same variables operating for the most
part in the same way. The regional differences in anti-black prejudice cannot be accounted for
by compositional differences between the regions in psychological characteristics, degree of
urbanization, socioeconomic status or ethnic composition. Those who spent most of their
childhood in one region but later moved to the other had attitudes toward blacks that were
intermediate between those of the nonmigrants in each region; this pattern was not present for
the other types of prejudice. The evidence presented tends to support a subcultural interpreta-
tion of the higher level of anti-black prejudice in the South in 1964.
One of the central issues in the study of
prejudice is the extent to which prejudice may
be explained as a consequence of personality
and psychological factors or as the result of
socialization to cultural beliefs and norms of
prejudice. Psychological explanations of pre-
judice have been very popular since the publi-
cation of The Authoritarian Personality
(Adorno et al., 1950), but many sociologists
(e.g., Rose, 1956; Pettigrew, 1958; 1959;
Rhyne, 1962) have insisted that cultural or
subcultural norms are a major source of at
least some types of prejudice. Pettigrew
(1958) and Rhyne (1962) carried out small
studies that suggested that anti-black preju-
dice was greater in the South than in other
regions of the U.S. and that the regional dif-
ference could not be attributed to psycho-
logical factors. They concluded that the great-
er anti-black prejudice in the South was prob-
ably due to a special set of norms embedded
in the southern subculture. Building on the
work of Pettigrew and Rhyne, I shall argue
along the same lines in this paper, though I
shall employ a national sample, a greater vari-
ety of measures of prejudice and psycho-
logical characteristics, and more complex
analytic techniques. I shall also consider a
number of related questions that the earlier
authors touched on only briefly or not at all.
More specifically, I shall attempt to answer
the following questions:

(1) Is there a higher level of prejudice
toward blacks, Jews, Roman Catholics and im-
migrants in the South than in other regions?
Do persons in the South and in other regions
differ with regard to psychological character-
istics that are generally assumed to be related
to prejudice? What are the implications of
these patterns for psychological and subcul-
tural explanations of prejudice?

(2) Can variations in prejudice within the
South be accounted for in the same way as
variations in prejudice within the non-South?

(3) If prejudice toward a given minority is
higher in the South, can this be attributed to
the lower educational levels and lesser degree
of urbanization and economic development of
majority whites in the South as compared
with those in other regions? Can we expect
Regional Differentials

From the great volume of previous surveys
and research on anti-black prejudice, there can
be little doubt that overt expressions of anti-
black prejudice are substantially higher in the
South (Bureau of Intelligence, 1942; Knapp,
1944; Roper, 1947; Stouffer et al., 1949;
Hyman and Sheatsley, 1956; 1964; Erskine,
1962; 1967; 1967-68; 19684; 1968b;
1968-69; Brink and Harris, 1963; 1967;
Gallup Opinion Index, Nos. 1, 3, 7, 12, 14,
16, 24, 35, 37, 40, 41, 46, 51, 58, 59, 62, 75,
771; Sheatsley, 1966; Glenn and Simmons,
1967; Schwartz, 1967; Selznick and Stein-
berg, 1969; The Harris Survey Yearbook of
Public Opinion 1970; 1971; Greeley and
Sheatsley, 1971; Campbell, 1971). As several
investigators have pointed out, region of resi-
dence appears to be the most important cor-
relate of anti-black prejudice; the differences
between South and non-South are generally
greater than the differences between various
population groups within the same region (J.
Noel, 1971 :62; Schwartz, 1967:48; Sheatsley,
1966: 311-2). The regional difference in anti-
black prejudice may be overstated in survey
results, since outside the South private bigots
may feel greater constraints to present them-
selves as tolerant, broadminded citizens in a
formal interview with a stranger. Yet, if it is
true that nonsoutherners are more likely than
southerners to don this artificial mask of
tolerance, that in itself would suggest that the
norms outside the South are less supportive of
anti-black prejudice than those in the South.

If previous research on regional differences
in anti-black prejudice is relatively clear, the
same is not true with regard to anti-Semitism.
In the early years of this century there were
strains of anti-Semitism and nativism in the
Populist movement in the South (Roche,
1963:88-91; Golden, 1965; Lipset and Raab,
1970:97-9), as well as in the appeals of the
resurgent Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s JJack-
son, 1967; Chalmers, 1965). More recently, a
number of surveys have shown that southern-
ers are somewhat more likely to accept anti-
Jewish stereotypes, to say they would reject a
qualified Jewish candidate for President, and
to disapprove of intermarriage between Jews
and non-Jews (Glenn and Simmons, 1967;
Selznick and Steinberg, 1969; Gallup Opinion
Index, Nos. 4, 24, 41, 46; R. Williams, 1964;
Hoge and Carroll, 1973). Evans (1973) main-
tains that the survey findings are at variance
with the subjective experience of most
southern Jews, who generally do not feel that
they are living in a particular hostile environ-
ment. There is some evidence that anti-
Semitic incidents and social discrimination
against Jews are no more prevalent in the
South than in most other regions (Anti-
Defamation League, 1962; Evans, 1973).
Furthermore, a number of surveys—particu-
larly those conducted in the 1930s and
1940s—have found less hostility toward Jews
in the South than in other sections of the
country (Erskine, 1965-66:662-3; Knapp,
1944; Roper, 1946; 1947; Crespi, 1964).

The South, as the heartland of Protestant
fundamentalism, has a popular reputation for
anti-Catholicism. Evidence from the historical
record, however, is mixed. The principal anti-
Catholic groups in the nineteenth century—
the “Know Nothings” and the American Pro-
tective Association—were strongest outside
the South, particularly in those areas with large
concentrations of Catholic immigrants (Lipset
and Raab, 1970:52-61; Kinzer, 1964:178-80).
Anti-Catholicism was probably the most im-
portant element in the ideology of the Ku
Klux Klan in the 1920s, since Klan leaders
generally considered Catholics to be a greater
“threat” than the relatively unorganized and
quiescent blacks (Chalmers, 1965:32-3; Jack-
son, 1967:20-6). Though southerners were
somewhat more likely than nonsoutherners to
join the Ku Klux Klan, the largest part of the
Klan’s membership in the 1920s was recruited
outside the South. In fact, the very success of
the Klan outside the South may have been
due to its anti-Catholic emphasis. Anti-Cathol-
icism also played a significant part in the
Presidential campaigns of Alfred E. Smith in
1928 and John F. Kennedy in 1960. In both
campaigns the issue of religion apparently
aroused greater concern in the South than in
other regions (Killian, 1970:75-7; Moore,
1956:145-200; Maddox and Fichter, 1966:53;
White, 1961:392, 101-8, 251-62). Survey evi-
dence also points to a somewhat greater
amount of anti-Catholic feeling in the South
(Erskine, 1965:495-6; Gallup Opinion Index,
Nos. 4, 24, 41, 46; Glenn and Simmons,
1967:185; Stouffer, 1955; Selznick and Stein-
berg, 1969:116). In a 1947 survey, however,
Roper (1947) found that the Southeast and
Southwest did not differ from other regions in
the percent who said that Catholics were
getting too much economic and political
power.

There is only meager evidence available re-
garding regional differences in attitudes
toward immigrants, though writers sometimes
assert that a kind of xenophobia, insularity,
and distrust of foreigners and outsiders char-
acterizes the South. Historically, nativist
movements have probably been stronger out-
side the South, especially in those areas where
large numbers of immigrants settled. Surveys
in recent years, however, generally do showa
somewhat higher level of anti-immigrant feel-
ing among southerners (R. Williams, 1964:74;
Gallup Opinion Index, No. 3).

Most previous investigators have reported
that residents of the South tend to have some-
what higher scores on the F Scale measure of
authoritarianism. These findings have general-
ly been based on studies of a limited number
of communities (Noel and Pinkney, 1964) or
of nonprobability samples of college students
(Christie and Garcia, 1951; Milton, 1952;
Smith and Prothro, 1957). On the other hand,
Pettigrew (1959) found no differences in F
Scale scores for white adults living in a num-
ber of small towns in the South and in New
England. Five F Scale items were included in a
national survey in 1953, however, and J.
It is often argued that where there is a
strong cultural tradition of prejudice toward a
particular group, authoritarianism and other
personality factors should play a lesser causal
role than in those areas where the tradition is
absent or is less deeply entrenched. According
to this view, people may acquire prejudice
through the normal process of socialization
without necessarily having personality pre-
dispositions. Attempts to show that the F
Scale and similar personality measures have
lower correlations with anti-black prejudice in
the South than in the non-South, however,
have generally failed. Siegman (1958) did find
a correlation between anti-black prejudice and
the F Scale of .41 for a small sample of col-
lege students in North Carolina. He argued
that this was substantially lower than the cor-
responding average correlation in the original
authoritarianism studies (Adorno et al., 1950)
conducted outside the South and concluded
that “the negative correlates of ethnocentric
attitudes tend to decrease as the culture
countenances these attitudes.”’ Most studies,
however, have found little or no difference in
the personality and prejudice correlations in
the different regions (Christie and Garcia,
1951; Pettigrew, 1958; 1959; Rhyne, 1962;
Hoge and Carroll, 1973).

There have been a number of similar
studies of white attitudes toward black Afri-
cans in South Africa (Pettigrew, 1958; Lever
et al., 1968; Colman and Lambley, 1970;
Orpen, 1970; 1971a; 1971b; 1971c; Orpen
and Rookledge, 1972). The authors have
generally suggested that the correlations of
authoritarianism or dogmatism with anti-
African prejudice were not very high, but in
the absence of an appropriate comparison
group, the significance of these findings re-
mains in doubt. Some of the studies did find
that measures of general social conformity
and of general agreement with South African
values in a variety of other areas were moder-
ately correlated with anti-African prejudice
(Pettigrew, 1958; Orpen, 1971b, 1971c).
Pettigrew (1958) concluded that personality
factors appeared to be as important as deter-
minants of prejudice in South Africa as in
other areas, but that personality factors did
not in themselves account for the high level of
prejudice in the sample. Social conformity, he
believed, was the key.

Many studies have found that attitudes
toward one minority group tend to be highly
correlated with attitudes toward other minor-
ity groups (Harding et al., 1969:15-7), and
this is usually taken as evidence in support of
a personality explanation of prejudice. It is
sometimes argued, therefore, that measures of
prejudice toward two groups should be less
highly correlated in those areas where there is
a strong cultural tradition of prejudice toward
one of the groups but not toward the other.
In two early studies, Prothro and Jensen
(1950) and Prothro (1952) found that in vari-
ous samples of college students and middle-
class adults in Louisiana the correlations be-
tween anti-Semitism and anti-black prejudice
were lower than in most of the samples in the
original authoritarianism studies (Adorno et
al., 1950). Selznick and Steinberg (1969:182)
also reported that in the South in 1964 some
35 percent of the people were “high” on anti-
black prejudice without being “high” on anti-
Semitism, whereas in the North only 18 per-
cent showed this pattern. Other studies (Petti-
grew, 1958; 1959; Rhyne, 1962; Maranell,
1967), however, have found that anti-
Semitism and anti-black prejudice were not
more highly correlated in the North than in
the South.

Most of the studies mentioned in the pre-
ceding paragraphs are seriously flawed by
their dependence on nonprobability conveni-
ence samples—most often of college or high
school students. Most of them also simply
compared correlation coefficients, sometimes
taken from different studies conducted at dif-
ferent times and with different instruments.
The best previous research on this topic is
probably Pettigrew’s (1959) study of white
adults in a number of small cities in New
England and Georgia. Although his hypothesis
that anti-black prejudice and authoritarianism
would be more highly correlated in the North
than in the South was not supported, he did
find evidence that he believed supported a
sociocultural interpretation of the high levels
of anti-black prejudice in the South. He
argued that women are the “carriers of cul-
ture” and reflect the mores of a group more
directly than men. Hence, in the South
women should be more anti-black than men,
but in the North men and women should not
differ significantly. This proved to be the case,
though the difference was not great in the
South. Frequent church attenders (versus non-
attenders) and political party identifiers
(versus independents) also proved to be more
prejudiced toward blacks in the South but not
in the North. Thus, he concluded that those
whose positions in the social structure should
be most associated with conformity did tend
to be more anti-black, but only in the region
where there was the strongest embedded his-
torical tradition of anti-black prejudice. There
are problems, however, even with the Petti-
grew study. In making these comparisons he
was able to control only on education, age
and sex, and the comparisons were made one
at a time. To accomplish this he employed a
matching process between comparison groups
within regions, but this also substantially re-
duced his sample size for each comparison and
impaired the representativeness of his samples.
tributed to the rural character and educational
and economic backwardness of the whites in
the region? This indeed has been a popular
argument among social scientists (Myrdal,
1944:462-6; Key, 1949:673; Rose, 1956:175;
Spengler, 1963; Mayo, 1964; Nicholls,
1964:40; Reissman, 1966). They have pointed
out that the South is changing rapidly and is
becoming more like the rest of the United
States in terms of urbanization, industrializa-
tion, occupational composition and levels of
income and education. They have suggested
that these processes are likely to bring a
moderation of anti-black prejudice, eventually
leading to a disappearance of the differential
between the South and non-South.

Thompson (1963) and Blumer (1965) have
voiced some skepticism about this argument.
Both have maintained that urbanization, edu-
cation and economic development are by
themselves unlikely to bring a fundamental
alteration in the structural position of blacks
in the South. Blumer (1965:325) has written
that in the transformation of the South “the
color line was carried over from the old situa-
tions to the new situations—from the planta-
tion to the factory, from the rural area to the
city, from the old institutional settings to the
new institutional settings.”
views in the area in which he lives. People who
through geographic mobility shift from one
cultural system to another usually neither
abandon the first nor absorb the second com-
pletely. There is in most cases a partial ac-
culturation. Thus, if the subcultural interpre-
tation is correct, we would generally expect
persons who were reared and currently live in
the South to be much more prejudiced against
blacks than those who were reared and cur-
rently live in the non-South: Those who were
reared in the South but who now live in the
non-South and those who were reared in the
non-South but now live in the South should
tend to show intermediate levels of prejudice
toward blacks. If there are regional subcul-
tural differences for other types of prejudice,
we would expect a similar pattern for them
also. An early study by Sims and Patrick
(1936) of students at the University of
Alabama and Ohio State University tended to
support this view for anti-black prejudice, but
problems of sampling and self-selection are
too severe for us to attach much weight to the
study.

Myrdal, observing the situation in the early
1940s, believed that the effect of interregional
migration on anti-black prejudice was asym-
metric. Those who migrated from the non-
South to the South, he felt, tended to become
more prejudiced toward blacks, because “the
Northerner in the South will find the whole
community intent upon his conforming to
local patterns” (Myrdal, 1944: vol. 1, p. 79).
On the other hand, he believed that southern-
ers who migrated to the non-South did not
necessarily become less prejudiced, because
they met with less concerted pressure to con-
form. In an analysis of attitudes toward racial
integration from a 1963 national survey, how-
ever, Hyman and Sheatsley (1964) and
Sheatsley (1966) found that almost the re-
verse was true. Persons who had always lived
in the North were much more favorable
toward integration than those who had always
lived in the South, but northerners who had
formerly lived in the South were only slightly
less pro-integration than their neighbors who
had always lived in the North. Southerners
who had previously lived in the North, on the
The data analyzed in this paper come from
a nationwide survey of 1,975 adults con-
ducted by the National Opinion Research
Center in October, 1964. Although the survey
focused primarily on the topic of anti-Semi-
tism, it included many questions on anti-black
prejudice and a few scattered questions on
other types of prejudice. It is, in fact, prob-
ably the richest source of data on prejudice
for a national sample of adults in the United
States that is currently available. The data are
now somewhat dated, but the survey remains
extremely valuable both for the large number
of questions dealing directly with prejudice
and for the wealth of background and associ-
ated variables. The interview schedule, details
about sampling procedures and basic results
are published in Selznick and Steinberg
(1969). That report, however, gives only brief
and passing attention to regional differences
in prejudice.

The boundaries of the South and other
regions of the United States have been defined
in various ways by different investigators. In
this analysis I have followed the Census defini-
tions for the four major regions: South,
Northeast, North Central and West. According
to this classification, the South is comprised
of the eleven states that made up the Con-
federacy during the Civil War (Virginia, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida,
Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas,
Louisiana, Texas) plus a number of Border
states (Oklahoma, Kentucky, West Virginia,
Maryland, Delaware, District of Columbia).
Few disagree over the inclusion of the Con-
federate states in the “South,” with the possi-
ble exception of Texas. The Border states are
more problematic. Yet Reed (1972:15-9) has
shown that both of these groups of states tend
to have higher scores than other states on his
Index of Southern Preference, calculated from
a set of questions asked by the Gallup Poll in
1957. In terms of people’s sense of identifica-
tion with the South, then, the Census cate-
gorization appears to be meaningful. Further-
more, Reed has found that residents of these
southern states tend to differ substantially
from those in other states in certain other
characteristics—their sense of attachment to
the local community, their attitudes toward
the private use, of force and violence and their
religious beliefs and practices (see also Glenn
and Simmons, 1967; Glenn, 1974).

The total number of interviews from the
survey in each region is as follows: South,
613; Northeast, 474; North Central, 575;
West, 313. Within the southern region, there
are 458 from the former Confederate states
and 155 from the Border states. When I exam-
ined prejudice toward a particular group, I ex-
cluded members of that group from the sam-
ple. There are 244 blacks, 61 Jews, 511
Roman Catholics, and 152 foreign-born per-
sons in the total sample of 1975. Hence, in
most cases in the analysis the sample size was
somewhat reduced. I employed the entire
sample, however, in determining whether or
not there were regional differences in the per-
sonality variables.

To measure personality variables and the
various types of prejudice toward minorities, I
constructed a number of scales. My first step
in the construction of a scale was to carry out
a factor analysis of those items from the sur-
vey that appeared to me to be substantively
relevant. I employed Rao’s canonical factor
analysis (Rao, 1955) and examined the result-
ing factor loadings both before and after a
varimax rotation. I then selected those items
that appeared to be clustered together and
subjected them to item analysis procedures. I
examined item to total correlations with a
Cureton correction (Cureton, 1966) and cal-
culated alpha reliability coefficients (Cron-
bach, 1951) for different combinations of
items. Generally, I selected the combination
of items that yielded the highest alpha for the
final scale. I also employed Heise and Bohrn-
stedt’s factor analytic approach to calculate
validity (P+s), invalidity (w,) and reliability
(2) coefficients (Heise and Bohrnstedt, 1970;
Smith, 1974). These calculations were based
on separate factor analyses (Rao’s canonical)
for the items of each scale. The number of
factors extracted in each case was equal to the
number of eigenvalues greater than one (up to
a maximum of nine factors). The coefficients
were calculated from the loadings on the first
unrotated factor.

The items included in each of the person-
ality and prejudice measures and the validity,
invalidity and reliability coefficients for the
scales are shown in Appendix A. The items
were scored by assigning numbers in serial
order to the responses, logically ordered. For
missing data, the integer nearest the mean was
assigned. The item scores were then trans-
formed to standard scores with a mean of zero
and a standard deviation of one. The standard
scores for all the items constituting a scale
were summed, and then the total scale scores
were converted to transformed standard
scores with a mean of 50 and a standard devia-
tion of 15.

In the analysis, I have used three social
psychological variables theoretically related to
prejudice: the F Scale, anomia and psychic
distress. The F Scale is composed of five items
taken from Forms 40 or 45 of the original
scale developed by Adorno et al. (1950), and
is designed to measure authoritarian or anti-
democratic tendencies. The Anomia Scale,
purportedly measuring a subjective sense of
normlessness, consists of three items taken
from the Srole (1956) scale. Actually, the
factor analyses revealed that all of the F Scale
and Anomia items had high loadings on the
same rotated factor, which raises a question
whether they are really tapping different
dimensions of attitudes or personality. Be-
cause there is a substantial theoretical and re-
search tradition behind each of these con-
cepts, however, I have retained them as separ-
ate variables. The other personality variable,
Psychic Distress, is distinct in the factor analy-
sis. I have included in the measure the five
items employed by Selznick and Steinberg
(1969) in their measure of “psychic inade-
quacy” plus one other. The variable is intend-
ed as a measure of general psychological dis-
tress, since it is sometimes contended that pre-
judice serves as a crutch for “crippled” per-
sonalities. Types of distress included in the
measure are general worry, finding oneself un-
able to solve problems that come up, feeling
lonely, tending to go to pieces in a crisis, feel-
ing unhappy, and worrying quite a bit about
what other people think of one.

To measure anti-black prejudice, I con-
structed a scale consisting of ten items dealing
with the acceptance of stereotyped beliefs
about blacks and support for discriminatory
practices toward blacks. In a factor analysis all
ten items had high loadings on the first un-
rotated factor. Selznick and Steinberg (1969:
175) used only five of these items for
their Index of Anti-Negro Prejudice, but
the reliability of the scale is improved by the in-
clusion of the other five available items as well.
Unfortunately, eight of the ten items are
worded in such a way that an “agree” or “yes”
answer indicates prejudice. Thus, it is possible
that the measure may be contaminated to some
degree by an acquiescence response bias.

Since the survey was primarily concerned
with anti-Semitism, a great many items were
available for the construction of measures of
this type of prejudice. A factor analysis of
these items revealed that most of them had
high loadings on the first unrotated factor.
For both theoretical and methodological rea-
sons, however, I chose to construct two differ-
ent scales to measure anti-Semitism. The first
is an Anti-Semitic Beliefs Scale consisting of
23 items that appear to measure primarily the
cognitive dimension of prejudice—the accept-
ance of negative beliefs and stereotypes about
Jews. The scale is similar in nature to the
11-item Index of Anti-Semitic Belief utilized
by Selznick and Steinberg (1969:22), but the
longer scale has a somewhat higher reliability
(Q = .897). Jackman (1973) points out that
all of the items in the Selznick and Steinberg
scale are in the same “direction’’—that is, a
“yes” or “true” answer indicates prejudice—
and she maintains that the scale is heavily con-
founded with an education-related acquies-
cence response bias. Since 19 of the 23 items
in the longer scale are also in the same “‘direc-
tion,” acquiescence response bias is also a pos-
sibility here.

Fortunately, the survey contains a number
of other questions about Jews that are not in
an “agree-disagree” format and thus are not
subject to “yeasaying” tendencies. These
questions reflect primarily the affective and
conative dimensions of prejudice—expressions
of hostility toward Jews and support for dis-
criminatory treatment of Jews. Jackman
(1973), in her analysis of the data, used three
of these items to construct an Anti-Semitism
Scale of Social Distance Feelings. I have con-
structed a similar Hostility Toward Jews Scale
that includes Jackman’s three items plus six
others. All nine items have reasonably high
loadings on the first unrotated factor in a
factor analysis, and the nine-item scale has a
reliability (2) of .696. The Hostility Toward
Jews Scale, then, differs from the Anti-
Semitic Beliefs Scale in two ways: it taps
primarily the affective and conative rather
than the cognitivie dimensions of anti-
Semitism, and it is clearly not subject to an
acquiescence response bias"
The final two measures of prejudice are
based on single questions. Those who agreed
that “Catholics are getting too much power in
the United States” were coded as anti-Cath-
olic. If they answered “‘Yes-True” to the state-
ment, “It bothers me to see immigrants suc-
ceeding more than Americans who were born
here,” they were considered to be anti-im-
migrant. These two measures have obvious
limitations. Their variance is limited by their
dichotomous nature, they are subject to ac-
quiescence response bias, and their reliability
is unknown. More adequate measures cannot
be constructed, however, from the items that
were included in the survey.

Throughout the analysis I have employed
the .05 criterion level (two-tailed) in tests of
Mean scores for the various types of prej-
udice and personality characteristics are pre-
sented in Table 1 for each of the major
tegions of the United States. The South is
further subdivided into a “Confederate”
group of states that are unambiguously
“southern” in culture and a “Border” group
of states that appear to be marginal culturally
as well as geographically.

The South has significantly higher means
for all types of prejudice except Anti-Catholic
Prejudice, but the regional differences are
generally small. It is only in the case of Anti-
Black Prejudice that the South has a substan-
tially higher mean score than the non-South.
The Confederate states have the highest level
of Anti-Black Prejudice, the Border states are
second, and the three nonsouthern regions
range much lower, with the West being par-
ticularly low. For the other types of prejudice
there are only slight regional variations. The
means.

The fact that there is a large difference be-
tween the South and non-South for Anti-
Black Prejudice but not for the other types of
prejudice constitutes something of an embar-
rassment to most personality theories of prej-
udice. These theories tend to emphasize in-
dividual personality predispositions to prej-
udice and do not give adequate attention to
the question of why certain minorities are
singled out as targets for prejudice. If prej-
udice were a simple function of personality
predispositions, one would expect each of the
types of prejudice to behave in essentially the
same way. Furthermore, one would expect to
find sharp regional differences in a particular
type of prejudice only if there were also major
regional differences in associated personality
traits. In Table 1 we see that persons living in
the South do have significantly higher means
on the F Scale, and the Anomia Scale and the
Psychic Distress Scale. The regional differ-
ences, however, are small and do not appear
to be sufficiently large to account for the
higher level of Anti-Black Prejudice in the
South. If one does attempt to argue that the
slightly higher scores of the southerners on
the psychological scales are sufficient to ex-
plain their much higher scores on Anti-Black
Prejudice, it becomes very difficult to explain
why there are not differences of the same
magnitude for the other measures of prejudice
as well. I believe that the patterns of the data
tend rather to support a subcultural view. A
special regional subculture appears to be
responsible for the substantially higher level
of Anti-Black Prejudice among those living in
the South—particularly those in the states of
the old Confederacy.

In the next step of the analysis, I sought to
examine the contention of a number of soci-
ologists and social psychologists that certain
psychological factors play a lesser role in prej-
udice toward a group when there is a deeply
embedded cultural tradition of hostility
toward that group. If they are correct, we
would thus expect that the factors associated
with anti-black prejudice would differ in the
South and the non-South, but we would not
expect to find such differences for the other
types of prejudice. To test these contentions,
I employed a multiple regression framework
with a full set of interaction terms for region.
In the regressions for each type of prejudice, I
included dummy variables for southern
residence, rural (versus urban) residence, occu-
pation of head (white-collar versus blue-collar,
farm versus nonfarm), minority status (black,
Jewish, Roman Catholic, foreign-born), plus
years of education and family income. I also
included each of the personality variables and
each of the other prejudice variables to test
whether it was really true that these were less
highly associated with anti-black prejudice in
the South. In addition, I included some of the
measures that Pettigrew suggested were associ-
ated with social conformity: female status, be-
ing a political party identifier (versus inde-
pendent), and frequency of attendance at
religious services (9-point scale). If Pettigrew
is correct, then each of these variables should
be more highly related to anti-black prejudice
in the South than in the non-South. I added a
dummy variable for age status (40 and over
versus under 40), since one could argue that
the cultural norms for anti-black prejudice
have changed more rapidly in the South than
in the non-South, and hence age should be
more highly associated with prejudice in the
South than in the non-South.

After first computing regressions for each
Anti- Hostil- — Anti- Anti-

 

 

Black —Anti- ity Catholic Immigrant
Preju- Semitic toward Preju- Preju-
Independent Variables dice Beliefs Jews dice dice
Constant 5.26 12.29* 23.58* 23.70* 23.16*
Residence in South = 1
Non-South = 0 31.14* -11.16* 9.35 3.80 8.58
Rural = 1, Urban = 0 52 1.07 2.66* 93 1.74
X South 08 53 “177 +13 ~.44
Years of Education -.37* “11 +37 +27 +15
X South 48 05 02 01 49
Head in White Collar
Occupation = 1
Other =0 +19 82 +23 73 -.87
X South 32 42 02 1.05 92
Head in Farm Occupation
=1, Other =0 2.77 2.94* 4.10* 1.36 -3.41*
X South 2:21 -4.81* -5.18* 49 1.03
Family Income .46* -.05 +17 +25 01
X South -51* -46* 44 -.26 ~17
Black = 1, Other = 0 2.81 08 -4.18* 7.38*
X South 2.34 87 4.74 2.88
Jewish = 1, Other = 0 -5.02* 4.22 2.41
X South -2.82 1.30 -3.50
Roman Catholic = 1,
Other =0 74 22 1.16 1.60
X South -7.39* — -1.02 -2.22 44
Foreign-born = 1,
Other = 0 41 4.00* 16 2.40
X South -11.06* 25 +85 4.21
Age 40 & Over = 1,
Under 40 =0 77 1.02 2.23* 1.04 -1.32
X South -2.04 +62 +91 -2.12 2.13
Female = 1, Male = 0 a7 2.99 32 99 -1.32
X South -3.24* -.80 2.09 -1.08 84
Political Independent = 1,
Other =0 +68 42 1.20 -.93 24
X South 1.29 -2.19 67 01 1.04
Attendance at Religious
Services +.20 1 .34* -28 +24
X South 45 +22 32 64 10
F Scale .22* .08* 03 .08* -14*
X South -.08 .19* 07 -.09 .01
Anomia .16* okie .09* .10* 05
X South +05 -.02 01 03 +01
Psychic Distress 04 00 -.05 05 .08*
X South 04 00 .07 06 03
Anti-Black Prejudice .24* .30* 06 03
X South -.06 -.06 01 03
Anti-Semitic Beliefs .15* .15* .16*
X South -.04 +01 01
Hostility toward Jews .26* 05 06
X South -.10 06 10
Anti-Catholic Prejudice 03 eS .09* .09*
X South 00 05 .06 01
Anti-Immigrant Prejudice 02 -16* .10* .09*
X South 03 00 06 -.02
R2 without interaction
terms -4372* = .3168* .2966*  .2050* -2041*
R2 with interaction terms -4517* — .3302* .3098* = .2151* .2093*
Increments to R2 from
interactions .0145*  .0134* .0132* = .0101 0052
* p<.0s.

4 See footnotes to Table 1 for sample exclusions and sample size for each of the types of
prejudice.
Table 2. Regression Coefficients for the Regression of Measures of Prejudice on Southern Residence, Other
Characteristics and Interactions between Southern Residence and Other Characteristics, United

States, 19642
Neen ee eee
type of prejudice with these additive terms, I
computed a second set of regressions includ-
ing a complete set of regional interaction
terms, created by multiplying each of the
original independent variables by the dummy
variable for southern residence. The regression
coefficients for the interaction models are pre-
sented in Table 2. In reading the table, one
should keep in mind that the effect of a given
independent variable in the non-South may be
read directly from the table as the coefficient
for the original variable (unmultiplied by
southern residence). To find the effect in the
South, one must add the coefficients for the
original variable and the corresponding inter-
action variable. For example, in the non-
South, rural residents are .52 points higher on
Anti-Black Prejudice than are urban residents.
In the South, rural residents are .60 points
(.52 + .08) higher than urban residents—net of
other variables. If an interaction term is
statistically signfiicant (p < .05), it means that
the South and the non-South differ signifi-
cantly in the extent to which the independent
variable is related to the measure of prejudice.

At the bottom of Table 2 the values of the
coefficient of determination (R,) are shown
for both the additive and the interaction
models, plus the increments to Rz asa con-
sequence of including the interaction terms. It
may be seen that the increments to R, are
quite small in the case of each type of prej-
udice. The F ratio tests of the increments to
R,, are statistically significant in the case of
Anti-Black Prejudice, Anti-Semitic Beliefs and
Hostility Toward Jews, but in no case does
the increment exceed .0145. The increment is
greatest for Anti-Black Prejudice, just as previ-
ous theory predicted, but this figure is actual-
ly only a tiny fraction higher than it is for the
two measures of anti-Semitism. Thus, even be-
fore examining the individual coefficients and
determining whether they are in the theoreti-
cally expected direction, the overall results
would lead one to conclude that there are not
very major differences between the South and
non-South in the factors associated with prej-
udice examined here, regardless of the type of
prejudice in question.

In the case of Anti-Black Prejudice, none
of the individual regional interaction terms for
any of the measures of personality or prej-
udice is significant. The interaction term for
sex is significant, but not in the direction
hypothesized by Pettigrew. Women in the
South are Jess prejudiced than men toward
blacks, but women and men differ very little
in the non-South. The regional interaction
terms for age, political independence and at-
tendance at religious services all fail to reach
statistical significance. Thus, none of the
hypotheses that have sometimes been ad-
vanced about the differences in the causal
antecedents of anti-black prejudice in the
South and non-South receives any support.
The only regional interaction terms that prove
tobe significant—apart from the one for sex—are
those for family income, Roman Catholic
status and foreign-born status. Income is
positively related to Anti-Black Prejudice in
the non-South (net of the other independent
variables) but is only very slightly negatively
related in the South. The foreign-born and
Roman Catholics tend to be less anti-black
than the native-born and non-Catholics in the
South, but there is little difference in the
non-South. This latter finding is of some inter-
est, since it runs counter to the suggestions of
several authors that Roman Catholics in the
South, perhaps because of their marginal
status, tend to assume the predominant racial
views of the non-Catholics in the area
(Fichter, 1951; Liu, 1960; Killian,
1970:78-83).

According to theoretical expectations,
there should be no significant regional inter-
action terms for the other measures of prej-
udice, and indeed there are only three for
Anti-Semitic Beliefs, one for Hostility Toward
Jews, and none at all for Anti-Catholic and
Anti-Immigrant Prejudice. Farm individuals
tend to be less anti-Semitic than nonfarm in-
dividuals in the South (net of all the other
independent variables), but they tend to be
more anti-Semitic on both measures in the
non-South. Income is positively associated
with Anti-Semitic Beliefs in the South but not
in the non-South. The F Scale is more strong-
ly related to Anti-Semitic Beliefs in the South
than in the non-South.

Because of the need to test a large number
of related hypotheses, Table 2 is necessarily
large and complex. In Table 3, I present a
simpler, clearer and more economical model
of the determinants of Anti-Black Prejudice,
first for the United States and then separately
for the South and the non-South. This model
accounts for 44 percent of the variance in
Anti-Black Prejudice, as compared with 45
percent for the model in Table 2. I arrived at
the abbreviated model by first including all
those independent variables that had signifi-
cant coefficients in the first column of Table
2, plus the variables paired with significant
interaction terms. With the dropping of other
variables, however, the regional interaction
term for sex no longer had a significant coeffi-
cient. Hence this variable and the variable for
sex were also dropped for the final model.
The asterisks for the regional interaction
terms in the first column of Table 3 indicate
that the South and the non-South differ
significantly in the extent to which the vari-
able is related to Anti-Black Prejudice. The
asterisks in the second and third columns indi-
cate that the coefficients are significantly dif-
ferent from zero within a given region. The
results of the abbreviated model are essential-
ly similar to those of the full model and lead
to the same general conclusions. The coeffi-
cients for most of the variables are similar in
the South and the non-South; only family in-
come, Roman Catholic status and foreign-
born status play sharply different roles in the
two areas. The constant term for’ the South,
however, is far higher than it is in the non-
South.

In summary, the regression analyses with
interaction terms for southern residence pro-
vide little evidence to support the hypotheses
that have most often been advanced regarding
the differences in the determinants of anti-
black prejudice in the South and in other
regions. There are a few significant regional
interaction terms, but these are not the ones
predicted by prior theory. The mean level of
Anti-Black Prejudice is much higher in the
South, reflecting the specific subculture of the
area, but the variation of individuals around
the mean in each region is explained by rough-
ly the same variables operating for the most
part in the same way.

Having established that most of the factors
examined here play a similar role in Anti-
Black Prejudice in both the South and the
non-South, I next sought to determine wheth-
er certain compositional differences may be
responsible for the higher level of Anti-Black
Prejudice in the South. Are the regional pat-
terns of prejudice and personality simply a
function of regional differences in the level
of urbanization, education and economic de-
velopment? To investigate this possibility, I
calculated adjusted means for each of the
measures of prejudice and personality, with
controls for size of community years of edu-
cation, white-collar versus blue-collar occupa-
tion of head, farm versus nonfarm occupation
of head and family income. The means were
adjusted through regression procedures so that
they are the values that would be expected for
persons at the national mean (for that particu-
lar subsample) on each of the control vari-
ables. The adjusted means for each type of
prejudice and each personality variable for
each region are presented in Table 4.

In general the adjusted means differ very
little from the original means of Table 1. The
differential between the South and non-South
is slightly reduced for each variable and is not
statistically significant for Anti-Semitic Be-
liefs, Anti-Catholic Prejudice, the F Scale and
Psychic Distress. The difference between the
South and non-South remains significant for
Anti-Black Prejudice, Hostility Toward Jews,
Anti-Immigrant Prejudice and Anomia, but it
is only in the case of Anti-Black Prejudice that
there is a major difference. Thus, even after
controlling for degree of urbanization, educa-
tion and economic variables, there is a sub-
stantially higher level of Anti-Black Prejudice
in the South than in other regions, but there is
very little regional variation in the other types
of prejudice or the psychological measures.
The question of compositional differences
as the source of regional variations in prej-
udice may be examined further with the data
presented in Table 5—this time in the form of
standardized regression coefficients. Zero-
order correlations between residence in the
South and the measures of prejudice and per-
sonality appear in the first column. Standard-
ized regression coefficients for the same rela-
tions but net of the effects of certain control
variables are presented in the second and third
columns. These may be compared with the
zero-order correlations to see how much the
control variables reduce the relation.

The coefficients in the second column of
Table 5 are net of the same social and eco-
nomic variables that were controlled in Table
4 plus a set of four dummy variables for
minority status (black versus white, Jewish
versus non-Jewish, Catholic versus non-Cath-
olic, foreign-born versus native-born). In every
instance there is a reduction in the size of the
original relation, but it is a very slight one in
the case of Anti-Black Prejudice. For most of
the other measure, the reduction is sufficient
to bring the coefficient down almost to the
zero point. The only coefficients for southern
residence that remain significant are those for
Anti-Black Prejudice and Hostility Toward
Jews, and only the former is substantial. The
very small size of the coefficients for the three
psychological variables indicates that south-
erners and nonsoutherners do not differ on
these personality characteristics net of the
compositional social variables. Hence, when
these three psychological variables were used
as additional controls in computing coeffi-
cients for the third column, there was very
little further reduction in the coefficients. It is
clear that the higher level of Anti-Black Prej-
udice in the South cannot for the most part
be explained simply in terms of regional com-
positional differences in the social and
psychological characteristics examined here.

The final strand of evidence that I wish to
examine pertains to the levels of prejudice of
persons who have migrated from one region to
another, as compared with those of persons
who have not migrated. One of the questions
-in the 1964 survey asked, “In what state did
you spend most of your childhood?” Using
the replies to this question plus current resi-
dence, I constructed four migration cate-
gories: (1) both childhood and current resi-
dence in the South (N = 520); (2) childhood
residence in the South, current residence in
the non-South (N = 114); (3) childhood resi-
dence in the non-South, current residence in
the South (N = 93); (4) both childhood and
current residence in the non-South (N =
1248). Then I calculated the mean scores of
each group for each of the measures of prej-
udice and personality. Since these means may
be affected by compositional differences be-
tween migrants and nonmigrants, I also calcu-
lated adjusted means net of the effects of sex,
age, size of community, years of education,
white-collar versus blue-collar occupation of
head, farm versus nonfarm occupation of
head, family income and ethnic status (black,
Jewish, Catholic, foreign-born). In general the
adjusted means were highly similar to the
original means. The adjusted means are pre-
sented in Table 6.

If there is a southern subculture of prej-
udice, those who were reared in the South and
who currently live there should be most high-
ly prejudiced; those who were reared and cur-
rently live outside the South should be least
prejudiced; and those who have migrated be-
tween the regions should be intermediate.
This pattern emerges very clearly for Anti-
Black Prejudice, but it is not present for the
other measures. In the case of the latter,
either the means are out of the expected
order, or there is very little difference among
the means. The one possible exception is
Hostility Toward Jews. There the adjusted
means appear in the expected order, but the
differences among them are slight.

The residents of the South who were
reared in the South are significantly more
Anti-Black than any of the other three groups,
and the residents of the non-South who were
reared in the non-South are significantly less
Anti-Black than any of the other three groups.
There is, however, no significant difference
between those who were reared in the South
but now live in the non-South and those who
were reared in the non-South but now live in
the South. Indeed, the adjusted means for the
two migrant groups are almost identical.
These results are thus at variance with both
the expectations of Myrdal (1944) and the
findings of Hyman and Sheatsley (1964).
Myrdal was writing about a period some
twenty years earlier when racial prejudice was
apparently much greater, and perhaps his
hypothesis would have been verified if it had
been tested at that time. The survey utilized
by Hyman and Sheatsley, however, is from
the same time period as the one analyzed
here. The differences in results may be due to
somewhat different definitions of interre-
gional migrants, to the use of different mea-
sures of anti-black prejudice and to the ab-
sence of controls for compositional differ-
ences between migrants and nonmigrants in
the earlier study. From this analysis it appears
that the effects of migration between the
South and non-South on anti-black prejudice
are symmetric. Those who spent their child-
hood in one region and later migrated to the
other tend to have about the same level of
prejudice—a level intermediate between the
two nonmigrant groups.

For the other measures of prejudice and
personality, there are a number of significant
differences between pairs of groups for the
original means but very few for the adjusted
In the analysis presented here, residents of
the South tended to show a much higher level
of anti-black prejudice than residents of the
non-South in 1964, but the regions differed
only slightly with regard to anti-Semitism and
anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant prejudice.
The two different measures of anti-Semitism
yielded similar results, though Hostility
Toward Jews was somewhat more strongly re-
lated to residence in the South. It appears to
me that an education-related acquiescence
bias in Anti-Semitic Beliefs was probably not
primarily responsible for the slight differences
in the behavior of the two measures, for years
of education showed a stronger inverse rela-
tion to the measure that is not vulnerable to
acquiescence tendencies. The South and the
non-South also differed very little on psycho-
logical variables—authoritarianism, anomia
and psychic distress. If prejudice were primar-
ily a function of such characteristics, we
would expect consistent regional differences
in each type of prejudice. The fact that anti-
black prejudice was far higher in the South
but the other types of prejudice were not sug-
gests that there was a special subcultural tradi-
tion of anti-black prejudice in the region.

Contrary to the expectations of most
authors who have written on the topic, the
factors examined here that were associated
with anti-black prejudice were basically sim-
ilar in both the South and the non-South. The
regression coefficients or slopes for Anti-Black
Prejudice were similar in the South and the
non-South, but the constant term, the point of
origin, was far higher in the South. Hence, the
mean score for Anti-Black Prejudice was high-
er in the South, but the variation of individu-
als around the mean can be explained in
roughly the same way in both regions. Similar
factors appeared to predispose people to ac-
cept prejudiced beliefs, norms and values in
both regions. The large regional differences in
anti-black prejudice apparently came simply
from the fact that the beliefs, norms and val-
ues that one is socialized to accept tended to
be much more extreme in the South.

The evidence regarding the attitudes of in-
terregional migrants also is consistent with the
subcultural view. Those who spent most of
their childhood in one region but later moved
to the other tended to have attitudinal posi-
tions with regard to blacks about at the mid-
point between the views of those who con-
tinued to live in the South and those who re-
mained in the non-South. The regional
acculturation process apparently was sym-
metric, with migrants to each region equally
likely to accept—at least partially—the norms
and beliefs dominant in their new locale. This
pattern of differences between migrants and
nonmigrants did not exist for attitudes toward
Jews, Catholics and immigrants.

Many authors believe that the regional dif-
ference in anti-black prejudice will decline and
eventually disappear as the South catches up
economically and educationally with the rest
of the country. I found, however, that when I
introduced controls for education, occupa-
tional status, income and degree of urbaniza-
tion, the difference between the South and
non-South in anti-black prejudice was only
slightly reduced. The higher level of anti-black
prejudice among southern whites could not be
attributed just to their rural character and
educational and economic backwardness. I be-
lieve that the critical factor is probably not
the socioeconomic level of whites but rather
the greater economic and social subordina-
tions of blacks in the South. If the structural
position of blacks in southern society im-
proves in relative terms and blacks come to
participate more fully in the educational and
economic development of the South, how-
ever, the level of anti-black prejudice in the
South may subside to those levels found in
other regions. The old subcultural norms may
be perpetuated for a time by virtue of the
socialization process, but without the continu-
al reinforcement provided by the structural
subordination of blacks, those norms will in
time most likely decay.

The survey data analyzed in this paper are
now somewhat dated, and it is likely that the
regional difference in anti-black prejudice to-
day is less pronounced than it was in 1964 (cf.
Glenn, 1974). The theoretical significance of
the findings from the 1964 data, however, is
not diminished by the fact that the patterns
may have changed. I believe that the findings
of this study tend to support the argument
that cultural factors and historical traditions
rather than psychological factors or socio-
economic compositional differences were
responsible for the higher level of anti-black
prejudice in the South in 1964. Of course, it is
possible and I would say probable—that cul-
tural norms, values and ideologies are respon-
sible not only for regional differences in anti-
black prejudice but also for the general levels
of prejudice toward each minority group.
Thus, most of the prejudice toward minority
groups may be due simply to the perpetuation
of cultural beliefs, values and norms through
the normal socialization process. This point is
difficult to demonstrate directly, however,
and this paper has undertaken only the more
limited task of showing that at least for one
type of prejudice, a cultural explanation of
regional differentials is much more compelling
than one that emphasizes psychological or
socioeconomic differences between the re-
gions.

One should not conclude, however, that
psychological factors are unimportant in ex-
plaining the level of prejudice of individuals.
As may be seen in Tables 2 and 3, with the
exception of Psychic Distress, the psychologi-
cal measures are generally independently re-
lated to each of the measures of prejudice,
and prejudice toward one group tends to be
related to prejudice toward another group.
One might argue, as Selznick and Steinberg
(1969) do, that authoritarianism and anomia
really constitute belief systems growing out of
an unenlightened world view rather than true
personality variables. These variables do, how-
ever, continue to play a significant inde-
pendent role in prejudice even after one con-
trols for education and various other indica-
tors of socioeconomic status that we associate
with “cultural enlightenment.” Nevertheless, I
am inclined to agree that the psychological
variables themselves have a cultural source—
but a source that does not differ substantially
from one section of the country to another.

One final caution is in order. In arguing for
a “subcultural” explanation of the high level
of antiblack prejudice in the South, I have mere-
ly labeled the observed regional difference in
levels of antiblack prejudice; I have not truly ex-
plained it. In my analysis I have been able to
tule out some possible explanations of the
differential. I have shown that it is not simply
a compositional difference due to the things
that are ordinarily thought to affect prej-
udice—notably socioeconomic status and
certain psychological measures. The nature

and source of the “subcultural” difference,
however, remains an open question. The great
weakness of cultural or socialization theories
of prejudice is that they do not tell us why
the prejudiced norms and beliefs develop
toward a particular group in the first place.
Further research of a substantially more
imaginative and ingeriious character will be re-
quired to elucidate the specific historical and
social processes that have led to the regional
patterns that we observe today. Historians and
sociologists (e.g., Jordan, 1968; D. Noel,
1972) have only begun to wrestle with this
difficult problem.
The complete interview schedule from which
the scale items were taken is reproduced in
Appendix A of Selznick and Steinberg (1969).
A. Anti-Black Prejudice Scale

1.

As you see it, are Negroes today de-
manding more than they have a right
to?

An owner of property should not
have to sell to Negroes if he doesn’t
want to.

A restaurant owner should not have
to serve Negroes if he doesn’t want
to.

Generally speaking, Negroes are lazy
and don’t like to work hard.

Before Negroes are given equal rights,
they have to show that they deserve
them.

Negroes who want to work hard can
get ahead just as easily as anyone
else.
10.

11.

nessmen.
Jews have a lot of irritating faults.
International banking is pretty much
controlled by Jews.

Jews are becoming more and more
like other Americans.

Jews don’t care what happens to any-
one but their own kind.

. Jews always like to be at the head of

things.

. Jews stick together too much.
. Jews are always stirring up trouble

with their ideas.

. Jews are warm and friendly people.
. Jews should stop complaining about

what happened to them in Nazi Ger-
C. Hostility Toward Jews Scale

Ie

Suppose you had a child who wanted
to marry a Jew who had a good edu-
cation and came from a good family.
How would you feel about this—
would you object strongly, some-
what, a little, or not at all?

How do you feel about having Jews
in your neighborhood? Would you
like to have some Jewish neighbors,
wouldn’t it make any difference to
you or would you prefer not to have
any Jewish neighbors?

If a candidate for Congress should
declare himself as being against the
Jews, would this influence you to
vote for him or to vote against him?
Suppose your political party wanted
to nominate a Jew for President of
the United States—that is, a religious
Jew who would go to synagogue
every week the way a Christian goes
to church every Sunday. Would this
disturb you very much, somewhat,
very little, or not at all?

If the United States government
wanted to pass a law to stop more
Jews from immigrating to this coun-
try, would you be in favor of this or
against it?

Which of the things on this card do
you think big companies should do
when are hiring people? Hire the best
people whether they are Jewish or
not. Hire Jews in proportion to the
number that there are in the com-
munity. Hire Jews only when they
are so good that no one else could do
the job as well. Hire no Jews at all.
Mr. Smith is a member of a social
club where there are no Jewish mem-
bers. Although he knows many of
the members would prefer not to
have Jews in the club, he decides to
try to get his Jewish friend, Mr.
Cohen, into the club. ... Now sup-
pose the members did vote to keep
Mr. Cohen out of the club....Do
you think that Mr. Cohen should feel
angry or do you think that he should
realize that Christians have a right to
their own clubs?

Some people say that Jews have suf-
fered a great deal in the past. Which
of these statements comes closest to
your own feelings about this? The
Jews have suffered no more than
anybody else. The Jews have suffered
but they generally brought it on
themselves. The Jews have suffered
through no fault of their own.

Which of these statements about Hit-
ler comes closest to what you be-
lieve? Sometimes I think that Hitler
was right in getting rid of the Jews.
Hitler was partly right in trying to
get rid of the Jews, but he went too
far. Hitler was wrong in treating the
Jews as he did.
Adorno, T.W., Else Frenkel-Brunswick, D. J. Levin-
son and R.N. Sanford
1950 The Authoritarian Personality. New York:
Harper.
Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith
1962 “A study of religious discrimination by
social clubs.” Rights 4:83-6.
Blumer, Herbert
1965 “The future of the color line.” Pp. 322-36
in J. C. Mckinney and E. T. Thompson
(eds.), The South in Continuity and Change.
Durham: Duke University Press.
Brink, William and Louis Harris
1963 The Negro Revolution in America. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
1967 Black and White. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Bureau of Intelligence, Office of War Information
1942 “White attitudes toward Negroes.” Report
No. 30 (July 28).
Campbell, Angus
1971 White Attitudes toward Black People. Ann
Arbor: Institute for Social Research, Univer-
sity of Michigan.
Chalmers, David M.
1965 Hooded Americanism: The First Century of
the Ku Klux Klan, 1865-1965. Garden City,
N.Y.: Doubleday.
Christie, Richard and John Garcia

1951 “Subcultural variation in authoritarian per-
sonality.” Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 46:457-69.

Colman, Andrew M. and Peter Lambley

1970 “Authoritarianism and race attitudes in
South Africa.” Journal of Social Psychology
82:161-4.

Crespi, Irving

1964 “Public reaction to the Eichmann trial.”

Public Opinion Quarterly 28:90-103.
Cronbach, L. J.

1951 ‘Coefficient alpha and the internal structure

of tests.” Psychometrika 16:297-334.
Cureton, E. E.

1966 “Corrected item-test correlations.”’ Psycho-

metrika 31:93-6.
Erskine, Hazel Gaudet

1962 “The polls: race relations.” Public Opinion
Quarterly 26:137-48.

1965 “The polls: religious prejudice, part 1.” Pub-
lic Opinion Quarterly 29:486-96.

1965-66 “The polls: religious prejudice, part 2, anti-
Semitism.’’ Public Opinion Quarterly
29:649-64.

1967 “The polls: Negro housing.” Public Opinion
Quarterly 31:482-98.

1967-68 “The polls: demonstration and race riots.”

Public Opinion Quarterly 31:655-77.

1968a “The polls: Negro employment.” Public
Opinion Quarterly 32:132-53.

1968b “The polls: speed of racial integration.”
Public Opinion Quarterly 32:51 3-24.

1968-69 “The polls: recent opinion on racial prob-

lems.’’ Public Opinion Quarterly
32:696-703.
Evans, Eli N.

1973 The Provincials: A Personal History of Jews
in the South. New York: Atheneum.
Fichter, Joseph H.
1951 Southern Parish: Dynamics of a City
Church. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Gallup Opinion Index
1965-71 Nos. 1, 3, 4, 7, 12, 14, 16, 24, 35, 37, 40,
41, 46, 51, 58, 59, 62, 75, 77.
Glenn, Norval D.
1974 “Recent trends in intercategory differences
in attitudes.” Social Forces 52:395-401.
Glenn, Norval D. and J. L. Simmons
1967 “Are regional cultural differences diminish-
ing?”’ Public Opinion Quarterly 31:176-93.
Golden, Harry
1965 A Little Girl Is Dead. New York: World.
Greeley, Andrew M. and Paul B. Sheatsley
1971 “Attitudes toward racial integration.” Scien-
tific American 225: 13-9
Harding, John, Harold Proshansky, Bernard Kutner
and Isidor Chein
1969 “Prejudice and ethnic relations.” Pp. 1-76 in
G. Lindzey and E. Aronson (eds.), The
Handbook of Social Psychology, 2nd ed., vol.
5, Applied Social Psychology. Reading, Ma.:
Addison-Wesley.

The Harris Survey Yearbook of Public Opinion 1970

1971 New York: Louis Harris.

Heise, David R. and George W. Bohrnstedt

1970 “Validity, invalidity, and reliability.” Pp.
104-29 in E. F. Borgatta and G. W. Bohrn-
stedt (eds.), Sociological Methodology
1970. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Hoge, Dean R. and Jackson W. Carroll

1973 ‘“Religiosity and prejudice in northern and
southern churches.” Journal for the Scien-
tific Study of Religion 12:181-97.

Hyman, Herbert H. and Paul Sheatsley

1956 ‘Attitudes toward desegregation.” Scientific
American 195:35-9.

1964 “Attitudes toward desegregation.” Scientific
American 211:16-23.

Jackman, Mary R.

1973 “Education and prejudice or education and
response-set?”” American Sociological Re-
view 38:327-39.

Jackson, Kenneth T.

1967 The Ku Klux Klan in the City, 1915-1930.

New York: Oxford University Press.
Jordan, Winthrop D.

1968 White over Black: American Attitudes to-
ward the Negro, 1550-1812. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.

Key, V.O.

1949 Southern Politics in State and Nation. New

York: Knopf.
Killian, Lewis M.

1970 White Southerners. New York: Random

House.
Kinzer, Donald L.

1964 An Episode in Anti-Catholicism: The Ameri-
can Protective Association. Seattle: Univer-
sity of Washington Press.

Knapp, Robert H.

1944 “A psychology of rumor.” Public Opinion
Quarterly 8:22-37.

Lever, H., L. Schlemmer and O. J. M. Wagner

1968 “A factor analysis of authoritarianism.”
Journal for Social Research 16:41-8.

Lipset, Seymour Martin and Earl Raab

1970 The Politics of Unreason:. Right-Wing Ex-
tremism in America, 1790-1970. New York:
Harper and Row.

Liu, William T.

1960 “The marginal Catholics in the South: a re-
vision of concepts.” American Journal of
Sociology 65:383-90.

Maddox, George L. and Joseph H. Fichter

1966 “Religion and social change in the South.”

Journal of Social Issues 22:44-58.
Maranell, Gary M.
1967 “An examination of some religious and
political attitude correlates of bigotry.”
Social Forces 45:356-62.
Matthews, Donald R. and James W. Prothro

1966 Negroes and the New Southern Politics.
New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.

Mayo, Selz C.

1964 “Social change, social movements and the
disappearing sectional South.” Social Forces
43:1-10.

Milton, Ohmer

1952 “Presidential choice and performance on a
scale of authoritarianism.” American
Psychologist 7:597-8.

Moore, Edmund A.

1956 A Catholic Runs for President. New York:

Ronald Press.
Myrdal, Gunnar

1944 An American Dilemma. New York: Mc-

Graw-Hill.
Nicholls, William H.

1964 “The South asa developing area.” Pp. 22-40
in A. Leiserson (ed.), The American South
in the 1960’s. New York: Praeger.

Noel, Donald L. (ed.)

1972 The Origins of American Slavery and Ra-

cism. Columbus, Ohio: Merrill.
Noel, Donald L. and Alphonso Pinkney

1964 “Correlates of prejudice: some racial differ-
ences and similarities.” American Journal of
Sociology 69:609-22.

Noel, Joseph Renny

1971 “White anti-black prejudice in the United
States.” International Journal of Group
Tensions 1:59-76.

Orpen, Christopher

1970 “Authoritarianism in an ‘authoritarian’ cul-
ture: the case of Afrikaans-speaking South
Africa.’’ Journal of Social Psychology
81:119-20.

1971a ‘‘Authoritarianism and racial attitudes
among English-speaking South Africans.”
Journal of Social Psychology 84:301-2.

1971b “The effect of cultural factors on the rela-
tionship between prejudice and person-
ality.” Journal of Psychology 78:73-9.

1971c “Prejudice and adjustment to cultural norms
among English-speaking South Africans.”
Journal of Psychology 77:217-8.
Orpen, Christopher and Quentin Rookledge

1972 ‘“Dogmatism and prejudice in white South
Africa.’’ Journal of Social Psychology
86:151-3.

Pettigrew, Thomas F.

1958 ‘Personality and socio-cultural factors in in-
tergroup attitudes: a cross-national compari-
son.’ Journal of Conflict Resolution
2:29-42.

1959 “Regional differences in anti-Negro pre-
judice.” Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 59:28-36.
Pettigrew, Thomas F. and M. Richard Cramer

1959 “The demography of desegregation.” Jour-

nal of Social Issues 15:61-71.
Prothro, E. Terry

1952 “Ethnocentrism and anti-Negro attitudes in
the deep South.” Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology 47:105-8

Prothro, E. Terry and John A. Jensen

1950 “Interrelations of religious and ethnic atti-
tudes in selected southern populations.”
Journal of Social Psychology 32:45-9.

Rao,C.R.

1955 “Estimation and tests of significance in

factor analysis.” Psychometrika 20:93-111
Reed, John Shelton

1972 The Enduring South: Subcultural Persis-
tence in Mass Society. Lexington, Ma.: Lex-
ington Books, Heath.

Reissman, Leonard

1966 ‘‘Social development and the American

South.” Journal of Social Issues 22:101-16.
Rhyne, Edwin Hoffman

1962 “Racial prejudice and personality scales: an
alternative approach.’’ Social Forces
41:44-53,

Roche, John P.

1963 The Quest for the Dream. New York: Mac-

millan.
Roper, Elmo

1946 ‘The Fortune survey: U.S. anti-Semites.”
Fortune 33:257-60.

1947 “The Fortune survey, part 2: racial and re-
ligious intolerance.” Fortune 36:5-6, 10.

Rose, Arnold M.

1956 “Intergroup relations vs. prejudice: per-
tinent theory for the study of social
change.” Social Problems 4:173-6.

Schwartz, Mildred A.

1967 Trends in White Attitudes toward Negroes.

Chicago: NORC, University of Chicago.
Selznick, Gertrude J. and Stephen Steinberg

1969 The Tenacity of Prejudice: Anti-Semitism
in Contemporary America. New York: Har-
per and Row.

Sheatsley, Paul B.

1966 “White attitudes toward the Negro.” Pp.
303-24 in T. Parsons and K. B. Clark (eds.),
The Negro American. Boston: Beacon.

Siegman, Aron Wolfe

1958 “The effect of cultural factors on the rela-
tionship between personality, intelligence,
and ethnocentric attitudes.” Journal of Con-
sulting Psychology 22:375-7.

Sims, Verner M. and James R. Patrick

1936 “Attitudes toward the Negro of northern
and southern college students.” Journal of
Social Psychology 7:192-204.

Smith, Charles U. and James W. Prothro

1957 “Ethnic differences in authoritarian person-

ality.” Social Forces 35:334-8.
An idealized pattern (a “‘blockmodel”) of the interaction among 107 scientists in a biomedical
research speciality is identified across networks of several distinct types of relationship. This
pattern is sustained by the data. Groups of scientists who share common “positions ” in the
multiple network structure are identified. Inferences concerning the stratification of these
groups are derived solely from a consideration of the patterns they induce on multiple net-
works. These inferences are then assessed in the light of (non-network) career attributes of
individual scientists. Substantive findings from previous studies in the sociology of science are
re-assessed in the light of blockmodel analysis.
Gaston, 1973; Griffith and Mullins, 1972;
Price, 1961), informal communication (Men-
zel, 1962; Mullins, 1968), the diffusion of in-
formation (Cole and Cole, 1973), and the ex-
change of information for recognition (Hag-
strom, 1965) are clearly aware that for many
analytical purposes the infrastructure of scien-
tific organization may usefully be conceptu-
alized in terms of “networks.” Kaplan
(1964:859) has suggested that sociologists of
science will make their distinctive contribu-
tion “by pointing to the network of social
relationships in which communication is em-
bedded and to the inadequacy of restricting
one’s attention solely to formal means of
