American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review
SSAGE
There is a solid consensus among present-day
commentators about the profound impact of
pragmatist philosophy on social interac-
tionism. This consensus breaks down, how-
ever, when it comes to spelling out the exact
nature of this impact. Some critics, mostly out-
side the interactionist perspective proper,
charge interactionism with an astructural,
subjectivist and status-quo bias and lay much
of the blame at the door of pragmatism (Kanter,
1972; Huber, 1973; Reynolds and Reynolds,
1973). Others argue that there is nothing inher-
ently astructural, subjectivist or conservative
about either interactionism or pragmatism
(Hall, 1972; Stone et al, 1974; Maines, 1977;
Stryker, 1980; Johnson and Schifflet, 1981).
Still others detect a fissure among social in-
teractionists, which they trace to the division
within the pragmatist tradition between the
nominalist and subjectivist pragmatism of
Dewey and James and the realist and objec-
tivist pragmatism of Peirce and Mead (Lewis,
1976; McPhail and Rexroat, 1979; Lewis and
Smith, 1980).

The question that this voluminous literature
on pragmatism and interactionism is bound to
raise in many a head is, “‘Shouldn’t the whole
matter be left for professional philosophers to
decide?”

One answer to this question is suggested by
Kuhn’s theory of paradigms. Along with sub-
stantive theories and research procedures, ac-
cording to Kuhn, all scientific schools include
“metaphysical paradigms” or “metaphysical
parts of paradigms’. Normally, philosophical
assumptions underlying research practice in a
given area are taken for granted, but in periods
of crisis “scientists have turned to philosoph-
ical analysis as a device for unlocking the rid-
dies of their field” (Kuhn, 1970:184, 83).
Whether sociology is currently undergoing a
crisis is beyond the scope of this paper; what
directly concerns us in Kuhn’s argument is that
the task of philosophical self-reflection is per-
formed by practitioners in the field and not just
by professional philosophers. Indeed, the pro-
digious output in speculative writings by Bohr,
Heisenberg, de Broglie, Born, Schrédinger,
Eddington, Jordan, Pauli, Weizsacker, and
Oppenheimer, to mention only better known
names in modern physics, should convince the
skeptics that the reflection on the a priori foun-
dations of science is more than a self-indulgent
practice of wayward sociologists. As
Whitehead (1938:29) put it, “if science is not to
degenerate into a medly of ad hoc hypotheses,
it must become philosophical and must enter
upon a thorough criticism of its own foun-
dations.” The present inquiry into the
paradigmatic unity of pragmatist and interac-
tionist thought accepts this judgement and is
undertaken in the hope that it will help to il-
luminate some of the predicaments of modern
interactionism.

More specifically, this study is intended to
show that since its formative years, interac-
tionist sociology contained a structural com-
ponent, although its pragmatism-inspired ap-
proach to the problem of social order signifi-
cantly diverged from the traditional one. The
study also demonstrates that interactionist
methodology has a strong predilection for par-
ticipatory forms of research, which reflects its
paramount concern, again directly influenced
by pragmatist ideas, with the objective inde-
terminacy of the situation. Finally, it is held
that the relative paucity of interactionist re-
search on the issues of power, class and in-
equality is not so much a reflection of the con-
servative bias that the interactionists allegedly
inherited from pragmatism as the result of their
failure to embrace fully the political commit-
ments of pragmatist philosophers.

The terms “pragmatism” and “social in-
teractionism” are used here inclusively. That
is, Peirce, James, Dewey, and Mead, despite
their divergent views, are all considered to be
pragmatists insofar as they took a common
stance against rationalist philosophy. Correla-
tively, Cooley, Thomas, Park, Ellwood,
Blumer, and a number of other kindred yet
disparate writers are treated here as interac-
tionists for the sake of contrasting their views
to those of functionalist thinkers. It is argued,
however, that the tension in the premises of
interactionist thought has resulted in the di-
vision between the more voluntaristically and
less voluntaristically oriented brands of social
interactionism.

Finally, about the plan of the exposition.
Without claiming to have exhausted the prem-
ises of social interactionism, the following have
been selected as central to interactionist
thought: the philosophical perspective on
reality as being in the state of flux, the
sociological view of society as emergent in-
teraction, the methodological quest for a logic
of inquiry sensitive to the objective indetermi-
nacy of the situation, and the ideological com-
mitment to ongoing social reconstruction as a
goal of sociological practice. These four
paradigm-setting features of social interac-
tionism are addressed in this order.
possibilities, waiting to be completed and ra-
tionalized. The fact that the world out there is
“still” in the making does not augur its final
completion at some future point: the state of
indeterminacy endemic to reality cannot be
terminated once and for all. It can be alleviated
only partially, in concrete situations, and with
the help of a thinking agent. The latter has the
power to carve out an object, to convert an
indeterminate situation into a determinate one,
because he is an active being. The familiar
world of color, sound and structure is his prac-
tical accomplishment, i.e., he hears because he
listens to, he sees because he looks at, he dis-
cerns a pattern because he has a stake in it, and
when his attention wavers, interest ceases, and
action stops—the world around him sinks back
into the state of indeterminacy.

There is more than a tinge of post-Kantian
idealism in this mode of reasoning, which
should come as no surprise, given the promi-
nent role transcendentalism played in the
pragmatists’ formative years. Traces of tran-
scendentalism can be detected in Dewey’s cel-
ebration of the mind as “the constitutive author
of the whole scheme” ([1929] 1960:33), James’
preoccupation with the world “anchored in the
Ego” ([1890] 1950, II:297), and Mead’s convic-
tion that “what a thing is in nature depends not
simply on what it is in itself, but also on the
observer’’ (1929:428). Transcendentalist over-
tones are unmistakable in the pragmatist view
of cognition, which harks back to the idealist
metaphor of knowing as carving. From tran-
scendentalism pragmatists learned to distrust
the rhetoric of ‘‘bare facts” which, in Mead’s
words (1938:98), ‘“‘are not there to be picked
out. They have to be dissected out, and the
data are the most difficult of ab-
stractions. . . .”” Pragmatists’ resistance to be-
haviorism as incompatible with the active and
conscious mode of man’s being in the world, no
doubt, also reflected the aversion to mate-
rialism bred into their bones in the years of
apprenticeship. Salient as the elective affinity
of idealist and pragmatist thought is, it should
not be taken to mean that pragmatists accepted
the idealist legacy uncritically: pragmatism is a
post-Darwinian philosophy in which the prin-
ciple of subject—object relativity was replaced
with that of the relativity of organism and envi-
ronment, the constitutive activity of Absolute
Mind with the instrumental activity of orga-
nized individuals, and dialectical logic with the
experimental logic of situation. Pragmatists
parted company with idealists on the issue of
the primacy and the constitutive power of
thought, which, according to them, needs to be
explained, not presupposed. The root of
knowledge is not to be found in knowledge
itself; it is to be sought in action. The latter
intervenes in the relationship between the
subject and object, giving rise to the phenome-
non of “emergence” which, in simplest terms,
refers to ‘a certain environment that exists in
its relationship to the organism, and in which
new characters can arise by virtue of the or-
ganism’” (Mead, 1934:330). Pragmatists con-
ceded that subject and object are bound to each
other by the fundamental relationship of rela-
tivity, yet they placed this relationship in a
broader context suggested by the Darwinian
theory of evolution. The individual con-
tinuously adapts to his environment, changing
his action to meet the exigencies of the situa-
tion and transforming the situation to satisfy
his practical needs; in that sense we can speak
of ‘a relativity of the living individual and its
environment, both as to form and content... .
The individual and environment—the
situation—mutually determine each other”
(Mead, [1924-25] 1964:278; [1908] 1964:86). A
key word in this statement is “mutual’’. Unlike
idealists, pragmatists emphasized that action is
constituted by, as much as it constitutes, the
environment. It is in the course of this mutual
constitution that reality opens itself up to the
knower. Knowing does not exist for its own
sake, but for the sake of doing. Whatever
doubts the knower has about the nature of
things, he alleviates practically, by manipulat-
ing his objects, putting them to different uses,
literally forcing these objects to conform to his
notion of them, and in the process of doing so
establishing—in situ—whether a thing in ques-
tion is what it is thought to be. The very mode
of handling things, thus, is part and parcel of
their objective being. Said Peirce ({1877]
1955:29), ‘‘thought is essentially an action.”
“The unit of existence is the act,” concurred
Mead (1938:65). The only reality available to
us, in James’s words, is ‘‘practical reality”
([1890] 1950, II:295). “Reality which is not in
any sort of use, or bearing upon use,” charged
Dewey ([1931] 1963:41), ‘may go hang, so far
as knowledge is concerned.”

As action took precedence over thought in
pragmatist analysis, the old question of thing in
itself emerged in a new light. “Reality in itself,
or in its uninterpreted nakedness,” observes
Thayer (1973:68), “is a pragmatically mean-
ingless notion. ...” The problem for prag-
matists is not so much that the thing in itself is
unknowable in principle, but that it can be
known in so many ways: one thing can function
as many different objects, and one object can
be represented by many different things; which
role a thing assumes in a given situation, which
determinate object it is made to impersonate,
depends not only on its inherent qualities, but
also on the interests, assumptions, and practi-
cal skills of the actor. A thing we call paper can
be used for building a fire, writing a letter,
covering the floor, making a mask, as well as
for many other uses, every one of which brings
into existence a new situation and a different
object. Moreover, as Mead (1936:158, 155)
stressed repeatedly, our very treatment of
things as definite objects involves an abstrac-
tion, in that it requires an active selection of
certain elements from among the many encom-
passed in our field of experience. The status of
a thing as an object of a particular kind is
problematic; it is determined in the course of
interaction between the thing in question and
other things: “Everything that exists in as far
as it is known and knowable is in interaction
with other things. . . . Interaction is a univer-
sal trait of natural existence” (Dewey, [1929]
1958:175; [1929] 1960:244). One of the things
involved in the interaction that produces a
meaningful object is the knower. Things
emerge as meaningful objects when they en-
counter the knower with all his practical skills
and the power of symbolization: ‘‘Symboliza-
tion constitutes objects not constituted be-
fore. . . . Language does not simply symbolize
a situation or object which is already there in
advance; it makes possible the existence or the
appearance of that situation or object, for it is a
part of the mechanism whereby that situation
or object is created” (Mead, 1934:78). Thus,
situation in the pragmatist lexicon always pre-
supposes an actor and a transaction between
the knower and the known, or as Gouinlock
(1972:8) put it, “if there were no human beings
(or comparably sentient creatures) there would
be no situations in nature.”

This pragmatist reasoning is ripe with in-
teresting, if unsettling, implications. It implies
the possibility of multiple realities, or to use
James’s favorite expression, ‘the pluralistic
universe,” comprised of many worlds, each
one rational in its own way, each reflecting
alternative lines of action, ends, and situations.
“Other sculptors, other statues from the same
stone!’ exclaims James ([1890] 1950, I:289).
“Other minds, other worlds from the same
monotonous and inexpressive chaos! My world
is but one in a million alike embedded, alike
real to those who may abstract them.” This
argument, however, runs into a problem: if the
world is as fluent and indeterminate as James
wants us to believe, how do we go about de-
ciding which course of action to follow, which
world to cut out of the primordial chaos of
unmediated being? Are we not heading for a
solipsism of some sort when we adopt this
mode of reasoning? These are the questions
that critics posed to the pragmatists and that
consumed so much of James’s time in the last
ten years of his life. His claim that ‘‘the fons et
origo of all reality, whether from the absolute
or the practical point of view, is thus subjec-
tive, is ourselves’’ ({1890] 1950, I1:296-7), ex-
posed him to the charges of subjectivism,
which, despite all his efforts, James was not
able to refute resolutely. This cannot be said
about Dewey, who came to appreciate without
reservation that ‘‘meaning is objective as well
as universal,” that ‘‘significant things are
things actually implicated in situations of
shared or social purpose and execution,” that
“communication is a condition of conscious- -
ness” ({1929] 1958:188-9, 180-1, 187). The
charges of subjectivism are also inapplicable in
the case of Peirce and Mead, both of whom
saw the terminating of indeterminacy as a fun-
damentally social process. From the start
Peirce was at pains to emphasize that ‘the very
origin of the conception of reality shows that
this conception essentially involves the notion
of a COMMUNITY,” that the real problem is
“how to fix belief, not in the individual merely,
but in the community” ({1868] 1955:247; [1877]
1955:13). Similarly, Mead, while acknowledg-
ing that ‘teach individual has a world that dif-
fers in some degree from that of any other
member of the same community,” consistently
stressed that the individual “slices the events”
from the standpoint of community life, and that
his very ability to “‘carve out” an object and to
handle it rationally ‘is social to the very core”
((1924-25] 1964:276, 1934:141).

In retrospect, many tenets of pragmatism
might seem dated; the pragmatist analysis of
the social dimension of human existence looms
larger and larger as the time goes by. Prag-
matists were not the first to recognize the im-
portance of this dimension—Scottish moralists
(Stryker, 1980) and romantic philosophers
(Shalin, 1984) had done so way before prag-
matists. Still, Morris (1970:96) hardly exagger-
ates when he describes the analysis of the so-
cial conditions of man as “‘one of the most
important achievements of the pragmatist
movement”. Without society, pragmatists
realized, there would be no rational human
beings, no world of meaning and structure, and
the primordial chaos would never be tamed.
Precisely because the world out there is not
fully determinate, because it can be carved out
in so many ways, there is a need for an or-
ganizing principle, a reference frame that can
guide the efforts of disparate individuals en-
gaged in the process of determination. The in-
dividual learns to do the ‘‘carving” against the
background of meaningful objects shared with
others. He grows in the environment ‘“en-
dowed with meaning in terms of the process of
social activity” (Mead, 1934:130), in which he
partakes with other human beings, and “this
community of partaking is meaning” (Dewey,
[1929] 1958:185). It is insofar as the individual
perspective on reality is mediated by and
rooted in society that it attains a quality of
being private or public, objective or subjective:
“The objectivity of the perspective of the indi-
vidual lies in its being a phase of the larger act.
It remains subjective in so far as it cannot fall
into the larger social perspective . . .” (Mead,
1938:548). The objectivity of any perspective is
thus not an arbitrary matter; rather, it is a
social, and therefore historical, matter, and as
such it invites, nay, requires sociological
treatment. Which brings us to social interac-
tionism proper.

Stated in pragmatist terms, the project of
interactionist sociology consists in a systema-
tic examination of the process of the determi-
nation of indeterminacy, insofar as this process
shapes society and, in turn, is shaped by it. Put
differently, it is an inquiry into the pluralistic
social universe brought into being by various
collectivities, each one creating a separate en-
vironment of meaningful objects that distin-
guish its members from those inhabiting dif-
ferent social worlds. A social world is real for
those participating in the same universe of dis-
course. It is ‘“‘a distinct world, with its own
ways of acting, talking, and thinking . . . its
own vocabulary, its own activities and inter-
ests, its own conception of what is significant
in life, . . . its own scheme of life” (Cressey,
1932:31). Such a world is not objective in the
traditional sense—it has no being in itself; it is
not ‘‘a world of independent realities such as
might be known by some ideal absolute sub-
ject; it is a world of . . . data given to concrete,
historically determined subjects, and of actions
which these human subjects actually perform
upon these objects of their own experience”
(Znaniecki, 1927:536). There is more than a
fleeting resemblance between Thomas’s
theorem, “If men define situations as real, they
are real in their consequences” (Thomas and
Thomas, 1928:572), and James’s dictum, ‘“*. . .
We need only in cold blood ACT as if the thing
in question were real, and keep acting as if it
were real, and it will infallibly end by growing
in such a connection with our life that it will
become real’ ({1890] 1950, II:321). The defini-
tion of the situation is that unmistakably prag-
matist “looking at,” “listening to,” ‘‘reaching
for’ which constitutes an early, hidden, at-
titudinal stage of an overt act and which
transforms ‘the big, buzzing confusion” of
everyday life (James, quoted in Park, [1924]
1955:265) into a clearly recognizable environ-
ment and gives a semblance of order to ‘the
irrational chaos of the real world” (Znaniecki,
1919:147). “The definition of the situation is
equivalent to the determination of the vague,”
wrote Thomas; before the definition sets in,
“the situation is quite undetermined,” but as
the definition unfolds, ‘‘the situation becomes
definite” (Thomas, [1918-20] 1966:240, 23-4).
That is when the flow of reality begins to show
a pattern and the situation reveals its
structured character. The pattern in question,
however, is not inherent; it is not a ‘fact’ in
the positivist sense of the word. ‘‘The great and
most usual illusion of the scientist is that he
simply takes the facts as they are . . . and gets
his explanation entirely a posteriori from pure
experience. A fact by itself is already an ab-
straction; we isolate a certain limited aspect of
the concrete process of becoming, rejecting, at
least provisionally, all its indefinite complex-
ity” (Thomas, [1918-20] 1966:271).
Interactionists’ frequent allusions to James
should not be taken to mean that they endorsed
his subjectivism. It is of paramount importance
from the interactionist standpoint that defi-
nitions of the situation vary not only from indi-
vidual to individual, but also from one group to
another, that “different tribes define the same
situation and pattern the behavior in precisely
opposite ways” (Thomas, 1937:8-9), that
“things do not have the same meanings with
different people, in different periods of time, in
different parts of a country” (Park and Miller,
1921:265). Interactionists clearly understood
that humans approach the task of defining the
situation as members of certain groups, armed
with “models of situations” and ‘‘super-
individual schemes’ (Znaniecki, 1919:199,
284). The symbolic environment he inhabits is
a shared environment, and the outlook he de-
velops is a shared outlook, reflecting a larger
social act of which he finds himself a part.' As
the individual grows older, he can challenge
this shared world—one thing he cannot do, as
long as he remains a rational member of soci-
ety, is to ignore it. His actions always refer to
the world that is already there, the intersubjec-
tive universe existing on the intersection of
objectively established group perspectives.
The interactionist must begin with the histori-
cally determined world of culture and meaning,
but he must understand it dialectically, i-e., not
as the “block-universe”’ (James) existing by it-
self and informing the individual's conduct
without being informed by it, but as the world
that is still in the making, the world that con-
tinuously produces individuals as conscious

' In pragmatist terms, Joas (1983:11) points out, it
is appropriate to say that “we find our purposes or
ends in the world, and we are practically embedded
into the world prior to every intentional act.” This
statement needs to be qualified, for it does not take
into account the dialectical nature of the relationship
between intentionalities and situations, and specifi-
cally the fact that intentionalities can attain a degree
of autonomy from the situation and serve as a source
of innovations.

human beings and that is continuously pro-
duced by them as a meaningfully objective
whole.

To sum up, pragmatism was a reaction to the
overdetermined picture of reality painted by
rationalist and mechanicist philosophers. Fol-
lowing the train of thought initiated by tran-
scendental idealists, pragmatists replaced the
static, predetermined, inherently structured
universe with the dynamic, emergent, histori-
cal world-in-the-making. This shift in perspec-
tive resulted in the ‘‘figure-background rever-
sal,” which illuminated anew the problem of
order. Whereas the chief difficulty for ration-
alist thought was to explain apparent ir-
regularities and incessant transformations in
the overdetermined world of natural order, the
problem for pragmatists was coming to grips
with order and structure in the overemergent
world of natural indeterminacy. How can one
do justice to the orderly nature of reality with-
out doing violence to its emergent
characteristics—such was the challenging
question that confronted pragmatist thinkers.
It is in response to this challenge that prag-
matists turned to the collective conditions of
human existence as a source of meaning, sta-
bility and organization. Social interactionism
was an outgrowth of this ingenious attempt to
find in society an anchorage for the determi-
nate world of objective reality. Interactionists
accepted the pragmatist thesis that the world is
not inherently determinate, that it is open to
multiple determinations, which led them to the
pioneering view of society as the pluralistic
universe continuously produced by the collec-
tive efforts of individuals. Society-in-itself
gave way in their work to society-in-the-
making, the study of structural givens to the
study of the production of social reality as ob-
jective and meaningful. With this reorientation,
interactionists had to find their own way of
coming to grips with structural properties of
social life without glossing over its emergent
characteristics. They also had to provide a
dialectical account of the individual as both the
product and producer of society. The view of
society as social interaction can be seen as an
attempt at resolving these vexing problems
placed on the agenda by pragmatist
philosophy.

STRUCTURE AS EMERGENT PROCESS:
THE INTERACTIONIST VIEW
OF SOCIETY

“Interaction” was more than a technical
sociological term in the vocabulary of social
interactionism; it was also a_ philosophical
category of wide-ranging significance. “The
idea of interaction,” wrote Park and Burgess
“Interaction” was more than a technical
sociological term in the vocabulary of social
interactionism; it was also a_ philosophical
category of wide-ranging significance. “The
idea of interaction,” wrote Park and Burgess
({1921] 1969:129) in their famous textbook,
“represents the culmination of long-continued
reflection by human beings in their ceaseless
effort to resolve the ancient paradox of unity in
diversity, of the ‘one’ and the ‘many,’ to find
law and order in the apparent chaos of physical
changes and social events; and thus to find
explanations for the behavior of the universe,
of society, and of man.” Note the reference to
the ‘‘one” and the “‘many”—code words for the
problem of universals and particulars. The au-
thors clearly thought that interactionism offers
the best hope for the resolution of this ancient
paradox. Their solution, however, insofar as it
applied to the relationship between the indi-
vidual and society, was itself quite paradoxi-
cal. Neither individual nor society, according
to interactionist theory, can be accorded un-
qualified primacy—each one is an aspect in the
ongoing process of social interaction, and both
are mutually constitutive. “The individual is no
thrall to society. He constitutes society as
genuinely as society constitutes the individual”
(Mead, 1935-36:70). ‘The individual and soci-
ety are neither opposed to each other nor sepa-
rated from each other. Society is a society of
individuals and the individual is a social indi-
vidual” (Dewey, [1897] 1972:55). ‘* ‘Society’
and ‘individual’ do not denote separable phe-
nomena, but are simply collective and distri-
butive aspects of the same thing” (Cooley,
[1909] 1962:314). ‘“‘The human personality is
both a continuously producing factor and a
continuously produced result of social evolu-
tion” (Thomas, [1918-20] 1966:11). ‘*. . . Habit
and custom, personality and culture, the per-
son and society, somehow are different aspects
of the same thing. . . . Personality [is] the
subjective and individual aspect of culture, and
culture [is] the objective, generic or general
aspect of personality’? (Park, [1929]
1952:203-4).

This argument is essentially circular: the in-
dividual is explained here in terms of society
and society in terms of individuals.? The circle
in question, however, is not a vicious one—it is
a dialectical or hermeneutical circle which de-
mands as a matter of principle that the part be
explained in terms of the whole and the whole
in terms of its parts, i.e., that the individual be
understood as a subject and object of the his-
torical process and society as a continuously
produced and a continuously producing factor
in social interaction. The originality of this ap-
proach consists in the fact that it eschews both
sociological realism with its reified view of so-
ciety as a superhuman entity existing before
and apart from individuals, and sociological
nominalism with its flawed notion of society as
a convention set up at will by individuals en-
dowed by nature with minds. The fight in-
teractionists had to wage, accordingly, was on
the two fronts: against the realist concept of
society as superorganic body and against the
nominalist theory of society as convention.
First and foremost, interactionist criticism
aimed at the classical view of social order as
external, atemporal, determinate at any given
moment, and resisting change—a super-
organic entity hovering above individuals in
the Platonic realm of ever-lasting beings. In
Tesponse to this ‘“‘hypostatization of society”
(Dewey, [1927] 1954:70) interactionists ad-
vanced a series of claims that “society is
merely the name for a number of individuals,
connected by interaction’’ (Ellwood,
1907:307), “rather a phase of life than a thing
by itself’ (Cooley, [1902] 1964:135), that ‘the
social group does not exist as a real entity”
(Park, [1904] 1972:24), that ‘social science
cannot remain on the surface of social becom-
ing, where certain schools wish to have it float,
but must reach the actual human experiences
and attitudes which constitute the full, live and
active social reality beneath the formal organi-
zation of social institutions ...” (Thomas
[1918-20] 1966:13-14). These and similar ut-
terances widely scattered throughout interac-
tionist literature convinced many a commen-
tator that interactionists, just as their prag-
matist mentors, had little use for enduring,
patterned manifestations of social life. This
conclusion is largely incorrect. The post-
rationalist tradition, in which both pragmatists
and interactionists were solidly rooted, did not
render the notion of structure irrelevant—it
rendered it problematic. The whole point was
how best to fuse the notions of structure and
process and to account conceptually for the
fact that “an actual entity is at once a process,
and is atomic,” that ‘the stone . . . is a society
of separate molecules in violent agitation”
(Whitehead, 1929:121). “Structure,” intoned
Dewey ([1929] 1958:72), is “‘an evident order of
changes. The isolation of structure from the
changes whose stable ordering it is, renders it
mysterious. . . .” ‘You cannot have a process
without some sort of a structure,” avered
Mead (1936:164), ‘‘and yet the structure is sim-
ply something that expresses this process as it
takes place... .”” Hughes (1955:6) preserved
for us a telling story of Robert Park, who used
to invoke an image of the classroom table while
discussing the nature of the social group and
urge his students to see both not just as things,
but as fields, a product of the ongoing interac-
tion of individual particles. Hughes’s reaction
to Park’s invocation of the image of the table
qua electronic field is emblematic of the in-
teractionist concern with the problem of order:
“T suddenly saw,” he recalls, ‘that, not
change, but the dynamics of remaining the
same, is the miracle which social science must
explain” (1955:6). Similar statements can be
found in the works of Znaniecki (1939:84),
Thomas (1939:84), and especially Ellwood
(1910:598), who went to great lengths to make
the point that society is ‘‘a mass of interac-
tions, not haphazard, but regular, co-
ordinated, and controlled, working for the
most part, toward definite ends, and making
groups true functional unities, ruled by habit
largely... . The significant thing for the
sociologist ... is not that these interactions
between individuals exist, but that they are
regular; not haphazard, but co-ordinated and
controlled.”

The gist of the interactionist argument con-
cerning the fluid nature of social order and the
emergent character of social universals is that
the particulars belonging to a given universal
(group, class, collectivity) are not tied to it
inexorably; they function simultaneously as in-
stances of different kinds, and their behavior as
elements in one class is affected by their mem-
bership in other classes. Which of these mem-
berships will prove decisive at any given mo-
ment is problematic, and so is the status of the
universal comprised by the particulars. This
becomes dramatically evident in the sociologi-
cal domain where the situation is exacerbated
by the fact that social particulars are individu-
als marked by multiple memberships and capa-
ble of taking a conscious attitude toward their
numerous group affiliations. ““The difficulty,”
Park ([{1904] 1972:24) pointed out, “lies in the
fact that the same individuals appear as mem-

bers of different groups ... that the same
physical base is shared by two completely dif-
ferent social structures....” At any given

moment the individual can defect from one
universal to another by literally “taking the
role of the other’ (Mead, 1934:254). As the
individual gives up one role and assumes a new
attitude, he makes a quantum jump from one
universal to another, and thereby affects, how-
ever marginally, the objective status of the
universal. Every time he universalizes his ac-
tion with reference to a given group, he for-
tifies its objectivity and universality. Con-
versely, when he abstains from framing his ac-
tion in terms of designated categories and de-
termines the situation by recourse to an alter-
native reference frame, he deprives it of a
quantum of objectivity and a corresponding
measure of universality. Any single episode of
the individual’s symbolic entry into and with-
drawal from a given universal can be negligible
from the standpoint of its objective status, but
the cumulative effect of such border-crossing
incidents is not. It forces social bodies to os-
cillate, renders them fuzzy not only at the
fringes but at the very core, and it makes social
universals emergent. Social universals emerge
as real or meaningfully objective when they are
placed in the perspectives of conscious indi-
viduals who, drawing on the same means of
universalization (symbols, definitions, values),
identify themselves as instances of familiar
classes and act accordingly. When individuals
fail to generalize the situation in the same
perspective and to universalize their own
selves in the same terms, i.e., when they fail to
take ‘the attitudes of the generalized other”
(Mead, 1934:156), the universal becomes less
real and more nominal. Whether social univer-
sals are real or nominal is therefore a matter of
degree, an empirical matter. We are dealing not
with natural constants but with social variables
whose value cannot be established entirely a
priori but must be gauged in concrete situa-
tions.

If we accept the emergent universality of
social universals, we have to be ready to take
the next step and acknowledge that there is a
degree of indeterminacy endemic to any social
whole (system, institution, structure). With
humans crossing group borderlines at will, the
outcome of each social encounter becomes a
matter of probability. High as this probability
might be, one cannot assume the outcome will
follow the same pattern the next moment sim-
ply because it happened this way the moment
before. What this means is that social structure
is not an atemporal, immovable being lurking
behind the scenes and shaping individual con-
duct (a sociological equivalent of the Newto-
nian ether totally independent of the movement
of particles), but an event continuously made
to happen by individuals in concrete situations
(a sociological analogue of the relativist
spatio-temporal structure informed by the in-
teraction of particles). That is to say, structure
does compel the behavior of individuals in a
given situation, but the conduct of individuals
structures the situation into a definite pattern.
Structure is only a possibility, a “virtual”
reality until it becomes an “event,” is
eventualized, i.e., made to happen in the here
and now of the practical situational encounter.
“Reality exists in a present,” said Mead
(1932:1, 32), the situation is the “seat” of
reality; and so we can say that every structure
to the extent that it has reality must have a
locus in a specific situational present—must be
temporalized. Situations are structured by in-
dividuals who, in the course of interaction, es-
tablish a joint sense of the present, develop a
corresponding sense of shared past, open
common horizons to the future, and shape their
conduct with respect to this collectively-
established and situationally-sustained time-
frame.

The interactionist treatment of structure as
emergent process is amply documented in
numerous research projects. Thrasher’s
(1927:75) study of the Chicago gangs high-
lighted “the ganging process [a]s a continuous
flux and flow,” the never-ending business of
“coalescing and recoalescing,” the peculiar
mode of aggregating, consensus building,
status display, and settling disputes in the
course of which the gangs are dissolved and
regenerated as interactional wholes. Zorbough
(1929:53) left us an account of ‘the social
game”’ of climbing the ladder of prestige in
Chicago’s high society. This game requires “a
continual planning, maneuvering, reciproca-
tion of invitations, efforts to ‘keep in the
swim’ ”’ from all those aspiring to a coveted
position in a high society, and it is this game
that assures the continuity in the social
structure of an elite social group. Anderson’s
pioneering study illuminated the world of
homeless men whose life revolves around “the
game of ‘getting by,’ ” ‘faking it,” “making it,”
the game that has its own ethical code, status
system and hierarchy of authority, and that
must be learned and practiced if one is to sur-
vive in the harsh environs of Hobohemia
(1923:55). Whyte ([1943] 1981:318, 323) com-
pared his study of an Italian slum to “taking a
moving picture instead of a still photograph,”
the effect he was able to achieve through a
long-term involvement with the local rack-
eteers, policemen, politicians, and other in-
habitants of the slum, whose personal
transactions offered him a rare glimpse of “the
social structure in action”. These are the
studies of structure in action and time, as it
makes itself felt in the thoughts and actions of
individuals. The concern for the emergent
properties of social reality is underscored by
the use of the gerundive mode of
description—‘ganging,” “‘climbing,” “getting
by.” This peculiarly interactionist mode of de-
scription helps the reader to share a present in
which the social world unfolds as a process
continually recreated by individual partici-
pants. To facilitate the sense of presence and
immersion interactionists supply the glossaries
of local terms, the local lingos, which represent
“different universes of discourse,—'little lan-
guages’ whose meanings depend on past expe-
riences peculiar to the groups, catchwords,
jokes, and songs linked to group memories”
(Thrasher, 1927:266). Encysted in these “‘little
languages” are guidelines for making appropri-
ate sense of different situations that the inhab-
itants of a given universe of discourse may
encounter in their lives. Drawing on this com-
mon stock of meanings, metaphors and pre-
cepts, individuals can converse with each
other, share the same sense of past and pre-
sent, bring about an anticipated future, and in
the process of doing so regenerate their world
as an objectively meaningful whole. Because of
all the incessant transmutations this world may
appear chaotic to a casual observer, but it has a
definite structure, and it has a structure pre-
cisely because it is continuously processed,
acted out, communicated from one individual
to another. This is what Dewey ([1916] 1966:4)
seems to have sought to express in a passage
quoted again and again by interactionist
sociologists: ‘Society not only exists by
transmission, by communication, but it may be
fairly said to exist in transmission, in com-
munication”; and what Park ((1927] 1955:15)
was trying to say when he urged that “in a
study of a social group . . . the point of depar-
ture is, properly, not structure, but activity.”
The message here is not that structure is a
fiction but that it should be grasped as an actual
occasion or event (dis)continuously produced
by conscious human beings in concrete situa-
tions.

It would be wrong to infer from our previous
discussion that structure makes an appearance
in interactionist theory as a dependent variable
only. There is a parallel and equally important,
from the interactionist standpoint, flow of de-
termination from society to individual, from
situation to definition (Kon and Shalin, 1969)
without which “the dynamics of remaining the
same” (Hughes) would remain a mystery. In-
deed, most interactions seem to follow patterns
fairly independent from individual whims. The
question is why do individuals converge
around certain perspectives and definitions
rather than fly apart on separate tangents? This
is primarily due to the fact that once defined
and collectively established, interactions form
what Dewey ([1929] 1958:271-2) called ‘‘rela-
tively closed fields” or “fields of interaction”
which possess a measure of autonomy and a
force of their own, felt by everyone drawn into
these fields. The social world is comprised by
interactional fields, strong and weak, that in-
voke in the minds of the participants certain
meanings and suggest, with various degrees of
urgency, appropriate lines of action. Actions
do not unfold in a vacuum, they are guided
and, in many cases, plainly coerced by the
field, so that ‘anything changes according to
the interacting field it enters’ (Dewey [1929]
1958:285). The coercive power of the field is
most evident in the early years of our lives,
when we are forced to make do with a world
that is already there, predetermined by others,
organized into stable networks of interactions.
“The child,” wrote Thomas (1923:42), ‘‘is al-
ways born into a group of people among whom
all the general types of situation which may
arise have already been defined and corre-
sponding rules of conduct developed, and
where he has not the slightest chance of mak-
ing his definitions and following his wishes
without interference.” What we see, think, and
claim as our own at this stage of our develop-
ment is determined by the situation, which
clues us to the appropriate definitions and
modes of conduct. Our mind at this point is
little more than the functional ability to survey
the larger social act in which we are impera-
tively implicated, and our self is a reflection of
a part we are assigned to play in this act. In due
course we acquire a measure of autonomy and
learn to take a critical attitude toward oneself,
yet our rationality remains commensurate
with, and will always be judged by, our ability
to act with reference to a larger social act. This
ability to weave one’s action into a collective
act or to place oneself in the perspective of
“the generalized other” is what interactionists
called ‘‘mind’’. From the ontogenetical
standpoint, the mind is primarily a way of
looking at the world in the terms supplied by
others, participating in the universe of dis-
course already in place, and acting as a
member of a team. The locus of the mind is
individual, but its content is not—it is social
through and through, and as such, it assures
mind’s special role as an agent of social con-
trol: ‘*. . . The mind that appears in individuals
is not as such individual mind. .. . Mind asa
concrete thing is precisely the power to under-
stand things . . . in terms of the use to which
they are turned in joint or shared situations.
And mind in this sense is the method of social
control” (Dewey, [1929] 1958:219 and [1916]
1966:33). ‘*Mind is coterminal with the group”’;
it comes into existence when “the behavior of
the group as a whole enters into the separate
individual” (Mead, 1982:162, 168). Acting ra-
tionally, with reference to one’s self, the indi-
vidual acts responsibly and with reference to
society. He surely imposes on the world the
categories of his mind and perceives the situa-
tion in terms of his self, but since his self and
the categories of his mind, just as those of
other individuals, have the same social source,
the outcome turns out to be orderly rather than
chaotic. And should the individual disregard
the operative interactional field and choose the
self uncalled for by the situation, he will be
promptly, and more or less painfully, reminded
of its force. A new girl quickly learns that the
conventions of polite society are out of place in
the taxi-dance hall (Cressey, 1932:38-9). A
member of the youth gang has to forgo contacts
with girls after the drubbing from the leader
(Thrasher, 1927:292). And Dollard (1937:49) is
forcefully reminded about the realities of caste
in the deep South when he seeks contacts with
blacks. As these examples show, when the in-
dividual’s definition of the situation comes into
conflict with a collectively established one, the
mechanisms of social control come into play.
Interactionist theory, thus, clearly recognized
the role of “the community as a defining
agency” (Thomas, 1923:43—4) and the fact that
the matrices of meaning in terms of which we
define our world are publicly enforced.

To summarize, interactionist theory entails a
dialectical circle: man is an author of his social
world, but he is also a product of society. From
the interactionist standpoint it is equally cor-
rect to say, “the self defines the situation” and
“the situation provides the individual with a
self.” At any given moment the self is the ex-
pression of the entire situation (interactional
field) in which the individual is acting, while
the situation is the reflection of the totality of
selves engaged in an interactional encounter.
The two are locked together in the process of
mutual adjustment in the course of which both
emerge as objective, determined realities. This
mutual adjustment is not a mechanical process.
Individuals are the ones who do the choosing,
who have to identify with the self called for by
the situation. As parts of different fields they
can always gear their actions to alternative
selves. Still, the actions of individuals, like the
actions of physical particles, are non-random,
though marked by a degree of indeterminacy;
structured, though the underlying pattern may
be illusive; predictable, though predictions
must be expressed in probabilistic terms.

It would be wrong to look for a full-fledged
theory of social structure in early social in-
teractionism. Many pertinent questions (e.g.,
why some transactions evolve into strong in-
teractional fields whereas others remain weak;
how the “‘little languages” are integrated into
the general universe of discourse; what deter-
mines the choice of identity in the situation
where interactional fields put conflicting claims
on the individual) remained in it unanswered.
And one can still feel skeptical as to whether
interactionist theory explains satisfactorily
“the dynamics of remaining the same,” given
the diversity of social fields and degrees of
freedom assigned to the movement of individu-
als. Despite these weaknesses, original in-
teractionist theory had important strengths that
made it superior to contemporary formula-
tions. Social interactionists diverged from the
classical approaches in making the order ap-
pear simultaneously as the explanandum and
the explanans, rather than as something that
must be either taken for granted or treated as
perennially problematic. They offered a new
perspective on social structure as fluid and sta-
ble at the same time, an emergent process that
functions simultaneously as an antecedent and
an outcome of social interaction. Interactionist
theory transcended the dichotomy of realism
and nominalism by bringing man and society
into one continuum and presenting each as an
aspect of the same process of production of
social reality as objective and meaningful. The
individual appears in this theory as both the
actor and the author of the social script, a
constituent of many interactional fields, none
of which can claim his undivided allegiance. A
self-conscious being, he can refuse to act as his
allegedly natural determinations dictate, cross
the borderlines separating one class from an-
other, and show oneself as an “instance of a
different kind”. Society as a whole transpires
here as a universe of interferentially overlap-
ping fields, coalescing around symbols and
meanings and exerting various pressures on
individuals caught in their gravitational pull.
When the borderlines separating these interac-
tional fields are strictly policed, they behave
like “bodies,” revealing their ‘corpuscular’
properties, which happens when the border-
lines separating different fields are strictly
policed. On other occasions their “wave-like”
properties are more in evidence, as crisscros-
sing identifications whittle away at their thing-
ness, making the fields appear as fuzzy, gase-
ous, easily penetrable formations. But the im-
portant thing for social interactionists is that
society is both a body and a field, a structure
and a process, and that in order to understand
it as a living reality researchers should seek to
involve themselves in situations where it is
made to happen by self-conscious human be-
ings.
meant understanding—better still—
experiencing it, if possible by direct immersion
in the mundane world of everyday life where it
is routinely generated by the participants in
social intercourse. To accomplish this feat, in-
teractionists had to assume a role markedly
different from that of a classical scientific
observer—they had to become participant ob-
servers. Participant observation as a method of
sociological research raised a host of method-
ological problems unknown to classical sociol-
ogy. In dealing with these problems interac-
tionists drew heavily on pragmatist epistemol-
ogy that did away with the notion of a ‘‘world
complete in itself, to which thought comes as a
passive mirror, adding nothing to fact” (James,
[1909] 1970:80) and that explicitly recognized
that “knowing is not the act of an outside
spectator but of a participant inside the natural
and social scene” (Dewey, [1929] 1960:196).
Rationalist epistemology failed, according to
pragmatists, and it failed on more than one
count. First, it was built on the erroneous
premise that ‘‘the processes of search, investi-
gation, reflection, involved in knowledge . . .
must be outside of what is known, so as not to
interact in any way with the object to be
known” (Dewey, [1929] 1960:23). Second, ra-
tionalists were mistaken in their belief that the
knower could approach his object without pre-
conceptions and biases: every research en-
deavor is rooted in some “practical interests,”
“aesthetic” attitudes and theoretical presup-
positions which represent “irreducible ultimate
factors in determining the way our knowledge
grows” (James, [1890] 1950, II:345). Third,
pragmatists rejected the rationalist view of
“verification as a process of comparing
ready-made ideas with ready-made facts,”
supplanting it with a notion that ‘‘both idea and
‘facts’ are flexible, and verification is the pro-
cess of mutual adjustment, of organic interac-
tion” (Dewey, [1890] 1969:87). Fourth, prag-
matists criticized the tendency of classical ra-
tionalism to “conceive a concrete situation by
singling out some salient or important feature
in it, and [then] reducing the originally rich
phenomenon to the naked suggestions of that
name abstractly taken, treating it as a case of
‘nothing but’ that concept” (James, [1909]
1970:249). Fifth, and finally, pragmatist epis-
temology diverged from the traditional one in
its deliberate blurring of the borderline be-
tween scientific and common sense knowl-
edge, i.e., “theoretic knowledge, which is
knowledge about things, as distinguished from
living or sympathetic acquaintance with them”
(James, [1909] 1967:249-50). This formulation,
prompted by the special needs of human sci-
ences, encouraged intimate familiarity with so-
cial reality and direct understanding of human
conduct in terms of an individual's own experi-
ence.

Pragmatist epistemology had a direct impact
on the methodology of interactionist research.
It looms large in Park’s renunciation of the
tendency “to substitute for the flux of events
and the changing character of things a logical
formula,” as well as in his commitment to
“personal and first-hand involvement with the
world” ([{1940] 1955:74, 72); it is echoed in
Znaniecki’s attacks on the rationalist premise
that ‘knowledge reproduces reality in its
preexisting determination’ (1919:232); it is
unmistakable in Cooley’s critique of abstract
and statistical reasoning and his desire to “‘il-
luminate the concrete object” (1927:145-6); it
is behind Thomas’s argument that ‘“‘we must
put ourselves in the position of the subject
[because] the environment by which he is in-
fluenced and to which he adopts himself, is his
world, not the objective world of science—is
nature and society as he sees them, not as the
scientist sees them” ([1918-20] 1966:23); and
last, but not least, pragmatist epistemology is
firmly entrenched in the research practice of
the second generation of social interactionists
who took for granted that ‘in order to get
knowledge [of society], one must participate
significantly in the collective life. This means
that one must come into human contact with
people and this in turn means intimacy, shar-
ing, and mutual identification” (Dollard,
1937:29). The term “participant observation,”
it should be noted, was not in use by interac-
tionists until the mid-20’s when Lindeman in-
troduced it as a method of grasping social
reality in terms of the meaning it has for the
participants (1924: 177-200). However, the idea
behind it had been in circulation for more than
a decade, since at least the time when Cooley
({1909] 1962:7) identified the manner in which
the sociologist ought to proceed in his research
as “sympathetic introspection,” or ‘putting
himself into intimate contact with various sorts
of persons and allowing them to awake in him-
self a life similar to their own, which he after-
wards, to the best of his ability, recalls and
describes.” Participant observation shared
with life history and documentary analysis—
two other principal methods of interactionist
research—the goal of recovering the meaning
that social reality has for those participating in
its production.? It carried this goal one step
further, to the point of actually “observing
human intelligence trying to make sense out of
the experience” (Dollard, 1937:19). Observing
human intelligence at work implied several
things: it meant studying people in situ, in their
natural habitat; it required the readiness on the
part of the researcher to enter personal rela-
tions with the subjects, to share their prob-
lems, feelings and thoughts; most importantly,
it implied that the research act can affect the
course of events under study. The participant
mode of observing reality violated the canons
of classical methodology, in that it blurred the
line between the knower and the known and
thus risked contaminating the natural purity of
things themselves. For the interactionist re-
searcher the transaction between the knower
and the known (and the resultant complemen-
tarity effect) was not only normal but also un-
avoidable. It fully accorded with the pragmatist
thesis that empirical knowledge presupposes
the ‘common system of the knowing and the
known,” and it was a direct realization of the
pragmatist ideal of “unfractured observation”
(Dewey and Bentley, 1949:104).

Criticism most often raised by the opponents
of interactionist methodology concerns its
logico-theoretical component. The charge is
that interactionists immerse themselves in the
research situation without spelling out in ad-
vance their theory and hypotheses, which
makes systematic testing of their propositions
impossible. The participatory nature of in-
teractionist research, it is further argued,
leaves too much room for subjectivism and
error. The source of the problem, according to
Huber (1973) and Lewis and Smith (1980), is
the pragmatists’ nonchalant attitude toward
formal logic and conceptual reasoning, and
their undue preoccupation with the ex-
ceptional, colorful and irregular. Whatever one
can make of this criticism, we should flatly
reject its implication that pragmatists and in-
teractionists ignored the role of logic and
theoretical reasoning. The hiatus between “the
rational organization of reality and the irra-
tional chaos of the real world taken in its his-
torical concreteness” (Znaniecki, 1919:147)
should not be taken to mean that the world of
uncertainty cannot be dealt with rationally.
What pragmatists and interactionists decried
was the undisciplined use of abstract
reasoning—the situation where, in the words of
Rucker (1969:166), “fixed logics and formal
systems of any sort become strait-jackets in-
stead of tools for inquiry.” The gist of the
whole argument was that formal logic fully
applies to the Platonic domain of the ideal
being where genera and species comprise
mutually exclusive classes and abide by the
laws of identity, noncontradiction, and ex-
cluded middle. As long as we stay within this
domain of pure rationality we can rely on these
laws, knowing that its objects (such as objects
of mathematics) possess no other properties
but those assigned to them. Following closely
in the steps of formal logic, classical research
methodology sought to minimize things’ multi-
ple determinations and to maximize their con-
sistency by neutralizing their alternative man-
ifestations. This is what typically happens in
the experimental situation where the scientist,
through a system of controls, strips a thing of
its multiple identities and forces it to behave
according to the class to which it has been
squarely reduced. But rationality and logical
consistency achieved in vitro is purchased at
the price of suppressing indeterminacy—the
generic feature of life in vivo. The moment we
reach out into the empirical world we face a
different situation where ‘other factors” are
never equal, where things refuse to behave ac-
cording to their a priori established class mem-
berships and obey the laws of logic. Actual
particulars, especially those in the social
world, are distinguished by their “capacity to
be several things at once” (Mead, 1932:49),
something the law of identity expressly for-
bids. No impregnable boundary can hedge off
individuals of one denomination from those in
the next taxon; by taking the role of the other
individuals can instantly change their class
identity, which makes class attribution a risky
undertaking. The traditional definition of class
as a totality of things satisfying the idea of a
class therefore needs to be qualified by the
following propositions: a thing in itself is inde-
terminate, its identity as a class member is
emergent, and it has no logical status apart
from the inquirer and the process of inquiry
where it is transformed into a definite self-same
object. Such was the message pragmatists were
trying to get across when they criticized formal
logic and sought to amend it with what they
variously described as the “logic of inquiry,”
“logic in use,” “the logic of situations’—the
logic whose purpose was to account for ‘the
transformation of an indeterminate unsettled
situation into a determinate unified existential
situation” (Dewey, 1938:296). This was a
seminal attempt, inconclusive as it might be, to
come to grips with the fact that the laws of
formal logic, like the laws of Euclidean
geometry, are not the properties of things
themselves but useful idealizations, that what-
ever rationality and consistency one finds in
the world is of our own making, and that no
matter how successful we are in transform-
ing—theoretically and practically—the world
of indeterminacy into the world of law, the gap
between the immaculate rationalities of reason
and empirical reality never disappears entirely.

Now, if we take a look from this vantage
point at the interactionists’ ambivalence about
formal theorizing, their unwillingness to spell
out in advance all the hypotheses, and their
desire to find things out in the situation, we can
see a clear rationale for their position. Interac-
tionists do not consider adjudication—a sys-
tematic reduction of things to logical
categories—a technical problem, as classical
scientists do, but see it as a substantive prob-
lem requiring direct and continuous examina-
tion. They do not abide by the principle of
mutual exclusiveness which requires placing
each thing in one taxon and disposing of the
ambiguous objects by confining them to a re-
sidual box specially reserved for marginal
cases. All social particulars, according to in-
teractionists, are marginal and situationally
emergent. Their identities inevitably spill over
the classificatory borderlines. Attempts to re-
duce them squarely and irreversibly to precon-
ceived categories are bound to backfire, par-
ticularly when we try to predict their behavior
on the basis of such unambiguous class attri-
butions. The way out of the predicament sug-
gested by interactionist methodology is by
mapping things simultaneously into various
taxa and treating their identities as proba-
bilities to be ascertained by direct observation
in concrete situation. The interactionist strat-
egy enables the researcher to track the situa-
tional reincarnation of things themselves as
objects of different denominations, to observe
in vivo their metamorphoses in space and time
(or rather times). Abstractions, gener-
alizations, conceptual reasoning all have their
place in interactionist research, but used
cautiously, with an eye to emergent transfor-
mations and situational inconsistencies that
qualify the power and reach of theoretical
propositions. Instead of forcing the individual
to take an unambiguous stance, reducing him
once and for all to taxon, and glossing over the
discrepant information about each individual
case, interactionists encourage individuals to
show their many faces and selves. Their strat-
egy is designed to maximize validity, even
where this requires a sacrifice of reliability.
Reliability, taken in its most common sense of
reproducibility, is typically secured by the
neutralization of the multiple determinations of
things: the more thoroughly the thing is
stripped of its multiple identities, the more reli-
ably the measuring device yields the same re-
sult on successive occasions. But the more re-
liable the data, the less valid it is. For insofar as
validity refers to things at large, it must square
off with the objective indeterminacy of the
situation, i.e., with all those ‘other factors”
that have been factored out under the ceteris
paribus clause and that immediately crowd in
the moment we move from the experimental
setting to the ecologically sound situation.
“... The more precise and unambiguous the
terms become, the less valuable they are”
(Blumer, 1939:124)—this typical locution ex-
presses the interactionists’ awareness that va-
lidity is the price at which traditional re-
searchers are able to purchase the reliability of
their data.

Potentially more damaging to interactionist
methodology is the charge that sympathetic
understanding with its focus on the fleeting and
the irregular leaves too much room for subjec-
tivism. Again, let us not forget that interac-
tionists were acutely aware of the problem.
“Perception of social events based on partici-
pation is difficult to standardize; yet,” Dollard
(1937:19) hastened to add, “I believe that my
experience can be repeated, that others can be
trained to see what I have seen, and more, that
the construct has predictive value.” The key to
this optimism is the pragmatist concept of
meaning as a social and action-bound phenom-
enon. Participant observers are not out there
hunting for obscure and hidden meanings in-
vented by particular individuals—they are
primarily interested in well established and
collectively sanctioned definitions of the situa-
tion, in routine transactions that form enduring
structural patterns. Nor do they rely on any
sort of inner vision to divine the definition of
the situation. When Cressey, the author of the
taxi-dance hall study, raises the question,
“‘What does this life mean for these girls? . . .
What does this dance hall mean in the lives of
young boys, the older men, the European im-
migrants, and the youthful Filipinos?”
(1932:15), he relies on the observation of their
behavior as much as on their accounts of its
meaning. Interactionists are not prepared to
take rationalizations and verbally expressed
attitudes of individuals as ultimate causes of
their conduct. Attitudes and behavior are in-
extricably linked; one cannot be studied with-
out the other; attitude-taking is itself a form of
conduct that must be judged in context and
compared to other forms of conduct. As par-
ticipant observers, interactionists seek to es-
tablish “(1) What is the group doing? (2) What
does the group think it is doing?” (Lindeman,
1924:190), and since the two things do not al-
ways coincide, interactionists are always on
the alert for discrepancies, seek to diversify
their local sources of information, and check
their generalizations against the data from out-
side sources. The sociologist qua participant
observer never submerges himself entirely in
the community life he studies; he measures his
involvement with detachment, sympathy with
reflection, heart with reason, all of which
makes the replication of interactionist research
not nearly as outlandish as it may sound and
assures a higher predictive value of interac-
tionist findings than most formal mea-
surements could offer.

One more objection to interactionist meth-
odology concerns its favoring of qualitative
over quantitative data. Early interactionists
often raised their voice against the spirit of
quantification and the wisdom of emulating the
physical sciences (Cooley, 1930:315; Ellwood,
1933:13; Znaniecki, [1934] 1968:viii; Thomas,
[1918-20] 1966:14). The reason for this am-
bivalence was the familiar pragmatist reluc-
tance to see a rich phenomenon reduced to a
taxon. The act of measurement which “enables
things qualitatively unlike and individual to be
treated as if they were members of a com-
prehensive, homogeneous, or nonqualitative
system” (Dewey, [1929] 1960:241), exacer-
bates the reductionist propensities of ration-
alism and breeds the ‘disdain for the particu-
lar, the personal, and the unwholesome”
(James, [1909] 1967:309). However, prag-
matists were no obscurantists; they understood
the importance of measurement and quantifi-
cation, as did interactionists. Opposing ‘the
worship of statistical technique,” interactionist
sociologists repeatedly expressed their belief
that ‘‘the method of statistics and of case study
are not in conflict with each other; they are in
fact mutually complementary” (Burgess,
1927:120; see also Lindeman, 1924:97; Park
[1929] 1952:208, and Cooley, 1930:315). For
the interactionist researcher the value of quan-
tification is chiefly heuristic: it shows the rela-
tions worthy of further thought and examina-
tion. Much of his interpretative work is done
within the situation where he settles down to
observe and think. His research is literally a
search of right questions to ask: “As I sat and
listened,” recalls Whyte ([1943] 1981:303), “I
learned the answers to questions that I would
not even have had the sense to ask if I had been
getting my information solely on an interview-
ing basis.”’ In other words, the interactionist
avoids the premature closure of the theoretical
process, remaining on the lookout for the un-
forseen and serendipitous, ready to “discover{ ]
new categories as emergencies of the group’s
changing activities’ (Lindeman, 1924:192).
What he loses in quantitative precision and
reproducibility, he makes up for in the qualita-
tive grasp of detail, in the breadth of theoretical
possibilities, and above all in truthfulness to
the objective indeterminacy of the situation.

Interactionist research posed a number of
methodological problems that early interac-
tionists failed to solve, or even address, some
of which still remain unresolved. The most
fundamental of these is the problem of deter-
mination. Interactionists distinguished be-
tween “the situation as it exists in verifiable,
objective terms, and as it has seemed to exist in
terms of the interested persons” (Thomas and
Thomas, 1928:572), but they gave few clues on
how to navigate between these two forms of
determinations, i.e., how the researcher's own
explanatory terms are superadded to the native
meanings, and vice versa, how native explana-
tions are incorporated into the body of the re-
searcher’s theoretical propositions. Equally
prone to confusion are the interactionists’
philippics against overly precise concepts. So-
cial reality is indeed too fuzzy to be subsumed
under a neat label, but the solution is not fuzzy
concepts and loose theorizing, as some in-
teractionists seem to imply, but a judicious as-
signing of each individual case to several tax-
ons, with conceptual categories kept sharply
bounded and structural interconnections ren-
dered explicit. The fact that social situations
are uncertain and indeterminate does not mean
that uncertainty cannot be patterned and inde-
terminacy described in structural terms. Also,
interactionists might have underestimated
what math and statistics could do for their
cause. Perhaps traditional statistics (which is in
effect the statistics of classical ther-
modynamics with its dubious assumption that
every individual in the population is a thing
with a clear-cut immutable identity) is of lim-
ited use from the interactionist standpoint, but
if its general premises are any guide, the non-
classical statistics of quantum mechanics may
prove to be a valuable addition to the method-
ological arsenal of social interactionism. These
drawbacks notwithstanding, interactionist
methodology constituted an important advance
in methodology of social research. Interac-
tionist sociologists took seriously the objective
indeterminacy of the social world to which
they sought to adjust their research practice.
This adjustment led to the recognition that no
impregnable borders separate the knower from
the known, that the research act inevitably
leaves its mark on the object, and that the
researcher must be prepared to become a par-
ticipant in the social process he studies.
Mindful of the emergent nature of social reality,
interactionists avoided the irreversible reduc-
tion of individual identities to preconceived
categories and encouraged the individual to
manifest one’s multiple selves, even when
these are logically inconsistent and contradic-
tory. They eschewed the premature closure of
theoretical deliberations, measuring their pre-
conceptions against the unfolding realities of
the situation and allowing their propositions to
be revised in the course of inquiry. Interac-
tionists also recognized that the relationship
between validity and reliability is that of
uncertainty—the two cannot be maximized si-
multaneously with arbitrary precision—and
committed themselves to validity as their basic
Fledgling immigrants from Europe and high
society socialites, residents of exclusive neigh-
borhoods and denizens of the slum, remnants
of the old Southern nobility and the descen-
dants of slaves, itinerant workers and gadflies
of the artistic demimonde, members of orga-
nized crime families and pursuers of religious
orthodoxy—such were the objects of early in-
teractionist research. Inhabitants of the
pluralistic universe called the United States,
these people managed to carve it in a niche, a
symbolic world of their own, reflecting their
unique cultural, ethnic, class, professional, and
religious background. The interest interac-
tionists took in these people was more than
academic. Nor was it spurred exclusively by
their fascination with the contrasting life-styles
and manners of defining the situation. Theirs
was an interest (concern may be a better word)
informed by the progressive spirit of the time
and rooted in the profoundly democratic values
inherited from American pragmatists.

From the beginning pragmatists rejected the
view of knowledge production as a purely in-
tellectual endeavor propelled by man’s desire
to know things in general, in abstracto. The
process of reasoning, according to Peirce
(1931-58, VIII:198-200), is largely a matter of:
acquiring beliefs on which humans can act. In
Dewey's view, “ideas are worthless except as
they pass into actions which rearrange and re-
construct in some way, be it little or large, the
world in which we live” ({1929] 1960:138). The
whole project of pragmatism, with its emphasis
on the indeterminate, practical, malleable na-
ture of reality, can be seen as a philosophical
justification for social reconstruction in the age
obsessed with reform. Pragmatism took shape
at the dawning of the Progressive era, when
rapid social change threatened to disrupt the
fabric of the American social order. The de-
cline of rural life, the massive population
movement from country to city, the appalling
conditions in urban slums, the influx of new
immigrants from Eastern Europe, the demise
of entrepreneurial individualism, the rise of
giant corporations—these all too familiar
symptoms of modernity set afoot a movement
for social reform that was supported by a wide
spectrum of social classes. Oscillating between
the enthusiasm for social change and the fear of
its consequences, progressive thinkers desper-
ately searched for a middle path between lais-
sez faire capitalism and socialism, for a pro-
gram that would undermine the appeal of
political radicalism without taking steam out of
the reform movement. Pragmatists were at the
forefront of this struggle for ‘a more balanced,
a more equal, even, and equitable system of
human liberties” (Dewey, 1946:113). Dewey
was a recognized leader of this movement,
whose crusade for progressive education in
America left an indelible mark on the spirit of
the epoch (Goldman, 1956; White, 1957;
Graham, 1967; Marcell, 1974). Mead’s in-
volvement with progressive causes, although
mainly on the local scene, was equally strong,
as his leading role in the Education Association
of Chicago, the Immigrants’ Protective
League, and other progressive organizations
demonstrates (Rucker, 1969:21). Peirce and
James did not take active part in the progres-
sive movement (in part because of their early
deaths), but Peirce’s pronouncements on social
issues were full of lofty idealism and vaguely
progressive sentiments, while James stressed
the connection between pragmatism and
ameliorism and toward the end of his life came
close to endorsing “the more or less socialistic
future toward which mankind seems drifting”
(James, [1910] 1962:488; Perry, 1964:242—-52).
As seen from the historical standpoint, the key
issue of the time was social reconstruction, or
rather organized reconstruction that ‘takes
into account the intimate and organic union of
the two things: of authority and freedom, of
stability and change” (Dewey, 1946:95), as op-
posed to the catastrophic, revolutionary recon-
struction. “That is the problem of society, is
not it?”, queried Mead (1936:361-2); “How
can you present order and structure in society
and yet bring about the changes that need to
take place, are taking place? How can you
bring those changes about in orderly fashion
and yet preserve order? . . . That is the prob-
lem, to incorporate the methods of change into
the order of society itself.”’ Institutionalizing
social change was the goal to which prag-
matists committed themselves. In their efforts
to make social change more rational and
humane they turned to science for guidance.
Not that pragmatists believed in ready-made
answers which science could furnish for the
modern predicament; they turned to science as
a best available model of democracy in action,
the model of a community based on rational
discourse, where every member is a free par-
ticipant, each claim is open to experimental
validation, and all solutions are subject to re-
vision. Science clued pragmatists to their ideal
of society as “ ‘universal’ discourse” (Mead,
1934:269) and individuals as ‘“‘the constant
makers of a continuously new society”
(Dewey, [1929] 1962:143). The unity of scien-
tific and social endeavors was endorsed by
Peirce, who stressed that the very nature of
science and logic ‘inexorably requires that our
interests shall not be limited. They ... must
embrace the whole community. The commu-
nity, again, must not be limited, but must ex-
tend to all races of beings with whom we can
come into immediate or mediate intellectual
relation. It must reach, however vaguely, be-
yond the ideological epoch, beyond all bonds”
({1931-58], VII:398). A community built on the
principles of free rational discourse will be
governed by the authority of the “public”—a
body of individuals conscious of their interests,
knowledgeable of the democratic process, and
determined to have their voice heard (Dewey,
[1927] 1954). Such a community would do
away with the traditional opposition of the in-
dividual and society; it would make the indi-
vidual a master of his own destiny, a true sub-
ject of the social process, and at the same time,
a responsible social being and an agent of sc-
cial control: ‘*. .. The idea of democracy as
opposed to any conception of aristrocracy is
that every individual must be consulted in such
a way, actively or passively, that he himself
becomes a part of the process of authority”
(Dewey, 1946:35). The scientist's role in the
process of social reconstruction was to educate
people, to give them means for solving their
problems, to alter their consciousness and
thereby the very society that made this con-
sciousness possible. Hence, the enormous em-
phasis on education and getting knowledge to
the public characteristic of pragmatist thinkers.

It is not necessary to go over the long and by
now well-known list of reform causes and as-
sociations with which interactionist
sociologists identified themselves in the hey-
day of progressivism (see Faris, 1970; Carey,
1975; Coser, 1978). What is to be stressed is the
lesser known fact of the long-standing collab-
oration between pragmatists and interac-
tionists on the issues of reform. It is no acci-
dent that when Dewey contemplated launching
a socialist weekly he turned to Park, then his
student and a journalist of some renown, for
collaboration. As Park’s unpublished notes
show, he was very much aware of the philo-
sophical and ideological connection between
pragmatism and the social survey movement:
Pragmatist themes are also readily detect-
able in other interactionist writers who recog-
nized the necessity of social change and the
role the science of society could play in “a
production of new schemes of behavior and
new institutions better adapted to the changed
demands of the group; we call this production
of new schemes and institutions,’ wrote
Thomas ([1918-20] 1966:5-6), “social recon-
struction.” The pleas for change issued by in-
teractionists were accompanied by the familiar
qualifications: change should not be cata-
strophic; it should be guided by intelligent
understanding. Hence, the typical distinction
between “‘moderate change, which is usually
wholesome, giving us the stimulus needed to
keep our minds awake, and radical change,
involving displacement’? (Cooley, [1918]
1966:180; cf. Park, [1927] 1955:35; Thomas,
[1918-20] 1966:230; Faris, 1937:4). Sociologi-
cal knowledge can have an ameliorating effect
on the course of social change if social scien-
tists realize that they are a part of society they
study and consciously use their skills and
knowledge to further the cause of progress.
The intended audience of interactionist
sociologists was not exclusively made up of
politicians and professional reformers. It also
included the general public. The view of the
public as a recipient of sociological knowledge
reflected the democratic values of interac-
tionist thinkers, their undivided commitment to
a political system that “is based on the partici-
pation of every member and [that] assumes in
all the wish and ability to participate; for in the
last analysis we mean by democracy participa-
tion by all, both practically and imaginatively,
in the common life of the community”
(Thomas, 1966:196). With this ideal in mind
interactionists set out to define their research
objectives and to select subjects for their re-
search. Poor, blacks, immigrants, delinquents,
itinerary workers, bohemians—all those ex-
cluded from effective participation in the
larger, national universe of discourse were dis-
proportionately represented in interactionist
studies. Locked in their parochial worlds,
these grous and individuals could not share in
the American democracy in a manner consis-
tent with the participatory ideals of social in-
teractionists. The purpose of interactionist re-
search was to sensitize these people at the
fringes of American society to their role as
participants in a larger discourse, to increase
their input into the process of democracy, and
thus to transform them into a public.

A variety of charges has been leveled against
the ideological positions of interactionists,
most of these revolving around their overly
optimistic vision of American democracy and
their failure to grapple with the harsh realities
of power and inequality (Shaskolsky, 1970;
Lichtman, 1970; Huber Rytina and Loomis,
1970; Kanter, 1972; Reynolds and Reynolds,
1973; Smith, 1973; Huber, 1973; Ropers, 1973).
Much of this criticism, insofar as it applies to
social interactionism, is correct. The source of
the problem, though, is not so much the in-
teractionists’ uncritical reliance on pragmatism
as their failure to follow consistently the tenets
of pragmatist philosophy. It is demonstrably
not true that the pragmatists’ account of
American democracy was a kind of “utopia
written in the present tense” (Shaskolsky,
1970:19), that the pragmatists’ perception of
reality was ‘‘untouched by alienation”
(Lichtman, 1970:80) and effectively signified
the endorsement of “the status quo” (Huber,
1973:275). Pragmatists recognized ‘the tragic
breakdown of democracy” (Dewey, 1946:116),
“the chasm that separates the theory and prac-
tice of our democracy’? (Mead, [1923]
1964:263). They spoke loud and clear about the
multiple failures of the present political system
ridden with “the inequality that arises and must
arise under the operations of institutionally
established and supported finance-capitalism”
(Dewey, 1946:117). They were painfully aware
of “the tragedy of industrial society” with its
“routine and drudgery of countless unin-
terested hands” and “the blind production of
goods, cut off from all the interpretation and
aspiration of their common enjoyment” (Mead,
[1925-26] 1964:295-6). Far from satisfied with
the program of piecemeal reforms confined to
welfare measures, pragmatists maintained that
“in order to endure under present conditions,
liberalism must become radical in the sense
that, instead of using social power to amelior-
ate the evil consequences of the existing sys-
tem, it shall use social power to change the
system.”* All his life Dewey (1946:116) kept
stressing that ‘‘actual and concrete liberty of
opportunity and action is dependent upon
equalization of the political and economic con-
ditions under which individuals are alone free
in fact, not in some abstract metaphysical
way.”’ Dubious also seems the assertion
(Huber Rytina and Loomis, 1970; Huber, 1973)
that the pragmatist view of science as politi-
cally engaged renders it uniquely susceptible to
the manipulation by extant powers.* The solu-
tion to the problem of the integrity of science
implicit in pragmatist premises is not in ridding
science of ideological biases, but in spelling
them out, turning them into acknowledged
premises, and letting the audience judge how
these might have affected the inquiry.

Now, if we turn to interactionism, we will
have to admit that with all their reliance on
pragmatism, interactionist sociologists did not
go far enough in implementing its values and
fulfilling its political commitments. Interac-
tionists realized of course that ‘‘our democracy
is not working perfectly at present” (Park and
Miller, 1921:261); they acknowledged the need
of social reconstruction (Thomas, [1918-20]
1966:6); they firmly aligned themselves with
the underdogs against ‘middle-class con-
ventional values” (Anderson, 1975:xii); on oc-
casion, they even took part in direct political
action (Whyte, [1943] 1981:338). But interac-
tionists failed to take on the American political
system the way pragmatists did in the 20’s and
30’s. They did not attempt to link the local
symbolic worlds and the miseries of their in-
habitants to the larger political, social, and
economic institutions. And they offered little
systematic analysis of how the individual's
class and status affect his participation in the
production of social reality. Besides these
drawbacks which stemmed from the failure of
interactionists to follow in the steps of prag-
matists, there were others that could be laid at
the door of pragmatism. Fisher and Strauss
(1978; 1979) rightfully point out that prag-
matists and interactionists relied too heavily on
persuasion, education, and socialization as in-
struments of social reconstruction. The idea
that people will see—and choose—a more ra-
tional and humane way, if only they are pro-
vided with the knowledge of their conditions,
reflects a benign view of human nature that
may not withstand historical criticism. Also, in
their desire to uphold the voluntaristic and
participatory character of democracy, prag-
matists and interactionists did not do justice to
political organization and power politics as
means of effecting meaningful social change.
Their optimism about prospects for the peace-
ful transformation of American society into a
politically and economically more equitable
system might have reflected their underesti-
mation of the power of vested interests and the
inertia of political and social institutions. Fi-
nally, along with pragmatists, interactionist
thinkers offered an exceedingly vague rationale
for the division of labor between scientific re-
search and political activism.

All said and done, it must be stressed that,
ideologically, social interactionism was one of
the more openly committed currents in aca-
demic sociology of the period. The interac-
tionist notion of sociological practice reflected
the pragmatist view of truth as a practically
accomplished unity of knowledge and reality.
This view underscored the necessity of social
reconstruction, the role of scientists as par-
ticipants on the social scene, and the contribu-
tion sociological knowledge could make to di-
rected social change. Knowledge is power and
power must belong to people—from this prag-
matist premise interactionists derived their
commitment to disseminating knowledge and
reaching the general public as goals of
sociological practice. The very emphasis on
structure and process can be seen as an out-
growth of the interactionists’ progressivist
leanings, of their yearning for stability and
change, individual initiative and social respon-
sibility. This dual ideological commitment re-
mains a trademark of contemporary interac-
tionist thought which strives to understand
society-in-the-making, i.e., society as a pro-
cess of ongoing social reconstruction.
not accord well with the non-classical ideas of
pragmatism. Indeed, Dewey’s Quest for Cer-
tainty was a philosophical response to the
paradigmatic shift in physics, and specifically
to Heisenberg’s principle of uncertainty, just as
Mead’s latter work was a self-conscious effort
to spell out the implications of the principle of
relativity for the human sciences. It was on this
meta-theoretical foundation furnished by
pragmatists and their German counterparts
that interactionists built a school of sociology
which become a prototype of a non-classical
social science.

Interactionist sociologists accepted the rela-
tivist premise that the sense people make of
reality is part and parcel of its objective being,
from which they inferred that sociologists
must deal not only with society in itself but also
with society for itself. Having rejected the no-
tion that social facts should be treated as
things, interactionists resolved to treat things
as social facts carved out by the collective ef-
forts of historically situated individuals. To the
traditional preoccupation with the inherent
order of society interactionists juxtaposed
their concern for the objective indeterminacy
of the situation and the emergent properties of
social structure. The dialectical tenets of social
interactionism opened the way for under-
standing not only how society produces the
individual, but also how individuals produce
society.

The dialectical tension in the interactionist
premises made itself felt in a negative way
through the division within the interactionist
movement between its more voluntaristically
and less voluntaristically oriented branches.
The proponents of the former focused their
research on the breaks in the routine function-
ing of social structures, the inevitable gaps in
the operation of formal orders, and other man-
ifestations of indeterminacy responsible for
novelty and serendipity in social life. In its
more extreme form, this approach tends to
exaggerate the freedom of the individual to
change one’s membership in social categories
and to shift at will from one self to another,
presenting what may be called an “overemer-
gent view” of social reality as something that
stays problematic most of the time. A different
brand of interactionism emphasizes the nor-
mative constraints and the power of ascription
in society. The proponents of this approach
point out that more often than not, the world
constructed in the course of symbolic interac-
tion tends to be a replica of the familiar social
order rather than something qualitatively new,
and that individuals, despite all their autonomy
and defining powers, typically end up defining
their selves and the situation in a predictable,
patterned manner, which suggests the presence
of social constraints. The strength of this ap-
proach is in its proponents’ concerted efforts to
make structure a focal concept in interactionist
sociology. Its weakness, exacerbated in part
by the greater reliance on laboratory and syn-
chronic forms of research, is in its blurring the
temporal dimension of structural processes,
which by its nature is more amenable to par-
ticipatory and diachronic modes of research.
No fast and sharp line separates the two
branches of social interactionism (although
pronouncements of some interactionists made
it appear so).° Even though the term structure
is not frequently mentioned by Shibutani,
Strauss, Glazer, Stone or Denzin, this does not
mean that they are oblivious to the fact of
structural constraints.” By the same token, the
emphasis of Stryker, Burke, Weinstein,
McCall and Simmons on the patterned nature
of the identity selection process does not mean
abandonment of the interactionist commitment
to studying society-in-the-making.® The worst
thing that could happen to interactionists is
yielding to a sectarian strife along the situation
vs. frame, indeterminism vs. determinism,
voluntarism vs. structuralism fault-lines. For
the different emphases in contemporary in-
teractionism represent the two sides of the
whole story, and juxtaposing them could only
undercut the raison d’étre of interactionist
sociology—its dialectical premise that society
produces individuals qua human individuals at
the same time that it is produced by them qua
human society. The task now facing social in-
teractionists is to join forces and to incorporate
various contributions into a unified interac-
tionist theory of social structure. Another
challenge before interactionist theory is to
bridge the gap between the micro- and
macro-level analysis of social phenomena.? In
doing so, interactionists need to reexamine the
origins of interactionist sociology, its meta-
theoretical foundation—pragmatist philos-
ophy, and particularly the notion of the in-
determinancy of the situation. If interac-
tionists are serious about tackling the issues of
power, class, and inequality, they will also
have to reclaim the political commitments of
their pragmatist predecessors.
Anderson, Nels. 1923. The Hobo. The Sociology of
the Homeless Man. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

. 1975. The American Hobo. An Autobiog-
raphy. London: E. J. Brill

Blumer, Herbert. 1939. Critique of Research in the
Social Sciences: An Appraisal of Thomas and
Znaniecki’s The Polish Peasant in Europe and
America. Bulletin 44. New York: Social Science
Research Council.

Burgess, Ernest W. 1927. “Statistics and Case
Studies as Methods of Sociological Research.”
Sociology and Social Research 12:103-20.

Carey, James T. 1975. Sociology and Public Affairs.
The Chicago School. London: Sage Publications.

Cooley, Charles Horton. [1902] 1964. Human Nature
and the Social Order. New York: Schocken
Books.

. [1909] 1962. Social Organization. New

York: Schocken Books.

. 1927. Life and the Student, Roadside Notes

on Human Nature, Society, and Letters. New

York: Alfred Knopf.

. [1918] 1966. Social Process. Carbondale:

Southern Illinois University Press.

. 1930. Sociological Theory and Social Re-
search. New York: Henry Holt & Co.

Coser, Lewis. 1978. “American Trends,” Pp. 287—
320 in A History of Sociological Analysis, edited
by Tom Bottomore and Robert Nisbet. New York:
Basic Books.

Cressey, Paul G. 1932. The Taxi-Dance Hall. A So-
ciological Study in Commercialized Recre-
ational City Life. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Dewey, John [1888] 1969. “The Ethics of Democ-
racy,” Pp. 227-49 in John Dewey, The Early
Works, 1882-1889. Vol. I. Carbondale: Southern
Illinois University Press.

. [1890] 1969. “The Logic of Verification,” Pp.

83-92 in John Dewey, The Early Works. Vol. III,

Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

. [1897] 1972. “Ethical Principles Underlying

Education,” Pp. 54-83 in John Dewey, The Early

Works, 1882-1898, Vol. 5. Carbondale: Southern

Illinois University Press.

. [1916] 1966. Democracy and Education.

New York: Free Press.

. [1927] 1954. The Public and Its Problems.

New York: Henry Holt & Co.

. [1929] 1958. Experience and Nature. New

York: Dover.

. [1929] 1960. Quest For Certainty: A Study in

the Relation of Knowledge and Action. New York:

Capricorn Books.

. [1929] 1962. Individualism, Old and New.

New York: Capricorn Books.

. [1931] 1963. Philosophy and Civilization.

New York: Capricorn Books.

. 1938. Logic: The Theory of Inquiry. New

York: Henry Holt & Co.

. 1946. Problems of Men. New York: Philo-
sophical Library.

Dewey, John and Arthur Fisher Bentley. 1949.
Knowing and the Known. Boston: Beacon Press.
Dollard, John. 1937. Caste and Class in a Southern
Town. New York: Yale University Press.

Durkheim, Emile. 1983. Pragmatism and Sociology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ellwood, C. A. 1907. “Sociology: Its Problems and
Its Relations.” American Journal of Sociology
13:300-48.

. 1910. “The Psychological View of Society.”

American Journal of Sociology 15:596-610.

. 1933. Method in Sociology. A Critical Study.
Durham: Duke University Press.

Faris, Ellsworth. 1937. The Nature of Human Na-
ture and Other Essays in Social Psychology. New
York: McGraw Hill.

Faris, Robert E. 1970. Chicago Sociology 1920-1932.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fisher, Berenice M. and Anselm L. Strauss. 1978.
“Introduction,” Pp. 457-98 in A History of
Sociological Analysis, edited by Tom Bottomore
and Lewis A. Coser. New York: Basic Books.

. 1979. “Georgé Herbert Mead and the
Chicago Tradition in Sociology.” Symbolic In-
teraction 2:9-26.

Goldman, Eric. 1956. Rendezvous with Destiny: A
History of Modern American Reform. New York:
Vintage.

Gouinlock, James. 1972. John Dewey's Theory of
Value. New York: Humanities Press.

Graham, Otis L. 1967. An Encore for Reform: The
Old Progressives and the New Deal. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Hall, Peter M. 1972. “A Symbolic Interactionist
Analysis of Politics.’’ Sociological Inquiry
42:93-99.

Hook, Sidney. 1969. ‘John Dewey and the Crisis of
American Liberalism.’’ Antioch Review
29:218-32.

Hughes, Everett Cherrington. 1955. “Preface,” Pp.
4-8 in The Collected Papers of Robert Ezra Park,
edited by Everett Cherrington Hughes, Charles A.
Johnson, Jitsuichi Masuoka, Robert Redfield, and
Louis Wirth. Vol. III. New York: Free Press.

Huber, Joan. 1973. “Symbolic Interaction as a
Pragmatic Perspective: The Bias of Emergent
Theory.”’ American Sociological Review
38:278-84.

Huber Rytina, Joan and Charles P. Loomis. 1970.
“Marxist Dialectics and Pragmatism: Power as
Knowledge.” American Sociological Review
35:308-18.

James, William. [1890] 1950. The Principles of Psy-
chology. Vols. 1 & II. New York: Dover.

. [1907] 1955. Pragmatism. Cambridge: Har-

vard University Press.

. [1909] 1967. The Meaning of Truth. Ann

Arbor: The University of Michigan Modern Li-

brary.

. [1909] 1970. **A Pluralistic Universe,” in Es-

says in Radical Empiricism and Pluralistic Uni-

verse. Gloucester: Peter Press.

. [1910] 1962. “The Moral Equivalent of
War,” pp. 480-91 in The Progressive Years. The
Spirit and Achievement of American Reform,
edited by Otis Pease. New York: George Braziller

Joas, Hans. 1983. “In Defense of Earlier American
Sociology.” Paper presented at the 78th Annual
Meeting of the ASA, Detroit.
Johnson, David G. and Peggy A. Shifflett. 1981.
“George Herbert Who? A Critique of the Objec-
tivist Reading of Mead.” Symbolic Interaction
4:143-55.

Kanter, Rosabeth M. 1972. “Symbolic Interac-
tionism and Politics in Systematic Perspective.”
Sociological Inquiry 42:77-92.

Kon, Igor S. and Dmitri N. Shalin. 1969. “D. G. Mid
i Problema Chelovecheskogo ‘Ia’ (G. H. Mead
and the Problem of the Human Self.” Voprosy
Filosofii 12:85-95.

Kuhn, Thomas. 1970. The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Lewis, David J. 1976. “The Classic American Prag-
matists as Forerunners to Symbolic Interac-
tionism.” Sociological Quarterly 17:341-59.

Lewis, J. David and Richard L. Smith. 1980. Ameri-
can Sociology and Pragmatism. Mead, Chicago
Sociology and Symbolic Interactionism. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Lichtman, Richard. 1970. ‘Symbolic Interactionism
and Social Reality: Some Marxist Queries.” Berk-
eley Journal of Sociology 15:75-94.

Lindeman, Eduard C. 1924. Social Discovery, An
Approach to the Study of Functional Groups. New
York: Republic Publishing Co.

Maines, David R. 1977. “Social Organization and
Social Structure in Symbolic Interactionist
Thought.” Annual Review of Sociology 3:235-59.

Marcell, David W. 1974. Progress and Pragmatism.
Westport: Greenwood Press.

McPhail, Clark and Cynthia Rexroat. 1979. “Mead
vs. Blumer: The Divergent Methodological Per-
spectives of Social Behaviorism and Symbolic In-
teractionism.”” American Sociological Review
44:449_67.

Mead, George Herbert. [1908] 1964. “The Philo-
sophical Basis of Ethics,” Pp. 82-93 in Selected
Writings. George Herbert Mead, edited by An-
drew J. Reck. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.

. [1924-1925] 1964. “The Genesis of the Self

and Social Control,” Pp. 267-93 in Selected Writ-

ings, George Herbert Mead, edited by Andrew J.

Reck. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.

. [1925-1926] 1964. “The Nature of Aesthetic

Experience,” Pp. 294-305 in Selected Writings,

George Herbert Mead, edited by Andrew J. Reck.

New York: Bobbs-Merrill.

. 1929. “Bishop Berkeley and His Message.”

Journal of Philosophy 26:421-30.

1932. The Philosophy of the Present.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. 1934. Mind, Self and Society. Chicago: Uni-

versity of Chicago Press.

1935-1936. “The Philosophy of John
Dewey.” International Journal of Ethics 46:64-81.

———. 1936. Movements of Thought in the
Nineteenth Century. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

. 1938. The Philosophy of the Act. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

. 1982. The Individual and the Social Self,
Unpublished Work of George Herbert Mead,
edited by David L. Miller. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Morris, Charles W. 1970. The Pragmatic Movement
in American Philosophy. New York: Braziller.
Park, Robert E. [1904] 1972. ‘The Crowd and the
Public,” Pp. 3-84 in Robert Park. The Crowd and
the Public and Other Essays, edited by Henry
Elsner, Jr. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. [1924] 1955. ‘Human Nature, Attitudes and

Mores,” Pp. 267-92 in The Collected Papers of

Robert Ezra Park. Vol. III. Society, edited by

Everett Cherrington Hughes, Charles A. Johnson,

Jitsuichi Masuoka, Robert Redfield, and Louis

Wirth. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

. [1927] 1955. ‘‘Human Nature and Collective

Behavior,” Pp. 13-21 in The Collected Papers of

Robert Ezra Park. Vol. III. Society, edited by

Everett Cherrington Hughes, Charles A. Johnson,

Jitsuichi Masuoka, Robert Redfield, and Louis

Wirth. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

. [1929] 1952. “Sociology, Community and

Society,” pp. 178-209 in The Collected Papers of

Robert Ezra Park. Vol. Il. Human Communities,

edited by Everett Cherrington Hughes, Charles A.

Johnson, Jitsuichi Masuoka, Robert Redfield, and

Louis Wirth. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

. [1940]. ‘News as a Form of Knowledge,”
pp. 71-88 The Collected Papers of Robert Ezra
Park. Vol. III. Society, edited by Everett
Cherrington Hughes, Charles A. Johnson, Jitsuichi
Masuoka, Robert Redfield, and Louis Wirth.
Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

Park Papers. n.d. Robert E. Park Papers, University
of Chicago Archives.

Park, Robert E. and Herbert A. Miller. 1921. Old
World Traits Transplanted. New York: Harper &
Brothers Publishers.

Park, Robert E. and Ernest W. Burgess. [1921] 1969.
Introduction to the Science of Sociology. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.

Peirce, Charles. [1868] 1955. “Some Consequences
of Four Incapacities,” Pp. 228-50 in Philosophical
Writings of Peirce, edited by Justus Buchler. New
York: Dover.

. [1877] 1955. ‘The Fixation of Belief,” Pp.

5-22 in Philosophical Writings of Peirce, edited by

Justus Buchler. New York: Dover.

1931-1958. Collected Papers of Charles
Sanders Peirce. 8 Vols. Cambridge: 1958. Harvard
University Press.

Perry, Ralph Barton. 1964. The Thought and Char-
acter of William James. New York: Harper &
Row.

Reynolds, Jenice M. and Larry T. Reynolds. 1973.
“Interactionism, Complicity and the Astructural
Bias.” Catalyst 7:76-85.

Ropers, Richard. 1973. “Mead, Marx and Social
Psychology.” Catalyst 7:42-61.

Rucker, Darnell. 1969. The Chicago Pragmatists.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Shalin, Dmitri N. 1978. “The Genesis of Social In-
teractionism and Differentiation of Macro- and
Micro-Sociological Paradigms.” Humboldt Jour-
nal of Social Relations 6:3-38.

. 1984. “The Romantic Antecedents of Mea-

dian Social Psychology.” Symbolic Interaction

7:43-65.

1986. ““Romanticism and the Rise of
Sociological Hermeneutics.” Social Research 53
(forthcoming).

Shaskolsky, Leon. 1970. “The Development of
Sociological Theory in America: A Sociology of
Knowledge Interpretation,” Pp. 6-30 in The
Sociology of Sociology, edited by Larry T.
Reynolds and Jenice M. Reynolds. New York:
David McKay Co.

Smith, Dusky Lee. 1973. “Symbolic Interactionism:
Definitions of the Situation From Becker to Lof-
land.” Catalyst 7:62-75.

Stone, Gregory, David Maines, Harvey Farberman,
Cladys I. Stone, and Norman Denzin. 1974. “On
Methodology and Craftsmanship in the Criticism
of Sociological Perspectives.’’ American
Sociological Review 39:456-63.

Stryker, Sheldon. 1980. Symbolic Interactionism. A
Social Structured Version. Menlo Park, CA:
Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Co.

Thayer, H. S. 1973. Meaning and Action. A Study of
American Pragmatism. Indianapolis: Bobbs-
Merrill.

Thomas, William E. [1918-1920] 1966. The Polish
Peasant in Europe and America, with Florian
Znaniecki, in W. I. Thomas on Social Organiza-
tion and Social Change. Selected Papers, edited
by Morris Janowitz. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

. 1923. The Unadjusted Girl, With Cases and

Standpoint for Behavioral Analysis. Boston: Little

Brown and Co.

. 1937. Primitive Behavior. An Introduction to

the Social Sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill.

. 1939. “Comments by W. I. Thomas,” Pp.

82-87 in Herbert Blumer Critique of Research in

The Social Sciences: An Appraisal of Thomas and

Znaniecki's The Polish Peasant in Europe and

America. Bulletin 44. New York: Social Science

Research Council.

. 1966. W. I. Thomas on Social Organization

and Social Change. Selected Papers, edited by
Morris Janowitz. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Thomas, William I. and Dorothy Swaine Thomas.
1928. The Child in America. Behavior Problems
and Programs. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Thrasher, Frederich M. 1927. The Gang. A Study of
1,313 Gangs in Chicago. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

White, Morton C. 1957. Social Thought in America.
The Revolt Against Formalism. Boston: Beacon
Press.

Whitehead, Alfred North. [1929] 1957. Process and
Reality. New York: Macmillan.

1938. Science and the Modern World.
Middlesex: Penguine Books.

Whyte, William Foot. [1943] 1981. Street Corner So-
ciety, The Social Structure of an Italian Slum.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Znaniecki, Florian. 1919. Cultural Reality. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.

. [1925] 1967. The Laws of Social Philosophy.

New York: Russell & Russell.

. 1927. “The Object Matter of Sociology.”

American Journal of Sociology 22:529-84.

. [1934] 1968. The Method of Sociology. New

York: Octagon.

. 1939. “Comments by Florian Znaniecki,”
pp. 87-98 in Herbert Blumer, Critique of Research
in The Social Sciences: An Appraisal of Thomas
and Znaniecki’s The Polish Peasant in Europe and
America. Bulletin 44. New York: Social Research
Council.

Zorbaugh, Harvey Warren. 1929. The Gold Coast
and a Slum. A Sociological Study of Chicago’s
Near North Side. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
