The Generalizations of Economic History

Author(s): Abbott Payson Usher

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 21, No. 4 (Jan., 1916), pp. 474-491
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763905

Accessed: 10-05-2016 04:58 UTC
THE GENERALIZATIONS OF ECONOMIC HISTORY

 

ABBOTT PAYSON USHER
Cornell University

 

Economic history is peculiarly dependent upon some division
into periods. Schemes are, of course, incomplete, and their short-
comings are peculiarly evident in this field. They can hardly
become the basis of sustained historical narrative, but they do serve
to bring the larger conceptions of evolution into close touch with
history and they vitalize research by emphasizing the problems
which are most influential in our thought. A scheme helps us to
think genetically and prevents us from losing sight of the deeper
speculative problems involved in the study of a subject whose
detail presents the bewildering diversity opened up by consider-
ation of the homely affairs of daily life and work. The scheme
should be the means of relating general notions to the concrete
phenomena of history. It is essential, therefore, that special effort
should be made to frame any scheme with reference both to the
philosophical problems and to the course of events. Unfortunately
the schemes thus far published have been narrowly pragmatic.
Each phase of economic development has been made the basis of
a division into periods.t With reference to each particular purpose
these schemes are valid, and it is hardly possible that any single
division into periods will be sufficiently comprehensive to be entirely
adequate. Various schemes will always be necessary. It is none
the less essential to recognize that some categories possess a broader
and more general significance than others, and that it is wise to
build up these broader generalizations into a comprehensive body of
doctrine. The periods usually associated with Professor Schmoller’s
name are of this broader type. They must be regarded as a note-

7K. Biicher, Die Entstehung der Volkswirtschaft (Tiibingen, 1898); translation
by Wickett, Industrial Evolution (New York, 1901); W. Sombart, Moderne Kapi-
talismus (Leipzig, 1902); R. Liefman, Beteiligungs und Finanzierungsgeselschaften
(Jena, 1909).
worthy beginning despite the naiveté of some of the underlying
conceptions and the infelicity of some of the phrases. Schmoller’s
conception of the evolutionary growth of society was developed
with the evident intention of placing the mercantilistic policies
of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in a historical setting,
and for that reason he did not endeavor to formulate a more com-
plete scheme of social growth. His chief concern was with the
transition from the Middle Ages to modern times. The problems
of the earlier stages of economic life are not fully treated. The
scheme is fragmentary and incomplete. It is a suggestion of the
lines of thought to be pursued rather than a completed body of
doctrine on the subject of social evolution. Schmoller’s famous
essay is primarily occupied with the antithesis between the “town
economy” of the Middle Ages and the “national economy” of
modern times.

The thesis of the essay is comprehensively stated:

In every phase of economic development, a guiding or controlling part
belongs to some one or other political organ of the life of the race or nation.
At one time it is the association of the kindred or tribe; at another the village
or mark; now it is the district, and then the state or even a federation of
states, which plays this part... .. Of course, it is not the only factor that
enters into the explanation of economic evolution; but it appears to me the
fullest in meaning and the one which exercises the most penetrating influence
upon the various forms of economic organization that have made their appear-
ance in history. In association with the tribe, the mark, the village, the town
(or city), the territory, the state, and the confederation, certain definite eco-
nomic organisms have been successively evolved of ever-wider scope: herein
we have a continuous process of development, which, though it has never
accounted for all the facts of economic life, has, at every period, determined
and dominated it.?

The earlier stages may be found in the classic world and also
in the early mediaeval world; it is thus a matter of some uncer-
tainty just when Professor Schmoller intended to begin his account
of this “continuous process of development.”

1G. Schmoller, Studien iiber die wirthschaftliche Politik Friedrichs des Grossen,
September 30, 1883. Part I has been translated by W. J. Ashley under the title,
The Mercantile System and Its Historical Significance (New York and London: Mac-
millan, 1896), and various reprints.

2Schmoller, The Mercantile System, p. 2 (New York, 1910).
The relation between the civilization of classical antiquity and
the Middle Ages soon became, in Germany, the subject of acon-
siderable polemic literature. Classical students endeavored to show
that the fall of Rome had been followed by a real decadence in
western civilization and an actual regression. The economic his-
torians maintained that there was an essential continuity in the
process of history and that the civilization even of the Middle
Ages represented an advance over the civilization of Greece and
Rome. The most significant statement of the case of the econo-
mists was Professor Biicher’s Industrial Evolution” For the first
of Schmoller’s major stages in development, the “village economy,”
Biicher substituted the conception of a “household economy.”
The characteristic feature of primitive society and the civilization
of Greece and Rome was, in his view, the patriarchal family. He
uses the word “household” in this sense: it includes a group of
kindred and usually a considerable number of dependents and
slaves. The city-states of classical antiquity were loose associa-
tions of such patriarchal households, and, though the political unit
was indeed the town or city, the economic unit was this extended
household.

There are many historical difficulties involved in all these
stimulating phrases. Biicher’s term “household economy” is
not an inapt characterization of the town life of the early classical
period, but it requires no small stretch of the imagination to apply
the idea to Imperial Rome. In Schmoller’s conception of a “town
economy” there is a grave difficulty involved in his emphasis upon
the desire to become self-sufficient, upon the “local economic
selfishness,” and “the struggle for self-sufficiency and independ-
ence.” The description of the “national economy” is couched in
identical language. There is no doubt an element of truth in all
this characterization, but there is something omitted; something not
easily defined, but none the less vital to the understanding of the
whole. The detailed history of these periods cannot wisely be
poured into Professor Schmoller’s molds.

Metaphysical difficulties are closely related to these historical
infelicities. It is not evident just how we get from one stage to

*K. Biicher, op. cit.
the next. The “town economy” gives way to the “territorial
economy” simply because the territorial princes who used to be
weak and insignificant have become strong. The only explanation
of why the territorial prince became strong is ‘‘that the necessities
of real life were relentlessly driving society toward territorial
organization” (p. 15). It would seem that the vital thing to dis-
cover and describe would be these ‘‘necessities of real life.” The
state intervenes as a kind of deus ex machina. Whenever any
change is to occur some newly constituted authority arises and
carries out the social transformation. Such a series of successive
changes is hardly the description of a spontaneous evolutionary
process; it is a creation by fiat upon an instalment plan. It is not
a rational development, but an accomplishment of brute force
conceived as external to the events described.

The growth of economic organization can be most successfully
measured in terms of commercial development. The history of
commerce in its widest sense affords a broader basis for general-
ization than industry: the mechanism for the determination of
values affords an accurate measure of the progress of social organ-
ization within each community or state; the sphere of influence
embraced by organized trade keeps ever present to our minds the
persistent interdependence of communities. The process of
growth is a development from systems of distribution based wholly
or in part upon power and arbitrary fiat to a system founded upon
the exchange of values. There is development also from a nar-
rowly circumscribed interdependence of small communities to a
world-wide interdependence of large states. Both of these pro-
cesses consist in a movement from unfreedom to freedom com-
parable in many respects to the changes so frequently described
as the characteristic feature of political life and the history of
thought. The increase in the economic freedom of the individual
is of two kinds: (z) increase in the area of social contact, and hence
greater freedom of physical movement in the world at large;
(2) increase in freedom from arbitrary or unreasoned interference.
Many acts are prohibited and forbidden in a developed commu-
nity; but the motive is evident and the necessity of such restric-
tions understood. Freedom is not the absolute, unconditioned
Il. “Isotatep” Markets IN THE MEDITERRANEAN WORLD

(Fifth Century B.c. to Seventeenth Century A.D.)

Opposition between Form and Content

The Antithesis between Town and Country

1. Urban units with dependent rural
suburbs.

2. Rise of distinct rural organization;
latifundia, village communities,
manors.

3. Rise of the mediaeval town: the
country remains independent.

4. Formation of small market sys-
tems.

The Rise of Cosmopolitan Commerce
1. Northern and southern spheres of
commerce.

2. Consolidation under Greco-Roman
influence and power.

3- Rise of systematic trade between
the semi-tropical East and the
manufacturing North:

a) Fairs of Champagne and

Flanders.

b) The second fair system: Lyons,
Flanders, Spain, Genoa.
freedom of a supposed “state of nature.” It is freedom from
caprice and custom, an activity subject only to the restrictions of
reason. The former conception, which became closely identified
with the ideas of economic freedom among the followers of Adam
Smith, implies that a state of freedom exists naturally and spon-
taneously, that it must needs exist unless destroyed or qualified
by governmental interference. The doctrine of laissez faire is the
inevitable deduction from such a conception of freedom; and it
would seem that the widespread distrust of governmental activity
and regulation might safely be attributed to this source. The
Hegelian philosophy is founded upon a conception of freedom that
is apparently more closely in accord with the history of political
rights and the evolution of thought. Freedom in this system of
thought is represented as an achievement. Instead of declaring
that “‘man is born free and is everywhere in chains,” the Hegelian
says, “primitive man is found enslaved by passion, by superstition,
and by armed force: in the process of social evolution he achieves
his freedom.” Economic freedom, like political and intellectual
freedom, is achieved in the course of a long historical struggle.
The state is not an obstacle, an unwarranted interference with the
‘course of nature,” but the means by which conscious society wins
its freedom. There is a real place for effective government even
in a free economic society, but government is not the whole of social
life. Evolution is seeking neither a transcendental “superman,”
nor an equally transcendental state. The development toward
freedom is a growth toward a better definition of the relations
between the individual and the state. Both must be dominated
by the principles of reason which are implicit in the most primitive
societies, becoming fully manifest as explicit laws and institutions
only in the course of historical development.

The nature of this change will perhaps be more readily under-
stood if we consider two typical illustrations. The fundamental
principle of social life is interdependence, both within the unit of
social organization and between different units. Even among the
most primitive peoples this fact of interdependence is apparent.
In his study of The Silent Trade, Mr. Grierson speaks of certain
tribes whose trade with other peoples is carried on through the
medicine men.* The goods to be exchanged are left in a particular
spot protected from theft by divers taboos. The other tribes come
and make the trade, leaving the goods giveninreturn. To many of
the tribes the unknown strangers with whom they trade are super-
natural beings—foreign devils. There is thus the fact of inter-
dependence, but no recognition of a common humanity. The
equivalence of values in such exchanges was crudely determined.
Within the tribe most exchange was reduced to the form of an
exchange of presents, so that the fact of trade was not formally
recognized. Presents were sometimes supposed to be of equivalent
values, but frequently the value of the gift was more closely related
to the social importance of the giver than to the worth of the object
received in return.

More significant perhaps is the relation between Rome and her
provinces. Much of the trade flowing from the provinces to Rome
was in fact an annual tribute levied by right of conquest. There
was exchange, or at all events commodities were sent to Rome, but
the provinces did not send their wares of their own free will, nor
did they receive any value equivalent for much that they sent.
There are some instances in modern times that are essentially
similar, notably the relation between Great Britain and India
during the short period of the “Investments” (1772-83). But
such a predatory relationship is not characteristic of modern times.
Modern trade is a voluntary exchange of values that are as nearly
as possible equivalent.

Free interchange of equivalent value has been achieved slowly,
because of the difficulty of creating the necessary mechanism.
There is need of markets for the determination of values of mer-
chandise, need of uniform laws governing commercial transactions
throughout vast stretches of territory, need of devices for the
liquidation of the great payments arising in the trade between
different populations. The problem of defining economic growth
is in a large measure a problem of describing these different aspects
of change in relation to.each other. There is in addition the neces-
sity of pointing out the relation of the institutions and structure of
primitive society to the organization of the city-states of the

*P. J. H. Grierson, The Silent Trade, p. 44.
Mediterranean world that produce the first conscious descriptions
of their own past.

The early period may be described as “exchange without general
measured value.” Commercial development is from mere exchange
to an exchange of values recognized as equivalent and expressed
in terms of standardized units of measure. The achievements
of this period are the development of weights and measures, of
monetary systems, and of an organized market.

The second stage of commercial growth is characterized by the
existence of “isolated” markets in a cosmopolitan world. It
embraces a period of apparently inordinate length, bringing us from
the dawn of history to the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
But these dates are not inconsistent with indications from many
other fields of human thought and endeavor. The changes of the
last two centuries have carried Western civilization into a decisively
new period of history, of which we as yet see only the first fruits.
The general heading of the long second period is designed to empha-
size the curious antithesis between an intense localism on the one
hand and a broad cosmopolitanism on the other. Classical antiq-
uity and the Middle Ages present both of these contrasts with
modern times, and the contrast is as real in the institutional as in
the intellectual sphere. The city-state was in form an “‘isolated”’
community, but each was characteristically dependent upon the
trade of the Mediterranean world. They were self-sufficient in
terms of their political structure and in much of their thought; in
actuality they were created and maintained by the general condi-
tions of Mediterranean life. In the Middle Ages, this is a little
more conspicuously evident. Venice was just such a city-state, in
legal theory completely independent. But the stranger that was
technically excluded was permitted to dwell in certain designated
buildings and by an elaborate set of legal fictions enabled to trade
with much freedom. Furthermore, this “independent” state
was in fact completely dependent upon the stream of general
European trade flowing from the Levant to the industrial districts
of Northern Europe. Outside of just such a curious cosmopolitan
world these city-states could not have existed. The description
of the period thus requires us to trace the growth of the social unit
and of the world in which it had its being. The development of
these different aspects of social life leads us into related but dis-
tinct problems of economic and social history.

The third period shows us a world composed of metropolitan
market systems. This phrase is designed to bring out two ideas:
first, that the community grouped around a metropolitan city or
a federation of metropolitan cities possesses a kind of functional
unity—for many purposes it works as a definite social unit; secondly,
that there is a functional recognition of the interdependence of
interests with other similar metropolitan cities and their dependent
communities. Expressing the idea in the language of the market
place, the market has a dual function to perform; it is organized
in part with reference to internal needs, in part with reference to
communication with the world outside. On the mediaeval markets
the stranger had little or no legal recognition. The modern market
recognizes frankly its relation to the rest of the world.

If we think of the growth of society in this way, it possesses
a real continuity, but consideration of a scheme of periods in the
abstract might easily lead us to misunderstand the nature of this
continuity. History includes the totality of life, and in our
attempts to express its meaning there is a real danger of omitting
essential features. The greatest danger lies in our conception of
historical continuity. The movement of history partakes of the
nature of life itself, and the historian, like the novelist, must avoid
arranging events too elaborately. Both must catch “the strange
irregular rhythm of life” which Henry James feels so keenly. There
is a certain consistency of movement which enables us to conceive
of life as a something inherently rational, but nothing is accom-
plished without struggle. There is an ebb and flow; tendencies
assert themselves spasmodically so that the forward movement of
history is hesitant, uncertain, and irregular. Certain forms of
recession are as much a part of the essence of historical change as
the movement forward. This tendency in life is most vividly pro-
trayed in the thematic structure of much modern music. In
Wagner’s last music drama, the Parsifal motif occurs at first in a
rather fragmentary form. It is incomplete, and its elements
demand further development. It achieves its full expression
slowly, only after the full story of development of the character
has been revealed. When the whole course of the story is con-
sidered there is an evident consistency of growth, but the growth
is not unopposed, and in this opposition lies the explanation of the
hesitant and uncertain nature of the process. So when we sum-
marize historical development and present the outline of the
changes as an unbroken and unimpeded succession of events, it
behooves us not to forget that the entire process of historic growth
involves opposition.

It is in this sense that we can find a real continuity of social
life between classical antiquity and the Middle Ages. There was
in some ways a recession, and yet it was a recession after the
manner of the ebb tide—a recession certain to be followed by a suc-
ceeding flood. It is no break in historical continuity, merely an
evidence of the essential nature of the process of history.

In the periods suggested no place has been assigned to the
recognized stages of industrial evolution. It is not desired to imply
that such an arrangement of material is unsound in principle nor
unimportant, but it would seem that industrial development is
subordinate to the general growth of society. It is an old principle
that the profitable limits of the division of labor are defined by the
extent of the market, and with this principle in mind it is not diffi-
cult to relate industrial growth to the expansion of the market.
The changes in the market are of two general classes: the develop-
ment of a general European market for the wares that become
associated with the great fair systems; later, the development of
what we may call the domestic market. The spread of the northern
textiles through Europe and the introduction of the silk industry
from the eastern countries resulted in the establishment of the
domestic system. The extent of the market for the textile products
resulted in an elaborate division of labor and a definite establish-
ment of a capitalist class; but the character of the market for food-
stuffs made it necessary to spread the industrial population over
as large an area as possible. Under these conditions the character-
istic industrial advantage was a surplus food supply. Industry
was closely associated with agriculture, and agricultural wealth was
the principal factor in the maintenance of industrial superiority.
The full development of metropolitan market systems opened up
the entire domestic market to the higher grades of industrial
products. Cheaper methods of production brought superior prod-
ucts within the reach of classes formerly obliged to supply their
own wants. Improved methods of transportation rendered the
predominance of the central market inevitable. Lastly, the possi-
bility of handling larger quantities of foodstuffs, evaluating them
with greater certainty, and procuring them from greater distances
opened the way to a concentration of industry formerly impossible
and to the location of industry with reference to climate, power, and
natural resources. Industrial development has been a consequence
and result of the changes in the character of the market, and while
the relation is close it is not readily shown by schematic arrange-
ment.

The term “metropolitan market system”? is intended to describe
the modern state in terms of economic structure. It is hoped that
this expression will be free from the difficulties involved in the
German phrase “national economy,” and in the conception of the
“domestic market” developed by Mill and his immediate suc-
cessors. The objections that may be urged against the German
phrase are the undue emphasis laid upon policies, the implication
that the boundaries of the state necessarily have a close relation to
economic organization, and the failure to give due proportion to
the relations of the state with the outside world. The conception
of the “domestic market” raises another set of difficulties. Mill
seeks to establish a distinction between the domestic and the foreign
market with reference to the general principles of valuation. The
“domestic market” was subject to a régime of values determined
primarily by cost of production under conditions of free compe-
tition. Trade with the outside world was based upon the principle
of comparative costs because there were so many obstacles to free-
dom of competition. To enumerate the criticisms of this point
of view would be to write a history of the economic thought of the
last thirty or forty years. Cairnes’s conception of non-competing
groups, the “utility” theories of value in their Austrian and in
their English and American forms, the rise of combinations,
monopolies, and other arrangements designed to qualify or destroy
“free competition,” the increased mobility of capital and labor, all
these varied factors make it impossible to attach much weight to
Mill’s distinctions. We no longer think of international trade as
a distinct problem in value, and we are very skeptical about the
existence or significance of free competition at home or abroad.
But it is still evident that the commercial and economic problems
of the home market are in many ways distinctly individual, and
that there is a sufficient community of interest in the domestic
area to warrant our treating it as a unit.

One of the most characteristic features of the last two centuries
has been the rise of the great capital cities. Political, commercial,
and industrial factors have all contributed to their growth and to
their place in the community. If we compare the town life of the
Middle Ages with modern urban life, we find that in the Middle
Ages there were many towns of co-ordinate importance and scarcely
any with a distinct prepondeiance. Today towns and cities are
grouped in a sort of hierarchical arrangement about the great
metropolitan centers which really dominate the social, economic, and
political life of the entire area subject to their influence. They
dominate their provinces no less completely than Rome in the time
of Augustus, but the domination has no element of military force
associated with it. The capital is maintained by a flow of trade,
an exchange of equivalent values, and not by a tribute exacted by
disciplined legions. The existence of such metropolitan centers
is thus a distinctively new feature of institutional life, and it would
seem that it is a sufficiently significant fact to be deemed the dis-
tinguishing characteristic of the new social fabric that is gradually
taking form around us.

In tracing the rise of this metropolitan system it is necessary to
draw a distinction which Schmoller expressed as a “territorial
economy.” This may be described as a “metropolitan sphere of
influence.” It is distinguished from the fully organized “metro-
politan market system” with reference to the relation between
the capital and the provinces. In the earlier period the capital
is an industrial and commercial center which receives food and raw
products from the provinces. It is an entrepét for certain foreign
wares that are to be sent to the provinces, but commercial movement
is usually toward the capital. The development of the full
machinery of the modern market system makes the capital a general
distributing-point. The trade of the capital is not merely its own
particular trade in food, raw products, and transit of merchandise;
it serves as a center for the concentration of much purely inter-
provincial trade. Goods are sent thither to be valued and dis-
tributed, perhaps even throughout the area of their production
and manufacture. These changes are closely related to the indus-
trial concentration characteristic of the period. Manufacture is
highly centralized; valuation and distribution are also centralized.

The rise of centralized banking systems and the organization
of the great financial markets in the metropolitan cities present
another aspect of their predominant influence in directing the
affairs of the community as well as affording the means of syste-
matic commerce with other countries. The simplification of the
difficulties of making payments for the wholesale trade of the
country can hardly be appreciated unless some study is made of
the cumbersome movements of credit and specie in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. The rise of a central market for bills
of exchange did much to obviate the inconveniences of many ship-
ments of specie that were such a frequent cause of apprehension to
the commercial community at that time. The purely financial
disturbance gave rise to complaints that are easily confused with
the so-called ‘“‘mercantilist” conceptions of the time.

If these distinctions are tenable, the essence of the individuality
of the basic units of modern social life lies neither in political pur-
poses nor in different principles of valuation. From the point of
view of commerce and industry, nations are structurally distinct.
They are definitely interdependent, but because of topographical,
political, and historical factors they are organized in systems of
markets which have peculiarly close relations with each other.
In France and in England this metropolitan system has apparently
achieved a high degree of stability, revealing already the forms
that are likely to endure for a considerable period. In Germany
and in the United States the economic structure seems less finished.
There are many evidences of instability and much is still uncertain.
These forms of organization are after all very new, and there is no
reason to believe that we can yet see more than the larger out-
lines of what is apparently a significant change in the structure of
society.

These changes result in a constantly increasing adaptation of
each society to its physical environment. In the classic world
topography exerted but a slight influence. Some cities were located
with reference to commerce and ease of access; more frequently
cities were located in places that were not too easy to reach. Plato
desired to locate the city for which the Laws were prepared in some
place not absolutely cut off from the rest of the world, but as nearly
isolated as possible. Considerations of safety made the location
of cities just a short distance from a nodal point perhaps the char-
acteristic feature of ancient life. Neither in the way nor out of the
way was the classic motto. In the Middles Ages the towns were
more closely related to the trade routes that developed along the
lines of least physical resistance. Points of intersection, or nodes,
as Mackinder calls them, became the characteristic factor in the
growth of towns. But throughout the Middle Ages historical
accident played a prominent part in the rise and fall of towns.
The location of the fairs of Champagne is perhaps the most notable
instance of the influence of purely political factors upon commercial
development. The migrations of the “fair of Besangon” in the
sixteenth century is another illustration. But the character of
the topography of the country as a whole exerted a persistent
influence. The brilliant description of the geography of France and
its relation to Paris, by Vidal de la Blache,* together with the similar
study of the geography of England, by Mackinder,? constitutes a
significant basis for the study of the rise of Paris and London to
their present positions. The relation of Berlin to the physical fea-
tures and trade routes of Germany presents a more complicated
problem, but there is evidence of a definite relation between the
physical features and the economic structure of society. Modern
society is elaborately conditioned by its physical environment. It
is easy to express such relations in the infelicitous language of
absolute determinism, but it is not necessary to accept a purely

*E. Lavisse, Histoire de France, Vol. I, Part I (Paris, 1903).

? H. J. Mackinder, Britain and British Seas (London, 1902).
materialistic interpretation of history in order to recognize facts
that are becoming increasingly important.

In a discussion of any phase of evolution much must needs be
said of growth and change. The many crude descriptions of growth
in terms of a purely mechanical transformation require us to
consider carefully what we mean by these terms. The purely
metaphysical discussion has a long history and is too elaborate
to be treated at length. But we must needs reach some definite
judgment on a number of questions. What is the nature of change?
Is it a mere unfolding of something already present, or does some-
thing distinctly and entirely new come into being? Hegel would
have said that the future is implicitly present in the events them-
selves. The process of growth was to him a passage from being
implicitly present to explicit and acknowledged existence. Berg-
son feels that we can hardly admit that all of the future is contained
in the stream of life. Much must needs be present by implication,
but he feels that something distinctively new is added. He is
rather skeptical on the subject of the conservation of energy and
the absolute indestructibility of matter. New energy may be
acquired in the process by which the dam vital makes itself manifest
in the world.

In addressing ourselves more definitely to the problems of
social evolution, these same general distinctions are evident, but
they appear somewhat obscured in form. Social development is,
in part at least, a process by which relations that were at one time
merely implied or unrecognized are acknowledged and given full

1 See particularly Bergson, Creative Evolution (New York, 1911); L. E. Hobhouse,
Development and Purpose (London, 1913). It is difficult to refrain from comment on
the latter suggestive and helpful book. There is a singularly felicitous union of meta-
physical power and historical perspective. There is the keen realization of the value
of abstract thought and a fondness for the manifold variety of history, perplexing
asit may seem. Itis significant also to note the relation of this work to the Hegelian
thought: “It seemed to me,” says Mr. Hobhouse, “that, details apart, the Hegelian
conception of development possessed a certain rough empirical value... . . Further,
if this conception was interpreted in terms of experience, it indicated a point of union
where one would not expect to find it, between the Idealistic and the Positivistic phi-
losophy”’ (p. xix). The conceptions of this present essay have been largely influenced
by the Hegelian writings, especially the Logic and the Phenomenology, and it is hoped
that the results will suggest the possibility of bringing this complicated aspect of
economic development into harmony with other tendencies in social growth.
legal standing in the body of law. It would seem also as if some
new relations came into being: new social problems arise, and,
although not entirely unlike the problems of the past, they contain
elements of novelty.

Social evolution involves the additional problem of conscious-
ness. The process is accomplished by conscious human agency.
In a sense, we may agree with Schmoller that the state is the instru-
ment by which social growth is accomplished, but the agency of the
state does not seem to be exerted in the way that Schmoller sug-
gested. In his presentation the significant decisions of statesmen
are the matters of high politics involved in the execution of
the mercantilist policies. The great statesman molds the body
politic as the sculptor molds the clay of his model. He shapes it
according to his will. But the most powerful prince cannot direct
the course of history in such a manner. Great reforms may be
accomplished, but they are not accomplished by the fiat of a pen,
although we frequently choose to identify the accomplishment with
some single decision. Great changes are brought about slowly.
The dramatic moments of history do not tell the whole story. The
4th of August, 1789, would have meant nothing to France apart
from the minute and persistent changes in the social fabric that
had already occurred. The famous scene gathers up in a significant
manner all that preceded, but it is only a part of the entire process.
If we would know more intimately the nature of historical growth
we must study events that are less dramatic, and occupy ourselves
not only with the famous statesmen but also with the humble
administrative officials, lawyers, and citizens.

Once we leave the field of high politics, too, we find that his-
torical growth accomplishes itself in ways not unrelated to the
general forms of change. Many things that are merely implicit
are recognized under the cover of legal fictions, until the fiction
can be discarded. Many acts which were done without legal
recognition or despite legal prohibitions come within the pale of
law. Allsuch change is transition from the implied to the explicit.
When new social relations and problems arise they become definite
institutions by means of “interpretation”? or by substantive
enactment.
The significance of legal fictions will be familiar to all readers of
Sir Henry Maine’s works, but it may not be amiss to suggest an
illustration directly related to our subject. The mediaeval town
was in theory an autonomous legal entity. A stranger had no
legal rights, whether to residence or to legal protection of proprie-
tary rights. But strangers lived in foreign towns for long periods
of time and traded with considerable freedom. This was accom-
plished by the legal fiction of the consulate. In Venice, in the
Flemish towns, in London, and elsewhere, special buildings or
groups of buildings were designated as a foreign jurisdiction.
The area was physically a portion of the town, but it was subject
to a different law. The theory of legal isolation and independence
was thus maintained without interfering seriously with the trade
that was technically unrecognized. In strict theory the town was
closed to outsiders, as Schmoller suggested, but in fact the gates
were open. By means of the legal fiction the fact of interde-
pendence was covertly recognized. When this fact became defi-
nitely predominant the old fabric was swept away and the freer
system definitely admitted to be a characteristic feature rather
than a mere exception to the rule.

Much social growth is accomplished by according legal recog-
nition to arrangements that appear spontaneously in social life out-
side the legally constituted institutions. The growth of deposit
banking in Venice and later in England would perhaps illustrate
this process. Chapters in the history of the Bank of England
would also be significant. Responsibilities to the banking system
of the country arose as a fact, and even today the position of the
bank is as largely determined by custom as by any actual statute.
When such new developments must needs be brought within the
body of law, the means at hand are substantive laws or the inter-
pretation of existing laws in such a way as to include the new sit-
uation within their scope. The doctrine of interpretation contains
many interesting suggestions. In theory nothing new has hap-
pened: no contingency has arisen that is outside the law; old
principles are applied to slightly different circumstances. None
the less, distinctively new things come into being by just such a
process. A significant illustration is afforded by the relation of the
bill of exchange to the decision of Baldus. Documents similar to
the modern bill had been common for some time, but there had
been much doubt as to the liability of the maker of a protested bill.
Baldus decided that there was an implied obligation, and, from that
time, the bill became an important commercial document. The
decision was a significant step in the evolution of modern society.
It was only a part of a long process, but for that reason it suggests
the nature of the changes that constitute the movement of social
evolution. These less dramatic moments are a fundamental part
of the history of society, and although they have none of the alluring
intensity of the moments of high politics, they lead us nearer to the
daily activities of the community and frequently bring us closer
to the full meaning of social life. It is in the midst of these events
that we find that strange irregular rhythm of life which we endeavor
to describe as an evolutionary process.
