The Psychiatric Aspects of War and Peace

Author(s): Franz Alexander

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Jan., 1941), pp. 504-520
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769921

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:12 UTC
THE PSYCHIATRIC ASPECTS OF WAR AND PEACE
FRANZ ALEXANDER

ABSTRACT

Rather than to seek the causes of war, it is perhaps more profitable to attempt to
discover the conditions under which peace is possible. The American continent offers an
opportunity for this type of study. Since the inhabitants of the Americas are largely of
European origin, it is less plausible to assume that their psychological structure has been
radically modified than to assume that a difference in social conditions is responsible for
the more peaceful history of this continent. Where organized groups co-exist without
conflicting interests, or with supplementary interests, peace is possible, and the adjacent
groups may fuse into a single economic and political unit. The fact that personal con-
flicts within a group are settled by law or by norm is encouraging in suggesting the
possibility of extending this type of settlement to intergroup conflicts. In order for
norms to provide a basis for the peaceful resolution of conflicts, socialization of the
individual is necessary. A democratic state requires a more socialized kind of human
material than a social order based on suppression and coercion. In considering Freud’s
statement that wars result from man’s innate destructiveness, it should be borne in
mind that human aggression frequently finds sublimated outlets. There are two im-
portant conditions for peace: (r) human beings must be united in one large, well-
integrated social organization; (2) there must be a technique for settling conflicting
interests. It is scarcely conceivable that these conditions can be realized until one
powerful group subdues the weaker ones and coerces them to participate in a larger
organization. A future league of nations must recognize the necessity of coercion until
consensus is established. Although the democracies should lead this supernational
organization, they are averse to the use of force. They must, however, recognize their
call to assume leadership.

As the manifestation of man’s destructive impulses war appears as
a legitimate subject of psychology. It would seem somewhat more
dubious whether or not it also belongs within the more restricted
scope of psychiatry—a field devoted to abnormal behavior. Certain-
ly historical experience would not justify considering war an ab-
normal phenomenon.

In a letter to Einstein, Freud wrote: “Conflict of interest among
mankind is in the main usually decided by the use of force. This is
true of the whole animal kingdom from which mankind should not
be excluded.”* This is not an opinion but a terse statement of fact.
From the point of view of psychiatry, it would seem that the pacifist,
who thinks of the elimination of war as an actual possibility, might
be considered a neurotic. He might easily be called a dreamer, sub-
ject to wishful thinking, who does not dare to face reality and who
escapes into fantasy.

«Why War? (Paris: International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation, League of
Nations, 1933), p- 3-
Freud in his letter to Einstein is fully aware of this. He sees the es-
sence of cultural development in the “strengthening of the intellect,
which begins to master the instincts, and the turning inward of the
tendency of aggression with all its advantageous and dangerous re-
sults.” He even questions whether or not culture “‘is leading to the
extinction of mankind since it encroaches upon the sexual function in
more than one way, and even today uncultured races and the back-
ward elements of the population increase more rapidly than the high-
ly cultivated.” But no matter whether we consider the cultural do-
mestication of the human animal as progress or degeneration, the
simple statement remains unassailable that, as long as powerful na-
tions or groups of people continue to pursue their interests by force,
by destruction, and by subjugation of their opponents, pacifism must
be considered as a morbid phenomenon—in fact, the rationalization
of self-destructive wishes. In the present state of affairs, as long as
pacifism is not being shared by all inhabitants of the earth, it is a
renunciation of self-defense. If self-preservation is a fundamental
and normal attribute of life, pacifism must be considered a morbid
phenomenon—the manifestation of self-destructiveness. It cannot
be excused even as the result of unclear thinking. Anyone who is
blind to the ubiquitous manifestations of human aggressiveness in
the past and present can be rightly considered a man who does not
face reality. If he is not of subnormal intelligence—unable to grasp
events around him—his inability to face facts must be of emotional
origin, and he may be considered a neurotic.

All this preamble is to refute those who seek the causes of war in a
specific emotional disturbance of the masses and refer to it as a mass
psychosis. We might even go one step farther and question the ex-
istence of a real peace. Since we know that war has always been the
usual way of settling conflicts between groups, we might ask how
peace is possible at all. It cannot be assumed that during the brief
periods of peace there were no conflicting interests between different
national, economic, and political groups. The answer seems to be
that, at least as far as the history of ancient and western civilization
is concerned, periods of peace were nothing but preparations for a

2 Ibid., p. 9. 3 Ibid.
coming war. Those who may doubt the validity of this pessimistic
interpretation of history should be reminded of the experiences of
their own lifetime. Anyone who grew up before the World War in
any of the central European states should have come to the convic-
tion that that period of peace was nothing but a preparation for the
World War. A casual glance at different national budgets, compul-
sory military service, and the different moves of the diplomatic
chess game must have convinced everyone of the validity of this
statement. Nobody who lived in central Europe after the World
War could have overlooked the fact that all these years were devoted
to a preparation for revenge, a preparation which increased in tempo
with the speed of a geometrical progression.

A student of European and ancient history can differentiate right-
ly only between periods of actual and latent war, the latter being
misleadingly called periods of peace. This statement can hardly be
refuted, no matter how disinclined we may be to accept it in this
simple formulation. We struggle against this depressing view be-
cause it is so difficult to look upon human events objectively without
wishful distortion. We easily confuse the state of affairs we should
like to have with existing conditions. In the light of this formulation
the history of civilized mankind is a history of wars interrupted by
preparations for more wars.

In contrast to this pessimistic and realistic evaluation of the past,
which is common among European historians, stands a more hopeful
attitude, frequently expressed by statesmen, publicists, and social
scientists in this country. These authors like to consider Europe a
congested area populated by people who are divided into small eco-
nomic, racial, and political units and, on account of this unfortunate
situation, live in permanent strife with each other. According to
them war is characteristic for that part of the world; that is to say, it
is the disease of the old world but is not necessarily a fundamental,
inevitable phenomenon of social life. The experience of this country,
where 122,000,000 people live in a large economic unit in peace with
each other and with neighboring nations, would indicate that under
the right conditions real peace is a possible state of affairs. The more
cynical observer may answer: “Of course peace is possible while
there are no adjacent groups with conflicting interests or the power
relations between them are extremely unequal. But wait until the
oceans no longer serve as imposing barriers. Asiatic, European, and
American nations will become, from the sociological point of view,
adjacent nations competing in the world-markets for world-trade.”
In fact, the American public is divided into two groups: those who
with a keen sense already anticipate that the protective value of
geographical distance will shrink and finally disappear, and those
who complacently continue to put their faith in the vastness of the
oceans. The introduction of compulsory military service and our ex-
penditures for national defense are the best proofs of the prevalence
of the more pessimistic view that peace is nothing but preparation
for war.

No matter how convincing these arguments may be, American
history could be considered as an experiment of nature demonstrat-
ing that peace which is not a preparation for war is a conceivable
condition of human affairs. In this continent, since the Revolution-
ary War and its aftermath, the War of 1812, not considering the
Civil War, there was no preparation for foreign wars and no standing
armies worth mentioning. The Mexican and Spanish wars were mere
incidental military operations. There was no emotional anticipation
of a coming war—quite different from the state of mind in which
people of Europe have been raised for centuries.

Since war is the more common phenomenon and real peace the
extremely rare exception, it seems more promising to approach the
problem of peace and war not by asking what are the causes of war
but by studying the causes or, more precisely, the conditions of
peace. If war is a permanent phenomenon of human history one
might more easily expect an understanding of its deeper roots if one
tries to establish those unusual conditions under which peace can
exist. Since the advent of dynamic psychology it is customary to
approach the problem of peace and war primarily from the point of
view of the individual. It is, however, quite obvious that one cannot
expect from the study of the individual’s psychological makeup to
establish those specific conditions under which nations can live be-
side each other peacefully, contrary to their habit of conducting wars
against each other. One cannot well assume that people deriving
from the same European stock here in America have, in a brief
period, changed their psychological structure to such a degree as to
explain the considerably long period of peace in this country. It is
obvious that those social conditions, both national and internation-
al, under which the same types of individuals live must be responsi-
ble for war and peace. Since war is the common state of affairs, the
question arises as to what those sociopolitical conditions are under
which a peaceful attitude among population and leaders will prevail
or, in other words, under which peaceful leaders and attitudes be-
come popular. In this approach we are considering for the moment
basic human nature as the constant factor and the sociological fac-
tors as the variables.

Contrary to a current view that war is the unavoidable manifesta-
tion of man’s innate destructiveness, we have good reason to believe
that both war and peace are compatible with human nature. In
order to demonstrate the validity of this view the example of the
Western Hemisphere appears promising, particularly the history of
the United States. It would seem that whenever organized groups
(in this case the individual states) live beside each other without
conflicting interests peace is possible. If in addition their interests
are complementary to each other (in this case the economic conquest
of a vast continent) the chances of a peaceful co-existence even in-
crease. Under such conditions it is possible for the adjacent groups
to fuse into one greater economic and political unit.

In the case of the Western Hemisphere the lack of conflicting in-
terests is the explanation of peaceful development. This is borne out
by the fact that as soon as a conflict of interests has arisen between
two more or less distinguishable parts of the country, as between the
South and the North, war became unavoidable. Of course the Civil
War was but a single interruption of a long and peaceful develop-
ment. The fact that the conflicting interests could not be adjusted
by peaceful negotiation and compromise but had to be decided by
the victory of the more powerful North led as an immediate result to
the unavoidable impoverishment of the vanquished South. Since
then a slow but gradual process of readjustment is in progress—quite
different from the usual post-war situations in European history,
where a peace settlement was nothing but the prelude to a war of
revenge.
Obviously there must be powerful irrational forces counteracting
the rational course of development which would lead to co-operation
and organization of neighboring groups. The example of post-war
Europe is most revealing as to the nature of these irrational forces.
Small economic units which formerly were united in a larger political
and economic framework became separated by the Treaty of
Trianon, although they lacked all necessary prerequisites for sepa-
rate existence. The treaties of Versailles and Trianon were the most
disastrous steps toward creating such a morbid state of affairs.
Small national units which had existed in the framework of the
Austro-Hungarian empire were split up into independent nations.
Instead of the rational needs of economic life, national pride
and unrealistic racial constructions became the basis of the new
order. This procedure was essentially the same as if the United
States were suddenly to be divided according to its national groups
into a little Czechoslovakia, Germany, Poland, Italy, Ireland, Eng-
land, and Palestine. Obviously, militant nationalism was the irra-
tional factor which hindered a peaceful reorganization of the Euro-
pean nations into an integrated politico-economic system.

All this would indicate that the process of social disintegration is
the direct effect of certain dynamically powerful but irrational emo-
tional factors hindering the creation of larger economic and social
entities which would allow people of different language and race to
live with each other in a peaceful co-operation.

If it were only a question of reason, it would not be difficult at all
to work out a plan of organization, in any given continent, which
would give different national units the security of economic and
national existence. It is not for objective rational reasons that the
Pan-Europe dream of a Briand, a Stresemann, or a Coudenhove-Kal-
lergi could not be realized. It is obvious that the recognition of these
irrational, emotional factors are of utmost importance. As Freud has
stated, an enemy which one does not see cannot be defeated. The
knowledge of those emotional factors which oppose a friendly and
rational organization of international relationships is the first step
toward understanding the problem of war and peace.

If real peace has ever existed in the history of mankind, which
seems somewhat questionable, these emotional obstacles must have
been absent during these periods. In order to find an answer we
should turn our attention to the rare periods of peace and compare
them with the usual state of war. History, however, does not give us
any opportunity for such a study. American history appears more
hopeful in this respect, but here again the objection might be raised
that the relatively long periods of peace in international affairs was
due to the geographical isolation of the United States and to the fact
that the power relationships between the states and the adjacent
nations have been so unequal. Furthermore, the conflict of interests
between these different national units are smaller than anywhere else.
The rarity of the population of the American continent may be
quoted as an added factor. It also must be considered that great
portions of this continent are still unexploited, which makes eco-
nomic expansion possible without creating conflicts of interest
among competing groups. As these favorable conditions are chang-
ing, as the uninhabited parts become populated, and the geographi-
cal isolation is diminishing, the possibility of war is increasing.

All this would indicate that it is not the lack of the disintegrating
irrational emotional forces which is responsible for a relatively peace-
ful state of affairs in the Western Hemisphere but the lack of suf-
ficiently strong conflicts. As far as such conflicts exist, the geographi-
cal obstacles against solving them by war are insuperable. If we ac-
cept Freud’s statement that the conflict of interests among mankind
is usually decided by the use of force, we should not be surprised to
see absence of war where the conflict of interests is not excessive or
where, owing to external circumstances, they cannot be settled by
war. Therefore the study of the Western Hemisphere as compared
with Europe does not offer a solution to our problem. As far as the
psychological factors are concerned, we must find another approach.
We have to look for an example of peaceful co-existence of human
beings in which the conflicts are not decided by the use of force, in
spite of the fact that there are conflicting interests, and the use of
force is not physically impossible.

Every well-organized national unit offers such an example.
Freud’s above-quoted statement, like most generalizations, is am-
biguous. He stated that a conflict of interest among mankind is usu-
ally decided by the use of force; but he obviously referred only to a
conflict of interests in international relationships and not to conflicts
between members of the same nation. Such conflicts usually are not
settled by the use of force—certainly not by warlike violence—but
by law. This discrepancy between the settling of intergroup con-
flicts and personal conflicts within a group is indeed an encouraging
fact. If man is able to live in a social system in which conflicting
interests are decided by mediation and compromise, as it is done all
over the civilized world and also in the so-called primitive societies,
it seems to be possible that such a peaceful organization could be
extended to regulate group relationships also.

Of course within a nation conflicting interests occasionally are
settled by violence—as in civil wars. But while in the history of in-
ternational relationship peace is the exception and war the rule, in
the internal life of a nation peace is the rule and civil war the excep-
tion. The solution to our question as to the conditions of peace ob-
viously lies in this contrast. Why do people accept a peaceful order
in their national life but revert to violence to settle their inter-
national conflicts? Einstein in his correspondence with Freud on this
problem seems to look primarily for an external reason. Internal
order is based on the enforcement of law. Since international law
cannot be enforced at present, international courts like the League
of Nations are doomed to failure. Law without power of enforcement
is ineffective. No international police force is conceivable at present
which could match the force of any powerful single nation.

Freud, on the other hand, is inclined to see the difficulty in the
biological nature of man—in his innate destructiveness. According
to him, destruction for its own sake is one of the strongest human
motive forces. The only condition under which human beings can
live peacefully is by deflecting this destructiveness to an outward
object. In a sense, therefore, national peace is dependent upon inter-
national wars. Unquestionably, both Einstein and Freud have much
in favor of their arguments, yet it seems to me neither of them gave a
fully satisfactory analysis of the problem.

It is easier to see the flaw in Einstein’s argument. The majority of
people do not need intimidation by police force in order not to com-
mit homicide or not to steal. Within a nation police force is not the
sole supporter of peace and order. Were it not for the internal psy-
chological control of the human conscience (superego), the existing
police force would not be able to maintain order. Police force is
needed only for checking the least adjusted members of society or
those who on account of their social status have the least ad-
vantages from social order. This internal inhibitory system, the con-
science, is not inherited but is the result of an educational process.
It is powerfully supported by religion. The force of this internal in-
hibition became so strong that in our modern wars the majority of
people have a genuine distaste for killing their fellowmen who belong
to another nation. It is partially external coercion and partly the
realization of the unwelcome necessity for violence which make men
fight. It is obvious, therefore, that the lack of enforcement of inter-
national law is not an ultimate obstacle against peace. If men be-
longing to different national units would be further domesticated so
that their consideration for the lives of people of other nations
would be equally as strong as that for their own compatriots, peace
would be possible. There is no reason to assume that the domestica-
tion can go only thus far and no farther. One could imagine a kind of
education which would lead to the development of an international
or world-conscience. Education, of course, is not a matter of individ-
ual action, and therefore such an education could be introduced only
after an international organization of nations is established. At pres-
ent the domestication of the human individual—his social conscience
—officially stops at the national boundaries. Therefore contempo-
rary man can only be complimented for the fact that his conscience
does not meticulously accept national boundaries, and only under
the influence of propaganda and often even of alcohol can he be
persuaded to kill.

From this perspective it would seem that only after historical
events have led to the extinction of small groups and their inclusion
into larger ones could a further step in the progress of human
domestication take place. In the history of nations this gradual ex-
tension of group boundaries can be clearly observed. Until as late as
the middle of the nineteenth century, Italy was not yet a national
entity but was divided into independent portions. For a long time
almost every city was a unit in itself, fighting the neighboring city.
The citizen was, in the original sense of the word, a member of a city
and not of a nation. Instead of nationalism there was the local pa-
triotism of members belonging to the same city. A transformation of
this particularistic state into a nation was accomplished as late as in
the second half of the last century. Fascism is obviously a last step
in the development of a national consciousness. Not much different
is the history of Germany, where only Hitler abolished the rudimen-
tary remnants of independence of the constituent parts of the Reich.
It scarcely can be considered as an accident that totalitarianism de-
veloped in just those two countries where national unity and con-
sciousness have developed later than in the rest of the great Euro-
pean nations.

This process of integration of more or less independent units within
a nation seems to follow the pattern that the powerful part becomes
dominant and subjugates the others. Gradually the difference be-
tween a dominant part, which is the crystallization point of the
union, and the rest of the new unit disappears. As soon as a single
German unit was formed out of Prussia, Saxony, Baden, Bavaria,
and Wiirttemberg, the crystallization point of this union, Prussia,
ceased to remain the leading portion. The country became one ho-
mogeneous state. In this sense the present European war appears as
the violent birth of a United States of Europe in which one dominant
part will subjugate the rest and thus serve as the crystallization
point of a new larger entity. The psychological expression of this
new state of affairs will necessarily be the development of a Euro-
pean nationalism in the place of a German, French, English, or
Spanish. The future historian of a not too remote age, whose na-
tionality will be “European,” will evaluate the present European
war in the same way as we today evaluate the centuries-long war be-
tween the cities of Venice, Genoa, Milan, Florence, Pisa, Rome, and
Naples. It is, of course, still an open question whether England or
Germany will be the crystallization point of this future Pan-Europe.

Thus, if we turn to historical events, we come to the conclusion
that peace can exist only between members of organized groups and
that the formation of such groups leads through wars and subjuga-
tion of the weaker by the stronger. A more just organization within
the new larger group is, then, a matter of later development. These
historical mass events are decisive and determine the later internal
changes in the individual members of the group. Human beings do
not become at first more social and then create larger social organiza-
tions, but they become forced into larger national units by wars and
subjugation, and only then do they become more social in adjusting
themselves to the life within this larger organization. After such
larger organizations have been established, the question of enforcing
the law does not exist any longer. Within a well-organized group
there is no difficulty in enforcing the law which protects—if not with
theoretical equality, yet to some degree at least—all members of the
group. Police and its internal ally, the conscience, together secure
social order.

One should not, of course, one-sidedly overlook the other aspect of
this process. The human material which is to become organized into
larger social units is of great significance. A creation of such a larger
entity is possible only if the process of domestication of the members
has advanced to a certain stage while still living in smaller groups.
This process of domestication is the basis of every group life; it starts
in early childhood. The overcoming of the oedipus complex is ob-
viously the first and most significant step in this development. It
means the adjustment of the individual to the first society—the
family. Also in the prehistoric past, the brothers’ renunciation of the
use of violence against the father and against one another was ob-
viously the first step toward the building of the first social cell—the
family—under the authority of the father. With the help of a similar
principle of marital tabus and renunciation of violence between male
competitors the next social unit, the clan, became possible. Later
clan spirit is gradually replaced by national solidarity. This is
the phase of social evolution in which the human race is at present.
In becoming a social being man at first must give up for the sake of
the other members of the family some of his personal narcissism.
Then he must abandon clan spirit (clan narcissism) and replace it
with patriotism (national narcissism). Obviously the next step to-
ward world-peace is overcoming nationalism and exchanging it for a
kind of highly diluted narcissism: an all-encompassing humanism.
In this progressive process of extension of self-love to object love,
every step consists in the desperate struggle to overcome the pre-
vious stage. Every psychoanalyst knows that in early life individual
narcissism is the greatest obstacle against accepting and recognizing
the rights of the other siblings. History shows that particularistic
clan spirit was the greatest obstacle against the creation of a unified
nation. The fight of the peers against the centralistic tendencies of
the kings in English and Hungarian history, the struggle of the
Italian cities under the leadership of one or two prominent families
for their independence, are the most convincing examples. Against
the rational necessity for the fusion of smaller units into greater ones,
there is the irrational tendency of the smaller units to maintain their
independent existence. This particularistic tendency is not fully
abandoned even after the smaller entities have been fused into a
higher organization. In times of stress, when the larger unit is ex-
posed to external attacks and is defeated, the dormant individualistic
tendencies of the formerly independent constituents become mobi-
lized and a process of disintegration sets in. The decline of the Aus-
tro-Hungarian empire is an exquisite example. It is only natural that
any organization will have little stability when the constituent parts
are dissatisfied because the mutual sacrifices which every member
has to make for the sake of social order are unequally distributed.
The cohesion of such an organization is secure only by the superior
suppressing force of the powerful exploiting group and not by the
co-operation of all the constituents. Only if the constituent groups
voluntarily give up their independent existence for the sake of
greater security and enjoy the advantages of the coalition, as in an
ideal democracy, will the larger social organism become a stable in-
stitution. It is obvious that such a democratic state requires a more
socialized kind of human material than any other social order based
on suppression and coercion. Only human material which has pro-
gressed far beyond the more primitive stages of personal, clan, and
class narcissism can live in a social order that is based on free consent
and enlightened self-interest. According to the testimony of history
such an advanced state of affairs can develop only gradually. At
first the constituent group must be forced into a larger social unit by
superior power of a sominant group.‘ Only then follows a further

4 Hitler with his astute political instinct is keenly aware of this historical principle.
He writes in Mein Kampf (New York: Reynal & Hitchcock, 1940): “Thus also the
founding of the German Reich was by itself not the result of some common intention
socialization of the personality in a long process of adjustment of the
individual to his new social climate.

The human material of the group which by conquest of the weaker
ones becomes the crystallization point of a larger entity is by no
means irrelevant. The future history of Europe will be entirely dif-
ferent if the coming Pan-Europa is organized under British or Ger-
man predominance. From a distant historical point of view the end
effect might be the same. The road to it, however, would certainly
be smoother and less tortuous in the first than in the second case.

This seems to be the answer to Einstein’s statement concerning
the difficulties of enforcing international law. This difficulty is mere-
ly a relative one. So long as independent Italian cities existed, there
was no way of enforcing the law which protected all citizens of the
Appenine Peninsula. As soon as this part of the world became organ-
ized into one national state, there was no longer any difficulty in
enforcing laws which insured peace and order within the new nation.

Now we may turn to Freud’s views concerning the innate destruc-
tiveness of man as the insuperable obstacle against peace. His de-
parture seems unassailable. The internal peace of a nation is possible
only at the price of war with the neighbor. Men must hate and de-
stroy something. Only if they have a common external object of
hate can they be saved from each other’s destructiveness. Leaders
know this instinctively, and, in order to avert revolution, they insti-
gate war. The question is whether this is a universal principle or is
true only under certain conditions.

We deal here obviously with a dynamic principle of collective life
which, like every dynamic principle, expresses a quantitative rela-
tionship. “Man is innately destructive—war is the manifestation of
destructiveness—ergo, man will always have to conduct wars” is the

along common ways but rather the result of a conscious—sometimes also unconscious
—wrestling for hegemony out of which struggle Prussia finally emerged victorious. ....
For who in German lands would seriously have believed two hundred years ago that
the Prussia of the Hohenzollerns and not Habsburg would some day become the germ
cell, founder and teacher of the new Reich?” (09. cit., pp. 754-55). And in another place
in discussing how federated states develop into a united state he says: “But the very
construction of the Reich did not take place on the basis of the free will of the identical
actions of the individual states, but as the effect of the hegemony of one State among
them, Prussia” (ébid., p. 831).
kind of scholastic deductive syllogism which may well serve as harm-
less intellectual gymnastics for those amateur philosophers who try
to revive prescientific thinking of the Middle Ages, but it is useless
for learning something about the complex phenomena and the world
surrounding us. Freud did not follow this philosophical procedure
which he so thoroughly disavowed in his writings. Although he as-
sumed that man has an innate destructiveness, he studied the mani-
festation of this destructiveness under different conditions and found
that this destructiveness might be diverted toward external objects,
thus allowing people within the group to maintain internal peace.
Where he did not go far enough into the differential analysis of the
problem was in discussing the relation of destructiveness to war.
Killing is certainly not the only manifestation of human aggression;
litigation by law in the defense of one’s own interests can also be
considered one of its expressions. Neither can a political campaign
be equated to war. Even intellectual endeavors to understand and
master the environment can be considered as sublimated manifesta-
tions of aggressive impulses. The mere fact that man has aggressive
impulses does not permit us to postulate that war is unavoidable.

This is not the place to discuss Freud’s problematic death-instinct
theory. The relationship of aggressiveness to self-preservation is
still, however, an open question. The existence of an innate destruc-
tiveness for its own sake, which goes beyond the limits of self-
preservation, has not been convincingly demonstrated. Not that
such a destructiveness for its own sake, in the form of sadism, would
not exist as a secondary phenomenon. There is more and more evi-
dence that sadism must be considered a secondary erotization of an
originally only self-preservative aggressiveness. It seems that in
morbid development, when large quantities of inhibited hostile im-
pulses accumulate, these may be drained by sadistic behavior which
serves merely as a gratification and not for self-preservation. Should
this view prove correct, there is hope that when individual interests
are well preserved by reasonable social order, international peace
is a possible state of affairs.

Obviously, democracy comes nearest to a peaceful solution of the
problem of maintaining social order within one nation; an interna-
tional league of nations organized along the principles of democracy
is at least a theoretically conceivable solution of international peace.
Of course such an international democratic organization of all the in-
habitants of the earth would mean the gradual disappearance of poli-
tical and economic boundaries between national or continental enti-
ties. We do not possess sufficient knowledge of sociodynamics to
predict that historical development will necessarily lead to a con-
tinuous enlargement of politico-economic units until all inhabitants
of the earth are organized under one system. History shows that,
apart from the tendency toward the emergence of large social enti-
ties, there is also in operation the opposite principle of disintegration
and separation leading to the breaking-up of empires. One after
another—the Roman Empire, the Holy Roman Empire, that of
Genghis Khan, of Islam, of the Hapsburgs, and of Napoleon—have
been dissolved. Possibly at present we are witnessing the dissolu-
tion of the British Empire. The estimation of the quantitative rela-
tionship between these upbuilding and disintegrating forces of his-
tory is beyond our present knowledge.

Peace is obviously the function of many factors—two of them out-
standing. Peace among large numbers of human beings is possible if
they are united in one large and well-integrated social organization,
usually under the leadership of one powerful dominant element.
This is the Pax Romana or Pax Britannica type of peace. The other
factor is represented by the technique by which conflicting interests
are settled among the members of one social organization and be-
tween different organizations. This technique, whether it is based on
violence or negotiation, does not depend on the innate qualities of
man but on his mentality, dependent upon the prevailing ideology
which influences the prevailing education. From this point of view
the democratic type of society and ideology seems to offer the great-
est chances toward peace. Pax Romana was based on the suppress-
ing force of that dominant power which was the crystallization point
of the larger organization. Because such peace is based primarily on
power, it is of temporary nature. At the beginning Pax Britannica
also was unquestionably based on superior force and only gradually
assumed a more democratic structure. When conflicting interests are
not settled by their free expression, negotiation and compromise, the
particularistic tendencies of the constituent parts, which originally
were independent, is great. The astonishing cohesion of the British
Empire, which we are witnessing at present, is due to the fact that
its constituent parts are members of the Empire by their own choice
and also because the whole Empire is threatened by a common en-
emy. Only a democratic, international organization of the world
would warrant lasting world-peace.

The experience of history does not entitle us to hope that such a
state of affairs, even if conceivable, could be achieved without at
first one powerful group subduing the weaker ones and coercing them
to participate in a larger organization. Later a gradual co-ordination
of conflicting interests may ensue. The further domestication of man
will be an adjustment of the individual to a new and more encom-
passing social organization which at first must be created by force.
The cardinal question is whether or not a democratic or an auto-
cratic nation will be the crystallization point of such a world-
organization. The League of Nations failed because it did not recog-
nize that at the beginning it must rely on armed force. At the begin-
ning a powerful nation or a group of nations must enforce inter-
national law by their superior force. At the beginning the league
cannot be based on theoretical justice or the equal right of all
participants. At first it must function as an enlightened benevolent
tyranny only to progress to the status of constitutional monarchy
and finally to democracy. The League of Nations was an anemic in-
stitution theoretically conceived in utter disregard for the dynamic
principles of history and mass psychology. A future league of na-
tions will have to accept the historical principle that at first only
with power can masses and groups be welded into a social organiza-
tion. Its armed force can be reduced to something like a police power
only after this new order has found an internal, psychological ally in
the form of an international conscience.

It is of great importance that the superior power enforcing the new
supernational organization should be a democracy, the most pro-
gressed form of social organization. The tragic paradox of history is,
however, that democracies, which should serve as the model of the
future supernational organization because of their nature, are averse
to revert to force. Totalitarian states, on the other hand, are full of
internal unresolved tensions and in order to survive are driven to-
ward dynamic expansive imperialism. Therefore they are destined
to create new supernational organizations. They are more likely to
make the first necessary step toward coalition by coercion. Their
ideology of force, suppression, and racial superiority, however, makes
them unsuited to create a stable organization of the subjected na-
tions. The only way out of this dilemma is that democracies finally
recognize their historical vocation to assume leadership toward a
new league of nations. This must be based at first both on justice
and on armed force, the latter to be discarded only gradually at the
same pace as the indispensable internal psychological ally in man’s
personality gains strength. This internal ally, a slowly growing prod-
uct of education, is an advanced form of humanism which does not
stop at economic, linguistic, or racial borders.

Cuicaco, ILLINOIS
