Mentality of Racial Hybrids

Author(s): Robert E. Park

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 36, No. 4 (Jan., 1931), pp. 534-551
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2767 160

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:40 UTC
MENTALITY OF RACIAL HYBRIDS"

ROBERT E. PARK
University of Chicago

ABSTRACT

Racial hybrids are one of the natural and inevitable results of migration and the-
consequent mingling of divergent racial stocks. The motives bringing peoples of di-
vergent races and cultures together are, in the first instance, economic. In the long
run, economic intercourse enforces more intimate personal and cultural relations, and
eventually amalgamation takes place. When the peoples involved are widely differ-
ent in culture and in racial characteristics, and particularly when they are distin-
guished by physical marks, assimilation and amalgamation take place very slowly.
When the resulting hybrid peoples exhibit physical traits that mark them off and dis-
tinguish them from both parent-stocks, the mixed bloods are likely to constitute a dis-
tinct caste or class occupying a position and status midway between the two races of
which they are composed. The mixed bloods tend everywhere to be, as compared
with the full bloods with whom they are identified, an intellectual and professional
class. The most obvious and generally accepted explanation of the superiority of the
mixed bloods is that the former are the products of two races, one of which is bio-
logically inferior and the other biologically superior. In the case of the Negro-white
hybrids in the United States, other and less obvious explanations have been offered.
It has been pointed out, for example, that the mulatto is the result of a social selec-
tion which began during the period of slavery, when the dominant whites selected for
their concubines the most comely, and presumably the superior, women among the
Negroes. There is, however, the fact to be considered that in a society where racial
distinctions are rigidly maintained, the mixed blood tends to be keenly conscious of
his position. He feels, as he frequently says, the conflict of warring ancestry in his
veins. The conflict of color is embodied, so to speak, in his person. His mind is the
melting pot in which the lower and the higher cultures meet and fuse.

I, HYBRIDIZATION
Racial hybrids seem to be one of the invariable accompaniments
and consequences of human migration. Hybridization is probably,
therefore, a mathematical function of the geographic mobility of
peoples. At any rate, miscegenation seems to take place, other
things being equal, more rapidly than elsewhere on the frontiers of
an advancing civilization; in seaport cities, and in commercial cen-
ters, where people of divers cultures meet and mingle with more
than ordinary freedom; and where, under the influence of a mobile,
changing, and cosmopolitan population, custom is relaxed and the
traditional distinctions of class and caste not rigorously enforced."*
* An address delivered at the Fourth Pacific Science Congress, held at Batavia-
Bandoeng, Java, May 16 to 25, 1929.
*“ See Dr. Arthur Ruppin, The Jews of Today (New York, 1913), chap. x, “In-

termarriage.” .
It is true that marital statistics in the United States seem to support the opposite

534
No effort has been made, so far as I know, to determine the pre-
cise condition under which hybridization actually takes place. Some
of these conditions are of a rather subtle psychological nature, and
not easily accessible to observation and description. However, the
interbreeding of races is ordinarily one of the incidents of cultural
contact, and amalgamation is, as a matter of fact, one of the indices,
perhaps the ultimate index, of the extent to which cultural fusion in
any given case has actually taken place.

The common market place has always been the natural meeting
place of peoples of different races and cultures. Men come together
first of all to effect an exchange of goods and services. As it is be-
cause men are useful to another that they come together at all, so it
is because they are different from one another that they are useful.

When peoples of divergent racial stocks come together to main-
tain a permanent, common life, a modus vivendi is established, in
the first instance, on the basis of economic necessity. Under these
circumstances people of divergent racial stocks ordinarily live, as
do the gypsies in our modern world, in relations that are symbiotic
rather than social. In that case they treat one another as utilities
rather than as persons. It is possible for races to live indefinitely in
such a condition of symbiosis, contiguous in space, but culturally
isolated; each group in its own world, and neither enjoying or seek-
ing status in the other. This seems to be the situation in which all
pariah people live; but it is true, to some degree, of every people

thesis. They indicate that, so far as European immigrants are concerned, intermar-
riage of the immigrant and native population is taking place more rapidly in rural
communities than in cities. This is due in part to the fact that the so-called “new
immigration,” in which biological assimilation takes place slowly, is very largely lo-
cated in the cities. On the other hand, the “old immigration,” which is more closely
related racially and culturally to the native population, is largely located in the small
towns and in the open country. Furthermore, intermarriage in the case of the old
immigration is more likely to take place between aliens and natives of the same ethnic
stocks, German immigrants, for example, marrying German-Americans; Irish, Irish-
Americans. Under these circumstances, intermarriage between native- and foreign-
born peoples is not an accurate index of the blending of divergent racial stocks. Of
the older immigration the Irish have the lowest rate of intermarriage, 299.5 for every
1,000 marriages. The Germans, with a ratio of 704.7 exogamous unions for every
1,000 marriages, have the highest. In every case, however, the rate of intermarriage
is higher among the older than the new immigration (Census Monograph 7: Immi-
grants and Their Children [1927]).
that maintains or seeks to maintain an independent cultural life and
tradition, while occupying the territory and participating in the
economic life of another and different cultural group. This was, and
to some extent is today, the case of the Jew, when, in the very center,
at the very core of a national and cultural life not quite his own, he
continued to live in his ghetto more or less an alien and a stranger
to the community about him.”

It is evident that man’s biological and his cultural interests are
not always in harmony, and that social and political organizations
are frequently either a compromise or, to speak in sociological
terms, an accommodation in the attempt to reconcile them. Slavery,
caste, and even social classes may be regarded, in one of their as-
pects, as devices for maintaining and enforcing this symbiotic rela-
tion, and at the same time of limiting more intimate and personal
contacts.

Social distances are, however, difficult to maintain, and the
measures intended to preserve them are invariably only partially
successful. Furthermore, sexual interest, which is still one of the
most powerful motives in human conduct, operates independently
and often counter to the interests represented by the organization
of society. Romantic love, which is proverbially interested in the
exotic and unfamiliar, not infrequently crosses racial barriers, and
is never completely inhibited by class and caste taboos.*

It follows from what has already been said that hybridization
does not proceed everywhere and always with the same facility and
at the same tempo. Statistics of intermarriage of immigrant and

? Louis Wirth, The Ghetto (Chicago, 1928), chap. xiv, “The Social Significance of
the Ghetto.” See also Ludvig Lewisohn, Israel (New York, 1925).

*It is psychologically true that only the unfamiliar and not completely controlled
is interesting. This is the secret of the interest of modern scientific pursuit and of
games. States of high emotional tension are due to the presentation of the unfamiliar
—i.e., the unanalyzed, the uncontrolled—to the attention. And although the intimate
association and daily familiarity of family life produce affection, they are not fa-
vorable to the genesis of romantic love. Cognition is so complete that no place is left
for emotional appreciation. Our common expressions “falling in love” and “love at
sight” imply, in fact, unfamiliarity; and there can be no question that men and
women would prefer at present to get mates away from home, even if there were no
traditional prejudice against the marriage of near kin (W. I. Thomas, Sex and Society
[Chicago, 1907], pp. 196-97). See also Morris T. Price, Christian Missions and Ori-
ental Civilization: A Study in Cultural Contact, pp. 286 f.
native stocks in the United States indicate that assimilation and
amalgamation are taking place at different rates in different groups.
In fact, the rate of intermarriage is different in every different na-
tionality.

An investigation based upon 79,704 marriages in New York
City, out of a total of 71,356 for the years 1908-12, inclusive,
showed that the intermarriage rates for the Jews and the Negroes
are less than those of all other national or racial groups.*

The intermarriage ratio of the Negroes born in the United States
was 1.17 for every 100 marriages. For Jews born in the United
States, it was 4.26. The author’s comment is that “just as differ-
ences of religion explain the low proportion of intermarriages be-
tween Jews and non-Jews, so differences in color account for the
small proportion of fusion between Negro and the white.’”

Not only does interbreeding take place at different rates for dif-
ferent racial stocks, but the incidental consequences of interbreed-
ing need to be sharply distinguished. For example, when Jews inter-
marry with Christians, their children become, nominally at least,
either Jews or Christians. Under ordinary circumstances the large
proportion become Christians.®

On the other hand, when Negroes interbreed with other races,
the offspring of such unions do not have the same freedom of choice.
The mixed bloods are either, as in the case of the mulattoes of the
United States, incontinently classed as Negroes, irrespective of the
degree of the racial mixture, or they occupy, as half-castes and
mixed bloods, a position somewhere between the two. In any case,

*M. A. Drachsler, Intermarriage in New York City: A Statistical Study of the
Amalgamation of European Peoples (New York, 1921).

*It is evident that relative numbers and the sex ratio are factors that need to be
considered here. In Copenhagen, where 89 per cent of the Jews of Denmark live,
there are 68 mixed marriages to every 100 Jews. But in this instance the proportion
of Jews in the total population is very small. A. F. Stone (Studies in the American
Race Problem), quoting the censuses of 1860, 1870, 1880, and 1890, where separate
enumeration of the mulattoes was made, says, “The results disclose the fact that
where the proportion of negroes to the whites is lowest, the proportion of the mu-
Tattoes to the total negroes was highest.”

* Prussian statistics of The Religion of Children of Mixed Marriages Living with
Their Parents show that, according to the census of 1905, of 7,016 children of mixed

matriages, 1,591, or 22.67 per cent, elected to be Jews, but 5,229, or 74.53 per cent,
were classed as Christians. See Ruppin, of. cit., pp. 175 f.
the mulatto, conscious of his mixed origin, unwilling to accept the
inferior status of his Negro ancestors, invariably constitutes, even
in the United States, a distinct racial category and a separate social
class. The consequence is that the mulatto is never completely
identified with, or.assimilated to, either one race or the other.

Fouillée says: “In discussions of the race problem there is one
factor of supreme importance which has been so far disregarded—
to wit, the opinion or idea which a race has of itself and the influ-
ence exerted by this idea.”””

Physical and racial marks, when they become the basis of class
or caste consciousness, acquire a unique significance because they
cannot be eradicated. A man may change his costume or his speech,
but he cannot change his color.

It is a notorious fact that class and caste distinction have been
very largely based upon racial differences. Visibility, to use the
vocabulary of the navy bulletins, seems to determine not merely
the existence of caste and class distinctions, but the vigor with
which the discriminations which correspond to them will be en-
forced. When the physical differences between races are so pro-
nounced that the hybrids constitute a distinguishable physical
type, they almost invariably occupy a separate social category and
are recognized as a distinct class or caste.

The mulatto, the name given without distinction to all Negro-
white hybrids of the United States, is not, to be sure, in all cases
distinguishable either from the black man, on the one hand, or the
white man, on the other. He is, however, everywhere recognized
as a distinct class, even though his position and his status are dif-
ferent in every country in which mixed bloods are sufficiently nu-
merous to play an independent réle.

It is, in fact, the r6le which the mulatto plays, and the position
that he occupies in relation to the black man and the white, that
determines in every case the character of the existing race relations
and the local race problem.

In the United States the mulattoes are on the whole, with some
important exceptions, the cultural advanced guard and the leaders

‘ Alfred Fouillée, “Race from the Sociological Standpoint,” Papers on Inter-Ra-
cial Problems, ed. G. Spiller (London, 1911).
of the Negro people. The two most eminent figures among Negroes
in the United States, Booker T. Washington, and W. E. B. du Bois,
were both mixed bloods. In recent years the Negroes have devel-
oped a literature dealing exclusively with Negro life. Most of the
contributors to this literature are mulattoes, but the first writer to
gain general recognition, Paul Lawrence Dunbar, was a full-
blooded Negro.

In the West Indies, and particularly in those islands where the
Negroes are in the majority, the mixed bloods are classed as “‘col-
ored,” and enjoy a more or less independent status. They are large-
ly represented in business, in the professions, and in the so-called
“white collar” jobs, and they constitute a respectable middle class
between the dominant white officials and the black peasantry. In
South America and particularly in Brazil, where Negroes and mixed
bloods constitute more than 60 per cent of the population, there is,
strictly speaking, no color line. Nevertheless, here, as elsewhere,
the white man is invariably at the top, and the black man and the
native Indian are at the bottom. Lighter-colored mixed bloods oc-
cupy the middle positions, and a successful black man generally
insures his own status and that of his children by marrying a lighter-
colored woman. As Lacerda puts it: “The mulatto himself en-
deavors, by marriage, to bring back his descendants to the pure
white types,” and “The marriages between metis and whites are no
longer disdained as they formerly were.” The mixed blood rises by
a process of social and sexual selection, “which removes from the
descendants of the metis all the characteristic features of the black
race.””

In South Africa, where racial antagonism is more intense than it
is even in the United States, the situation is a little confused. The
distinction between the hybrid people and the native blacks is
everywhere maintained, but the “colored people,” as the mixed
bloods are called, occupy a higher status in Cape Colony than they
do in the other provinces. In general, the situation in Cape Colony
approaches that in Jamaica and other West Indian Islands under
English domination. In Natal, however, and particularly in the

*Dr. Jean Baptiste de Lacerda, “The Metis, or Half-Breeds, of Brazil,” ibid.
II. THE MENTALITY OF THE MULATTO

I have discussed in some detail the conditions under which hy-
bridization ordinarily takes place and the réle which the mixed
bloods ordinarily play in the community in which they find them-
selves, because I am convinced, as will appear a little later, that
what I have called the mentality of the racial hybrid—that is to say,
his peculiar mental bias, the character of the intelligence which he
displays, and the general level of the intellectual life he has achieved
—is very largely due to the social situation in which his mixed ori-
gin inevitably puts him. He is biologically the product of divergent
racial stocks, but just because of that fact he is, at the same time,
the cultural product of two distinct traditions. He is, so to speak,
a cultural as well as a racial hybrid.

There have been numerous attempts in recent years to determine
with some precision, on the basis of intelligence tests, the native
ability of the Negro as compared with other racial stocks. These
investigations, in spite of the industry and ingenuity with which
they have been carried on, remain inconclusive, largely because of
the difficulties in distinguishing between the factors of nature and
nurture, of innate ability and cultural opportunity. For this and
other reasons, the results obtained have turned out to be capable
of several different and inconsistent interpretations.

In general, however, the intelligence tests have shown that at the
present moment the intellectual niveau of the Negro is consistently
below that of the white man. On the other hand, the same tests
have shown the intelligence quotient of the urban population to be
higher than that of the rural, that of the native white to be superior
to that of a foreigner, and the mental grade of both native-white and
Negro populations to be higher in the northern than in the southern
states.’°

° Maurice S. Evans, Black and White in South East Africa: A Study in Sociology
(New York, 1911), chap. x, “The Asiatic and Coloured Sub-problem,” p. 283-309.
See also Raymond Leslie Buell, The Native Problem in Africa (New York, 1928),
Vol. I: South Africa, pp. 58-155.

* Carl C. Brigham, Study of American Intelligence (Princeton, 1923). See also
G. O. Ferguson, “White and Colored Schools of Virginia as Measured by the Ayers
When attempts have been made to distinguish between the intel-
lectual capacities of pure and mixed bloods, the results obtained
have generally shown that the mulattoes were superior to the Ne-
groes. In all cases, however, the literate members of both races
made a better showing than the illiterates, and the literate Negroes
ranked higher than the illiterate whites. The whole question of the
intelligence tests, so far as they bear upon the comparative innate
mental capacities of the black man and the white, have been care-
fully and critically reviewed by Edward Byron Reuter in his vol-
ume, The American Race Problem: A Study of the Negro.™

Summing up the results of the United States Army tests upon
Negroes and whites made during the mobilization of the Army in
1917, Dr. Reuter says:

Certain . . . . facts of interest and significance appear as the data of the
examinations are studied. In all cases the literate members of every race made
a better showing than the illiterates. Irrespective of the section of the country,
the literate Negroes ranked higher than the illiterate whites. The Northern
Negroes very greatly surpassed the Italians in America. In the Alpha tests the
New York Negroes made approximately the same ranking as the Alabama
whites, while in the Beta tests the New York Negroes ranked approximately
nine points superior to the Alabama whites. That is, the New York Negroes,
on the basis of the tests, and in whatever the tests measure, are equal to or
slightly superior to the whites of Alabama. Very clearly the accident of a
Southern birth is a determining element in intelligence, as measured by the
Army tests.

This means that the tests made to determine innate racial ca-
pacity may be, and possibly should be, interpreted as demonstrat-
ing that intelligence, so far as it is at present possible to measure it,
is due to “increased education, greater freedom in social contact,
greater incentives, higher economic status,” rather than to innate

Index,” School and Society, XII (1920), 171-74; “The Psychology of the Negro, an
Experimental Study,” Archives of Psychology (New York, April, 1916), No. 36. See
also M. J. Mayo, “The Mental Capacity of the American Negro,” ibid., IV, No. 28
(1913). See also Barbara Stoddard Burke, “A Summary of Literature on the Deter-
mination of the Intelligence Quotient and the Educational Quotient,” Twenty-sev-
enth Year Book of the National Society for the Study of Education (1928).

* Op. cit. (New York, 1927), pp. 91-92. See also Margaret Mead, “The Methodol-
ogy of Racial Testing: Its Significance for Sociology,” American Journal of Sociolo-
gy, XXXI, No. 5 (March, 1926), 657-67.
and unalterable traits, as other interpreters of the results have con-
tended.

If attempts to measure the native intelligence of Negroes have
failed to show the differences that were expected, there is, never-
theless, no question at all in regard to the actual superiority of the
mulatto in comparison to the Negro, provided superiority is meas-
ured by present achievements and by the relative status of each in
the existing social order. Everywhere the mixed blood has, with
certain outstanding exceptions, outclassed the Negro. Whatever
estimate future investigators may put upon the native ability of
either racial group, and without reference to what the future may
show, the mixed blood as a class has shown himself more enterpris-
ing, and his progress, accordingly, has been more rapid. Not only
in the learned professions and in politics, but particularly in litera-
ture and the expressive arts, the mulatto has outdistanced the Ne-
gro. This is perhaps less true in South Africa and the West Indies
than it is in South America and the United States. Speaking of the
metis of South America, Lacerda says:

No one, however, can dispute that they are keenly intelligent and have a
disposition for letters and science, and a fairly political capacity. The metis of
Brazil have given birth down to our own time to poets of no mean inspiration,
painters, sculptors, distinguished musicians, magistrates, lawyers, eloquent
orators, remarkable writers, medical men, and engineers, who have been un-
rivalled in their technical skill and professional ability. As politicians they are
clever, insinuating, and very acute in profiting by any favourable opportunity
to secure a position; they are usually energetic and courageous in the struggle,
in which they use every weapon with equal zest.

Even in Haiti, where the black man first gained his personal free-
dom and his national independence, a relatively small number of
mixed bloods, constituting less than 10 per cent of the whole popu-
lation, hold most of the public offices and carry on most of the pro-
fessions.*”

Here, as elsewhere, however, the mixed bloods have had no
monopoly of the superior positions. The black man who succeeds
in demonstrating superior ability is almost certain to be adopted
into the mulatto aristocracy. If he then marries, as he usually does,

* Lothrop Stoddard, The French Revolution in San Domingo (New York, 1914).
See also The Magic Isle (New York, 1928).
a mulatto vife, his children will inherit, by that fact, the superior
status of the mixed blood.

The disposition of the black man who has achieved distinction
to marry into the mulatto class, referred to by Lacerda in his “Ob-
servations on the Metis of Brazil,” is so characteristic of the Negro
in the United States that it has been maintained that the superiority
of the mulatto is due in large part, at least, to social and sexual se-
lection.”

This would seem to indicate that Negro aristocracy, like that of
the English, is maintained in what is probably the only way any
aristocracy can in the long run be maintained, namely, by syste-
matically recruiting its members from the ranks of the inferior
classes. However the mulatto may have achieved his present su-
periority, there seems to be no question that it exists and can be
measured as soon as a satisfactory criterion of superiority can be
found. In the study of the mulatto to which reference has already
been made, Dr. E. B. Reuter undertook this task. He collected from
all available sources a list of persons who were recognized by Ne-
groes themselves as in some way exceptional. The lists he obtained
in this way constitute a kind of Negro Who’s Who."*

The inquiry as finally made took into consideration the relative
status of 4,267 persons, of whom 614 were men and 3,650 were
women, all of them persons rated by Negroes themselves as in some
sense exceptional. Of this number it was found that 447 were full
bloods, and 3,820 were mulattoes. This means that while the ratio
of full bloods to mixed bloods in the Negro population at the time

*«The mulatto group continually is being improved by the addition to it of the
best blood of the Negro race. The black man of ability, in almost every case, marries
into the mulatto caste; and his children, with whatever of their father’s superior
mentality they inherit, are mulattoes. So far as his superiority is inherited, it becomes
an asset to the mulatto group. The black man of greatest ability, perhaps, .of any
black man in the race is married to a light-colored mulatto woman. The most widely
known black man of the race has a wife who is near white. The black man who ap-
proached nearer to genius than any other man the race has produced, married a light
mulatto. The rule is almost without an exception that the black man of consequence
marries into the mulatto caste. The mulatto group thus, on the assumption of the
transmission of superior mental capacity, tends to become not only a culturally but a
biologically superior group” (Edward Byron Reuter, The Mulatio in the United
States [Boston, 1918], pp. 396-97).

* Ibid., p. 186.
Ill. THE MULATTO AS A PERSONALITY TYPE

It is often said of the mulattoes, as of mixed bloods generally,
that they inherit the vices of both parent-races and the virtues of
neither.** It is, however, notoriously difficult to assess moral quali-
ties, particularly since traits which under certain circumstances
may be regarded as vices are under other circumstances reckoned
as virtues.

It is, in any case, interesting that there are, or seem to be, char-
acteristics which, whether they are the results of one kind of cross-
ing or another, are attributed to mixed bloods as such. It suggests,
what has indeed been asserted, that the mixed blood, without re-
spect to his racial origin and merely because of the réle he is called
upon to play, constitutes a distinct personality type. Mulattoes, as
a class, exhibit certain personality traits which distinguish them
from Negroes, with whom they are identified in the United States
and South Africa, as well as from the whites, with whom they are

* “There is a widely accepted theory that the result of a union between white and
black, or indeed between white and any coloured and backward people, is a breed
which seems to combine all the weaknesses and vices of both parent stocks and none
of the virtues of either. This does not seem to me to apply in the case of these Eur-
Africans. Physically they are a fine people, in some cases with a colour and complex-
ion distinctly attractive, not the sickly yellow of many other half-breeds, but a light
brown with a tinge of red; both men and women often large, robust, well set up,
with a tendency to corpulence, and with good features. They do not often display
the energy and will power of their fathers, but to some extent this is due to lack of
opportunity, their undefined status and anomalous position, and the deadening influ-
ence of their narrow and restricted environment. In any case they do not substan-

tiate the somewhat cynical generalization I have quoted, for their general conduct is
good, and they do not seem to have any specially vicious tendencies” (Evans, of. cit.,

P. 300).
disposed to identify themselves elsewhere.*° They are, as I have
said, more enterprising than the Negroes, more restless, aggressive,
and ambitious. The Negro, by contrast, is described by one who has
known them on the plantations in the South as “docile, tractable and
unambitious,” and invariably contented and happy “when free from
the influence of the mulatto and the white man.” The author is de-
scribing a character of the Negro peasant with whom the black man
is ordinarily identified.””

The mulatto and the mixed blood are often sensitive and self-
conscious to an extraordinary degree. They do not have, on the
other hand, the insouciance and naiveté which makes the Negro
invariably so ingratiating and agreeable a companion. Mulattoes,
also, are keenly aware of the defects of the Negro, but because their
status is so intimately bound up with his, they are not able to view
these defects with the same objectivity and tolerance as the white
man does.**

One of the consequences of his more intense self-consciousness is
that the mulatto lives at a higher tension than the Negro. He is
more intelligent because, for one thing, he is more stimulated, and,
for another, takes himself more seriously.’®

We are bound to recognize the fact that intelligence, like con-
sciousness, is an incident of action, and the intellectual attainment
of an individual or a race is a function of their activities. Restless-
ness, while not identified with thought, and not in any sense a sub-
stitute for it, is nevertheless the first and most elementary response

*. B. Reuter, “The Personality of the Mixed Blood,” Publication of the Ameri-
can Sociological Society, XXII, 52-59.

* Alfred H. Stone, “The Mulatto Factor in the Race Problem,” Atlantic Monthly,
XCI, 658-62. See also Stone, Studies in the American Race Problem.

*See W. H. Thomas, The American Negro: What He Was, What He Is, and
What He May Become, for a frank and candid expression of the attitude of the mu-
latto toward the Negro at the date this volume was published (1901). It must be re-
membered, however, that attitudes change and, with the gradual rise of the Negro,
the traditional attitude of the mulatto toward him has been greatly modified.

* See a paper by W. E. B. du Bois, “The Talented Tenth,” in the volume, The
Negro Problem, by Booker T. Washington and others. This is a plea for the higher
education of the Negro. It is based on the general conception that the Negro masses
can only hope to improve their status as a result of the advances made by the so-called
“talented tenth.” This talented tenth, however, was composed then, as it is now, very
largely of mixed bloods.
to a problematical situation that requires reflection. The restless-
ness, aggressiveness, and what may perhaps be described as the
general egocentric behavior of the mulatto as compared to the Ne-
gro may, and probably does, have a temperamental basis. They are
usually attributed, sometimes by the mulattoes themselves, to the
infusion of the blood of the dominant race. These lines are from a
poem entitled “The Mulatto to His Critics,” which at once reflects
temper and explains, in terms of popular psychology, the tempera-
ment of the mulatto.

Ashamed of my race?

And of what race am I?

I am many in one.

Through my veins there flows the blood

Of Red Man, Black Man, Briton, Celt and Scot,

In warring clash and tumultuous riot.?°

Temperament in the case of the mulatto has, however, been rein-
forced by tradition—tradition that goes back to the days of slavery
and life on the plantation. The mulatto slaves claimed and were
granted privileges on account of their color. Frances Kemble, in her
reminiscences of life on a Georgia plantation, relates that she was
accosted one day by a mulatto woman who wanted to be put in some
other form of work than field labor. She stated that hoeing in the
fields was particularly hard on her “on account of her color,” and
then explained that “being a mulatto she considered field labor a
degradation.”’*

Anyone at all familiar with the records of plantation life will re-
call numerous incidents which clearly, though quite unconsciously,
reveal the fact that the mulatto was, so to speak, the favored child,
the “white-haired boy” of the plantation.

The mulatto made a better appearance than the Negro and was
chosen for that reason, as well as for others, to be the house servant.
In the homes of well-to-do planters he acquired the manners of the
superiors with whom he was associated. The mulatto slaves, partly
because they were so largely house servants, and sometimes the
children of their master, were the first to be emancipated. Of the

Joseph S. Cotter, Jr., in Negro Poets and Their Poems (Washington, D.C.,
1923), by Robert T. Curlin.

* Frances A. Kemble, Residence on a Georgia Plantation, p. 194.
Negroes in the southern states in 1860, but 10 per cent were free.
On the other hand, of the mulattoes, 40 per cent were free.”

Mulattoes, partly because they were the first to gain their free-
dom, were very largely concentrated in cities, in both the South
and the North.”* Some of them, particularly in the port cities of the
southern states—Charlestown, Savannah, Mobile, New Orleans—
were sufficiently well to do to be themselves owners of slaves and
thus able to give their children the advantages of a relatively su-
perior education, either abroad or in the northern states. In Charles-
town and in New Orleans there was and is a colored aristocracy
composed of these mixed bloods and their descendants. In spite of,
or just because of, the fact that they were so generally the favored
class among the slaves, the mulattoes, in proportion to their num-
bers, seem to have furnished a larger quota of fugitive slaves. It
was from these fugitive slaves that the ranks of the antislavery so-
cieties in the North were recruited. Among these fugitive slaves the
most conspicuous was Frederick Douglas, himself a mulatto, a dis-
tinguished orator, and the first man of Negro blood to achieve a
national reputation.

The mulatto and the mixed blood are, for the reasons I have de-
scribed, the product of a double inheritance, biological and cultural,
that is different from that of the black man. If the mulatto displays
intellectual characteristics and personality traits superior to and
different from those of the black man, it is not because of his bio-
logical inheritance merely, but rather more, I am inclined to be-
lieve, because of his more intimate association with the superior
cultural group.

Furthermore, the mixed blood, with the indubitable evidence in
his features and in the color of his skin of his kinship with the domi-
nant white race, was bound to reflect that whatever justification
there was for holding the black man in a position of permanent in-

See Reuter, The Mulatto, p. 113, where the census figures for 1850 are recorded.

* Tn Savannah, Georgia, in 1860, 18.1 per cent of the Negro population were mu-
lattoes; in the rest of the state the proportion of the mixed to pure bloods was 8.2.
In Charlestown, S.C., the proportion of mixed to pure bloods was 28.2; the rest of the
state was 5.5. In New Orleans 48.9 per cent of the Negro population was mulatto,
and in the rest of the state the proportion of the mixed to pure bloods was 11.0. See
ibid., p. 115.
subordination, it did not apply to the same extent to the brown. The
black man might dream of a return to Africa, to the land of his
fathers, in order to set up there an independent state where he might
work out his own salvation and that of his race. But such future
could not appeal with the same force to the mixed blood, particu-
larly since his father was in most instances a white man, while his
mother was frequently an Indian. As a matter of fact, the amount
of Indian blood in a mulatto is considerable, much larger than is
generally recognized, and the brown man has, very naturally, clung
to the traditions of his white and Indian ancestor. All this has con-
tributed to make him a very different man physically and culturally
from the Negro and, above all, to give him a very different concep-
tion of himself. This is, in part at least, the basis of that restless-
ness and instability to which reference is so frequently made in
writings on the subject of mixed races.

So far as the existing intellectual superiority of the mixed bloods
requires an explanation other than that of heredity, I am disposed
to find it in the stimulating influences of his unique environment.
The mulatto shares more or less completely the life-experiences of
two unassimilated races. He is not able, for that reason, to identify
himself completely with either. The situation is at once anomalous
and untenable, and it imposes upon the mulatto, foremostly and
before all others, the task of finding a solution. This task, which is,
for the mixed blood, so intimate and personal a matter, is at the
same time difficult enough to call into action all his energies. The
race has, in fact, become, in the United States at least, the center

* Lacerda is convinced that mixed bloods frequently achieve an intellectual su-
periority which cannot be explained by heredity. He said: “Galton’s deductions in
regard to hybridity in animals cannot be wholly applied to human half-breeds. In
the case of man there is an inheritance of moral and intellectual qualities that follows
no fixed and absolute rules. Under the influence of agencies of which we do not know
the nature, the intellectual qualities often reach, in the mixed progeny of the white
and black, a degree of superiority which cannot be explained in terms of heredity,
either remote or proximate. Some unknown force gives rise in them to an intelli-
gence that is capable of developing to a pitch that neither of the parents could reach.
It is, in fact, common to find, as the offspring of a white of very mediocre intelli-
gence, mated with a negress of the lowest grade of culture, an individual of consid-
erable intellectual power; just as if one of the effects of crossing in the case of man

was precisely to improve the intelligence, or the moral and reflective qualities which
distinguish individuals of the two races crossed” (p. 380).
and focus of the intellectual life of the whole Negro race. It has so
completely absorbed the interest and attention of a certain number
of the intellectuals of the race as to become to them an obsession.

It is inevitable that an interest so dominating and actual should
have a profound influence, not only upon the intelligence, but upon
the personality of the mixed blood, who is, by his very origin, more
directly concerned than anyone else. It is certainly true of the
mixed bloods of the United States, who have achieved real distinc-
tion, that they have often displayed a degree of intelligence of which
their parents were apparently quite incapable. This is eminently
true in the case of Frederick Douglas and Booker T. Washington,
who in their day and time were the two most eminent leaders of
their race. Both were born in slavery and had, for that reason, very
little opportunity for an education of a formal sort. Both were, no
doubt, men of superior native intelligence, but it was the conjunc-
ture of events and the réles which each in his time was called upon
to play that enabled them to achieve the distinction and exercise the
influence upon national affairs which they actually did. It was in
their tasks, and in the association and activities which these tasks
imposed, that these men gained their education.”*

It has been the disposition of the mixed bloods, wherever they
have been denied the status of the dominant race, to compensate
themselves by withdrawing from association with the Negro and
establishing a separate caste. Where they have succeeded in com-
pletely segregating themselves, as they have in some instances in
South Africa and the United States, they have either deteriorated,
physically and culturally, or they have at best remained stationary
and not shared in the general economic and cultural progress of the
race as a whole. This is true of the little mulatto aristocracies that
established themselves in Charlestown and New Orleans before the
Civil War. It is particularly true of those little isolated communi-
ties of mixed Indian, Negro, and white populations—peoples that
established themselves in the foothills of the Blue Ridge Moun-
tains of Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee,
or in other settlements on the outskirts of civilization in other parts

* See Booker T. Washington, My Larger Education, and Frederick Douglas, My
Life and Times.
of the southern states. These communities of free Negro and In-
dian origin withdrew themselves during slavery days from inti-
mate association, not only with the black man, but with the white,
in order to maintain their freedom and to escape identification with
the despised free-Negro class. They now frequently claim to be
white but are not accepted as such.

In these isolated settlements the mixed bloods succeeded in
achieving their independence and securing for themselves recogni-
tion as distinct from either the Negroes or the mulattoes. They
were given, for one thing, separate schools, separate from both
Negro and white, but they did not escape in this way the inevitable
deterioration which isolation from participation in the cultural life
of the larger community invariably brings.”

The same thing seems to have taken place in the case of the
Griquas, a mixed-blood people of South Africa, as has taken place
in these isolated mixed-blood communities in the southern states.
Maurice Evans, speaking of the Griquas, says: “The Griquas are a
degenerate, demoralized, dissolute people, weak, lazy and thrift-
less.””?"

Even the so-called “cape colored” of Cape Colony, South Africa,
who long enjoyed in that colony a freedom and a status which was
not accorded them elsewhere in South Africa, are, according to re-
cent reports, declining in numbers relative to other elements in the
population. “Apparently,” says Leslie Buell, “this group [cape
colored] which contains some of the leading non-Europeans in
South Africa is beginning to degenerate.’’*

While it is true that the mulatto in the United States, as is the
case of the mixed blood generally, has been disposed to escape from
the racial coil in which his origin and his history have involved him
by separating himself from the masses of the Negro race, the vigor
with which the racial line has been drawn against him has compelled
him to take another course.

More and more in the course of his struggle for position and

**See Arthur Esterbrook and Ivan V. McDougall, Mongrel Virginians: The Win

Tribe. This study is devoted particularly to one of these hybrid racial groups but
contains references to eleven others in that general region of the Blue Ridge.

* Quoted in Black and White in the Southern States, pp. 25-26.
* Op. cit. 1, 11.
status in the white’s man world the brown man has chosen to throw
in his fortunes with the black and make the Negro’s cause his own.
He has made himself not merely the leader but the teacher, the in-
terpreter, and in some sense the emancipator of the race. In this
struggle the black man, as education has been more widely diffused,
has begun to play a more important rdle. However, the mulatto, in
spite of his smaller numbers, still largely represents the intellectual
class of the race.

This struggle, gathering in breadth and intensity, which Lothrop
Stoddard has described as “the rising tide of color,” has been at
once an inspiration and a discipline to the mulatto. What is more,
it has given him a cause and a career, the influence of which upon his
intellectual life can hardly be overestimated, for intelligence and in-
tellectual life, as I have said before, are incidents of action, and it is
only the sense of participation in the great action that gives indi-
viduals or races the courage and the é/az that is necessary to rise
from a lower to that higher cultural level of intellectual life which is
standard in the modern world.
