A Business Man's Reflections on Labor Problems

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 21, No. 4 (Tan., 1916), pp. 446-457
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763903

Accessed: 10-05-2016 04:47 UTC
A BUSINESS MAN’S REFLECTIONS ON LABOR
PROBLEMS

By ARBITRATOR"

Every man who considers matters outside his own immediate
sphere of activity must have become aware of the feeling of unrest
which permeates society. The rich as well as the poor, the edu-
cated as well as the more ignorant, all are affected by it. It is
universal, and its cause or causes cannot be confined by locality nor
be due to the circumstances of any particular individual. It
must be attributed, rather, to some influence which is general and
not specific. Some of our deepest thinkers—men who are devoting
their lives to the study of social problems—have endeavored
to determine the fundamental causes of this unrest. It is not with
any idea that a correct solution has been found, but rather with
the hope that a hint may be dropped which may be of assistance
to these scientists, that the following suggestions are made.

Twenty years ago a man who knew only the law of gravitation
could infer correctly from that standpoint that the science of
aeronautics was an idle dream. If he saw an aeroplane in flight
today, he could not deny the evidence, but he might consider that
the law of gravitation had been disproved. But there are other
laws acting in conjunction with, but not in contradiction of, the law
of gravitation, which explain fully the flight of the aeroplane. It is
the resultant of all these forces acting in harmony. The error of
the man was in his assumption that the law of gravitation only
applied, and in his presumption that he was familiar with all laws
which could apply. We have endeavored to forecast the result of

* The writer is an official in a large manufacturing corporation. Until recently
he has paid no attention to academic theories. He has taken existing business struc-
ture for granted, without entertaining suppositions about need or possibility of
change. His own observations of industrial unrest have lately led him into the
courses of thinking indicated in this paper. As an index of reactions among men of
his type which are rarely reported to the public, the discussion is important.—THE
Eprrors.
It was very soon found impossible to reconcile the old observations of
Uranus by Lemonnier and others with any orbit that would fit the observations
made in the early part of the nineteenth century, and what was worse, the
planet almost immediately began to deviate from the orbit computed from the
new observations, even after allowing for the disturbances due to Saturn and
Jupiter. It was misguided by some unknown influence to an amount almost
perceptible by the naked eye. The difference between the actual and the com-
puted places of the planet amounted in 1845 to the “intolerable quantity” of
nearly two minutes of an arc.

One might think that such a minute discrepancy between observation and
theory was hardly worth minding and that to consider it “intolerable” was
putting the case very strongly, but in science unexplained “residuals” are often
the seeds from which new knowledge springs. Just these minute discrepancies
supplied the data which sufficed to determine the position of a great world,
before unknown.

As the result of a more skilful and laborious investigation Leverrier, a
French astronomer, wrote in substance to Galle, then an assistant in the
Observatory at Berlin:

“Direct your telescope to a point on the ecliptic in the constellation of
Aquarius, in longitude 326°, and you will find within a degree of that place a
new planet looking like a star of about the ninth magnitude and having a
perceptible disk.”

The planet was found at Berlin on the night of September 23, 1846, in
exact accordance with this prediction, within half an hour after the astronomers
began looking for it and within 52 minutes of the precise point Leverrier had
indicated.

In the foregoing illustrations the observer of the aeroplane
and the astronomers who had calculated the orbit of Uranus,
through insufficient knowledge, had been led to wrong conclusions.
All man-made laws are supposed to be enacted for the benefit of
those affected by them. The fact that outrageous laws, and laws to
accomplish purely selfish ends, have been passed does not vitiate
this assumption; it merely proves ignorance or selfishness or
unfaithfulness on the part of the lawmakers. It must be borne in
mind also that all laws are supposed to be based upon the observa-
tion of certain evils which they are designed to correct. If when
honestly made they do not succeed in their purpose, it is because
the observation has been imperfect, or because the conditions upon
which they were based have been changed. If experience proves
that they do not “fit the case,” they either become a dead letter
(as have some of the so-called “Blue Laws” of Connecticut and
other states) or else they are modernized. The Sherman law
affords an illustration of a law which requires amendment. The
reasons for its failure are very clearly explained in that able paper
entitled ‘The Sherman Law,” written by Mr. George W. Perkins.
Although enacted but thirty years ago, as it stands today its effect
instead of being a benefit to the country, as it was honestly intended
to be, has been detrimental, because its framers did not and obvi-
ously could not take into consideration the present conditions.
It was framed before the day of the large corporation, before the
day of the large accumulations of capital in the industrial world,
and before the telephone and other scientific inventions had
revolutionized business, and developed possibilities undreamed of
at that time.

To get a little nearer the subject under discussion, are the
so-called laws of business perfect and immutable? The unrest
in society and the friction in business relations is becoming more
and more marked. Rather than admit that this is due to the
imperfections of these laws, it is easier to lay all the blame upon
agitators, and accuse them of selfishly endeavoring to set aside or
nullify the laws. Is this easier answer the correct one? Some
of these business laws have become so venerable that they have
been given the authority of axioms. One of these proclaims that
“any commodity is worth what it will fetch in the open market””—
and a corollary to this law is, “labor is a commodity.” Based
upon this law and its corollary, another law states: “An employer
is not legally or morally bound to pay more for the services of an
employee than is necessary to secure those services.” Considering
this law and its corollary as the premises, and the last-named
law as the conclusion to a syllogism, is it not possible that there is a
fundamental error in the minor premise that “labor is a com-
modity”? Admitting for the sake of argument that the services
of this laborer may be properly so classed, is that feature all that is
to be considered when we buy or sell “labor”? When we say that
we have bought a barrel of flour or a bushel of potatoes, we have
described the whole transaction in so far as the flour or potatoes are
concerned; but is this true when we say that we have hired a man
for a dollar per day? It would seem that there is a difference in
the two cases, because we cannot dissociate the services of the man
from the man himself or from his other functions; yet in dealing
with the problem we have applied only the same reasoning or law
that we should to the flour or potatoes.

Celluloid is composed of cotton which has been treated with
acids and combined with camphor. It is not cotton, however,
although cotton is its principal ingredient. Its entire character
has been changed by synthesis. It cannot be spun or woven,
neither would it make a soft cushion. A laborer is more than a
machine; he is also a synthetical compound. The commodity
feature is part of the combination, but an inseparable part. We
cannot use the labor without affecting the laborer. As in the case
of the celluloid, we must deal with the combination as a whole and
not with one ingredient alone.

Society is composed of individuals, and the welfare of society
is made up of the aggregate welfare of its members. The
laborer is a member of society, which demands from him obedi-
ence to its laws and customs. He is a consumer, and the cost
per unit of that which he consumes is the same irrespective of the
amount received from the sale of the commodity part of his activity.
He may or may not be a citizen of the country in which he resides,
but it is his duty to contribute actively toward the general welfare,
physical and mental; otherwise he would be a parasite. Except
in rare instances, he has others more or less helpless, who are
dependent upon him, and it is his duty to provide not only for
their present and future physical necessities, so that they may
not become a burden on society, but he also must provide for their
mental needs, so that they in turn may do their part as members of
society. Potatoes and flour partake of none of these characteristics,
yet in considering the laborer as one who merely has his services
to sell, we treat him as we do the flour and potatoes, and to the
extent that we pay him no more than what is termed a “living
wage” do we curtail his other functions, which to society at large
are quite as important—indeed more so. The laborer himself may
not be fully aware of his composite nature, but society is, and is
beginning to demand recognition of its claims. For example, it is
generally admitted today that the laws which have been passed
for the benefit of women and minors are economically sound, and
that the minimum-wage law is entirely justified; yet if the women
and minors are to be considered the same as machines or only as
producers of ‘‘commodities,” these laws have no sound basis.
In all the laws just referred to society demands that its interest be
conserved.

May not further investigation show that the unrest in society
is due in part to our failure because of ignorance, or mental inertia,
or even unwillingness to consider carefully and fairly economic
questions which deal with social conditions? Our ignorance is
inexcusable; but our mental inertia is dangerous, as it may lead to
mental degeneration; while our unwillingness can be regarded only
as dishonest to ourselves and disregardful of our duty.

Welfare work is most commendable, and it is undoubtedly
beneficial to a certain extent. The individuals who have come
in contact with the workers have been given higher ideals, their
ambitions have been aroused, instructions in household economics
and hygiene and sanitary matters have increased the comfort and
health of those for whose benefit the work has been undertaken,
and trades have been taught—but here the work ends; a most
commendable and beneficial work, which does not and cannot,
however, because of its nature, strike at the root of the trouble.
This work has been undertaken by many corporations and associa-
tions, because of a sincere desire to ameliorate the conditions of
the poor; but by many for whose benefit it is undertaken it is
regarded as an admission that the amenities of life are un-
fairly distributed, and while the results of such unfairness are
being softened, the fundamental causes still remain undisturbed.
Where such feeling prevails, the dissatisfaction remains—in
fact it is sometimes accentuated by these honest philanthropic
efforts.

In our public schools the children of all classes of society have
been brought into very close contact. These children are inti-
mately associated in a most democratic way until they graduate,
when their paths diverge, the divergence increasing as the years
pass. Old intimacies are forgotten. The child of the rich or well-
to-do continues his studies at college while the child of the poorer
man goes to work. The latter cannot understand the justice of
being debarred from these advantages which he himself would
enjoy, and by which he would profit quite as much as does his more
fortunate playmate. This discontent, which started in childhood,
increases as the man matures until he becomes morbid or some-
times even resentful. Is not the public school partially responsible
for this unrest? If we find that the public school is respon-
sible in part for this unrest, no one on that accouht would suggest
that the system of public education be discontinued. Whatever
unrest it may be responsible for is an evidence as well as one of the
causes of the evolution through which society is passing. The
influence of the school as a whole is beneficial, and the fact that it
creates unrest is not sufficient reason for its abolishment. As the
evolution continues, the inequalities which have been called so
forcibly to the attention of the child may in time be removed or
reduced. This result might be hastened if, as has been done in a
few cases, the state should provide a certain number of scholar-
ships to be awarded under proper conditions only to those who are
unable for financial reasons to enter any of the higher institutions
of learning.
Inventions have brought the individual as well as the com-
munity into new and closer relations with other individuals and
the world at large. Business is pursued on a scale and by methods
undreamed of and impossible before the advent of telegraph and
telephone. As the number of employees has increased, so also has
the opportunity for interchange of ideas. The employer and
employee have been brought into much closer relations, to the
benefit of both. May not this unrest be still further intensified
by our failure or unwillingness to acknowledge that, coincident
with this evolution in business, society itself is undergoing a similar
but none the less positive evolution? The results of this evolution
are permanent and must be recognized; the unrest will continue
until some readjustment is made.

The professional socialist does not stop to determine the cause,
but is ready with a remedy irrespective of the cause. Such ill-
considered action on his part is illogical, and the remedy which
he offers may cause worse troubles than those he is seeking to
escape. One of the foremost students of sociology in the country,
in commenting on the propaganda of the professional socialists,
calls it “quack medicine.” In substance he declares that they do
not endeavor to determine whether the trouble is in the head or
the stomach or the heels of the body politic, but have a universal
panacea for all ills—in fact, are veritable quack doctors. They
deal with the results only and do not seek to remove or even deter-
mine the cause.

In their endeavor to find relief, wage-earners, such as mechanics
and laborers, have organized labor unions and other similar bodies.
All of these unions are purely selfish. They demand not only
increased compensation but also shorter hours of labor, thus
reducing the earning power or the efficiency of their labor, for
which they demand a higher price. Are these unions (exclusive of
the I.W.W.) acting on any principle fundamentally different from
that which has prompted the policy of the employer? Can one side
be accused of being more selfish than the other? Is not each party
endeavoring to obtain all that he can for himself, irrespective of the
welfare, outside of the actual necessities, of the other? The
community, including both the employee and the employer, pays
for this reduced efficiency—the employee by reason of the inevitable
increase in the price of the necessities (the higher cost of living)
and the employer in the reduction of his net earnings. Un-
doubtedly the majority of the members of these unions do not
tealize the injustice done to the employer, but unfortunately a
few of the more intelligent leaders have this very object in view.
They not only seek to raise up the employee but endeavor to pull
down the employer, thus reducing to the extent of their success the
difference between the two. No plan is suggested by which the
general welfare of society may be improved. They seek to benefit
their members only. Demands are frequently made which are
unreasonable, but which the employers in many instances have been
obliged to grant in order to avoid a disturbance in their businesss.
Concessions have been granted by the employers only after bitter
controversies, or after a strike has been declared. But in the
end, in almost every case, the employer has yielded to a greater or
less extent, and the wage-earner’s compensation has been gradually
but persistently increased. These concessions have strengthened
the power of the unions without increasing the good-will of the
employees toward the employers, without which no enterprise,
corporate or individual, can achieve the highest degree of success.
Until recently such organization has been confined entirely to the
classes named. The movement is spreading, however, and quite
recently a similar union has been formed among salaried employees.
This latest organization made demands which were promptly
granted. Such action is fraught with danger, as it inevitably
suggests to all employees that their only hope is to be found in
organization, thus creating a spirit of antagonism against the
employer which can end only in industrial warfare.

The Industrial Workers of the World is the most serious and
unreasonable combination of wage-earners which has yet been
organized, partly because it is largely composed of the most ignorant,
and also because its membership is made up almost entirely of
foreigners, who are not familiar with our customs or laws and who are
easily led by any demagogue or unprincipled organizer. In all of
these organizations there is the desire and demand for a larger share
in the profits of the industry in which the employees are engaged.
While no intelligent person can agree in full with the con-
clusions which have been reached by many of the labor organizations,
it is becoming more and more evident that there may be some truth
(possibly not more than a grain) in their contentions. No indi-
vidual has any choice as to his parentage, nor as to the environment
by which he will be surrounded when he is ushered into the world.
It is therefore claimed that no credit is due him because his parents
are wealthy, or because opportunities come to him entirely by
virtue of his environment. It would appear that both of these
contentions were absolutely logical. It is admitted that there is
credit accruing to the individual if he improves the opportunities
which birth has given him, but it is also equally true that many men
who have not had this privilege or good fortune, had they enjoyed
this environment, would have improved it to a larger extent than
do many who have been thus favored. Some extremists have
even gone so far as to demand that the property or wealth which
was owned by a person at his decease should not be transmitted
to any other person, but that it should be turned over to the state,
inasmuch as it was largely through the protection of the state, and
owing to the organization of society in general, that he was enabled
to accumulate the property. To a very limited extent the state
has recognized the justice of this principle, by imposing an inherit-
ance tax which must be paid by the executors before the estate
of the deceased is distributed. This is the same idea that underlies
all taxation, namely, that the taxpayer has received benefits from
society and that he should assume his share of the burden
necessary to sustain society. Irrespective of its merits or de-
merits, the present system of inheritance accomplishes for its
beneficiary the same results in the financial race as does the
handicapping system in athletics—it permits him to start, so to
speak, from the 1o- or 20-yard line against the scratch man. There
is an important difference, however. The handicapping in the
financial race is arbitrary, or rather accidental, as it is based upon
the accident of birth, whereas in the athletic race it is based upon
the merit or skill of the individual.

The government grants monopolies to inventors, who in the
majority of cases assign their patents to corporations. It affords
protection by the tariff or other laws which it has passed. It is
admitted that the corporation has a legal right to proper compensa-
tion for inventive genius or for successful management, but it is
claimed that the government has passed such laws and afforded
such protection with the expectation that society also shall share
in the resulting benefits. So long as these corporations were not
called upon to publish a report of their operations, the general
public was kept in ignorance of the extent of their profits. The
necessity of limiting the activity and power of these corporations
was not apparent. Laws are not, or rather they should not be,
passed for the benefit of the few. In the passage of these laws,
the benefit to be derived by the individual or association of
individuals in the corporate form was secondary; the primary
object sought was the benefit of the community at large. The
benefit to the few was the price paid to secure the larger benefit for
the many, but the public in general and the employees in particular
are becoming impatient and are insisting that they are entitled
to a share in the large profits which are the result of these corporate
undertakings. The state encourages the organization of corpora-
tions because it is realized that by combination more can be accom-
plished than by individual effort. To use an illustration from
hydraulics, it encouraged the damming of the river so that the
energy thus accumulated and stored might be utilized to better
advantage than if the stream were allowed to continue its natural
flow. Is it not possible that the unrest in the community is
partially due to the protest of the abutters on the stream that their
riparian rights are being violated? And if these protests are not
heeded, may not the abutters compel the lowering of the crest of the
dam, or at least the removal of the flashboards, even though such
action may result in a curtailment of the power? Would it not be
more prudent before taking the case to court to order a resurvey to
determine whether or not, in the endeavor to store as much water
as possible, inadvertently (presumably not intentionally) the level of
the water has been raised so that thestream has overflowed beyond the
limits shown on the original survey on which the charter was based ?

Has not too much effort been misdirected in endeavoring to
locate and define the causes of this “unrest,” with the sole purpose
of removing them? Have we not assumed that it is entirely
artificial and unreasonable and undesirable? While this may be
true to a certain extent, is it not possible that a considerable por-
tion is the result of evolution, and entirely natural and wholesome—
and to that extent an evidence that the body politic is awake and
active, and not sleeping or dead? In so far as this unrest is an
evidence of evolution, it is unwise to attempt to correct it by
endeavoring to remove the causes thereof. These causes are
fundamental, and can no more be removed than can the growth of
a healthy child be stopped. The evolution must continue. It is
wiser to recognize and admit the evolutionary character of the
movement, and to change our policies and plans so as to be in
harmony therewith. The careful physician makes a thorough
diagnosis of each case presented to him. If his patient complains
of “headache,” before making up his prescription he will first
determine whether it results from a disordered stomach or an
overworked brain; but if he finds that the headache is due to a
strain on the eyes, he will refer the patient to an oculist. If the
latter finds that the difficulty is not temporary but is occasioned
by advancing years, which have changed the form of the eye,
he will recommend that glasses be used. The physician endeavors
to remove the cause of the headache; the oculist finds that it is due
to a failure to recognize the physical evolution or growth of the
individual, and he endeavors to work in harmony therewith.
Society needs the services of both the physician and the oculist. If
the unrest is due to artificial or selfish reasons, the physician should
prescribe; but if the unrest is due to a natural evolution, the oculist
should be consulted.

Furthermore, as education has become more general and
broader in its nature, a larger number of individuals have been
taught to think for themselves. So long as education was con-
fined to comparatively few, it was natural that those who did the
thinking should look at all problems from the viewpoint of their
own environment, and should endeavor, unconsciously perhaps,
to solve these problems to their own advantage. As the oppor-
tunity for acquiring education has been widened, new ideas have
been advanced by reason of the different environment of the
thinkers, and an entirely new tone and virility have been injected
into the controversy in which each party thereto is endeavoring
to obtain an advantage for himself, even at the expense of his
opponent. Can a permanent state of equilibrium be reached until
each side recognizes the just claims of the other and both work
together, instead of in opposition, to determine what is right and
just to both?

The forces of nature are irresistible, and in so far as this dis-
quiet is an evidence of the natural growth of society it is useless
to attempt to oppose it. As well might the scientists of thirty or
forty years ago have considered that the suggestions made by Bell,
Brush, Edison, and Sprague were revolutionary, and that business
would be disorganized if their propositions were considered. To
the man who elected to stand in the way and oppose this scientific
progress, it may have appeared of the most revolutionary character,
but his opposition resulted only in disaster to himself; whereas
the man who recognized the evolutionary character of the move-
ment, and coincided therewith, received benefits almost commensu-
rate with his coincidence.

Democracy would not triumph if ‘“‘Unionism” as now inter-
preted should prevail. The latter would be an oligarchy of a most
selfish and relentless type. The true democracy demands fair treat-
ment for all and a division of opportunity and reward commensurate
with each man’s ability. This ideal may never be fully realized,
but it cannot be even approximated until all feelings of antagonism
are subdued and a spirit of co-operation and good-will predominates.

Early action is imperative, and the initiative should be taken
by the employer. The present condition of affairs cannot continue
without jeopardizing, not only the welfare, but also the very
existence of our institutions. Concession must be made by both
employer and employee, or else the prophecy of the failure of our
democratic system made by Macaulay nearly sixty years ago will
be fulfilled.t
