Acquisitive Mimicry

Author(s): Edward Alsworth Ross

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 21, No. 4 (Jan., 1916), pp. 433-445
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763902

Accessed: 10-05-2016 04:39 UTC
ACQUISITIVE MIMICRY

EDWARD ALSWORTH ROSS
University of Wisconsin

The “tricks of the trade,” business “shrewdness,” lying by
advertisement, newspaper prevarication, the wiles of the bar, and
the ruses of diplomacy are serious enough in their way, but they
do not greatly hamper the honest functional people who are striv-
ing to render genuine service. What most hurts them is the tend-
ency of the unworthy to simulate every type or trait which has
won social approval in order to steal prestige from it. This taking
on the popular hue is like that coloration and mimicry one finds
among the lower forms of life, save that it is acquisitive rather than
protective. The simulator usually aims to traffic on the prestige
he filches from the simulated.

In the Middle Ages piety was the best cloak for self-seekers to
assume. In his Inferno, wearing mantles of lead but gilded with-
out, Dante places two “joyous Friars Catalano and Loderingo,”
founders of the Order of Knights of Saint Mary, who were called
in by the Florentines in 1266 to act as mediators in private disputes.
but who proved to be corrupt and grasping. Satirizing the prel-
ates, Erasmus writes:

To work miracles is old and antiquated and not in fashion now; to instruct
the people, troublesome; to interpret the Scripture, Pedantick; to pray, a

433
sign one has little to do; to shed tears, silly and womanish; to be poor, base;
to be vanquisht, dishonourable . . . . and lastly to dye, uncouth; and to be
stretcht on a Cross, infamous.

With the rise of the centralized monarchy bloomed a new type,
the courtier. Thanks to Richelieu’s work, Louis XIV could have
proud feudal nobles as pliant ornaments of his court. La Bruyére
says:

Whoever considers that the king’s countenance is the courtier’s supreme
felicity, that he passes his life looking on it and within sight of it, will compre-
hend to some extent how to see God constitutes the glory and happiness of the
saints.

According to Taine:

The Duc de Fronsac, every morning at seven o’clock, in winter and in
summer, stationed himself, at his father’s command, at the door of the small
stairway leading to the chapel, solely to shake hands with Mme. De. Main-
tenon on her leaving for St. Cyr. “Pardon me, Madame,” writes the Duc de
Richelieu to her, ‘the great liberty I take in presuming to send you the letter
which I have written to the king, begging him on my knees that he will occa-
sionally allow me to pay my court to him at Ruel, for I would rather die than
pass two months without seeing him.”

How a monarch who had become “‘the fountain of honor” was
able to trade upon the passion of his ambitious subjects to share
in the prestige of the feudal nobility is indicated in one of Montes-
quieu’s Lettres Persanes:

The King of France is the most powerful prince in Europe. He has no
gold mines, like his neighbour the King of Spain—but he has greater riches
than he, because he draws them from the vanity of his subjects, more inex-
haustible than any mine. He has undertaken and maintained great wars,
having no other funds than titles of honour for sale, and by a prodigy of human
vanity and pride, his troops are paid, his places filled, and his fleets equipped.

From the courtier example there spread quickly through society
a deceptive glaze of manner. In one of his sermons Bossuet

declares:

Never have people lived so much on caresses, on kisses, on words chosen
to bear witness to a perfect cordiality, yet if we could pierce to the bottom of
all hearts, if a divine light could disclose suddenly all that conventionality
and good taste, interest and fear hold so well hidden, then what a strange

spectacle!
There is no reason to suppose that modern society is so corroded
with hypocrisy as was the seventeenth century in France. The
brushing aside of glittering parasites by the rise of the rough-and-
ready, plain-dealing, functional people has brought sham into bad
odor. Polite society is probably as sincere as it ever has been,
while religion is now but a thin cloak for worldliness. Commercial
simulation, however, waxes apace. Layer after layer of people
have come to buy other people’s products instead of consuming
their own, so that the total purchasing power exciting the cupidity of
traders is nearly equal to the entire volume of production. The
possible buyers of nostrums, gold bricks, beauty recipes, “salted”
mines, and town lots under water are legion. The fraud orders
of our Post-Office Department in a single year bar the mails to
schemes which have robbed the public of $239,000,000 within the
last four years.

The rivalry to unearth new strata of customers and to sell new
kinds of goods results in an ear-splitting overproduction of publicity
and hence a resort to every trick of falsehood, sensationalism,
suggestion, and association of ideas to impress fleeting attention.
Adulterations, the misbranding of goods, the counterfeiting of
trademarks, the forging of testimonials from celebrities, the manu-
facture of stock-exchange quotations for worthless securities, the
sale of diplomas by bogus medical schools, advertisement mas-
querading as news dispatch or editorial—these illustrate how good
repute is preyed upon. Owing to the association of the Quaker
name and symbols in the public mind with integrity and just deal-
ing, dealers are using them so unscrupulously for advertising pur-
poses that the Quakers are now seeking legislation forbidding the
use of their name as a trademark on commercial products.

A more serious, because more elusive, form of simulation is the
professionalizing of something that ought not to be used for making
money. There is the professional mendicant whose tone and tale
far surpass in piteousness the appeal of the honest victim of mis-
fortune. Sport is infested by the professional athlete posing as
an enthusiast for physical development while greedy of prizes and
purses and bent on secretly hiring himself to amateur teams and
organizations whose eagerness to win has gotten the better of their
honesty. In college he passes for a student while he debases inter-
collegiate athletic contests with his low standards and unscrupulous
methods. Nothing has so hurt real sport as the creeping in of
these mercenaries among the true sportsmen.

Our courts. are plagued by the presence of the professional
expert witness on handwriting, poisons, or insanity. He simulates,
of course, that disinterested love of truth which is rightly presumed
of the bank cashier, alienist, or chemist who for a moment steps
aside from his work to clear up a doubtful point in a law suit.
The fact is, however, that the expert who makes a trade of furnish-
ing testimony becomes a parasite on his own past and on the credit
of his profession. To keep fees flowing in he must give testimony
in favor of the side that has engaged him, at the same time guarding
himself from damaging grilling by the experts and attorneys of
the other side. Hence, when he has a hard case, he hides himself
in a maze of technical minutiae or a cloud of big words, which can
only mystify and befog the court. Experts who make a business
of furnishing testimonials as to the merits of commercial wares
follow the same downward path.

It is instructive to follow the recent rise and downfall of the
professional muckraker. At first the exposure of the misdeeds of
the high and powerful in the political, the financial, or the commer-
cial world is dangerous, and only brave men undertake it. But
in case, as sometimes happens, exposures excite interest, are eagerly
read, and make money and fame for both writer and publisher, there
arises the professional muckraker who aims to meet the market
demand for exposure; who not only probes for a living, but who
sensationalizes, spices, and misinterprets in order to dress a dish
to the readers’ taste. By showing only one side, twisting facts,
hinting when he cannot prove, suggesting bad motives for innocent
actions, and interpreting errors as crimes, he sells his wares but
finally discredits the work of even the honest muckraker and
brings all unauthorized exposure into doubt or contempt.

A religious body that has gained resources, credit, and power
is likely to become infested by worldly clerics to whom the pulpit
is an opportunity for easy living or a chance to rise. The ambitious
wire-puller, without a spark of religion in his heart but adept
in its tones, phrases, and postures, schemes his way up to the miter,
while the real saint works unnoticed in his parish. These shrewd
self-seekers are of course strong for authority, profess orthodox
beliefs, and commend themselves by their zeal in smelling out and
hounding down clergymen honest enough to confess to a heresy.
Until someone has devised a litmus paper for testing spirituality,
wealthy and powerful churches will be liable to progressive dry
rot while pure religion will be found where a learned and hard-
worked clergy commands no temporal power, only a modest living,
and not too much social consideration.

When charity and social work, having achieved a solid financial
basis, begin to hold out the prospect of a reputable career, a change
is likely to occur in the type of worker. The self-devoted still
offer themselves as in the days of ill-paid and uncertain employment,
but with them enter ambitious young people of greater ability
and broader preparation, perhaps, but lacking the spirit of service.
Conscientious and efficient they may be, but they feel little sym-
pathy and liking for the distressed people they deal with. Try
as they may to imitate the approach and manner of volunteer
workers, the poor sense their coldness and are less confiding and
less comforted than under the old system. While it is inevitable
that social work should develop into a profession, the friends of
the unfortunate who have relinquished their ministrations to paid
workers may well supervise and study these workers, to the end
that only the genuine may be kept and advanced. There is need
of labor on unpaid boards and in voluntary associations to hold
the organized services up to the mark.

Once a labor union is in smooth water with a loyal dues-paying
membership willing to maintain salaried officials, the leader of its
storm-and-stress period is often succeeded by the canny schemer
who prefers a salary to a wage. Although willing to sell out his
fellows to their political enemies—as from the Mulhall lobby investi-
gation we know that thousands of union officials actually did—he
is pat with the talk and pose of class loyalty. His first concern is
by fair means or foul to keep himself in office. Thanks to his
methods, labor-hall contests are sometimes worse than the politics
of the lowest slum wards. While voicing roundly labor sentiments
and getting what he can for his constituents, he is too shrewd to
risk his job by attacking a formidable abuse or calling a hazardous
strike unless he is driven to it. His counsels of narrow self-interest
chill his people to the cause of labor; so that when his ilk control
a labor organization “‘the fight is out of it.” By the fiery crusaders
who rouse and organize unskilled labor, such union officials are
styled “labor grafters.”

The hollowness of the patrician pretense that every popular
unheaval threatening privilege is the work of “irresponsible agi-
tators” should not obscure the fact that disturbance may be
followed asa trade. The man possessed of assurance, a glib tongue,
a platform manner, and a taste for excitement may make a career
for himself by going about stirring up discontent without in the
least knowing or caring whither it will lead. Until he has met the
acid test it is easy to mistake him for the unselfish champion of
the wronged and the prophet of the disinherited. The workingmen
dread being fooled by the windbag and are likely to withhold their
full confidence from the agitator until he has proved his mettle
in a time of danger and persecution.

Most insincere agitation, however, is the work of another type,
the vote-seeking politician. Once power has passed from classes
to masses, there springs up the professional politician, a man
unembarrassed by principles, loyalty, or public spirit, whose sole
and abiding concern is the gaining and keeping of office. In a way
he is the modern courtier. Says Mr. Lecky:

In the field of politics the spirit of servility and sycophancy no longer
shows itself in the adulation of kings and nobles. The man who, in former
ages, would have sought by Byzantine flattery to win power through the
favour of an emperor or a prince, will now be found declaiming on platforms
about the iniquity of privilege, extolling the matchless nobility of the masses,
systematically trying to excite their passions or their jealousies, and to win
them by bribes and flatteries to his side.

A thousand times the political conservatives have thus exposed
him without persuading the people to return to class government.
They remember that the governing class cost them quite as much
as the politicians and insulted them into the bargain.

In order to maintain himself the politician must be able to
drive off the field the real leaders, the men of positive character and
conviction, who have gained popular support for their ideas. This
he does by impudently outbidding them at every point. His
patriotism is loftier, his rhetoric more glowing, his promises more
dazzling. Beside him the truth-teller who makes no mealy-
mouthed professions, nor promises more than he can perform,
seems halting and timid.

When a hitherto negligible class—the wage-earners, for example
—gains the suffrage, or shows independence in voting, the politician
professes suddenly a deep concern for its welfare. He takes to
voicing its grievances and advocating measures in its program.
Since the politician is able to bring to the workingmen prestige
and a following, perhaps even a party, they are tempted to discard
at this point the trusty working-class leaders, who have brought
them thus far but can hold out to them no prospect of immediate
gains, and swing to the support of the politician. It is needless to
add that they either fail to get what was promised them, or, if they
get it, it proves to be a sham.

When by years of labor and sacrifice a reform movement has
been brought within sight of victory, some “practical” politician
takes up with it, professedly as a convert, but really because he
deems it a vote-getter. At this crisis its faithful friends, who
nursed it through its initial unpopularity and have built it up to
its present strength, are sent to the rear because they bear the
taint of radicalism and the scars of defeat. Taken up by a “safe”
political celebrity, the reform triumphs and goes down in history
as the fruit of his statesmanship. Thus has it been with tariff
reform, old-age pensions, direct democracy, and. workmen’s com-
pensation. Under the two-party system scarcely any great reform
is credited to those who sacrificed most for it. The glory goes to
some political strategist who opposed or ignored it when it stood
most in need of friends and became an eleventh-hour convert only
when it could do as much for his party as his party could do for it.
Such is the way of the world.

In England the old party custom of encouraging only men of
fortune to stand for Parliament was defended as a means of exclud-
ing the political adventurer. After the class struggle came into
politics, however, the practice had to be given up, since it left the
wage-earners entirely without representation from their own -lass.
Non-payment of legislators has been justified on the ground that
if service in the legislature involves financial sacrifice the self-
seeking politicians will shun it, thus leaving the way clear for men
of means and public spirit. Here again labor is put at a serious
disadvantage, so that everywhere democracies have come to com-
pensate their legislators sufficiently to cover at least their actual
expenses. It is probable that the public is least plagued by politi-
cal job-hunters when it allows only expenses for part-time service—
like that of the legislator, the university regent, and the member
of an advisory board—while for full-time service it pays well
enough to attract ability.

“Tt is the weaker sort of politicians,” says Lord Bacon, “that
are the great dissemblers.” Resort to the arts of popularity is,
however, no proof that a public man is a professional politician.
They may be forced on him by competition with the professionals.
They may be his means of withstanding money and organization.
The candidate of the prosperous classes does not need the eyebeam,
the handshake, or the platform way of the representative of the
popular cause; he has behind him the “interests” and the
“machine.” It is the champion of the broader public welfare or
of the poor man’s cause who must expose himself to the sneers of
the powerful by openly paying court to his constituents.

Everything that gathers prestige will be counterfeited if it is
possible to do so. This is so true that the advertisements of trashy
goods give the warning, ‘“‘Beware of imitators,” in order that the
reader may think they have prestige. Quacks hang on to the skirts
of the medical profession. Shysters and “ambulance-chasers”
insinuate themselves among the men at the bar. Science being
a name to conjure with, astrologers, clairvoyants, rain-makers,
magnetic healers, and “Swamis,” all profess some “science.”
Social climbers pretend to good birth and breeding, to social
experience and intimacy with the exclusive, in order to break into
the charmed circle. Once a religious order has attained credit
and comfort, the lazy wriggle into it in spite of all that can be done
to keep them out. Like a bright river losing itself in a swamp,
the Yogi movement in India lost itself among fakirs leading a life
of ease by appearing more ascetic than they really are. A new
departure in art or literature has scarcely won recognition ere
its originators are trodden under by the rush of charlatans and
notoriety-seekers who convert the thing into a caricature of itself.
Dissect symbolism, cubism, or futurism in their heyday and how
small the core of sincerity!

One reason why “the new broom sweeps clean,” “what is new
is always fine,” is that the new, lacking prestige, suffers little from
the presence of impostors. The young political party, the religious
order in the flush of youth, the new religious movement, the develop-
ing branch of knowledge, the literary departure not yet recognized,
the experiment in philanthropy, the new-born public service,
such as sanitation or forestry, is likely to be in the hands of the
sincere; so that it may do better and reach higher than later after
its success has attracted to it sycophants and charlatans. This
is why it has so often been remarked that the fervor of faith is
strongest when a religion is persecuted, not after it has won official
favor; that the noblest men are to be found in a service or an agita-
tion before there is a good living in it; and that the early leaders
of a cause or a party pitched the note higher and stirred hearts
more than those who headed it at its moment of triumph.

Groups and interests wear masks as well as individuals. Free-
dom being dear to man, selfish interests use it as a stalking-horse—
leagues for “medical freedom,” “industrial freedom,” ‘‘free Canal,”
“freedom of the seas,” etc. “Personal liberty” is a fig leaf for
the liquor traffic. Rich men unite to fight “socialistic” measures
under the name of ‘Liberty and Property Defense League.”
But their concern for liberty is a tittle compared. witli their concern
for property. A movement for the defense of the family turns out
to be a mask for brewers fighting equal suffrage. Certain national-
ist societies among our foreign-born are the screen from behind
which liquor dealers attack “dry” measures. A “national water
power conference” may be a scheme of power companies to gain
the front page for the arguments of their attorneys. Under the
cloak of a “pure food”’ association the attorney of a baking powder
company has sought legislation against rival baking powders.
During the Great War a number of non-neutral movements among

99 66
hyphenated Americans have worn the guise of a peace propaganda,
or a “truth” movement.

From the foregoing we may deduce:

1. The better the reputation the more eager is the simulation.
Counterfeits cast no discredit on the genuine. In the words of
La Rochefoucauld, “‘Hypocrisy is a sort of homage that vice pays
to virtue.”

2. From the humbler classes proceed impostors in quest of gain;
from the higher classes impostors in quest of respectability, dignity,
reputation, honors, or public office.

3. Frauds known and tolerated discredit the genuine, and if they
are allowed to multiply will ruin whatever they have attached them-
selves to.

4. The unmasking and casting out of hypocrites is a temporary
embarrassment to the thing simulated, but an ultimate benefit.

5. Endowments attract parasites as honey attracts flies;
so that only great precautions in the way of visitation, investiga-
tion, and publicity can prevent an endowment from becoming
a nest of corruption.

6. The more honest labor is despised the more will men seek
to live by means of simulation. Making productive effort respect-
able lessens the resort to acquisitive mimicry.

7. Services that, being spiritual, are not subject to test should
be underpaid. Clergymen, missionaries, revivalists, writers of
devotional literature, poets, prophets, agitators, leaders, inspirers,
and public men should receive less than their ability might com-
mand in other lines in order that these precious ministrations be
not adulterated.

The showing up of the fringe of simulators that attach them-
selves to every reputable thing is one of those necessary but dis-
tasteful and thankless services which remind us that it is not
kindness so much as militant honesty that keeps the linchpins of
society from falling out. Nearly everything which has a good
name stands in need of protection; hence the providing of fraud-
detectors is a means of accelerating social progress.

It is not enough that the state has tardily come to lay an arrest-
ing hand on the venders of impure foods, drugs, seeds, and ferti-
lizers; to scrutinize the securities offered to the public; to fix
tests for admission to certain professions, and to disbar tricky
lawyers. More, much more, is needed. In every worthy calling
the sheep ought to find means of isolating and branding the goats.
Every profession ought to be alert to keep itself free from tares.
Even now associated physicians issue an annual exposure volume
about quacks and nostrums. Bureaus are forming for the inter-
change of the information about impostors which accumulates in
the hands of charity agents. Boards of conference study to weed
out the professionals from intercollegiate athletics. Although
the idea of a “people’s lobby” to apprise the citizens as to the
voting record of their representatives was never realized, such
features as the “Roll Call” and “Comment on Congress” help
us to compare performance with promises. Municipal voters’
leagues and legislative voters’ leagues hunt the hypocrite out of
politics by printing a relentless analysis of his record. In one state
a single fearless writer, publishing after every legislative session a
faithful history of that session, has made himself a terror to the
‘“‘whited sepulchers”’ of politics.

The campaign against the stealers of good repute ought to be
far more general and vigorous. Since tainted news is destroying
the confidence of the public in the press, the honest journals
ought to band together to pillory the lying newspapers. Since
fearless art critics and literary critics are needed to part the real
from the spurious, such critics ought to stand together against
advertisers’ efforts to intimidate them. The scandal of the pro-
fessional expert witness might be ended by having technical
testimony sought by the court—not the litigants—from some
member of a panel of reputable experts recommended by their
profession.

The timely recognition of merit may be as serviceable to society
as the prompt elimination of the fraud. A university or a scientific
institution ought to function as a testing laboratory, its degrees
and appointments as certificates of purity of scholarship. To
waive aside diplomas and degrees as “toys for the babyhood of
science” is to overlook their value in protecting the public against
mountebanks possessing the phrases and trappings of learning
but not its substance. A learned society with its honors and medals
and programs may render a like service.

The public should be enabled to discriminate sharply between
those who do and those who by lavish and skilful expenditure
simulate achievement without having in fact achieved. By a
shrewd outlay of money and attention a mere rich man may cap-
ture for himself the name of “philanthropist” which ought to be
reserved for those who, like Vincent de Paul and John Howard,
give themselves. By hiring able helpers and by drawing upon
ample resources he may with little risk or hardship to himself gain
the honors of the geographical explorer. By financing the good
cause which is on the point of issuing from obscurity he may reap
the reputation of reformer. By well-timed gifts and attentions
to religion he may deodorize his past and acquire the aroma of
sanctity.

Such stealing of plumes will not discourage those who love
achievement for its own sake, but it damps the ardor of such as are
fired to high emprise by the prospect of appreciation and recogni-
tion. If society allows Dives to capture the honors which ought
scrupulously to be reserved for real achievers, just because they can
hope for no material reward, it will be served less and exploited more.
Consequently we ought to hail as deserving public servants the
implacable critics and stern exposers who foil the schemes of the
unmeriting to take the credit which belongs only to genuine achieve-
ment.

We Americans have been slow in waking up to the possibilities
of formal recognition as a means of encouraging signal social
service. In our eyes all honors and titles have been suspected
because they are associated in our minds with privilege and heredi-
tary transmission, neither of them essential to social recognition.
But a democracy like Australia or Canada sees no harm in the
knighting of citizens who have nobly served their fellows. Royalty
has stimulated ifs servants by holding out decorations. Why
should not the people inspire their servants with the prospect of
recognition ?

In the rational encouragement of the ambitious citizen to do
his best for the common weal, Germany is a generation ahead of us.
Many a tradesman there keeps straight in the hope of some day
seeing the crown over the door of his shop and calling himself
Hoflieferant. After that he may strive for the dignity of Kom-
merzienrath, while beyond that is the high honor of Geheimrath;
and so on. Besides this ladder of titles, any man who has done
something very fine, be his station never so humble, may be honored
with a signed photograph of the Kaiser, or even invited to lunch
with His Majesty. In the hands of a hereditary monarch the
method of graduated recognition may be perverted to dynastic
and militarist designs; yet the principle is sound and it ought to
be as feasible for the people to capture and keep the power of
recognition as it has been feasible for them to capture and keep
the power of the purse.

Our neglect of public ante-mortem recognition has obliged the
man of high desert to vociferate his claims or else remain in obscu-
rity with no other reward than the consciousness of duty performed.
If in every walk of life notable achievement were promptly singled
out and formally recognized, our eardrums would not ache as now
with the self-recommendation of impostors. We need more respon-
sible agencies with the right to seek out and set a hallmark on ster-
ling merit. It is not too much for society through governor, mayor,
state university, library trustees, school board, or other representa-
tive to give an early and a right direction to public esteem. Let a
certificate, diploma, medal, label, portrait, or commemorative
naming of street or park or public building set the man of extraor-
dinary merit apart, while he is still alive, from the pursuing horde
of impudent pretenders.
