The Influence of Newspaper Presentations Upon the Growth of Crime and Other Anti-
Social Activity

Author(s): Frances Fenton

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 16, No. 4 (Tan., 1911), pp. 538-564
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763009

Accessed: 09-05-2016 05:36 UTC
THE INFLUENCE OF NEWSPAPER PRESENTATIONS
UPON THE GROWTH OF CRIME AND OTHER
ANTI-SOCIAL ACTIVITY (Continued)

FRANCES FENTON
The University of Chicago

CHAPTER IV
METHODS USED IN THE PRESENT STUDY

Two kinds of fact regarding the influence of newspapers
upon the growth of crime and other anti-social activity have
been collected in this investigation: direct evidence of newspaper
suggestion, consisting of cases in which the cause and effect
relation between the newspaper and anti-social activity is known
to have existed; and analyses of the relative amounts of space
devoted by newspapers to anti-social and other matter. The
latter constitutes a study of the possible objective sources of the
stimuli in the newspaper to anti-social activity; the former some
of the responses to these stimuli. Both studies are necessary
preliminaries to any adequate control of the anti-social activity
under consideration here.

The direct evidence was collected from all the available
sources, from newspapers themselves, from persons who came
in contact with criminals or other anti-social persons, or with
juvenile offenders, and from court records. In addition 201
question-lists' were sent out, 74 to prison and reformatory
officials, 75 to juvenile court judges and other judges, 45 to chief
probation officers, and 7 to other persons. In return, 20 replies

1The question-list sent out was as follows:

1. Do you know of any persons, young or old, who have received the idea
of committing some crime or abnormal act from the newspapers?

2. If so, will you answer the following questions regarding them: (a) name
and place; (b) description of act committed and circumstances; (c) newspaper
from which the idea was obtained; date and place of publication; (d) if there

is a court record, please cite it in addition.
3- Did you get your information from the person’s own confession, from

538
were received, 7 from prison and reformatory officials, 3 from
juvenile court judges, 8 from chief probation officers, and 2 from
other sources.2_ The results from all these sources are collected
in chap. vi, but they are too extensive for publication here.
The object in view in analyzing the material in newspapers
was to get a clear and accurate idea of the relative amounts of
space given to news and other matter relating to anti-social and
other activities. This was undertaken not because the actual
amount of anti-social matter in a newspaper is known to bear a
direct relation to the growth of crime, or because we have any
evidence to show that changes in the two bear a constant relation
to one another. (A study of this matter would be an important
one to undertake.) The value of the quantitative analysis under-
taken here, which is based upon a qualitative analysis of the
material measured, is conceived to lie first in its more exact
characterization of the newspaper matter which we are consid-
ering as stimuli to activity, this characterization being indispen-
sable to any changes in the newspapers. One of the first questions
asked by those to whom this matter is being mentioned for the
first time is, “But is there much of this news of crime in our
papers and how much?” This question implies the second reason
for the value of the quantitative study, that the amount of anti-
social matter of certain types is a factor which enters (1) into
the conscious, or unconscious selection of reading matter on the
part of individual readers, and (2) into the possible length of
time during which the attention is occupied with anti-social
matter. For the purpose stated above it would not suffice merely
to count all of the matter in the paper dealing with anti-social
themes and to compare that amount with all the matter not
concerned with anti-social subjects—a method which has been
followed in previous treatments. Such a comparison, while it
would have some interest, would not have any special signifi-
cance, because, in the first place, it would be too general, and
because in the second place, there is no real basis of comparison
between matter qualitatively different. In other words, such a
comparison does not make clear the fact that matter relating
to anti-social circumstances and activities appears in different
forms, some in the literary section of the paper, some in the
“news proper,” some in book reviews, and still other matter in
advertisements, sporting news, and editorials. Nor does it take
account of the fact that a definite amount of matter in news-
papers is of such a nature as never to be anti-social in character—
for example ; market and financial news, legal, marriage and death
notices, weather reports, and miscellaneous matter, such as
“beauty talks,” recipes for housekeepers, etc. Any adequate
analysis and estimate of newspaper matter must be based upon a
careful classification of the material in papers; and the percent-
ages of matter dealing with anti-social subjects must be carefully
classified and related to the total of that kind of material of
which it is a part, and not to the whole of the matter. Only
thus is an accurate picture to be made of the material in news-
papers, and a working basis arrived at for changes in newspapers.

Consequently, newspaper matter was classified as follows:
I, Regular news; II, Critical, including book reviews, theatrical
news and criticism, musical criticism; ITI, Literary and illustra-
tions (exclusive of illustrations which are organic parts of the
printed piece and which are included with the printed matter
with which they occur) ; IV, Editorial; V, Sporting news; VI,
Market and financial news; VII, Notices, i.e., weather reports,
marriages, deaths, society, and miscellaneous items. Adver-
tisements were totally excluded from tabulation, and sporting
news was excluded from among the tabulated sources of anti-
social suggestion; the former, not because considered unim-
portant but because the limits of the present study precluded
the special treatment which their qualitatively different effect
demands; the latter not because it is held not to be the source of
much brutalizing effect, but because again the limits of the present
study debarred a consideration of this type of suggestion which
it is difficult, with our present evidence, to analyze and prove.®
Material falling under some of the classifications, as VI and
VII, would evidently contain little or no anti-social matter.

The unit used in measuring newspaper matter was the inch
instead of the item, because the former gives a comparative
quantitative space estimate, which the latter, a unit of varying
size, does not afford. The total amount of matter under each
heading, as well as the total amount of anti-social matter under.
each heading, was measured.

The general basis for the definition of “anti-social matter”
was explained above® in connection with the word anti-social.
It was stated that this basis is founded on the objective effects of
newspaper matter, its suggested consequences, rather than its
intent. Any kind of matter, therefore, which may furnish sug-
gestion to anti-social activity is considered anti-social. More
specifically, it includes, on the side of content: (1) not merely
such matter as would obviously and technically be regarded as
dealing with crime juridically considered, but (2) all material
which a scientific psychology and psychiatry would classify as
affording simuli to anti-social, that is, criminal and immoral,
acts.© This classification is not less true to the facts than one
based on a juridical definition, but it is more specifically inclu-
sive of the various types of matter which incite to anti-social
activity, which, if not criminal, may be either immediately or indi-
rectly criminal in its results. That is to say, it includes matter
which not only describes acts criminal in the legal sense, but also
those acts which are immoral but not legally criminal. And on
the other hand, it also includes not only matter which stimulates

>A separate study of both advertisements and of sporting news should be
made, the former with special reference to medical advertisements and their
effect. Cf. Survey (June 25, 1910), 503. The efforts to prevent the exhibition
of moving pictures of the Johnson-Jeffries prize fight, together with less wide-
spread but none the less strong protest regarding the attention given by news-
papers in news columns and pictures to the same fight, are evidences of the
popular conviction as to the effect of sporting news.

*Cf. chap. ii. * Cf. chap. i.

°It makes little or no difference in what form this material happens to
appear—whether as news, stories, book reviews, etc. Cf. chap. ii.
directly to crime, but also such items as stimulate directly to
immorality and thus indirectly to crime. There is no real divison
line here between the legally criminal and the immoral, though
the two are not coterminous and the latter is perhaps a wider
category than the former. To stop with the legally criminal
would be to underestimate the anti-social effect of much news-
paper suggestion (as also of much suggestion from five-cent
theaters and other dramatic performances), because descriptions
of legally criminal acts may incite both to criminal acts and to
immoral acts, and descriptions of immoral acts may incite both
to other immoral acts and to criminal acts. In other words, a de-
scription of a criminal act may incite to another criminal act or
only to an immoral act, while a description of an immoral act
may stimulate not only to another immoral act but also even to
a legally criminal act. On the basis of this explanation, there-
fore, the matter classified as anti-social was of two general sorts:

I. Descriptions of criminal acts: (a) inciting to other crimi-
nal acts; (b) inciting to immoral acts.

II. Descriptions of immoral acts: (a) inciting to other
immoral acts; (b) inciting to criminal acts.

The criterion here worked out is not as definite as the one
based on a juridical or legal definition, for it depends, in a
larger degree, upon the judgment and experience of the person
using it and does not work as automatically as does the juridical
criterion or category. It depends for its utility upon the knowl-
edge and use of psychological principles. A large body of psy-
chological and psychiatric facts, however, are at the basis of it.
It becomes, consequently, more useful than the juridical cri-
terion, in that it includes all types of significant anti-social
relation between the newspaper and activity, that is, it takes care
of the social and ethical facts in the case. Moreover, it ulti-
mately furnishes a basis for a legal or juridical definition. It is
one of the fundamental principles of jurisprudence that formu-
lations of law follow customs, that certain moral and social
principles are recognized generally before they are formulated
as law. “Moral notions progress faster and develop quicker
than law. The latter presents, so to speak, a lower step in de-
velopment, a step which morals have already taken.”? To leave
out of account, therefore, a large body of activities classified as
immoral but not illegal would be to ignore the important relation
of this type of activity to law.

Of this anti-social matter, as just defined, three divisions or
classes were made on the basis of degree of possible suggestive-
ness in order to show the qualitative differences in “anti-social
matter.” The first and narrowest division includes what may be
termed obvious material for suggestion, that is, material dealing
with crime or immorality in such a detailed and striking manner
as to constitute what the psychologist and psychiatrist would
recognize as a most probable medium of anti-social suggestion.
Examples are: detailed accounts of murders, suicides, rob-
beries, rape, abnormal sexual relations and exhibitions, etc. The
Thaw trial is a specific example of this type.

The second division includes matter of a less detailed sort,
in which details and bare facts of murder and other crimes,
etc., are not directly presented, but indirectly indicated and per-
haps called up quite vividly. Examples are: references to crimes
and immoral acts which have been detailed at great length in the
papers, or short, relatively undetailed accounts of the kind of
fact mentioned in the preceding example. Ordinarily an item is
classified on the basis of its immediate content, although its
reference to previous related items must be taken into con-
sideration.

The third division includes all other mentions of anti-social
facts. The matter in this division may be suggestive in various
ways which it is difficult to get at. A mere two-line mention
of the arrest of a murderer may, for example, call up all of the
anti-social images which a former detailed account of that same
murder, or of another, has established in the neural set. Vague

™N. M. Korkunov, General Theory of Law (Boston Book Co., 1909), 63.
See also on this same point: Roscoe Pound, “The Causes of Dissatisfaction with
the Administration of Justice,” Report of American Bar Association (1906),
XXIX, 399; Carter, Law, Its Origin, Growth and Function (G. P. Putnam’s Sons,
1907), 320; Augustus Pulazky, Theory of Law and Civil Society (T. Fisher
Unwin, 1886), 312; G. F. Puchta, Cursus der Institutionen (Breitkopf und
Hartel, 1850), Bd. I, S. 31.
statements concerning the illegal dealings of the Sugar Trust, or
of the Beef Trust, may set up in the minds of young people and
others standards of public and commercial dishonesty which have
a vague but real effect upon later conduct. However, this can-
not be taken for granted or too closely insisted upon.

The boundary line between these classifications of newspaper
matter are not and cannot be either wholly distinct or exact. The
categories are not made too inclusive, however. They are not so
inclusive as to cover matter that is not suggestive within the
limits established above. As a matter of fact, any news may be
suggestive in an anti-social direction. Psychologically the cri-
terion of this suggestiveness is exceedingly indefinite and shift-
ing. No more definite one, however, is offered by psychology, and
the present analysis can be pushed only so far as the psychological
knowledge and experience already worked out admit. The
difference between divisions III and II is a difference of the
directness with which the stimulus can go over into activity.
Stories of graft, as they are ordinarily told in the newspapers,
are likely to go over into activity of an anti-social type less
directly and immediately, while detailed accounts of murders or
robberies, because of their stronger motor or activity appeal, may
go over at once. The situation might, however, be reversed, and
for this and other reasons given above, all of these categories are
necessary to cover all possible stimuli to anti-social activity. The
basis of I and II is treatment of anti-social facts; of III the
mere mention of such facts.®

The following classification of the anti-social matter in one
of the papers analyzed will serve to illustrate the kinds of items
included in each of the three categories. Only the titles of
articles are given. The reason for including each item under its
TABLE I

ILLUSTRATING THE CLASSIFICATION OF NEWSPAPER MATTER UNDER THE THREE

CATEGORIES*

 

 

I

Ir

III

 

Moss Beat PoiceMAN (re-
ferring to Philadelphia car
strike).

(Miss Addams’ statement.})

Experts BatrLe at Stour
TRIAL.

(Murder trial; arousing cu-
riosity, beautiful young
girl exciting sentimental
sympathy.)

PicTuRE OF MountTED Po-
LICEMAN DIsPERSING Mos.

(Definiteness of act, firing
into mob.)

New Riots IN PHILADEL-

PHIA.
(Miss Addams’ statement.})

Car Strike Leapers DE-
CLARE DyNnamITE Pris-
ONERS Martyrs.

(Part of car strike item
above.)

“JT SHatt Go Free,” Says
Girt on TRIAL AS Szay-
ER.

(Stout trial continued.)

Man Forcinc “Loan” FRoM
Ricu Faces Court.

(Details of getting money
under false pretenses.)

SEEK To SET Day For TRIAL
oF Rev. Kemp.

(Recalls concrete abnormal
details.)

 

Inpict Davies 1n C. H.
Foster EXTORTION
CasE.

(Unnecessary details.)

Girt’s Escort STABBED;
Crawits MILE FOR

AD.

(Wording and _ situation
arouse abnormal inter-
est.)

ELEcTRocuTE NEGRO
SLAYER.

(Instils admiration for
negro criminal by
quoting his sentimental

prayer.)

Horter LaSatte Woman
Guzst Founp  In-
JURED.

(Sensational situation,
mystery.)

Fucrtive Nurse HELp as
Turer Raves IN CELL

(Unnecessary abnormal
details.)

WraitH oF OLD Love
DarkENS PaTHWAY
or New.

(Idea of immoral con-
duct.)

Packers Frar Inpict-
MENTS IN City THis
WEEK.

(Disregarding legal sum-
mons.)

 

Betts Cuarces Por
in Coat Lanp Case.

MERCHANT SHOT, 5 IN
Jatt: ResuLt or CARD
GAME.

Gem Suspect BroucHtT
Back.

Baron Siarn In PistoL
Duet By FoRMER
FRIEND.

Mystery IN DEATH OF
FRIEND OF SENATOR
Quay.

Raw SALOON AFTER THE
Fray.

(All of these items are
more or less bare state-
ments of criminal or
other anti-social acts.)

 

* Such items as the following, entitled “Woman Pinned Under Car Half-Hour, Dies,” giving details
of injuries, have not been included. A large class of items presenting details of deaths from epilepsy, etc.,

facts concerning insane asylums,
categories.

Nevertheless, this class of items often

as well as much sporting news, has not been included in any of these
ave an abnormal effect (people occasionally becom-

ing mentally unbalanced from reading them), and are quite unnecessary in the newspaper.
4 For ten years T had lived in a neighborhood which was by no means criminal and yet during Octo-

ber and November of 1898 we were startled by ten murders within a radius of ten

locks. A little inves-

tigation of details and motives, the accident of a personal acquaintance with two of the criminals, made
it not in the least difficult to trace the murders back to the influence of the war. Simple people who read
of carnage and bloodshed easily receive suggestions. Habits of self-control which have been but slowly
and imperfectly acquired quickly break down when such stress is put upon them.”—Jane Addams,
Newer Ideals of Peace, 43.

“Boys and girls read about graft and dishonesty among people in the supposedly higher walks of
life, and the example is a powerful thing for evil in their lives. Children become calloused more or less
to vice, and get really false notions, because what they read in the papers is after all the exceptional case,
and too many of us are prone to judge the general condition by what is, after all, only an exceptional or
special condition.”—Ben B. Lindsey, The Light, September, 1906.
TABLE I—Continued

 

 

I

ca

tr

 

Hoty Man For SENDING
Girt Porson.
(Details of method.)

$525 LooTEp FRoM SAFE.
(Method given.)

Exeanor Rogson In HER
Latest AND Her Future
ROLE.

(Picture making sexual ap-

Puysician Enns Lire
As Famity Looxs on.
(Sensational details.)

Arrest in Hoter Rap.
(Description of disorder-
ly conduct.)

Wire Snoots at Man
Sue Says DenrED HER
Foon.

peal.) (Sensational details.)

How Jacques CopELt Diep.

(Short story describing how
a spiritualist suggested
idea of his death to a man
until he killed himself.)

 

particular category is given in parenthesis directly beneath the
title.

In the following chapter the results obtained by the method
outlined above will be stated and explained.

CHAPTER V
TABULAR ANALYSIS OF THE PAPERS STUDIED

With the definition of anti-social matter determined upon as
explained in the preceding chapter, the measurement of papers
was undertaken. The analysis was confined to an intensive study
of a comparatively small number of representative American
papers exclusive of Sunday issues.1_ The papers analyzed were,
first, the daily papers taken by the Chicago Public Library for
three different dates, November 1 and 30, 1909, and January 3,
1910. The issues for those dates were not selected by the writer,
but were merely those which it was convenient for the library
to give away. This set of papers comprised, in general and in

1Since the object of the analysis was to obtain comparative results as far
as possible, the Sunday issues could not be included, because, (1) a large
number of representative papers have no Sunday issues, and (2) the Sunday
editions represent characteristics so diverse from the week-day papers in size,
arrangement of matter, and apportionment of space that they could not be
included in an average which was to be compared with another average in which

a Sunday edition was lacking. They demand separate treatment, therefore;
but it was not possible within the limits of this study to consider them.
the main, the more conservative newspapers of the country.
Altogether they numbered 130 for the three issues, though some
were in such mutilated condition that they could not be analyzed,
and, therefore, data from only 103 issues appear in the tables.
Second, the Chicago E———— and the Chicago D———— were
analyzed for the month of February, 1910, and the New York
A———., the New York B———, the New York C———, and
the Denver G————, each for seven days in the same month,
February 18 to 27 inclusive. These Chicago, Denver, and New
York papers were chosen because they are not among those taken
by the Chicago Public Library, because they are well-known
papers of large circulation, and because they are said to represent
certain characteristic types of the American newspaper.”

The newspapers were carefully read and the anti-social mat-
ter in them marked as follows: The matter falling under
division I of Table I? was numbered (4), the matter falling
under division II of Table I was numbered (3), and all other
mention of anti-social activities was numbered (2). This
numbering held for matter under all the headings except that
marked “editorial,” in which case a slightly different classifica-
tion was necessarily used. The editorials dealing with anti-
social facts from a constructively social viewpoint were marked
(2), those dealing with anti-social facts from an anti-social
viewpoint were marked (3).

The following form of table was used for tabulating the first
results and for purposes of computation:

 

 

 

 

 

Reg. News Critical Literary Editorial | | 2 | g
Bi
£/3|3
trle}3}ta;/zrle2{3sia{r{2{sl4{rl2}3/a ala
No. Inches . .
Percentage ..
? With the exception of Chicago E- a morning paper which has been

 

characterized as one of the best newspapers in the country of the moderately

conservative kind,” these papers have generally been designated as “yellow

journals” and some of them of the worst type. These papers were chosen for

analysis on the basis of the popular classification given them. The results of the

analysis in this chapter will throw some light on the justice of this classification.
*Cf. Table I, chap. iv.
Column 1 under each heading represents the total number of
inches of that class of matter; column 2, all the matter dealing
with anti-social facts in that class, including also columns 3 and
4; column 4 represents matter falling under division I of Table I;
column 3 represents the sum of divisions I and II of the same
table, that is, the sum of matter which constitutes an obvious
medium of suggestion and of matter of a less detailed sort, as
described in chap. iv. Divisions I and II were both grouped
under 3 in order to show more graphically the total percentage of
matter that should be removed from the newspaper in making
any constructive change in it. The results were then combined
in the tables that follow. These results may seem meager, but
they were all that could be obtained from a study carried on
accurately and intensively within the limited time of the investi-
gation. They comprise, however, accurate averages from repre-
sentative papers of a fairly wide range as to type, time, and
territory.

Table II represents a comparison of the general news section
of the papers taken by the Chicago Public Library for the three
dates of November 1 and 30, 1909, and January 3, 1910, with
averages for all the papers for the three dates taken together, and
with totals for all the papers taken together for each date. Col-
umns I, 2, 3, and 4 under each date represent the total number of
inches of news of the types described above as indicated in these
columns.* The figures immediately below those in inches are the
corresponding percentages, on the basis of the total number of
inches of “news proper” taken as 100 per cent. The totals for
November 1, 1909, in percentage terms, are: column 2, 7.63: col-
umn 3, 5.58; and column 4, 4.72, as contrasted with the percent-
ages for January 3, 1910: column 2, 13.61; column 3, 7.65; and
column 4, 6.24, and further with November 30, 1909: column 2,
15.25; column 3, 8.14; and column 4, 6.52. These total percent-
ages and averages represent results from 103 of the rather more
conservative papers in the country, ranging from 0.69 per cent
for column 2 in the Springfield H.- of November 1, to 21.27

 

* Newspaper columns vary in length in different papers. It was necessary,
therefore, to reduce columns to a common basis of inches.
gtror |gortx |f9:92 Joor |x4-£  |rb-zz loz'te oor |x6-s |t6-4 lous oor |Sg-gr los-ze |Zb-zh oor *soBejusorag

 

 

 

 

Sig [$04 ~—fezs‘x |pxacs |Sss  |S6L = |rzx'z |gge’g ore |reb —|gro'z overs jose [egg —igzutx | ggo'r + +“saqout [e101
v € @ 1 ¢ £ z I v e z I v e z roofer Terese egg Se
tye ‘82 ‘ee ‘6x ‘gx ArenIqag
——9 sone ——9 og man ——4 04 ma ¥ y40q may

 

 

NOILOGS SMEN TVAAINED
AI AT&VL

 

   

ee. beg, bow bow pews bm

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. oor tervr |sv-vr |sb-yr [oor lors + *soBequooIeg
” S-ovi'e [Pg —|906 [go |gzg _|Saxb'x [S-POo'x |os-Scu'e |zL6%x lovo'z [Poe's |661'e |ecc‘or +++ *saqout ]eI0,
¥ ¢ z I % € z I + € z | I % ¢ z I
——4 0800149 ——al 080919 a O02 a 080214
NOILOGG IVTAOLOIg GNV AUVaTLYT NOLLOSS SMEN AVINOTY
Ill @TaVL
og's —_|igg _—_[€x-zx Joor 2-9 |Sq-4_——|x9°€z__ oor 28-9 |brg —|SeSx__ [oor zl'y — |gS-S | £9°k joor srresseesss goSpquaqrag
of 164 |S" gog's |Goo'or los rgh‘zg |Sz-gxg'x |SZ-gee'z |Sz-PeO'e |Sz- gdz‘bz |zgo'r |Sz-G60'x |S4-EL6'E [$4 C6L'Se |oS-zOe*r [SL OFS | 100% |SL-xxb‘Lz |--+ > sopoUL roquIU [eIOT,
¥ € z r ¥ € z r % € z r v € z r “*Sor sxeded yo roqumyy
soqeqy sory] —o8vI0Ay or6x ‘¢ Arenuet 606r ‘of soquieAONT 606r ‘1 raquieAoyy

 

 

NOILOIS SMIN TVIINTD
Il @TavL
per cent for column 2 in the Toledo I- of the same date;
for November 30, ranging from 1.04 per cent for column 2 in the
Springfield H to 29.61 per cent for column 2 in the New
York K; and for January 3, 1910, ranging from 1.61 per cent for
column 2 in the Springfield H to 26.14 per cent for
column 2 in the Philadelphia L The corresponding, or
minimum and maximum, figures for column 4 on the same dates
are: 0.32 in the Louisville M- and 15.59 in the Tacoma
oO for November 1; 0.00 in the Springfield H.- and
14.65 in the Philadelphia L for January 3; and for No-
vember 30, 0.27 in the Springfield H. and 12.68 in the
Omaha P-. :

Table III represents a comparison of the regular news section

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

and the literary and pictorial section of the Chicago D: with
those of the Chicago E for February, 1910. The average
percentages of anti-social news for the Chicago D. are

37-16 for column 2, 23.02 for column 3, and 20.02 for column 4,
as compared with Chicago E. ’s 18.90 per cent for column
2, 8.48 per cent for column 3, and 7.10 per cent for column 4.
The percentages of anti-social matter in the literary and pictorial
section are, for the Chicago D. , 14.45 for both columns
2 and 3, and 14.27 for column 4, as compared with 0.44 per
cent in column 2 alone, for the Chicago E

Table IV contains a comparison of the general news sections
of three New York papers and of the Denver G- for seven
corresponding days in February, 1910. The New York A
has the highest percentages in all three columns, 42.47 for
column 2, 21.70 for column 3, and 18.45 for column 4 respec-
tively. The New York B. has the lowest percentage of
news, in column 4, 5.91 as compared with 18.65 for the New
York A , 7.71 for the New York C- , and 10.76 for
the Denver G The percentage of news which would fall
under the second division of Table I, found by subtracting
column 4 from 3, is lowest in the New York B , 2.43, and
is slightly higher in the other three papers: 3.05 in the New York
A. , 3-38 in the Denver G- , and 4.73 in the New
York C- .
Comparing the percentages of the New York papers and of
the Denver G: for columns 2 and 4 with corresponding
percentages for the two Chicago papers here analyzed, and
ranging them according to size of percentage in each column, we
have the result given in Table V.

TABLE V
CoMPARISON OF PERCENTAGES OF ANTI-SOCIAL NEWS IN COLUMNS 2 AND 4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

COLUMN 2 CoLuMN 4
Name of Newspaper Percentage ‘Name of Newspaper Percentage
New York A 42.47 | Chicago D——............ 20.02
New York B———. «-| 37-78 | New York A———. : 18.65
Chicago D———. .-| 37.16 | Denver G——.. 10.76
New York C——— 33-20 | New York C- 7.71
Denver G———. . 26.63 | Chicago E———. 7.10
Chicago E- . «.| 18.90 | New York B- 5.91

   

 

Table VI is made up of the average percentages for sections
I, II, III, and IV of all the papers studied. Thus it represents
the average percentages for the three dates of the 103 papers in
Table II, the averages for the Chicago E— and Chicago
D for the month of February, the averages for the New
York A. , New York B. , and New York C-. ;
and the Denver G- for seven days in February, 1910.

Table VII is the most inclusive of all the tables. It repre-
sents a comparison of the six papers for certain common dates,
February 18 to 27, inclusive, omitting the twenty-first for which
date one paper was lacking. The first column, marked “Total
Space,” contains the total number of inches of matter, exclusive
of advertising space, in each of these papers for the dates men-
tioned, that is, the sum of the first columns under each section.
The upper figures for each paper under each section represent
in the first columns the total number of inches of each kind of
matter, and in columns 2, 3, and 4 the number of inches of anti-
social matter under each category for each kind of matter.
Under sections V, VI, and VII, as has previously been explained.
only the total number of inches of that kind of matter appears.
The lower figures for each paper in every case are percentages
of the “total space.” This table is significant as representing a
“sodequeoied a7ewI}s9 0} YOIYA Woy JojZeUT [eTDOS-17Ue OU ‘

 

‘aosttedui0d Jo siseq Ou Sea B19q} aSNeOAq SaFeyUsoIed Jo PeoqSUT atoy UOATS Iv SOyUT 4

 

 

(Sb), | = : ss | (SsoLe%%,) | °° (84°16), |gL-ot|go-b1]€g*gzloor|* +++ +++ +++ 2 anuag

Lo'y |LE-o1| oor 26 z £6: z |€6°z OOor a (48S), |16°S |v6°L |gZ°LE]oor|-~ . J 440 many
Iz‘l j7g'r | oor (499), Igeg |ev-erl€v-zr} oor iLL lvb-zrloz" €£|oo1)- ——) y40q many
€S-orjr1°zz| oor gl-or te-arleg-an O10 £6°Sz|€6°Szj€6°Sz} oor Sg gtjoL12|Lb-zbloor|: ——Y 440 many
s+ |pS+r | oor ana 00%, lof"z joz€ jor-b oeor jor [gh-g jo6-gtjoor|- ‘ta ospo1y4)
sso} oor |lze-b1/Sh-b1)Sb- br Oor SS°r |zz€ jez-€ oor %0°02|z0" £z/g1 LEloor | espa)

 

 

SL° gg" oor jvr'r |ob'r job oor ve ddr [ire oor = fog’ $ |Agg |€1‘z1loor

  
 
 

st corr (E
Aseauel pl pur ‘6061 ‘of {6061
‘I JoquIBAON oy siodeg for

£ z r v € @ I v £ z I v £ z I

 

Tesoupy samyog pur Arey jenug Worjoeg SMAN] IEMZy

 

 

IA ATAVL
loore

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

z9° Lrfr_ |6e:0r So" [vor |xz-g__|60° |xx- |xx- los-s ++ |S00"|So0:|ox-¢ 64° — |ob-g |4z-€ oor _|--aaoqe pouorjuam sag
SL-S8g'6 |$4-x6t%0r |rgo'9r zd [Sq [8 L196 |zer four ols |Sz-or9'xr| -- | g |g |S4-zog'y $4: 264% |SL-gog's |Ooo%or |S" rgh*zg |rhgttsz |2aay.7 a4 105 pazdpeue siodeg
zee 1g°6 zorvr Sz" Jez" [gf lag" |sg- |ug: |r6-er go") Go'| rx'|@Z-z  |gd-S 86-9 |ggror |gg'€S oor Teter asequaarad
S'Llote |LSgv —|z06'g_—jxzz |gor |S-g0d¢r loot | Arb J6zb |zog‘9 of | sb es |sper |dbgiz sz arbte jzre'g |S" gzs‘qz |eeeoh |o-s-+ +--+ ++ “soqour [eIOY,
oz"? qyror— [er-gr sete bpere [ee ++ loregr septs [rs [ores |sers  lro-s  leS-Sx [zzz oor
Sexy [Srzzo'r |S*sgsr | ++ Jes |grgee | ++ |pgetr nfs sire [Ses Se-gps |Seztx |S-e6q'y |gzg6 [-+++ +++ -———p soauaq
99°8 oor — 4g" 60° |vz- |gz*z ozs Joz Joe |16°9 st [ct [close |srre eb” |gsgr |zgr08 — Joor
16 zrg'r — gootr «= |ax_ igz |goz = ibe loz |e |zZ9 efits dc tgse lage gue LEL'r joSo'e |sev6 |+++++ ++ quog may
ssrz £0°S £$-g go |oor Jogr'e =f -- | =+ | ++ |oz*o gor] br] czlrbz fog fz6-z—|Sarzz |eg*1Z oor
o6r yrs 1£9 9 (6 |rie : “eg g | vr | zz |rgz os svs tzg't \gos's |esorz |--r-+ + 2D ys0x may

tees ree Sez [fv |r6- |rz-¢  |sx-elec-elez-eleb-ge Sr°] Sr] Sr-}gs- 6z°6 — |6Lor ~—|Zg*0z |99°6h oor

1 Sor'r jo JoS odz love E92 |foe |rdg"r bx | or [bs £99 1h Azb'x |zos'€ —|fgg’g [ot quog may
os zocor ods rr “1 [ee Josey "+ lpre [4erk ux] dxjore  |ut'y — |sees — |svepr Jor-cg oor
Seb Stolstx |bL6 ++ Jor log zx |zo9 vx | $1" |6gz soe eb Z6-11 |o4-1S — |S-zge'g|-*++ +++ -—_—-g o8 024
gfx es*h zvrez = |g6 + |ZE-% — J6g-x/6g-z|6g-z| br xz #0'| bor] to-\ses [rg-o rove forex (@e-eh oor
£6 11 S-gestx [to oof = fof jofx lotr |rsrr e |¢ |e loge zor —foss 66g [606% | S-zogtg|+++ +++ ++» 080914.

1 I 1 e}ze] 1 |olele 1 plete 1 v g z 1
= sands sodeg Jo oureyy

snoowe |, “298 Td,
sposryy. [TEU | Surx0dg Teroupy — | suoensnyy pue Arex0yr] ream Wor}D9g SMON TEIOUAD

AEN

 

 

TA aTavL
comparative intensive study of the relative apportionment of
matter in these papers and of the percentages of anti-social matter
in relation to the entire paper (exclusive of advertisements)
rather than to each class section separately. In the general news
section the percentages range for mention of anti-social facts
(column 2) from 21.15 per cent for the New York C-
to 15.52 per cent for the Denver G; for column 3, from 10.79
per cent in the New York A to 4.44 per cent in the New
York B. ; and for column 4, from 9.29 per cent in the New
York A to 3.15 per cent in the New York B ~ It
will be seen from these figures that even when the percentages
are taken on the basis of the total reading-matter in the paper
they are still high for this class of papers. It should be noted
also that it so happened that the dates here analyzed did not
include any special criminal “sensation” or “epidemic” ; hence the
averages are lower than they otherwise would be.

The figures so far given have not had any reference to the
matter of the circulation of the newspapers. Consequently, the
comparative potential influence of these newspapers with respect
to the number of people by whom they are read has been ignored.
The following diagram, Table VIII, indicates a more significant
fact for purposes of comparison in that it shows side by side the
approximate circulation and the percentage of anti-social matter
in column 4 of each paper.

A ‘comparison of the general news section and the editorial
section of all the papers studied is especially to be noted in this
table. It appears from these figures that whereas the Chicago
D has 20.02 per cent of matter falling under column 4
in its news columns, none of its editorial space is devoted to a
treatment of these anti-social facts in a socially constructive man-
ner (column 2), while 6.58 per cent of the space in its editorial
columns is devoted to editorials dealing with anti-social matter
from an anti-social point of view (column 3). The Chicago
E. , on the other hand, devoted 1.54 per cent of the space
in its editorial columns to discussion of anti-social facts from a
social viewpoint (column 2), and did not, within the period
studied, deal with such matter at all from an anti-social stand-
TABLE VIII

Circulation 100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000 §00,000 600,000

New York A.

 

New York B———

New York C-

 

Chicago D-——

 

Chicago E-

wwe me om Percentage of Anti-Social Matter

Denver G——

 

 

In this table the paper with the greatest circulation, the New York A. , is
taken as 100 per cent and the circulation of the other papers represented as per-
centages of that. The figures for circulation were taken from Ayer & Sons’
Newspaper Annual and Directory, 1910.
from the newspaper was not to make an exhaustive list of such
cases. That would have been impossible within the limited time
and with the facilities available. The purpose was to establish
the existence, not the full quantitative extent, of anti-social
newspaper influence. The machinery for getting at these cases
was very inadequate, because the questionnaire method alone
was available, and because this method is not one likely to bring
either numerous or detailed results. Few cases are, as yet, to be
found in the literature of criminology’ or in court records, be-
cause thus far the less obvious sources and causes of crime have
been only slightly studied, and there was no means of getting
information directly from persons influenced by the newspapers.
Moreover, only cases of conscious suggestion? could be collected,
that is, cases in which the relation between the newspaper as
stimulus and the resulting response had been recognized at the
time by the person involved and was thus remembered, that is,
in which there could be introspective evidence of the relation. Of
those that could be thus introspectively ascertained, only a cer-
tain proportion, in actual fact, would be remembered by the per-
sons themselves, and still fewer by third persons to whom con-
fessions of such connections were made.
never recognized, so in the commission of crime the source of the stimuli
is as infrequently recognized or as often forgotten.

Moreover, of the whole number of cases remembered, only
certain ones would be confessed to other persons. This number
would be likely to include cases of crime alone and few cases of
other anti-social activity, the former being the more likely to
come to official or public notice. Finally there are comparatively
few reports or records of such cases, possibly because people
dealing with offenders have not as yet had their attention on
this unconscious cause of crime as much as on other more
obvious, because more conscious, causes. The fact that a num-
ber of those to whom question-blanks were sent refer to cases
of which they have not preserved any memorandum and which
consequently they do not describe shows the lack of close atten-
tion to this cause of crime. Therefore, it is clear that
the number of cases of newspaper stiggestion to anti-
social activity which it would be possible to collect at the
present time would be no adequate measure of the extent to
which the newspaper has actually operated as a factor in causing
anti-social acts.

The evidence of the existence of, newspaper suggestion to
anti-social activity which has been collected in the course of this
study may be classified as follows:

1. Direct introspective evidence of such connection, con-
fessed in every case to some third person, and the details of
the act described by this person.

2. Direct introspective evidence of such connection, con-
fessed to some third person, but the nature of the act and the
details of the act not given.

3. Cases described in the newspapers themselves and stated
by the newspapers to have been caused by reading newspaper
accounts of similar crimes.

4. Statements from persons in close contact with criminals
and other social offenders, to the effect that this suggestion
exists, but containing no description of particular cases.

The exhibits which have been collected under these heads
represent a mass of both direct and indirect evidence of the sug-
CHAPTER VII
CONCLUSION

1. Summary and conclusions—The object of the present
study has been to show a causal connection between the news-
paper and crime and other anti-social activity. In how far and
in what manner this has been done a summary of the previous
chapters will show.?

Chap. iii explains the psychological process by which news-
paper influences operate on activity, and lays the theoretical
basis for the consideration of cases of newspaper suggestion and
of forms of newspaper stimuli. The conclusion reached in this
connection is that the newspaper can enter into activity in all
of the ways in which it can influence the nervous set, i.e., it may
be the source of initial images, ideas, or impulses that are now
either the fringe or the focus of a present act, or it may be a
present stimulus calling out images, ideas, or impulses that are
already present.

In chap. iv a method was worked out on the basis of these
principles for analyzing the amount and kinds of anti-social
matter in newspapers; a definition of anti-social matter was de-
termined upon different from the definitions hitherto employed,
and founded on an objective and socially constructive basis,
that is, a basis that is able to take care of all anti-social rela-
tions between the newspaper and activity and based upon a body
of psychological and psychiatral facts—a definition, conse-

® Chap. vi, as submitted for publication, contained a mass of evidence which
the editor was compelled to omit for lack of space. What appears here repre-
sents the material so edited.—EprTor.

+The concluding chapter was written to accompany chap. vi in its original
form with the entire mass of evidence and detailed discussion of evidence in-
cluded.
quently, both more and less inclusive, and more functional, than
the juridical definition.

In chap. v the results obtained by an analysis of newspapers
on the basis of the foregoing definition were given in several
tables representing a comparative and intensive study of approxi-
mately 57 papers for three different dates, of the general news
and literary and pictorial sections of the Chicago E. and
Chicago D for one month, of the general news sections
of three New York papers, the New York C- , the New
York B. , and the New York A , and of the Denver
G. for seven corresponding dates, a comparison of four
sections of all the papers studied, a comparison of the six papers
above mentioned by name for common dates as to relative appor-
tionment of matter and percentages of anti-social matter in rela-
tion to the total matter in each paper, and finally a diagrammatic
representation of the relation between certain percentages of
crime in the six papers mentioned by name and the circulation
of those papers.

Chap. vi was concerned with an analysis of typical cases of
American newspaper suggestion, as well as with a mass of evi-
dence from foreign newspapers, from ‘analogous sources of
anti-social suggestion, such as the yellow novel, moving pictures,
etc., and also with the presentation of the opinions of experts
in penal, judicial, and journalistic matters tending to confirm the
general thesis. Also an incidental account of movements
initiated and practical steps taken on the basis of a belief in, or
of positive proof of, the existence of this anti-social suggestion
was given.

The results of the analysis of the anti-social matter in the
six papers mentioned specifically above show the highest per-
centage of the kind of news which is an obvious medium of
suggestion considered on the basis of a comparison of news
alone, to be 20.02 and the lowest, 5.91; while an estimate based
upon all mention of anti-social news makes the highest per-
centage 42.47 and the lowest, 18.90. The amount of news
alone which should be withdrawn from the newspaper columns
is more nearly represented by the figures shown in column 3 of
the tables, 23.02 being the highest percentage there, and the low-
est, 7.94. This, however, is exclusive of forms of anti-social
matter other than that included in the news proper. The per-
centage of all kinds of anti-social matter out of the entire paper
which should be removed, a figure found by relating the sum of
inches in column 3 in all the papers to the total space exclusive
of advertisements, is 8.11.

One of the most significant results of this analysis comes
out in the figures relating to the comparative percentages of
anti-social matter in the editorial and news columns. Given a
certain amount of anti-social matter in the news columns, the
question arises whether the editorial columns are an adequate
offset to this, that is, whether this anti-social news is so treated in
editorials as to interpret it for those for whom it would be sug-
gestive in an anti-social direction—provided, of course, that the
editorial section can so offset the effect of the news columns. In
the paper whose news columns contain the highest average per-
centage of anti-social news, ie., 20.02 per cent, the editorial
columns contain only 6.58 per cent of anti-social matter. But all
of this matter is treated from an anti-social rather than from a
socially constructive standpoint. Here, then, the reader gets no
counter-evaluative stimuli to the news columns. The paper whose
news columns contained the lowest average percentage of anti-
social news—5.91—devoted 10.37 per cent of its editorial space
to a discussion of anti-social facts from a constructively social
viewpoint, and 4.07 per cent to a discussion of anti-social
facts from an anti-social viewpoint. Here, also, the editorial
columns are by no means an adequate offset for the anti-social
effect of the news columns—granting that the editorials are as
often read as are the news items, an assumption which is not
borne out by fact.

It appears from chap. vi that the newspaper leads to anti-
social activity in a number of ways. These may be summed up
by saying that it influences people directly, both unconsciously
and consciously, to commit anti-social acts. It also has a more
indirect anti-social influence on public opinion during criminal
trials through its accounts of these trials and through its partisan
selection of evidence; and, finally, it aids in building up anti-
social standards, and thus in preparing the way for anti-social
acts.

Finally, the results from the analyses of the papers are
based upon a comparatively extensive number of issues of papers
(203), comprising 57 different American newspapers. The per-
centages, therefore, constitute representative figures, both as to
number and kind of papers and total number of issues studied.

The evidence collected for chap. vi unquestionably establishes
the existence of suggestion to anti-social activity, and indirectly
suggests its extent. Cases of direct newspaper suggestion to crime
and other anti-social activity, cases of exactly analogous sugges-
tion through the similar medium of literature, also similar cases
of suggestion through moving-picture shows, theater representa-
tions, etc., along with a large body of facts testifying to a wide
experience and conviction on the part of experts and others that
the suggestion exists, were presented in support of the argument.

II. Newspapers and other interests are accustomed to object
to evidence of the kind here presented, that the persons who are
alleged to have been so influenced would have committed the
anti-social acts any way. This objection, however, is either based
upon the false assumption that criminals and other social offend-
ers are born such, or represents a failure to raise the question of
what makes the offender, if he is not born. Modern and scien-
tific criminology does not recognize the existence of the born
criminal or offender. If criminals are made, and not born such,
they have to acquire their anti-social habits somewhere. The
evidence here given has shown beyond question that the news-
paper is one of the means by which people are set to acquiring
anti-social habits and to committing anti-social acts.

Moreover, the newspaper itself admits an analogous sugges-
tive influence in other fields.2 The psychological principle, as
well as the evidence of actual fact, is the same in both cases.

III. Recommendations for Changes in the Newspaper.—
(1) The newspaper is a tremendous influence in the community.
Its stimuli reach an enormous number of persons and reach them

Instances were collected for chap. vi, but not published here.
frequently and insistently. It should, therefore, be an educa-
tive and dependable medium. Its possible educative value has
scarcely been realized. Suggestive anti-social matter should be
excluded from it. This does not mean that all mention of anti-
social matters should be excluded. It is desirable that the pub-
lic should be informed on all matters which they can assist in
improving. But the news which gives them the information
should not be couched in terms or presented in forms and details
which make it criminally suggestive or factually misleading. It
is possible to deal with anti-social matters in such a manner as
to minimize the possibility of suggestion to anti-social activity
by confining the treatment to bare statements of fact, by selecting
such facts only as are necessary to constructive action in the
matter. It is likewise possible to use all of the media which
contribute so largely to anti-social results in gaining increased
social results. Many of these methods constitute a technique
ready made for educative purposes. Large type, vivid and pic-
turesque writing, illustrations, colored type, diagrams, etc., are
just as easily the media of social as of anti-social suggestion
and when the content conveyed by them is of a social character
they are indispensable for readers who are fatigued, or who
read in poor light.

(2) There are, however, strong forces working against such
changes as have been suggested, at the present time. Commer-
cial influences operating upon the policy of newspapers serve to
suppress facts important to the public. Any accident, theft,
crime, which is likely to react unfavorably on the buying public
is not coupled with the name of the firm with whom it occurs.
For example, if an accident occurs in a State Street department
store in Chicago, whether due to fault of the company or to
some other cause, the newspapers do not mention specifically
where it occurred, because such mention hurts the store’s trade.

The newspaper is also accustomed to play up or distort facts
when such a course pays. An example of this is to be found in
the fact that while the opera Salome was under fire in Chicago
and not yet suspended, some of the Chicago papers and likewise

See Clifford G. Roe’s Panders and their White Slaves (Revell, 1910).
Cleveland papers (for which city the opera was booked after
Chicago) took the side of the opera and minimized its sug-
gestiveness.

The fact that the newspapers work for a margin of sales
also strongly influences their policy in printing anti-social mat-
ter. There is a circulation which can be pretty definitely
counted upon, i.e., a certain number of people buy papers con-
stantly for the news regardless of the content. Beyond this,
featuring, doctoring, and faking draw a wide circle of buyers who
would not otherwise be attracted. For example, the sporting sec-
tion is usually printed on colored paper and placed on the outside
of the evening paper for the purpose of attracting this margin of
sales among a class who are not generally interested in the
political and social news of the day. Likewise there are girls
who would not buy a conservatively gotten-up paper, i.e., one
dealing with the essential and standard facts of life presented
in an uncolored and dependable manner, who will buy a copy
which bears the caption in large red type, Turns Revolver Upon
Woman, Shoots Self.

In short, advertising columns and pecuniary reward muzzle
the news columns and distort and color the facts which they
contain, thus destroying their accuracy and utility and leading
to anti-social presentations. When any argument is made for
the control of newspaper presentations, however, it is met by the
time-honored appeal to freedom of discussion. But, as an an-
swer to this appeal, it should be remembered (1) that as a mat-
ter of fact the public does not get freedom of discussion in the
newspaper. It gets discussion which is strictly censored in the
ways mentioned above, in large part by special interests and the
desire for gains at the cost of the public; and (2) that as a
principle, freedom of discussion is useful and desirable only
when it secures advantageous social results. Freedom of dis-
cussion apart from its results is not in itself a worthy end.

(3) Endowed and public-owned newspapers have been pro-
posed as remedies for the present evils springing from a system
of private-owned newspapers. While public-owned newspapers
might secure the kind of news which is desirable—at least in
some respects—they are such a far-off contingency that it is
more practical to consider proposals which can be put into
operation more quickly. The endowed newspaper, as an ade-
quate solution of the problem, is at present as impracticable as
the public-owned newspaper. It would moreover be but a partial
relief, so long as private-owned newspapers were in the field.

(4) Therefore it is important to consider methods possible
at present.

(a) We need new and adequately enforced laws defining
strictly the power of newspapers to deal with news, laws analo-
gous to those already in operation in regard to the use of the
mails, billboards, etc. Such laws would, as a matter of fact, in
many cases be mere formulations of practices already in vogue.
Courts both in the United States and England have already
shown their power to restrain newspapers from, or to punish
them for, detailing certain types of anti-social facts.

(b) Judges should recognize in their decisions the facts al-
ready known regarding anti-social suggestion.

(c) Public opinion needs to be educated to secure support
for constructive legislation along this line and to support such
laws as we have or as may be made.

(d) Further investigation of the relation of newspaper sug-
gestion and other suggestion to crime and other anti-social
activity should be made, and public officials, such as probation
officers, juvenile court judges and other judges, superintendents
of institutions, etc., should be encouraged and required to keep
records of cases of such connection. In this way a better basis
for activity regarding the newspapers could be established.
