The Scope of Sociology. VII. Classification of Associations

Author(s): Albion W. Small

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 6, No. 4 (Jan., 1901), pp. 487-531
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2762289

Accessed: 09-05-2016 03:53 UTC
VII. CLASSIFICATION OF ASSOCIATIONS.”

Ir our exhibit of the scope of sociology were to be con-
tinued upon the scale of minuteness adopted in chap. vi, it
would be necessary to cover ground which has long ago been
cultivated so well that there is little hope of improving the work
at once. To continue the argument from the point now reached
we have only to cite such well-known discussions as the follow-
ing, viz.: Ratzenhofer, Die sociologische Erkenntnis; Part IV, “The
Social Process of the Human Race;” Part VI, ‘The Social
Forces ;” Part VII, “Social Evolution in the Light of Sociologi-
cal Perception;” Ward, Dynamic Sociology, second edition, Vol.
I, pp. 468-706, ‘“ The Social Forces;” Spencer, Principles of
Sociology, Vol. 1, Part I, chap. xxvii, and Part II.

It will not be superfluous to add one more general state-
ment, as a reminder of the relations between general classifica-
tions of sociological material and the various divisions of
sociological interpretation.

In presence of the same material, that is, the same body of
specific facts about men, intellectual interests in organizing and
interpreting the material concentrate in several distinct ways.
For instance, one variety of thinkers will look out over human
associations, and they will be moved to ask: “How did men
come to associate as they now do?” This is the typical ques-
tion of those whose primary curiosity is about the genetic aspect
of human experience. Thinkers of another variety will survey
the same facts, and they will ask: “How do men manage to
preserve the status quo?” This question voices the peculiar
interest of the men who care more for insight into the present
social situation, for analysis of present social arrangements and
the way they work, than for knowledge of how they came into

*This paper is presented, not as an attempt to classify associations, but as a

preface to such attempt. It does not belong in the main line of argument upon the
scope of sociology. It goes back rather to necessary methodological preliminaries.

487
existence. A third variety of thinkers are relatively indifferent
to both these questions, and they ask rather: ‘What are the
visible indications about the ways in which men will associate
in the future?” This is the question that rallies the men who
are trying to make the things which are seen disclose those that
are unseen. It is the question of the seer, the idealist, the
constructive philosopher. To him past and present are nothing
except as they contain and reveal the future. Still another
variety of men take for granted all the answers to these ques-
tions that seem to them worth considering, and their question is:
“What is the thing to do here and now, in order to make the
better future that isto be?” This is the query of the men who
want to be more than mere scholars. They want to accomplish
something. They want to organize rational movements for
making life yield increasing proportions of its possibilities.

The fact that these lines of cleavage exist between men who
deal with sociology calls for attention to several things that have
caused much confusion. In the first place, men of these dif-
ferent varieties have expressed or implied descriptions of the
scope of sociology which perhaps seem irreconcilable. The
truth is that they have merely emphasized, and in some cases
overemphasized, the particular phase of the vast reaches of
sociology which is peculiarly interesting to themselves. They
have very naturally placed special stress upon their own division
of labor, and they have incidentally slurred over the other
divisions of labor. It by no means follows that these men would
explicitly eliminate or disparage these other portions of science,
nor that the final answer to the different types of question will
contain anything irreconcilable. The fact, however, that men
have actually pursued these different inquiries under the name of
sociology accounts for the wide divergencies between treatises
and monographs that have used this title. In one case we
find plain anthropology or ethnology; in another, simply old-
fashioned philosophy of history, with little except its arrogation
of a new name to redeem it from the condemnation under which
the older thinking rests; in other cases we have had political or
economic or ethical philosophy; and again we have had the
same rule-of-thumb policy that experimenters have time out of
mind adventured, sometimes to worse than no purpose, and some-
times with fortunate results.

Now the truth is that human associations have aspects
and implications that are at one and the same time genetic
and static and teleologic and technologic.’. Probably very few
sociologists, however special the studies which have given them
most prominence, have entirely neglected the other aspects of
social reality. At all events, sociology will be an abortion until
it is a successful integration of the genetic and static and teleo-
logic and technologic elements involved in the social process,
and consequently in sociological theory. It is by no means
desirable that division of labor within the sociological field
should cease. On the contrary, our problems are demanding
further differentiation without visible limit. The desirable thing
is that the workers of the types just mentioned shall keep within
sight of each other, shall remember that they are parts of each
other, and shall acquire more facility in correcting themselves
by each other.

To whichever type of investigators we belong, our depend-
ence upon ability to catalogue and classify associations is equally
real. In the monograph which we shall quote below Dr. Stein-.
metz has not too severely characterized the poverty of resource
from which we derive most of the generalizations that do duty
as “inductions” in the social sciences. For discovery of methods
in the evolution of associations, or of laws of reaction within and
between associations, or of ends implicit in associations, or of
means adequate to hasten achievement of those ends, we have
no other source of knowledge than the facts displayed by asso-
ciations past and present. Whether our immediate purpose is
the partial aim of the specialist, or the comprehensive aim of
the philosopher who wants to outline the most extensive and
intensive view obtainable of the meaning of human life, our
alternatives are, on the one hand, resort to speculations, or, on
the other hand, analytic and synthetic organization of the facts

*Cf. PROFESSOR HENDERSON’s article in the present number of this JouRNAL,
“The Scope of Social Technology.”
presented by every known phase of human association. It is
hardly to be expected that a final classification of associations
can be proposed, for associations themselves are not finalized.
What we may expect is such use of analyses and classifications
appropriate to separate types and phases and stages of associa-
tion that our knowledge of the actual social process may move
toward completer comprehension. The present discussion is an
attempt to point out certain approaches to such use of classifica-
tion.

Wherever men have reflected about men they have instinc-
tively paid more or less attention to the facts recited and the
interpretations suggested in the foregoing chapters and in the
passages named in the first paragraph of this chapter. Whether
thinkers have carried generalization and abstraction to the point
of mentioning “association,” or even associations, is immaterial.
They have perforce dealt with men in groups, in reactions, in
combinations of some sort. The most naive writing about
society has had its expressed or implied classifications of men,
and these represented actual or conceptual associations (popult
romant and gentes; plebs and patricians; elect and reprobate;
clergy and laity; civilized and uncivilized; orientals and occi-
-dentals; Latins and Saxons; etc., etc.).

As the social sciences grew more systematic and sophisticated,
their classifications gradually took account of more and more
species of association. Ethnology schedules racial associations ;
history, by preference political associations; economics, indus-
trial and incidentally other associations. All these classifica-
tions have their uses, which cease when they begin to obstruct
discovery of relations which the traditional categories do not
disclose. After we have looked out over the human race, and
have seen the people of the world divided into geographical,
political, racial, vocational, and countless minor groups, we come
back to the reflection that these people are, after all, merely
variations of the same sort of personal unit that we find in our
individual selves. We remember that these diversified associa-
tions are merely incidental to the working out by other men of
the same life-purposes which we are pursuing in our particular
associations. We recall that these associations are all more or
less essential means to ends. They are devices for reaching the
same ultimate aims that we clearly or vaguely seek. Thereupon
we begin to ask: Is it possible so to classify men’s associations
that the relativity of their meaning will appear? Is it possible
to see how the human unit works into one association within
another, distinctly enough to discover the kind, and at last the
degree, of significance of each association for the essential
interests out of which and into which life develops ?

The sociologists have assumed an affirmative answer to these
questions, and have made beginnings of descriptive classifications
of men in their universal activities. Comte tried to provide for
such descriptions by the proposal of ‘social physics.” His idea,
like that of Quételet, was of society as a vast machine made up
of human units whose acts obey strictly mechanical laws. He
would describe human beings and their associations as parts
within parts of the social machine. We need not waste words
upon the futility of this attempt.

There followed a generation of sociologists who perceived
that men associate with each other more intimately than parts
of a machine play into each other. The beginnings of scientific
biology had been made. They caught the imagination of social
philosophers. These men said: Society is not a machine;
society is a living body. Thereupon three notable attempts
were made to describe human associations under the analogy of
an animal organism.’ This too, after all that is true is said, was
in some respects a crude and dangerous experiment, but even
those who are most contemptuous toward it would admit that
while this attempt to describe the essentials of society has held
the attention of sociologists some progress has been made, and
deeper insight has been gained. Suppose it be granted that this
gain is in spite of a certain fanciful element in the surroundings
of biological analogy. Let it even be admitted, for the sake of
argument, that the gains have been made merely in the line of
refuting errors incident to the use of this analogy. It remains
true that the intricacy and intimacy of human associations are

* Lilienfeld, Schaeffle, Spencer. Cf above, Vol. V, pp. 626-31.
better understood than when they were treated by Comte in terms
of mechanics. We have progressed from the assumption of a
mechanical or physiological principle, as the bond of human
associations, to the assumption of an evolutionary principle,
operating through means partly vital, partly psychical. In
accordance with this principle, whatever it may prove to be, men
arrange themselves in correlated groups, the whole forming a
system of activities which is organic in a higher sense than that
of biology. There is no consensus about definition of this prin-
ciple, but description of what actually occurs among associations
is gradually narrowing down the limits of definition, just as
description of what occurs in the animal world first resulted in
the formula of natural selection, and then haled that formula
before the scientific courts of review, where it is now having a
second hearing.

With something of this idea in mind, a large number of men
have proposed more or less exhaustive classifications of associa-
tions, or of “society,” or of what occurs in society. The pres-
ent discussion will not review these in detail, but references to
them will lead rather to certain methodological eliminations and
substitutions as a result of dealing with them in principle.

All the schemes hitherto proposed for classifying men in
association have somehow fallen short, by narrower or wider
margins, of satisfying instant demands. All descriptions of
objects merely as objects leave them undescribed at last. The
objects of our knowledge are related to each other. Our knowl-
edge of the objects becomes real in proportion as it discovers
their relations. All objects of knowledge are functioning parts
in the whole cosmic reality. Within the world of people each
man and each association of men has a functional meaning.
Human associations are created by persons in the course of their
efforts to attain ends. These associations all have their mean-
ing, as well as their being, in connection with their implicit
personal purposes. The associations are incidental to the attain-
ment of purposes by individuals. More than this, they are the
partial attainment of the purposes pursued by individuals. The
suggestion is natural that, if we knew the purposes of individuals,
we should have a key to the associations produced by these
purposes. This leads to the suggestion that associations might
be classified on the basis of the ends to which they are tributary.
Recurring to our working analysis of human interests and
desires, and adopting it by way of illustration as a starting-
point for discussion, we might plan our description of human
associations under the following titles:

1. Health associations.

. Wealth associations.

. Sociability associations.
. Knowledge associations.
Beauty associations.

. Rightness associations.

In other words, the most direct way ideally to get at the
reality of what is going on in human associations would be to
find out what men as individuals want—not merely in detail,
but in the principles implied in details—then to discriminate
the associations that cater to these several wants.”

Are there insuperable difficulties in the way of adopting such
a method? Having in mind all the phases of societary differen-
tiation thus far referred to in these papers, our main inquiry in the
present chapter is: May human associations be more adequately
described and classified than by use of the already familiar
schemes? May we discover methods of classification which
will more nearly satisfy the requirements of the evolutionary,
functional, teleological conceptions which, in some manner or
other, demand recognition in all formulations of social reality ?
Our answer is decidedly in the affirmative, but it would be fool-
ish to disguise the tremendous difficulties of the undertaking.

It ought not to embarrass us if we at once discover, for
instance, that there is likely to be relatively little material in the
health series, as compared with the wealth series which has been
worked out so elaborately during the last century. Possibly we
shall find that the economic series will always occupy the major
part of the social domain. This, however, signifies nothing

AupAw yo

* Above, pp. 177 5g.
2On the method of isolation vid. DIETZEL, Theoretische Socialékonomik, pp. 16 sg.
prejudicial to our perception. We are not bent on filling out a
schedule of sciences that shall be schematically uniform. All
we want is to find a way of reporting what actually is. If one
of these elements absorbs more life-force than another, we cer-
tainly do not want it to figure in sociology as equal to each of
the other terms in the social equation. Our starting-point is that
men carry into all their associations tacit or express requisitions
for all these kinds of satisfaction. All the activities that go on
among associated men are the actual response that action makes
thus far to these implicit desires. The associational activities
are the process of satisfying these desires in so far as the process
goes onat all. If we are right in our hypothesis that associated
human life is to be understood in the large only as the entire
system of functionings with reference to the ends indicated by
the six desires which we detect; and if we are right in presup-
posing that associated human life will become a process that
approaches completeness in proportion as it functions with refer-
ence to the several satisfactions in accordance with some ratio
not yet discovered, we should expect to find, meanwhile, that
the several ends are very unequally and disproportionately pro-
vided for in present society. Specific exhibits of the actual
situation, however, will serve not merely to describe what is.
They will at the same time amount, at least in a general way, to
teleological indications.

The foregoing suggestions afford another view of the appall-
ing complexity of our subject-matter. It may be further indi-
cated with the help of an illustration drawn from one of Herbert
Spencer’s doctrines. In discussing the ethics of voting Spencer
declares that equity would be most fully realized in a state in
which “there is not a representation of individuals, but a repre-
sentation of interests.’’?

The obvious reply is that interests are essentially individual.
All human interests are primarily individual interests. They are
inseparable, in fact, from the individuals to whom they pertain.
Interests that are more than individual get that plus character,
not by differing in kind from individual interests, but by being

* Principles of Ethics, Vol. I, p. 192.
permutations of individual interests. There is no way, therefore,
to represent interests without representing or misrepresenting
the individuals who are the ultimate repositories of the interests.

This particular case brings to view the rock on which the
profoundest attempts to analyze human associations may split ;
viz.: When we try to divide human associations in accord-
ance with the impulses that create and maintain and move
them, we soon confront the apparent dilemma that we must either
give up the attempt in despair, or we must find a way of dis-
membering individuals and of distributing the parts among the
associations that they compose.

The same individual, for example, might schedule himself as
a farmer for his health; a lawyer for his wealth; a member of a
“four hundred ” for his sociability ; of an academy of sciences
for his knowledge; of a musical society or an art league for
his beauty; of a lodge, or ethical-culture society, or reform
club, or church for his rightness. Unhappily for the purposes
of science, our live individual is not accommodating enough
to get all the satisfactions of any single desire in the activities
which answer primarily to that desire. On the contrary, each
of these desires may satisfy itself in part in every activity
that answers to each other desire. Accordingly, there are
very few individual activities, and perhaps still fewer associa-
tions, that can be referred exclusively, even in a superficial way,
to a single desire. More than this, if we think of individual
interests as merged into the interests of associations, we find that
the actual persons in whom the interests have their local lodg-
ment are bodily in one association and spiritually in a dozen or
a thousand other associations at the same time. Moreover,
there seems to be no way of so bringing the different phases of
their interest together that interests and the personnel of asso-
ciations will coincide.

For instance, the members of a dairy association may be
divided in health programs between Christian Science and Mor-
monism, and Ann Leeism and frank libertinism. In response to
social impulses they may distribute themselves between the
Republican, Democratic, Populist, Prohibitionist, and Socialist
Labor parties. In their knowledge associations they may form
other groups around certain more or less learned publications that
enter some of the homes, or the grange, or the university-exten-
sion center. Their beauty associations may be confined to cer-
tain codperations with the artistic departments of the state or
county fair, or the support of a singing school or a village-
improvement society. In rightness associations they may
arrange themselves visibly in a score of religious connections, or
lodges, or fraternities; while in actual types of conduct, in the
real moral tendencies that they promote, they may be distributed
among a hundred varieties of action—from those that are sur-
vivals of the predatory state to those that anticipate the mil-
lennium.

What resort is open, then, if sociology is to advance beyond
the ‘game, vermin, and stock” order of classification? It is, of
course, /ése-majesté toward the sovereignty of tradition, but the
truth must be told that, tried by the tests of serious logic, the
categories in current use in the social sciences hardly rise above
that amateur grade. Sociology has nothing to gain by conceal-
ing the perplexities which we at once confront when we try to
get better categories. It surely looks as though we had formu-
lated, in the abstract, a set of problems and a program of inves-
tigation impossible in the concrete. If we are counting on
quantitative knowledge as precise and extensive as that of phy-
sics and chemistry, these doubts are amply justified. If, however,
we appreciate the value of qualitative knowledge ; if we recognize
the importance and utility of more profound and accurate insight
into all the regularities manifested by human associations; we are
very far from having exhausted our means of search. The cate-
gories which we have indicated will be available both in extend-
ing and in enriching social science. Without waiting for the
development of the new sciences suggested below (p. 499), we
may make qualitative analyses of actual associations. We may
discover more and more precise laws of the adjustments that take
place beween persons when one or other of the desires is evi-
dently foremost. We may also in many cases determine the
order of rank and force among the other desires represented by
the same persons. How fast this search will yield results that
will appeal to the multitude should be none of the sociologist’s
concern. It is the search in which we shall push the frontier of
knowledge about society beyond its present bounds. The few
who should find a vocation in general sociology will in the end
serve society best if they free themselves from the present
eagerness of most sociologists to produce doctrines that will
have popular vogue. Their merit as well as their ultimate suc-
cess will be more secure if they rather devote themselves to some
part of the fundamental work of which we are now sketching the
outline. The first step toward understanding men in the associa-
tions that constitute universal conditions of human life is to make
accurate descriptions of these associations in terms of their func
tional relation to the whole social process. This can be done
only by rigid attention to the precise facts, without distraction
of attention in the beginning to theories about the facts, or to the
bearings of the facts upon persons or classes in our immediate
surroundings. Just as geologists describe rock deposits in order
to discover what they reveal about the process of building the
world, so we must learn to describe human associations in such
a way that they will reveal the most truth about the past and
present process of forming society.

We must refer to another type of proposal which has impor-
tant bearings upon our present subject. In working toward
adequate analysis of society, Simmel has contended that the
essential task of sociology is to make out and exhibit merely
the forms under which men arrange themselves in different
associations. That is, a certain number of variations are pos-
sible in the forms of relationship which personal associations
may assume. For instance, persons may be on terms of
equality with each other in numerous associations for as many
different purposes. For example, the huntsmen in a tribe, in
the matter of equal freedom in given hunting grounds; or
the ‘‘powers” recognized by each other as alike entitled to
the “open door” in China; or the members of a church with
respect to all its privileges; or the members of a book club, a
traffic association, a postal union, a learned society, etc., etc.
Regardless of the purposes of the association, the form of rela-
tionship between its members may be identical with the form of
relationship in other associations; 7. ¢., in this case the form of
equality. Again, perhaps the most familiar form of relationship
in association is that of superiority and subordination. There are
countless hierarchies among people, from that of mistress and
maid in the household, of employer and operative in the mill,
of master and apprentice in the trade, of teacher and pupil in
the school, of officer and private in the army, of bishop and
priest in the church, of manager and salesman in the depart-
ment store, to the protecting and the protected state in world-
politics. Whether there are other forms of association which
are coérdinate with these, or of similar practical importance, is a
question which has attracted much attention among sociologists
since the publication of Simmel’s thesis.

We have thus noticed three orders of categories, viz.:

1. The émpulses of association ; 2. ¢., the six elementary inter-
ests (chap. v and p. 493 above).

2. Certain incidents of association ; 7. e., characteristics always
manifested in associational activity; the facts referred to as
“data” of sociology in a special sense (chap. vi).

3. The forms of association (Simmel’s schedule).

Now, whatever be the dictates of abstract logic, in actual
practice we are likely to find ourselves unable to learn very
much more about the content of either of these categories,
unless we keep both of the other groups of terms at the same
time within easy call. We shall probably increase our knowl-
edge of each incidentally while we are studying another directly.
A rigid abstraction of each from the others is both impossible
and undesirable. For instance, the problems that descriptive
sociology encounters today may be indicated by the question:
In what forms and with what relative force do we actually find
the interests of individuals organizing themselves in associa-
tions? In working toward a geometry and calculus and logic

«For Simmel’s own statements vid. Annals of the American Academy, December,
1895, and AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SocroLocy, September and November, 1896. For
a schedule of the “forms” proposed or hinted at by Simmel vzd. AMERICAN JOURNAL
oF SocioLocy, November, 1898, p. 390.
of association that will ultimately serve as a practical means of
analyzing actual society, the procedure that in the end will yield
the largest returns seems to be precisely the method to which
physical scientists settled down long ago, viz., the examination
of cases and the tabulation of results. We have to collect cases
of the individual desires in all their associational reactions.
The degree of precision with which the work can be done at
present may not seem to promise results of high scientific
respectability, but that has been the case at the outset with
most of the larger problems that scientists have confronted. We
have reached the necessity, at all events, of tackling the prob-
lem: How do men conduct themselves in actual associations
when each of the six desires is in turn uppermost? This is
virtually a demand for six abstract-concrete sciences, instead
of one of the order of political economy. That is, the things
which we want to know about associated men call for an advance
beyond the abstraction of the economic man, to similar abstrac-
tions which we may indicate in the rough as the physical man,
the social man, the scientific man, the zsthetic man, the ethic
man. We need to know how each of the other elementary
desires works, when it has the right of way, just as we have been
learning since Adam Smith how the wealth desire acts when it
is decisive. No isolated human interest furnishes the where-
withal to move and mold individuals or associations. The inter-
ests have each certain tendencies which must be known seviatim
before we shall be equipped with the rudiments of knowledge
about the social situation. Supposing, however, that we have
these series of knowledges about abstractions from human
activity, each of them represents merely one ward of the
complex lock which guards the whole secret of a concrete social
situation. How to bring all into working conjunction is the
problem of real sociology.

In the present state of knowledge the suggestion of new
sciences to constitute a six-fold series codrdinate with political
economy in its orthodox scope will hardly be taken seriously.
Nevertheless we shall point out before the close of this paper
that in all probability we shall find some application of these
interest categories necessary in working out those subdivisions
of associations which will prove most important in the next
stages of societary analysis.

We have thus sufficiently emphasized the difficulties of ana-
lyzing and classifying associations. Progress in sociology
depends, however, upon overcoming the difficulties.

The importance of classification as a stage in the progress of
science has been common fame since Aristotle. The neces-
sity of finding categories of classification adequate to the differ-
entiation of social facts has been recognized, in the abstract,
by all the important sociologists, and it has been insisted upon
with great force by not a few. The demand for sociological
classification has never been presented with greater clearness
and energy than by Dr. Steinmetz in a recent monograph.” Cer-
tain passages are so timely that we epitomize at some length:

The first fault that strikes every critical mind, even in the best works on
sociology, with very rare exceptions, is the lack of universal and systemati-
cally completed knowledge of their whole domain. We rarely get the impres-
sion that the author is oriented on all sides or even upon many... . . It
is exceptional for a sociologist, when trying to demonstrate the universal
applicability of a law, to base his induction on more than a single category of
societies. He usually neglects with a liberality truly naive... .. We may
sum up our charges in the following judgment: for all sociology which deals
with humanity in general, or with both barbarous and civilized peoples, that
is to say, which is not identical with ethnology proper, the comparative period
is not yet begun. The comparative method is not yet an absolute essential
in all the researches worthy of the name, which pretend to be more than
rhetoric or chatter (cawserie). Now, I believe the principal reason why this
method is so little in favor is the absence of a classification and a catalogue
of all peoples according to their social status and the degree of their civiliza-
tion.

. ... In point of fact, there are very few sociological propositions which
are true of Germans and of Bushmen, of Athenians and Chinese and Esqui-
maux. Yet sociologists do not confine their assertions to a special class
.... nor do they trouble themselves to discover the domain within which a
fact prevails. They seem indifferent to the capital question whether the phe-
nomenon is only an exception, or a general fact common to numerous classes,
if not to all, The reasonings of sociological works are almost always entirely
vague and without sufficient foundation.

Classification des Types sociaux,” in DurKHEIM’s L’ Année sociologique, III,
1900.
On the other hand, in historical works there is great care taken to describe
and authenticate the pertinent facts. Comparisons figure with the historians
rather as distractions, or at most as means of better comprehending the other
facts in question. The establishment of a general law upon a sufficient
induction is never their end. The sociologists are too abstract and too little
positive; the historians are too concrete, and indifferent to generalizations.
Yet the latter only are the object of science. The sociologist sees neither
different classes nor types, because he is insufficiently precise. The historian
sees them little better, because he is too narrow in his knowledge and tend-
encies, because he has not the scientific spirit in the highest sense of the
word. The sociologist wants general ideas without trying to found them on
facts. The historian hunts for facts, but simply as facts they teach nothing
The sociologist needs to learn that there are different social species, that
humanity is not a homogeneous abstraction. The historian needs to recog-
nize that the body of people which occupies his attention is only an
individual, a member of a class, by the side of which there are many others,
also interesting, and that the aim should be to know them all.

Because, with rare exceptions, the best works upon ethnology or com-
parative sociology do not try to make an induction as complete as possible,
they do not succeed in delimiting classes with any precision. Adequate
induction and precise limitation of classes imply each other... ..

If there were more general appreciation of the logical value of the exfert=
mentum crucis,* neglected by almost all the sociologists, there would be more
serious attention to induction. It is a notorious fact that few sociological argu-
ments have weight with critical minds. The reason is: first, the insufficiency
of the inductions, in place of which there is mere reasoning by example; in
the second place, there is almost invariable lack of the experimentum crucis.
When the sociologist has cited a few examples in support of his hypothesis, he
is satisfied. He does not try to extend the research over the whole class in
question. He does not ply his explanation with objections. He does not hunt
for apparent exceptions to the supposed rule. Consequently he never con-
vinces,

. .. There is only one means of remedying this situation in sociology.
The demands of method should be raised, in order that the work of the dilet-
tante may be distinguished at once from that of the genuine scholar. Now,
the first advance needed in method—a stage for which, too, our science is
ripe—is the introduction of classification.

The greatest benefit which I anticipate from classification in sociology
will be the final and total break with that abstract and philosophical sociology
which consists merely of sonorous affirmations. It will aid us to attain this
end that every contribution which will count among genuine experts will be
truly a contribution to our positive knowledge. It will be real knowledge,

*Cf. Jevons, Principles of Science, pp. 507, 518, and 667.
Literary sociology must be banished beyond recall. So soon as classification
of peoples and of types of culture shall have made a place for itself in our
habits of research, and shall have come to control our minds, it will rout
abstract and baseless deduction. It will at each moment recall to our atten-
tion the mass of classified facts which we are called to explain and to elabo-
rate in order to discover laws.

Chaos is in itself so abhorrent that the mind turns away from it spon-
taneously and attends to some abstraction which it gathers out of the con-
fusion. On the contrary, a mass of facts once classified is so admirable, and
at the same time so attractive, that it fixes the attention. So soon, then, as
we shall have succeeded in introducing a little order in the chaos of social
facts, the way will be open for others. We shall always, however, have in
view the facts, the veritable problems. We shall no longer reason in a
vacuum, far from the problems. Classification will present to us so many
questions, it will plunge us so deep into that sea of positive and limited
problems, that the desire will never more leave us to discover all their most
secret depths. Then we shall realize that our science, like every other, has
to explain facts, not entertain the imagination with phrases.

The second advantage of this work once accomplished or merely under-
taken in a serious fashion, will be the following: Classification presupposes
and facilitates collection. Whoever wants to classify must collect. Whoever
wishes to collect must complete. To complete the collection becomes an
indomitable passion. Now this is precisely what we need. In natural history
specialists collect with enthusiasm ; in sociology, with indifference. Nothing
will be more effective in changing this state of things than classification. It
will be a beginning merely to mention some of the gaps in the description.
I will mention only some of the most serious :

1. Primitive peoples are disappearing. If we do not collect facts about
them now, they will presently be lost forever.

2. We lack complete and profound descriptions of the social and moral
life of civilized peoples. We may indicate our needs in this respect under
three heads: (a) folklore; (6) description of component groups of the popu-
lation — industrial centers, great cities, etc. We have brilliant samples of
this sort of work, but compared with the material they are rare. (c) Descrip-
tion of the life and all sorts of peculiarities proper to special classes of the
population — prostitutes, the criminal and dangerous classes, soldiers, sailors,
ecclesiastics, bohemians and wandering artists, nobles, millionaires, etc. It
is only within recent years that, thanks to the Italian school, the two first
classes have been studied somewhat profoundly, but even these researches
ought to go deeper, and they should be extended to other countries. How little
we know about these classes! It will be a long time before studies in this
field can be truly scientific. There are great entomological societies for the
study of insects, but we do not give ourselves any trouble to know the people
who surround us. (d) Characteristic traits, more descriptive than reasoned,
of entire peoples, like those of Russia by Tikhomirow,' of the United States
by Tocqueville? and by Becker, of Italy by Niceforo,‘ etc.

It is fortunate that, at least for economic facts, this work has been
done more or less completely by descriptive political economy and by sta-
tistics. For the rest of social life there are voluminous materials, meritorious
attempts, but nothing more. But throughout this domain the passionate
desire to complete the collection will be stimulated by collection jtself. It
will presently make changes of which sociology is in pressing need.

The same will be the case in another, closely related sphere, viz., social
history, in the large sense of the word, or the history of civilization. Social
history is made up of a continual series of descriptions, which have for their
subject-matter the social situation of a people or of a group of peoples, It
thus contains the most important problems which are presented tous. I
would not undervalue the important and admirable work which has been done
here by the historians, especially by the historians of political economy, but
the sociologist who has had occasion to compare the social histories of various
peoples upon some special social questions knows how far we are from a
satisfactory condition of knowledge. It is not merely because many sides of
social life are neglected, nor because the social history of many peoples is
very incomplete or deserves little confidence. It is because the materials are
not arranged so that they might be easily employed by those who try to com-
pare them for the purpose of making them intelligible, that is, really useful.
For, after all, the concrete materials of special histories do not serve their real
purpose except through the use made of them by the sociologist, when he
explains them and discovers their laws by means of the comparative method.

There will be no credible sociology until all these gaps are filled. Clas-
sification will stimulate scholars to do the needed work. Up to the present a
sociologist who proceeded exclusively by means of exemplification and illus-
tration has been able to flatter himself that our descriptive science is very
tich and approximately complete. His view of the field is so confused that
it is scarcely possible for him to make out the enormous gaps in the evidence,
and the use which he makes of the fragmentary evidence at his disposal does
not promote such discovery. Even into his mind, however, classification will
shed revealing light. The absence of order is of itself sufficient to prevent
perception of lack of knowledge.’ Classification once introduced into scien-
tific custom, the exigencies of veritable induction will force us, more than
any other power, to remedy the evil which they will themselves have brought
to light with cruel evidence.®

tLa Russie politique et sociale, 1886. 3 Die hundertjihrige Republik, 1879.

2 Democracy in America, 1850. 4D Italia Barbara, 1898.

5 “From the classifications and definitions of a science one may form conclusions

as to its accomplished results,” says WuNDT (Zogz#, 1883, II, p. 42). What a
somber diagnosis would result if this rule were applied to current sociology !

° Cf. MILL on classification (Logic, Vol. II).
Classification will of itself render impossible the method of reasoning
from isolated examples. It will force the most recalcitrant intellects to
genuine induction, because it will show that there are different groups of social
types, and that what is true of one may not be true of another. Nothing
will aid us better to avoid premature generalizations, the actual scourge of
our science. Under the dominance of classification the presumption will be
against crediting a group with a trait unless it has first been observed in that
group. The present tendency is precisely the contrary. We now pass by
involuntary shocks from generalization to limitation. Then we shall advance
more prudently from the latter to the former.

It cannot be denied that there is at present among the sociologists a cer-
tain horror of admitting an exception. We shall outgrow this repugnance
after the habit of classification has become firmly fixed. .... We shall at
last develop a passion for the exferimentum crucis, a passion which is the
severe and infallible touchstone of the genuine scientist. With this perfec-
tion of method there will be no chaos of facts that we cannot reduce to order.
What real experimentation is to the physical sciences, the experimentum crucis
is to those sciences that cannot make use of genuine experimentation. With-
out it there can be no complete induction. We may not accept a law as cer-
tain without having discovered and satisfactorily explained the exceptions to
the rule. What is the value, for example, of the assertion that woman is in
a servile and degraded condition among hunters, if I am unable either to
demonstrate by a complete induction that there are no exceptions to the law,
or to explain the exceptions by the increasing influence of some other cir-
cumstance ?

This careful search for exceptions will, moreover, have the further
advantage of putting us on the track of new laws, for the exceptions must
themselves be manifestations of some law. There is no rest for the genuine
scientific investigator until the exceptions are reduced to new laws. Hence
we shall advance to the demonstration of laws that will be more precise and
more true, because we shall have determined the conditions under which they
prevail, z. ¢., the sphere of their action. We shall discover their depend-
encies upon each other and their relation to more general laws. The
laws then formulated will be no longer vague and ambitious assertions.
They will rather contain candid expression of all the certainty and all the
generalization to which our evidence entitles us. Then at last chatter will
be banished from sociology, as it already is from other, more fortunate sci-
ences. The chatterers will be stigmatized as dilettantes, who have no lot
with true science, which is devoted to discovery.

In the constructive portions of his monograph Steinmetz dis-
cusses proposed classifications of society by use of selected
schemes grouped as follows:

1. Artificial classifications; e. g.:
(a) Coste: according to the relations of urban to absolute
population. (Steinmetz, p. 83.)

(4) Ward: according to social stages distinguished as: (1)
the solitary or autarchic stage; (2) the constrained aggregate
or anarchic stage; (3) the national or politarchic stage; (4)
the cosmopolitan or pantarchic stage.* (Steinmetz, p. 87.)

(c) Fouiliée: according to the relation of the whole to the
parts.3 (Steinmetz, p. 85.)

2. Morphological classifications :

(a) Spencer: according (1) to the degree of integration; and
(2) to the degree of militancy and industrialism.* (Steinmetz, p.
88.)

(6) Durkheim: a variation of Spencers (Steinmetz, p. 91.)

(c) Giddings: according to genetic relations indicated by
degrees of differentiation; another variation of Spencer.®

3. Economic classifications :

(2) Hildebrand: according to the internal organization of
economic life, in the manner in which products are distributed.”
(Steinmetz, p. 99.)

(4) Béucher: according to the general organization of indus-
try. (Steinmetz, p. 101.)

(¢) Grosse, Hahn, Liszt, and many others: according to the
development of technique.2 (Steinmetz, pp. 98 59.)

4. Geographico-ethnographic classifications :

* Les Principes d’une Sociologie objective. Paris: Alcan, 1899.

2 Dynamic Sociology, first edition, I, pp. 464-7.

3 La Science contemporaine, 1897.

4 Principles of Sociology, passim. Professor Giddings has recently published a
very clear exposition of this element in Spencer’s system, Jternational Monthly,
November, 1900.

5Les Régles de la Méthode sociologique, pp. 100 sq.; La Division du Travail
social, p. 189.

6 Principles of Sociology, pp. 63 sq.

7“Natural- Geld- und Creditwirthschaft,” in Jahrbiicher fiir Nationaloekonomie
und Statistik, II (1864), p. 4; also the important work, Recht und Sitte auf den ver-
schiedenen wirthschaftlichen Kulturstufen, 1896.

8 Die Entstehung der Volkswirthschaft, 1898.

9GROSSE, Die Formen der Familie und die Formen der Wirthschaft, 1896; HAHN,
Die Hausthiere (1896), pp. 385 sg.
(a) Ratzel: according to the influence of the geographic envi-
ronment.? (Steinmetz, p. 134.)

(4) Frobenius: according to diameters from a given center,
with more deference to voluntary choice than in the other
school? (Steinmetz, p. 134.)

5. Psychological classifications :

(a) Comte: according to the “law of the three stages.” 3
(Steinmetz, p. 126.)

(4) Sutherland: according to the general level of intelligence.*
(Steinmetz, pp. 118 sg.)

(¢) Morgan: according to inventions.’ (Steinmetz, p. 111.)

6. Mixed classifications :

(a) Vierkandt:° according to psychic and social differences.

(0) Le Play and his followers.? (Steinmetz, pp. 107 sg.)

(¢) Steinmetz: according to a combination of economic and
psychologic criteria (pp. 137 sg.).

We have not reproduced the above schedule because it is
exhaustive, or because its brief characterizations are entirely
just, or because we propose to discuss these or like schemes in
detail. Our immediate purpose in citing these propositions is
merely to illustrate the multiplicity and variety, and more than
all the futility, of attempts to classify societies up to date. We
thus have a background for the remainder of the argument.

Before we proceed, another series of general propositions
may be useful in binding together the divisions of our discus-
sion.

*Volkerkunde, 1885. 2 Der Ursprung der afrikanischen Kulturen, 1898.

3 Cours de Philosophie positive, Vol. IV, pp. 463 sg., 503 sg., and the whole of Vol. V.

4 The Origin and Growth of the Moral Instinct (1898), pp. 103-8.

8 Ancient Society (1877); Houses and House-Life of the American Aborigines
(1881), p. 43.

6 Naturvilker und Kulturvilker (1896); “Die Kulturformen und ihre geogra-
phische Verbreitung,” Geographische Zeitschrift, 1897 ; “ Die Kulturtypen der Mensch-
heit,” Archiv fiir Anthropologie, 1898.

7Ouvriers Européens (1879), I, pp. 70, 210, 212. On the work of Le Play in
general vid. WERCKSTEIN, in Jahrbiicher fiir Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Volks-
wirthschaft, 1894, and Vacuks, La Science sociale d’aprés les principes de Le Play et
de ses continuateurs, two volumes, 1897.
We may concede that the generalizations referred to in the pre-
ceding chapter and at the opening of this paper are the product
of observation and reflection which could hardly be called final.
If we propose inductive verification and refinement of these
provisional formulas, it is obviously necessary to have collected
as a basis of induction a vast number of cases of all sorts of
association, and to have examined these cases so closely that
their distinguishing marks will serve as means of classification.
In other words, general truths about association may be dis-
covered by the sort of guesswork that may easily pass as intui-
tion. Evidence, worthy of scientific repute, that the guesses
are correct must consist of generalization of enough cases
to exclude the probability of all contradictory or inconsistent
formulas. This perception challenges sociologists to catalogue
and classify human associations.

Our argument with reference to a program of classification
cannot be presented in a word. Its successive steps may seem
to wander from the path of direct reasoning. It may be well,
therefore, to anticipate the conclusion at which it arrives. The
theorem which we shall reach by a course of criticism now to be
outlined is substantially as follows: Human associations are not
things, they ave processes. To know them we must ascertain their
Sunctional values, just as truly as we must know both the general and
the special service to be rendered by a wheel or a shaft or a valve or
@ connecting gear, in order to be able to classify that part of a
machine, first in its immediate relations to the machine as a whole, and
then in a general mechanical scale. Human life, in the individual or
in associations, is, as we have seen, a process of realizing latent inter-
ests. The life of a given primitive group, of a people at any stage of
historical development, of any contemporary civilization, or of a minor
association within an earlier or a later civilization, is a stage and a
factor in that process. Human assocations must be classified then,
not as though they were constant structures, but in view of the fact that
they ave variable functions. They must be distinguished by the part
which they perform in the life-process. Inasmuch as that part varies
according as the whole process is less or more highly developed, the
classification of associations that would satisfy the facts of one stage of
evolution would not fit the facts of another stage. Associations must
therefore be classified functionally, and, more than that, our working test
of all functional classifications must be our teleological concepts. That
zs, we are bound to schedule associations in accordance with our judg-
ment of their relation to the scale of ends that are at issue in the par-
ticular situation in which those associations function.

In view, then, of the many previous efforts to classify social
phenomena, and of their unfortunate failure to reach results at
all satisfactory, it behooves everyone who ventures to renew the
undertaking to do so with caution and modesty. It is probable
that each type of classification thus far proposed has certain per-
manent uses. Much more has been accomplished in the aggre-
gate by previous attempts, abortive though we may judge each
of them to be, than is likely to be added by any single organizer
of data. In all probability each of the attempts at classification
named above, with many others of which they are types, con-
tains something of value. At all events, the limitations which
the attempts encounter are full of meaning, if we can learn how
to interpret them.

It does not follow that the task of classification which
remains is a problem of arranging harmony and synthesis
between the various previous classifications. We are rather in
search of a harmony and synthesis of the different portions of
subject-matter with which these attempts have been concerned.
Nothing is plainer than that the different schemes which we have
reviewed have been concerned primarily with one of several dif-
ferent orders of facts. Some of them have seen society as it
appears from the ethnologists’ point of view; others, as it
appears from the economists’, the technologists’, the legists’, or
the moralists’ point of view. Accordingly, as we have found to
be the case throughout the social sciences, the makers of the
respective classifications have each unconsciously based their
calculations upon a very narrow abstraction from the social whole,
and have tried to make this abstraction a secure nucleus about
which the rest of the facts might gather.

The program now to be proposed for a more adequate
method begins with our conception of the whole in and of which
the facts to be grouped are parts. As we have said (chap. v,
p- 202): “Human association is a continuous process of realizing a
larger aggregate and better proportions of the health, wealth, soci-
ability, knowledge, beauty, and rightness desires.” Accordingly the
classification of associations that we seem to want is one in
accordance with the parts of this process which the different
associations accomplish.

With this as our express requisition it is at once probable
that an adequate scheme of classification will be highly complex.
Association is a fact that is at any given time merely a passing
phase of an immeasurable process. What association is accom-
plishing at a given moment can be seen only by setting the
process of that moment in its appropriate place in the genetic
series which the moment continues. On the other hand, human
aims are constantly differentiating, and associations are pari passu
changing the form and force and quality of their internal and
external reactions. That is, the classification of associations as
parts of a static order is one thing at one stage of evolution and
a quite different thing at another. In this connection we hit
upon one of the most obvious crudities in many familiar attempts
to classify societies; viz., they start with categories which, for
the sake of argument, we may assume to be adequate for rudi-
mentary societies. Then, however, they stop short and fail to
differentiate the categories to keep pace with the evolving char-
acteristics of the associations to which they are applied. This
is as though one should collect and classify birds’ eggs, and
then attempt to make the groups into which they fall suffice as
a complete scheme of classification in ornithology; or it is as
though, without the concept ‘‘transportation,” one should
attempt to classify all vehicles in accordance with—we will
say—some absolute esthetic preconception. The dugout and
the ‘ Deutschland,” the drag of poles and the limited express,
with all the types of vehicle that have intervened, might be
grouped according to variations from the assumed esthetic norm.
It is certain, however, that in either case the classifications would
not go far toward fixing the real significance of the specimen parts
in the process concerned, particularly in its more evolved stages.
Classification of human associations must therefore make a
place for genetic, for morphological, and for functional catego-
ries, and the morphological and functional phases of the scheme
must evidently at last fall into a genetic series parallel with the
evolution of the associations themselves. The morphological
and the functional categories in turn will have to be worked out
by a process of adjusting perceptions of workings to conceptions
of ends toward which the workings tend.

It might be held that such classifications of societary activi-
ties as those of Spencer, Schaeffle, and De Greef are functional,
and that a functional criterion of activities is implicitly teleologi-
cal. The reply is that, whatever may be the logical implications
and correlations of the notion “function,” it by no means in
actual use draws with it a working notion of end. Indeed, it is
more than probable that sociological criticism will at last fix
upon the absence of an adequate concept of the end, or the
“universal,” indicated in the visible parts of the social process,
as the factor which limits the availability of the functional classi-
fications of which those named are types. The best of them,
such as that of Schaeffle, appear to be but unorganized cata-
logues of activities after all, so soon as we confront the final task
of correlating the activities analyzed and scheduled. We dis-
cover incidentally that the idea of function treated as an
abstraction, and held apart by itself, is as sterile as any other
purely formal conception. The idea of a “sustaining system,”
a ‘distributing system,” anda “regulating system,” for instance,
is of itself something as far from touch with the realities of
human association as the vulgar idea of ‘perpetual motion” is
from embodiment of the realities of mechanics. To make terms
of mechanism real it must be mechanism that functions in a real
process. We must have companion-conceptions, in the case
cited, first of what is sustained, what is distributed, what is con-
trolled; and, second, of why the sustaining, distributing, and
controlling, z. ¢., of the end to which the mechanism and the
process are incidental. This is the setting in which we find
most use for the formula to which we have constant recourse,
viz.: Society, or human association, must be considered as a
continuous process of realizing an increased aggregate and better
proportions of the health, wealth, sociability, knowledge, beauty,
and rightness satisfactions. Analysis of associations so consid-
ered should be in accordance with the teleological criterion.
Associational activities must be classified with reference to their
respective relations to different parts of this complex end.

In other words, human association is always, from smallest
to largest, from lowest to highest, a process of producing utili-
ties of one sort or another; 7. ¢., of catering to human desire for
satisfactions of varying degrees of complexity. We have only
two relatively developed examinations of associational activities
from this point of view, viz., economics and philosophical civics.
The latter may be said to organize a conspectus of social activi-
ties on the basis of their relation to a certain sort of moral
utility, in brief and in chief the maintenance of conventional
order, 2. ¢., utilities which are in form apparently referable to
the sociability interest; in content, however, they distribute
themselves among all the interests. The former attempts to
set forth all human activities on the basis of their relation to
the production of utilities that havea material measure. Hardly
an overt act performed by human beings escapes the notice both
of civics and of economics, but from the point of view of either
the same acts fall into an order of importance quite different from
that which would emerge if we should attempt to scale the value
of the same activities with reference to either of the other utilities.

For instance, if we were to name the most important activi-
ties of the last century, or thereabouts, the different human satis-
factions being in turn the standard, we might decide that, from
the point of view of health, all that men have done scales down
from the value of the discoveries of anesthesia, and of the pro-
cesses of disease propagation. We might say that the wealth
interest has been most served by the engineering and mechanical
workshops, from James Watt’s tea-kettle to Edison’s laboratory;
and we might rank all else that men have done in proportion to
its share in applying or inventing wealth-producing devices. We
might say that sociability utilities have ranged in value from the
new impulse launched into the world by the American Declaration
of Independence to the quietest “‘ pleasant Sunday afternoon”
in any slum district in England. We might decide that, from
the point of view of knowledge utility, the center of human
action has been Darwin’s collection of observations, and all
other actions have had rank according to their relation to the
emerging evolutionary concept. Without presuming to imagine
what would be a plausible theory of esthetic graduation, we may
suppose, in the case of the rightness utilities, that the transfer-
ence of the moral meridian from heaven to earth, and the sub-
stitution of positive for speculative criteria of values, will prove
to be the summit from which to scale the relative significance
of other activities in this realm.

What is the meaning of the actions of associated men, the
different utilities in which men are interested being in turn the
criterion? What then is the meaning and value, at any given
time, of the whole plexus of activities carried on by an associa-
tion, in view of the interest of each and all of the members in each
and all of these distinguishable utilities ? These are the questions
that set the tasks of distinguishing and classifying associations.

Our present limits permit only a sketch of the plan of classi-
fication to which these suggestions point. In the first place, we
would distinguish four phases which human association on a large
scale presents:

1. Biologic association.

2. Economic association.

3. Civic association.

4. Ethic association.

Whether these phases are in any association chronologically
separable is not a capital question. They mark associations
with different ratios of prominence at different stages of socie-
tary evolution. In phase 1 there may or may not be marks
of distinction from the associations of lower animals. At all
events it is the phase in which the physical and physiological
factors predominate, in contrast with the factors that hold the
balance in the other phases. It is the kind of association in
which the classifications of physical anthropologist and ethnolo-
gist are of paramount importance.
Phase 2 is that marked by contacts between people inci-
dental to their common zeal to make the most of the world’s
material resources. Here the categories of economics and
mechanical technology must primarily be decisive.

Phase 3 is that characterized by realization of the need of
control, regulation, organization beyond that spontaneously
adopted in the course of applying labor power to the develop-
ment of material resources. The classifications of political
science must here be fundamental.

Phase 4 is that in which conduct in association recognizes
the authority of some standard not given in physical impulse or
material economy or civic necessity per se, but presupposing
some utility to which all these and all the individuals concerned
are subordinate and mediate. We cannot say here, in symmetry
with the propositions immediately preceding, that the categories
of moral science must be taken as standard. On the contrary,
the fundamental utility of sociology is in its prospective fur-
nishing of a criterion for criticism of ethical categories. The
different moral systems, whether obsolete or still effective,
posit standards of obligation more or less external to the life-
process. Doubtless complete historical analysis of human
experience would have to employ a great many variations of
morphological and functional classification corresponding to the
ethical presumptions that actually prevailed. Ethic association
of many different qualities has been actual. There must be
many reciprocal relations between these social phenomena and
our objective analysis of them, on the one hand, and our con-
ceptions of absolute ethical criteria, on the other. At this point
we may simply say that our classifications of present associations
in their ethical phase must conform to our fundamental theorem
(vid. p. 509) as to the whole social process.

As we have hinted above, there may have been distinct
periods during which each of these phases of association, or at
least each with the one or more placed before it in the list,
covered the whole field of association to the exclusion of later
phases. Whether this is absolutely the case is not a matter of
first-rate importance. For our present purpose we have no
occasion to press back beyond the evident fact that human
associations have exhibited these distinct phases. We need not
even attempt to formulate the order in which the different
motives have predominated. It is certainly not a constant
order, though the variations from the order given may be excep-
tions easily explained.

In proposing these general divisions of social conditions we
have had in mind the activities of the human race as a whole,
though it is evident that neither periods of civilization nor
geographical limits could be designated in which these distinc-
tions would precisely classify the whole human family. If soci-
ological theory is ever complete, its generalizations must cover
the largest circuit of actual association. Up to date, however,
the conditions of human contacts have been such that the exten-
sion and intention of the associational process have to be learned
chiefly by observation of associations ranging from the family
at one extreme to the state at the other. It is by no means
certain whether the most fruitful method of settling upon a mor-
phological and functional and teleological system of classifying
associations will be found by those who start with the family
and move outward through association after association until
they reach the state, or by those who begin with the state
and analyze down through association after association until
they reach the family, and thence the individual. Perhaps
there would be more superficial consistency with our introduc-
tory references to the individual assumption (chap. iv, pp.
60-62; chap. v, pp. 177-99) if we adopted the former course.
For reasons which need not be detailed, however, we find the
latter alternative more immediately promising, though by no
means necessarily likely to acomplish so much that it will be
final without verification and expansion through independent
elaboration of the opposite method. We therefore propose a
system which may be called a basis for national sociology. The
theory so called will be related to the more inclusive sociology
very much as the orthodox political economy, or, as the Ger-
mans have more appropriately phrased it, “national economy,”
has been related to the more general theory of utilities striven
for by the so-called “Austrian school.’ In other words, human
associations that can be known and called such have, as a mat-
ter of fact, functioned chiefly within the organized state. Whether
or not we can profitably generalize what is now known about
human contacts in terms of association wider than that within
the state, we shall doubtless for the present economize effort if
we concentrate attention upon those reaches of association which
are displayed by populations either organized in states or of
sufficient size to make their potential statehood plausible.

On this basis, then, we begin with the seemingly somewhat
self-contradictory classification of states, as follows:

1. Biologic states.

2. Economic states.

3. Civic states.

4. Ethic states.

That is, our subject-matter is not evolved into shape for our
use until potential states of the first and second sorts are well
advanced toward becoming actual states of the third or fourth
sort. This perception should reinforce the position, all along
insisted upon by the sociologists, that, however important the
biologic and the economic elements always must be in associa-
tion, they necessarily diminish in relative importance as associa-
tion advances toward the unfolding of all its implications.
Accordingly we are at once disposed to challenge the right
of the anthropologist and the ethnologist to impose their
classifications upon phases 2, 3, and 4 of national association.
In the biologic states, anthropological and ethnological group-
ings are not to be challenged, but in the economic states associ-
ations immediately begin to cut through and through the lines of
ethnic groups. Accordingly we must not persist in attempting
to classify economic associations under ethnic categories, nor
are we permitted to assume that the forces which produce the
stigmata of anthropological and ethnological types are the same
forces which produce economic associations. The sociologist
has no right to dictate the classifications to be used by anthro-
pologist and ethnologist. Their own centers of interest and
objects of attention will give the needed categories. On the
other hand, it cannot be asserted too emphatically that neither
anthropologist nor ethnologist does or can classify associations
when he classifies peculiarities of individuals in association. The
associations are diversified by physiological and racial traits, but
these do not exhaust the qualities of the associations.

Not to involve ourselves in discussions of anthropological
technicalities, let us assume that the anthropologists have agreed
upon a system of classification which carries out the general
zodlogical scheme. Let us suppose that they have divided the
human race into types designated as A, B, C, and D. Suppose
that these types include classes indicated by the symbols a, 4,
c,and d@. Suppose that orders of each class are represented by
the terms ai, 5’, c,d’, Suppose that subspecies, varieties, etc.,
are clearly made out and designated by a¥, 4%, ci, gi; gill, pil, iit
d*, etc., etc. Now, our point is that when the anthropo-sociologist
has applied these categories toa given population, as Demolins has
done to the population of France,’ or as Lapouge has indicated an
ambition to do in a comparative way to populations in general,”
he has not classified the state. He has merely classified certain
details of more or less importance abstracted from the whole
body of conditions and activities which constitute the state.

The same propositions hold true of the ethnologists. With-
out carrying out our illustration in detail in their case, let us
suppose a hierarchy parallel with the foregoing, designated by
the symbols £, F, G,H; ¢,f,g,h; 4, f', g', ki, etc. These, as
before, are symbols of abstractions from associations. They are
not subdivisions of real associations.

The sociologist, on the other hand, does and should try to
classify societies. He must decide for himself which groups of
anthropological and ethnological results are of value as data for
sociological elaboration.

An approach to formal indication of the sorts of judg-
ments likely to be passed may be made by considering the
relation of anthropological and ethnological categories to eco-
nomic classification, z. ¢., classification and analysis of economic
states, and of all states subsequent to that phase considered

* Les Francais d’aujourd’ hui. 2 Vid. Lavouce, L’Aryen.
as economic. In the latter we have contacts inspired by
differentiating impulses. Our classifications of associations in
the economic state must be in accordance with the functional
relations of the associations to the economic end. Such classi-
fications, both genetic and morphologic, are already worked out
to a very nice degree of precision in economic science. Now
let us assume that we have grand divisions of economic states
in accordance with no matter what accepted principle.

For the sake of clearness let us suppose that classifications
of economic activities are reduced to the same forms which we
have presupposed in the cases of anthropology and ethnology,
2. é., to type, class, order, species, subspecies, variety, etc. Thus
we might make out four types of economic association, J, K,
L, M, distinguished, we will say, by hand-to-mouth economy,
provident economy, intensive economy, and humanitarian
economy. Each of these types might include classes 7, 2, /, and
m, distinguished by the kind of natural resource primarily culti-
vated; each class in turn might include the orders 7%, £3, 2, mi,
determined by the organization of labor force within the society’
say between production, transportation, exchange, and nonpro-
ductive activities, etc., etc. Now, these economic activities are
carried on by people, and wherever there are people the anthro-
pologist and the ethnologist find material for their abstractions.
Our present aim is to make the proposition as monotonous and
commonplace as possible that the analyses of each of these and
coérdinate specialists deal with abstractions, and that we run
into fatal fallacy when we begin to accept them as bases for
classification of societies themselves. In every association the
people have ethnic relationships and anthropologic peculiarities.
These ethnic and anthropologic variables may or may not con-
stitute differentiating factors in the economic state. If they do
not, the associations within the economic state should evidently
be classified just as though the people composing them were per-
fectly similar and homogeneous. That is, the groups within the
economic state, and the divisions and subdivisions within the
groups, will turn primarily upon economic differences.

It thus becomes a question of fact, in the case of any particular
economic state, whether the anthropologic and ethnic factors pres-
ent in the state affect the associations most characteristic of the
state. If so, and to that extent, we have within the state, and we
must learn how to distinguish and designate, varieties of each grade
of association, according to variations produced by the physical
and racial peculiarities of the members. Thus in each of the grades
of economic association above supposed it might be necessary to
distinguish subgrades dependent upon either anthropologic or
ethnic peculiarities. In an economic state made up of Celtic,
Saxon, Latin, and African elements, for example, the racial
factor might cause in every grade in the whole hierarchy of asso-
ciation variations of actual combination from what it would be
as resultant of economic influences pure and simple. In other
words, the physical and racial make-up of the state is a factor
of the whole association which constitutes the state, but when
considered by itself it is an abstraction from the state, and there-
fore not a possible classifier of the state, except in particulars
which are subordinate in a degree to be determined in each case
by the peculiar facts.

Now, we might say the same thing, in principle, of the civic
state, and of its relations to the economic and the biologic state
respectively. The civic state, considered as an abstraction from
the actual association of which, in a given case, it is a phase, is
an association having as its characteristic end control. Let us
assume that types of the civic state may be made out in accord-
ance with the predominant purpose of control, thus: J, exploita-
tion of the many; O, offense and defense; P, preservation of
balance among individuals within the state; Q, development of
physical and human resources. Let us assume further that
these types of civic states fall into classes in accordance with
Bluntschli’s categories of origin, viz.: 2, original ; 0, secondary ; f,
derived. Suppose further that Aristotle’s categories of the forms
of states apply to their divisions into orders, thus: 7, monarchy;
o, aristocracy ; A, polity. Let us assume once more that species
of civic states are formed by relative prominence of one or
another division of administration, thus: ##, control of territory;
o', control of persons; #, control of external relations; etc., etc.
With analysis of civic states carried to this point we are
surely in a position to see that the relation of this civic analysis
to the previous economic analysis, and then to the antecedent
biologic analysis, is precisely like the relation previously described
between the economic and the biologic. With reference to the
civic ends the subdivisons of the economic and of the biologic
factors involved in procuring the ends are significant in ways
that give them a civic standing entirely different from their
logical place in their peculiar hierarchy. At every step we
encounter the questions of fact: Does the civic association domi-
nate the economic and the biologic, or does the biologic or the
economic element dominate the civic? Assuming that we have
states in which the civic motive dominates—z. ¢., the intention
to maintain order for the sake of order—the facts of economic
or biologic modification of the associations and subassociations
so motived would as before constitute varieties and subvarieties
of the civic associations.

Let us imagine now that we have states which may be
described as ethical in the special sense above indicated, 7. ¢.,
they have posited a certain estimate of conduct values as making
for some conception of life, in the individuals and in the whole,
that is held to be superior to civic order or to economic success,
or to both combined. In fact, we would neither claim nor admit
that such states exist today. The category is highly specu-
lative, but we shall hereafter attempt to justify it as a category.
In the hypothetical quality of state now in question the motive
which is foremost and uppermost and undermost is realization of
the controlling conception of life. We may suppose that one of
these ideas of the social end is the assurance of felicity after
death; another, the development of maximum justice among the
members of the association; another, the production of a few of
the most highly evolved individuals possible; another, the pro-
duction of a population as large as possible composed of indi-
viduals all of whom exercise the franchise of self-expression in
the highest measure permitted by their endowment. Again, and
to the degree in which the several motives dominate, we shall
have four distinct types of the ethical state, and we might at last
have classes, orders, and species as in the case of the other prime
divisions of states. It need hardly be repeated that, in propor-
tion as the differentiating motive is severely and purely ethical,
the subsidiary means, involving the machinery and personnel of
the civic and economic and biologic substrata merged into the
ethic association, would furnish merely the stigmata of subordi-
nate groups in the ethical hierarchy, coérdinate with similar
groups in the previous hierarchies.

We are now ready for the observation that in all actual states,
whether biologic, economic, or civic, there has doubtless been a
certain emergence of the impulses characteristic of all the states
logically subsequent. Even the biologic states have had their
incipient economic, civic, and ethic systems, or at least factors.
Accordingly we could not develop a comparative national
sociology without classifications in which subdivisions would be
formed by variations borrowed from social conditions which
would have to be scheduled as later in both genetic and logical
order.

Applying all this formal and hypothetical analysis to the
task before us, we have the following indications:

1. There has been and still is an evident vocation for social
sciences that describe and classify parts of the activities of
men which prove to be only abstractions from the whole social
process. It is an important step toward knowing the whole
process to work out systems of classifications in which the
different phases of these abstractions are exhibited in logical
relations to each other. Thus we have facile tools in the classi-
fications of anthropology, ethnology, political science, econom-
ics, and ethics respectively.

2. In attempting to describe any national society whatever,
whether inchoate or developed, we find that it is not an abstrac-
tion of the same sort as that made by the sciences just men-
tioned. It is an abstraction from the rest of the people of the
world, but not from the activities that the other social sciences in
turn formulate. It is necessary in each case of such concrete
abstraction, therefore, to have in mind the categories of each of
the social sciences, and then to discover which sort of activity is
really primary, secondary, tertiary, etc., among the distinguishing
activities of the association.

3. With our present knowledge it is obviously impossible to
make a classification that will assign to the leading modern
states fixed positions in a sociological hierarchy. We cannot
say, for instance, that Great Britain is an economic state of
Type J, class #, order Zi, species mii, etc., while Germany is a
civic state, Type WN, class o, order p", species g", etc., etc., for the
reason that we have no differential calculus of civic qualities, and
no standard of measure that can be applied with precision to
one state after another.

4. The indicated order of procedure in sociological analysis
of modern states is therefore, fivst, a universal conception of the
social process ; second, mastery of the principles and systems of
classifications agreed upon, or still under discussion, in anthro-
pology, ethnology, economics, and civics; ¢hivd, mastery of some
principles and systems of morphological and functional classifica-
tion of activities within the state considered as part of an ethical
process ; fourth, specification of the associations within the states,
and determination of their functional values relative to the
whole process which the state maintains. It is in this connection
that we look for immediate progress from use of the interest
categories as suggested above (p. 493). We shall thus be able
to work out rather classifications of associations within states than
classifications of states themselves. It should be added that in
order to get the good out of all this analysis at last, it is neces-
sary to cultivate parallel with it adequate perceptions in the field
of the logic and the psychology of ethics. Formal ethical
categories will get their content from our knowledge of actual
functions in concrete association, and per contra we shall be able
to classify our valuations of associational functions by application
of logical and psychological criticism.

It will make a great deal of difference in the course of our
inquiry whether we assume that the state which we study is a
biologic state, with economic, civic, and ethic variations; or an
economic state, with biologic, civic, and ethic variations; or a
civic state, with biologic, economic, and ethic variations; or an
ethic state, with biologic, economic, and civic variations. At
the same time, if we see and keep distinctly in mind that each
state is all of these at once in some proportion or other, not one
of them alone, we shall have adopted a point of view which will
insure more certain approach to adequate classification and com-
parison of associations than has yet been reached.

In other words, the most promising program in the interest
of ultimate classification of societies is the program of assort-
ing associations within states in accordance with their structural
and functional relations to the whole process maintained by the
states. This program may be undertaken in two ways: first,
historically and genetically, by analyzing the least differentiated
states and then the more and more differentiated states; second,
contemporaneously, by analyzing the activities maintained by
the different associations within a state of the most highly devel-
oped group. The results of analysis of this latter sort would
then be in a measure available as norms for comparison of less
developed processes in earlier states.

The former program is doubtless implicitly in all historical,
and particularly in all ethnological, investigation. We need not
now inquire why it has been so abortive, from the sociological
point of view. Even the sociologists have not invariably seen
the advantages of the latter program, and many of them have
sooner or later lapsed into impotent imitation of the former.
The consequence has been that they have failed to get the
proper benefits of either. The most vital tendency in sociology
since Comte has appeared in the attempts to analyze mod-
ern society functionally. This is the content which gives to
Schaeffle’s work its permanent value despite the limitation which
we have pointed out above (p. 510). Structural and functional
analysis of activities within the state, or within society as a whole,
is prerequisite to classification of the associations that make up
the state or society.

Briefly, this analysis of actual association in modern states
was what Schaeffle attempted in his Bau und Leben, 1875. With
merely the necessary minimum of attention to the other phases
of the situation, he carried through a minute static analysis. He
showed in great detail how different parts of the associational
process interpenetrate each other and together maintain the
entire individual and social life-process. He was far ahead of
his time in prevision of the scientific and practical demand for
this analysis. It has been the rule, ever since the first edition
of his work appeared, to abuse and misrepresent it and its
author in a fashion which indicates more plainly than anything
else that people had not read the volume. They could not
have originated or repeated such stupid judgments if they had
made themselves familiar at first hand with the treatise itself.
There are numerous and gratifying signs that the provincialism
manifested in this treatment of Schaeffle is giving place to
more critical and liberal appreciation. The respect with which
such a man as Schmoller,? for instance, refers to Schaeffle shows
that people who have less ability to make up sane opinions on
the merits of evidence, but who are not above echoing second-
hand judgments, will soon be obliged to acquire a new set of
estimates of Bau und Leben?

At the same time it must be repeated that Schaeffle’s analysis
is, after all, only an incident in progress toward teleological
analysis and classification of associations within states.

In accordance with all that has preceded, we may make a
somewhat specific prospectus of the sort of knowledge which
has to be gained before we shall have the materials for respect-
able beginnings of national sociology. Let us assume at the
start a basis of generalization no wider than that which
would be furnished by the facts about the five nations com-
monly known as the foremost political powers of the world,
viz.: Russia, Germany, France, Great Britain, and the United
States. In each case the knowledge that we need would have
to be sufficient to fill out the following schedules:

* Vid. Grundriss der allgemeinen Volkswirtschafislehre, erster Teil, pp. 63, 72,
123, e¢ passim.

2 Vid. Bau und Leben, second edition, Book I, chaps. 2-5.
NATIONAL CONDITIONS AND ACTIVITIES,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Anthropologic, Ethnic, Economic. Civic, Ethic.
Type... A-D £-H J-M N-O R-U
Class ....... a-d eh jm n-q ru
Order....... ai-di ani Jimi ni-gi ru
Species weeee aii_gii ai_pii Jimi nii_gii pii_yii
Subspecies . qiii_giii eu pit niti_giii yiti_ygiit
Variety ..... aiv_giv aiv_piv jimiv niv_giv piv_yiv
Etc......... etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.

It is perhaps superfluous to repeat that the classifications in
the antecedent sciences are not in such shape that even the
abstractions from one of these states, represented by one of the
vertical columns in the blank, could at once be transferred to
these groupings. We have conducted our formal process of

eliminating proposed principles of classification by assuming
schemes of classification which, so far as we know, are not
advocated in their entirety by specialists in the divisions of
social science discussed. Although we thus do a certain seem-
ing injustice to those sciences, the essential justice of the pro-
cedure is beyond question. The main point is that, even if
activities within the biologic, the economic, the civic, and
the ethic series were severally reducible to classifications which
could be paralleled in each of the other series, the ultimate
classification of a particular state would be a matter of placing
it in a scale, not of abstract, but of concrete activities. In
the concrete these series are complicated almost beyond recog-
nition. The categories adequate for the abstracted series of con-
ditions and activities would be entirely inadequate for states,
and even for minor associations within states. On the contrary,
the principle of classification for concrete associations must be
found in their functional relations to the whole life-process in
which they have value. This amounts to the conclusion that the
cardinal divisions of associations are ethical. We do and must assort
associations according to the part which they appear to play in
the largest whole to which we can trace their relations."

The sense in which we use the term “ethical” should be pre-
cisely described. We mean to indicate by it those actions which
seem to the actors to be performed in response to the demands
of a whole to which they regard themselves as accountable; in
contrast with all other activities in which utilities are treated as
first and last the concern of the actor alone. The “whole”
implicitly regarded in a given case may be the individual or the
group self, so conceived as to be considered a more complete
or authoritative whole than the actual self. ‘Ethical’ does not
here connote a judgment of subjective moral quality. It relates
to the range of relations to which actors refer their action, or
to which it is conceived as being referred by those who are
tracing its tendencies. It distinguishes conduct dictated to
individuals by notions of a whole beyond themselves, within
which they are parts or incidents, from conduct in which indi-
viduals virtually assume that they are the whole.

Applying the above conclusion to states, and referring once
more to our formula of the social universal (p. 509), our propo-
sition is that, if we are seriously bent on getting nearer to a real
sociology of the order of generality which would cover the
activities of the leading modern states, we have the task of
making out in each case, not the popular shibboleths, not the
current moral formulas, but the actual assumptions of social ends
which distinguish activities within the countries in question. It
becomes, then, a series of questions of fact how elaborate and
complex that ethical assumption is in each case. The details in

x“Wie jeder Mensch in seiner Familie, in seinem nachsten Kreise geschatzt
wird nach dem, was er durch seine Persénlichkeit, seinen Besitz, seine Leistungen,
diesem Kreise ist, so hat zu allen Zeiten die dffentliche Meinung die arbeitsteiligen
Berufsgruppen und -klassen des ganzen Volkes nach dem gewertet und in ein

Rangverhaltnis gebracht, was sie dem Ganzen der Gesellschaft waren oder sind.”
(ScHMOLLER, Die gesellschaftliche Verfassung der Volkswirtschaft, ester Teil, p. 393.)
this connection would furnish the primary subdivisions of these
states within the ethical series of our scheme (p. 524). Then
the further questions follow, viz.: How, and to what extent, do
the tributary civic, economic, and biologic interests further
diversify these associations? In other words, when we consider
states with reference to the largest conception of the life-process
that we can form, their total attitude toward the implications
of this life-process is the primary criterion of classification.
Then the specific activities within each state, with reference to
subdivisions of human interests, as contained in the civic, eco-
nomic, and biologic series, will furnish the differentia of the
states and of their constituent associations. In each case, and at
every step, the functioning of the group with reference to the ends
that account for its existence is a matter of fact, and its determi-
nation would settle the problem of its place and classification.
To represent this proposition schematically we may vary the
schedule above (p. 524). The general description of a national
association on the basis which we propose would bring out its
distinctive marks in a scale of subordination indicated as follows:
necessarily be ethic as in the chart. They would be civic, eco-
nomic, and biologic.

It will not be superfluous to add at this point the positive
statement that the program thus suggested by no means proposes
to cut loose from results derived from investigating primitive and
minor associations. Whether sociologists admit more or less of
the teleological and the technological phases of theory into their
conceptions of their science, they will all, if hard pressed, claim
to be aiming at knowledge of association at its highest power.
What they learn of inchoate or limited association is supposed
to be worth learning because it reveals the meaning factors in all
association. It is necessary, however, to bring these partial and
primary perceptions to the test of applicability and sufficiency
within the most evolved associations that we know. Otherwise
there is no safety against the tendency to assume that knowledge
of very limited abstractions is comprehensive of the whole social
reality. If Newton’s generalization had turned out to cover the
facts in the orchard, but not the facts in the solar system, it would
hardly have served as a base-line in physics. So, if an economic
formula ora psychological uniformity is made out in the horde or
the tribe, or in a particular state or stage of civic development,
but cannot be verified elsewhere, it does not deserve to rank as acar-
dinal social law. Still less does it deserve such rank if our accept-
ance of it as a formulation of facts inthe undeveloped or partial
association really rests on absence of full knowledge, rather than
sufficient evidence about that association. Whatever help is to
be had from investigation of the stages and the parts of the
social process is wanted at its proportionate value, of course, in
the last synthesis that we construct. It is time, however, for
real sociology to force a clear understanding that by far the most
knowledge of the societies which it is most important for us to
know is to be had by direct study of those societies themselves,
not by inference from associations remote from them in space
and time and type. This involves, however, more intensive study
of national sociology than has ever yet been proposed.

The partial products worked out by our discussion so far
may be indicated as follows: All the human associations
which it is worth while for sociologists to study at present scale
up to or down from states. Not ignoring international and trans-
national associations, we find it probable that most progress will
be made toward ultimate comprehension of the larger whole by
limiting investigations pretty closely for a while to these grand
divisions of the whole. Enough of the life-process is carried on
within the state to make formulation of that process more
accurately descriptive of the whole than any formulations which
we are likely to reach for a long time by more ambitious gen-
eralization.

On the other hand, we have posited the conception that the
portion of the life-process which takes place at a given time in a
given state is a stage in the series of activities proceeding in that
state toward further development; and we have posited further
the conception that these same activities are portions of a whole
human life-process in which all states and peoples codperate
toward a more evolved associational process carried on by the
whole human family.

Now, in order to make out classifying distinctions between
different sorts of association, we have chosen to consider them
in their relations up to their fusion with states, and we have chosen
to consider states themselves with reference to the ends beyond
themselves, or probably we should say with more immediate pro-
priety, first, beyond their present selves, and ultimately leading
into the wider correlations toward which they function. These
ends are presumably given in certain ideals of fitness held by
individuals, and known as ethical conceptions. Every state acts
consciously or unconsciously toward the realization of some
moral situation. We call such a moral situation a civilization.
When we reach the stage of reflection, we have certain judg-
ments of the more or the less fit civilization. Our own standards
of fitness being then necessarily the provisional criteria of judg-
ment, what are the marks of low or high, of retarded or advanced,
civilization? We thus enter necessarily upon a critique of
morality. What characterizes the state which we pronounce
high or low in the ethical scale? This is not equivalent to a
critique of theories of morality, for we have assumed all that, and
have adopted a formal conception of an ethical criterion which
presupposes rejection of all the other formal ethical conceptions
that are inconsistent with it (p. 509). What we are nowafterisa
content for our formal conception of the ethical. We want to
find the marks by which we may be able to say of a given
situation : This association is more highly moralized than that ; or
this activity of the state makes more entirely for a wholly
harmonized situation than another.

The program which we propose cannot be outlined in further
detail in this paper, but some of the clues which it will follow
are indicated in the following propositions: The order of asso-
ciational development may be symbolized by the terms: one,
struggle ; two, moralization ; three, socialization. The differentia
observed in the series are quantitative rather than qualitative, z. ¢.,
we trace a passage from less to more integration in a common
process. The symbolic terms chosen are selected, not because
they are supposed to be exclusive, but because they are evidently
nonexclusive. Each connotes something of the others. Oxe
involves aminimum of three. Three contains a minimum of one.
Two is merely an arbitrarily chosen stadium between one and
three. It is potentially and in part actually in one; it is devel-
oped and extended in three. Morality, as we propose to use the
term, is the type of modus vivendi recognized at any given stage
of the associational process by the persons conscious of associa-
tion, as appropriate to their association. Not the persons pass-
ing judgment, but the associational process itself which they
implicitly judge, renders the last valuation of a morality which
it is possible for men to justify. When struggle has become so
moralized that it loses the outward marks of struggle in regularly
coérdinated interchange among all the persons in contact, under
the prevailing idea that the good of the whole is paramount to
the good of the parts considered as having an existence in
antithesis with the whole, we have a quantitatively intense asso-
ciation, with a modus vivendi of its own which contrasts sharply
with all the previous mechanical regulations of categorical
morality.

Again, the stages between struggle and socialization may be
distinguished gwalitatively in this way: One connotes individuals
convinced, either emotionally or intellectually, of an indi-
viduality which is predominantly antagonistic to other indi-
viduals. Not recalling now in detail our analysis of the content
of the individual element, but assuming that this content is
in principle constant, we restate the progress of individuals from
struggle to socialization as a passage through (2) recognition
of other individuals (or groups); (4) advance toward recogni-
tion of egual value in other individuals (or groups); (¢) pro-
gressive discrimination of the elements of value thus to be
recognized ; (d@) progressive extension of the diameter of these
recognitions until it includes all men.

Now, the ethical rating of a state depends upon (1) the
degree in which the individuality of each citizen is practically
recognized; (2) the extent to which individuals approach
demand for complete self-expression ; (3) the degree and extent
in which the activities that pass for moral in the state are articu-
lated with the life-processes of other men.

There are thus dimensions of length, breadth, depth, and
height in the ethical measure of a state. Its character depends
on whether it takes account of the present moment only, or of a
long past and a long future; whether it takes into view a small,
or a large, or a universal association; whether it contemplates
basic human wants, or ideal human conditions, or the whole
scale of interests from base to summit.

It of course seems anomalous to declare on the one hand
that no states are today properly ethical in the sense in which
we use the term,’ and on the other hand to propose a classifica-
tion of states on the basis of their ethical differences. In
explanation we may say, first, that there have probably been
states in the past which should be classed as ethical, e. g., the
Hebrew commonwealth at certain stages of its history; second,
while it would do violence to obvious facts if we were to assume
that either of the leading states today is, as a state, “ethical”
rather than “civic” or ‘‘economic,” it is true that the ethical
factors in the minds of the people of these states are sufficiently

1Cf. above, p. 519.
potent to constitute differentiating traits of the states them-
selves. These factors also constitute cardinal traits of the states.
While the civic and economic interests are foremost in the pub-
lic mind, ethical elements which form the setting of these inter-
ests are decisive within certain limits. These ethical elements
establish a standard of life to which the civic and economic
elements must conform. While these ethical factors in the indi-
viduals are not so powerful that they change the visible type of
states from the “economic” or the ‘“‘civic”’ to the “ethic,” they
vary to such a degree that there are obvious qualitative differ-
ences in the economics and the civics of these states. It may
prove impossible so to formulate these ethical traits and to
determine them as differentia of these variations that they can
be made bases of tenable classification. Nevertheless we pro-
pose to make the experiment of adopting the length and breadth
and depth and height of the ethical conceptions which fix the
orbit of state activities, as the points of departure from which to
describe and classify states and the minor associations partly or
wholly within states. Probably no one now living will survive
to see citizens of the leading states subscribe general assent to
graduation of those states upon this basis. Quite likely we
shall succeed with this device merely in classifying activities, not
states at all. If so, we shall certainly not have gone backward
scientifically, for, as we have seen, all that the social sciences
have accomplished by way of classification so far proves to be
a graduation of activities, not of associations. We shall cer-
tainly have grouped the activities of states with reference to a
more comprehensive conception of the relations affected by the
activities. We shall have related them to a larger whole. We
shall thus have attempted at least to make out their meaning
as functions of a universal that is closer than the circumference
of these minor motions to the absolute social reality.
AxBion W. SMALL.
