The Concept "Social Forces” in American Sociology. Section VI. Wishes and Attitudes as
Social Forces

Author(s): Floyd N. House

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Jan., 1926), pp. 512-525
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2764748

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:37 UTC
SECTION VI. WISHES AND ATTITUDES AS SOCIAL FORCES

ABSTRACT

Wishes and attitudes as items in a comprehensive new theory of social behavior.
—wW. I. Thomas and Park and Burgess have been responsible for the introduction
into the literature of American sociology of a fairly elaborate new conceptual system
for the analysis and explanation of human social behavior, with particular reference
to its motivation. The principal formal terms used to designate the concepts in this
system are “attitude,” “value,” “situation,” “definition of the situation,” “wish,” and
the “four wishes” or classes of wishes.

The wish concept—The wish concept originated with the psychologists;
Thomas and Park and Burgess appear to have been influenced especially by E. B.
Holt’s account of it. Thomas’ earlier formulations of the “attitude” concept did not
discriminate clearly between attitudes and wishes, but his correlation of attitudes
with social values or social objects was later carried over to the definition of the
wish concept. A wish is now defined as a wish for something; it involves a motor
tendency. All wishes are conceived to fall in four classes, which cannot be substi-
tuted for one another.

The attitude as a behavior pattern.—Park has abstracted the attitude concept
from the wish concept more clearly than Thomas had done, and has classified atti-
tudes as behavior patterns in four classes: approaching, withdrawing, superordina-
tion, subordination.
Peasant in Europe and America. In two methodological discus-
sions in this study the authors have made the effort to define the
terms “wish” and “attitude” for the purposes of sociological
analysis, and to correlate them with each other. The generalized
exposition of the concepts has been carried further in Park and
Burgess’s Introduction to the Science of Sociology, in Park and
Miller’s Old-World Traits Transplanted, and in Thomas’s The
Unadjusted Girl. Probably the last-mentioned work, which pre-
sumably contains Thomas’s latest thoughts on the subject, is the
most satisfactory expression at the date of writing of the concep-
tion of wishes and attitudes as social forces which is so influential
at present with the Chicago school of sociologists.*®

As we examine, in the following pages, some of the passages
most in point from the writings of these men, it will appear that
the concept “wishes” is not of an entirely different order from
Ward’s concept “desires.” What Thomas has done, in effect, is
to redefine somewhat the notion of fundamental, more or less uni-
versal human nature motives, and to signalize his revision of the
concept by the adoption of a new term, imported from the field of
psychoanalysis—the “wish,” and of still another, the “attitude,”
incorporated into a scientific hypothesis from the field of ordinary
discourse by giving to it a precise definition. Along with these
fundamental motive-concepts, Thomas and his followers have
found it necessary to develop some three other closely related
ones—that of the social “value,” the particular “situation,” and
the “definition of the situation” made by the individual or pro-
vided in the culture of the group. There is not entire agreement
among those who have been working with these terms as to the
exact meanings to be attached to them, but this will come out in
the passages to be quoted below.**

* Thomas’s doctrine of the attitudes and wishes has had considerable influence
upon some of the younger members of the Department of Political Economy of the
University of Chicago, where he formerly taught. Compare Douglas, Hitchcock, and
Atkins, The Worker in Modern Economic Society (1923), pp. 52 ff., and Atkins and
Lasswell, Labor Attitudes and Problems (1924), chapter i.

** The readings in this chapter are arranged in the natural order of the-develop-
ment of social forces. They were first thought of by historians as tendencies or
trends. Then, in the popular sociology, social forces were identified with significant
By way of introducing more carefully the story of the develop-
ment of these concepts, it may be observed that there are two pos-
sible bases of classification of the fundamental human motives.
As an actual research procedure, each of these will involve a
method somewhere between systematic induction and a crude
process of trial-and-selection. Following the one line of approach,
the methodologist will attempt to classify motives according to the
ends toward which they are, or appear to be, directed. If the other
approach is used, the basis of classification is the actual form of
the behavior pattern itself. The former is substantially the method
by which Ward’s classification of desires and Small’s classification
of interests were formed. It is also the principle on which the
Thomas fourfold classification of “wishes” is based. Park and
Burgess, on the other hand, following up rather vague suggestions
made in the writings of Thomas, have made a fourfold classifica-
tion of attitudes as behavior patterns, stating at the same time
that a more elaborate classification might be made on the same
basis. In the earlier writings of Thomas, however, there are, as we
shall see from quotations to be given below, only faint adumbra-
tions of the distinction which we have just noted.

In The Polish Peasant, Thomas and Znaniecki approached
the problem of defining their “attitude” concept through a pre-
liminary definition and description of “social values”:

By a social value we understand any datum having an empirical content
accessible to the members of some social group, and a meaning with regard to
which it is, or may be, an object of activity. Thus, a foodstuff, an instrument,
a coin, a piece of poetry, a university, a myth, a scientific theory, are social
values... .. The meaning of these values becomes explicit when we take
them in connection with human actions... .. The social value is thus op-
posed to the natural thing, which has a content, but, as a part of nature, has
no meaning for human activity, is treated as “valueless”; when the natural
thing assumes a meaning, it becomes thereby a social value. And naturally a
social value may have different meanings, for it may refer to many different
kinds of activities.

By attitude we understand a process of individual consciousness which de-
termines real or possible activity of the individual in the social world. Thus,
hunger that compels the consumption of the foodstuff; the workman’s decision
to use the tool; the tendency of the spendthrift to spend the coin; the poet’s
feelings and ideas expressed in the poem and the reader’s sympathy and ad-
miration; the needs which the institution tries to satisfy and the response
which it provokes; the fear and devotion manifested in the cult of the divin-
ity; the interest in creating understanding, or applying a scientific theory, and
the ways of thinking implied in it—all these are attitudes. The attitude is thus
the individual counterpart of the social value; activity, in whatever form, is
the bond between them.17

In the sentences which follow those just quoted, the authors set
forth plainly another feature of their conception of the attitude as
they were defining the term; they were making an attempt to
establish an objective, behavioristic classification, in place of the
subjectively defined categories of motives used by the older psy-
chology:

By its reference to activity, and thereby to the social world, the attitude
is distinguished from the psychical state. In the examples quoted above we
were obliged to use, with reference to ideas and volitions, words that have be-
come terms of individual psychology by being abstracted from the objective
social reality to which they apply, but originally they were designed to express
attitudes, not psychological processes. A psychological process is an attitude
treated as an object in itself, isolated by an act of reflective attention, and
taken first of all in connection with other states of the same individual. An
attitude is a psychological process treated as primarily manifest in its refer-
ence to the social world, and taken first of all in connection with some social
value. Individual psychology may later re-establish the connection between
the psychological process and the objective reality which has been severed by
reflection; it may study psychological processes as conditioned by the facts
going on in the objective world. In the same way social theory may later con-
nect various attitudes of an individual and determine his social character. But
it is the original (usually unconsciously occupied) standpoints which deter-
mine at once the subsequent methods of these two sciences. The psychological
process remains always fundamentally a state of somebody; the attitude re-
mains always fundamentally an attitude toward something.18

* Thomas and Znaniecki, The Polish Peasant in Europe and America, I, 31-32.
Compare also Thomas, The Unadjusted Girl, pp. 232-33.
* Loc. cit. pp. 22-23.
In their definition of the concept “attitude,” the authors made
it very clear that they were attempting to set up a category in the
realm of the social, as the preceding passage has shown. That in
the attitude as they defined it—an objective, observable process of
behavior—they had something essentially social in nature, they
further demonstrated by an analysis of the formation of attitudes.
Briefly, the course of that analysis was as follows: We have to as-
sume some kind of behavior to start with, of course; activity, and,
apparently, to judge from the observations of Watson, several
recognizable patterns of activity, are found in the newly born hu-
man infant. Let us then label these assumed but little known in-
born behavior patterns “temperamental attitudes.” Now it is evi-
dent that we do not have temperamental attitudes to deal with in
our study of the behavior of ordinary persons; for the tempera-
mental attitude is altered to some extent the first time it operates.
The infant acts on the prompting of its inborn impulses, but the
first time it acts, it acquires as a result of the act some perception
of an object or “value,” and at the same time the attitude is modi-
fied or defined. The next time the impulse occurs, it is an impulse
which has in it something of the previous experience—something
of the previously experienced object. Hence the attitude which is
now operative is a compound of the first “temperamental” atti-
tude and the value with which it came in contact. Similarly, when
an object occurs in experience for any time after the first experi-
ence of it or something like it, it has in it, humanly speaking, or
for that person, a certain quality which it received by the impact
of the former act. A child has, let us say, a certain value category,
“ball,” formed out of its experience with its soft rubber plaything;
it has linked with this value a certain attitude or behavior pattern
of manipulation. One day some one tosses the child a baseball, and
at once both its value “ball” as “something to play with—soft, it
won’t hurt me” is altered to fit the new experience; while at the
same time the attitude called forth by the occurrence of the ex-
perience “ball” is correspondingly modified. This line of analysis
the authors have summed up in the following propositions:
The fundamental methodological principle of both social psychology and
sociology—the principle without which they can never reach scientific explana-
tion—is . . . . the following one:

The cause of a social or individual phenomenon is never another social or
individual phenomenon alone, but always a combination of a social and an in-
dividual phenomenon.

Or, in more exact terms: The cause of a value or an attitude is never an
attitude or a value alone, but always a combination of an attitude and a
value.t®

The implication of this, according to Thomas and Znaniecki,
is that social science, in its search for working hypotheses and
general concepts, is limited primarily to cultural data:

The more generally an attitude is shared by the members of a given social
group, and the greater the part it plays in the life of every member, the strong-
er the interest which it provokes in the social psychologists, while attitudes
which are either peculiar to a few members of the group or which manifest
themselves only on rare occasions have, as such, a relatively secondary signifi-
cance, but may become significant through some connection with more general
and fundamental attitudes.

On the other hand, scientific generalizations are productive and valuable
only in so far as they help to discover certain relations between classes of the
generalized data and to establish a systematic classification by a logical sub-
ordination and co-ordination of concepts; a generalization which bears no rela-
tion to others is useless. Now, as the main body of the materials of social psy-
chology is constituted by cultural attitudes, corresponding to variable and
multiform cultural values, such elementary natural attitudes as correspond to
stable and uniform physical conditions—for example, attitudes manifested in
sensual perception or in the action of eating—in spite of their generality and
practical importance for the human race, can be investigated within the limits
of this science only if a connection can be found between them and the cul-
tural attitudes—if, for example, it can be shown that sensual perception or the
organic attitude of disgust varies with the variation of social conditions. As
long as there is no possibility of an actual subordination or co-ordination be-
tween the cultural and natural attitudes, the natural attitudes have no immedi-
ate interest for social psychology.?°

The fundamental methodological problem which gives rise to
this discussion is, of course, as Thomas and Znaniecki have very
clearly seen, that of establishing or discovering valid general cate-
gories under which the manifold data of social science can be

* Loc. cit.,1, p. 44. » Loc. cit., 1, 29-30.
classified." Such general categories they have set up, and Thomas
has later refined, in their fourfold classification of wish patterns—
without, however, making it at all clear to us by what process of
reasoning these categories were arrived at. Presumably it was a
matter of trying out first one classification and then another, till
one was found which satisfied the logical criteria that had been set
up in the beginning. We know from the evidence of some of
Thomas’ earlier writings that he had dallied with the plan of re-
ducing all human phenomena to explanation in terms of two cate-
gories of motives, hunger and sex, and in various sentences in the
methodological note from which we are quoting passages there is
an assumption of the existence in the human organism of “in-
stincts,” from which these classes of wishes are presumably some-
how derived. Thomas and Znaniecki give the following as their
first rendition of the fourfold classification:

We have assumed throughout this argument that if an adequate technique
is developed it is possible to produce any desirable attitudes and values, but
this assumption is practically justified only if we can find in the individual at-
titudes which cannot avoid response to the class of stimulations which society
is able to apply to him. And apparently we do find this disposition. Every in-
dividual has a vast variety of wishes which can be satisfied only by his incor-
poration in a society. Among his general patterns of wishes we may enumer-
ate: (1) the desire for new experience, for fresh stimulations; (2) the desire
for recognition, including, for example, sexual response and general social ap-
preciation, and secured by devices ranging from the display of ornament to the
display of worth through scientific attainment; (3) the desire for mastery, or
the “will to power,” exemplified by ownership, domestic tyranny, political des-
potism, based on the instinct of hate, but capable of being sublimated to laud-
able ambition; (4) the desire for security, based on the instinct of fear and
exemplified negatively by the wretchedness of the individual in perpetual soli-
tude or under. social taboo.?2

In the Introduction to Volume III of The Polish Peasant,
written apparently some time after the Methodological Note in
Volume I, from which the above passages are quoted, we find that
the authors have modified both the classification of the wishes
and the terms applied to the categories. In this volume the dis-
tinction between temperament and character is emphasized; tem-

* On the difficulties of generalization in social theory see also ébid., I, 62.

* Loc. cit., 1, 72-73.
perament being used to refer to the sum total of the inborn, “in-
stinctive” attitudes with which the individual is endowed at birth,
and character referring to the attitudes which are organized
through experience on the basis of the temperament. In this vol-
ume there is suggested, rather indefinitely, a new scheme of four
categories of wishes, in two pairs. The desire for new experience,
resting upon the instinct of curiosity, and the desire for security
or stability, resting upon the instinct of fear, seem to be conceived
of as nearer to the temperamental basis. The desire for response,
ie., for intimacy, friendship, love, and the desire for recognition,
i.e., for superior status, admiration, social position, are conceived
of as classes of wishes evolved in a larger degree from forces in the
social milieu.

In The Unadjusted Girl (1923), Thomas has asserted more
confidently and clearly the classification as presented in Volume
III of The Polish Peasant.* In this book the author gives us the
fruit of riper reflection and experimentation with the whole scheme
of analysis of human social behavior through the concepts “atti-
tude,” “value,” “situation,” “definition of the situation,” and
“wish.” It will be enlightening in this connection to examine two
particularly clear passages from this later book.

When a concrete wish of any general class arises it may be accompanied
and qualified by any or all of the other classes of wishes. Thus when Pasteur
undertook the quest described above we do not know what wish was upper-
most. Certainly the love of the work was very strong, the ardor of pursuit,
the new experience; the anticipation of the recognition of the public, the sci-
entific fame involved in the achievement was certainly present; he invited re-
sponse from his wife and colleagues, and he possibly had the wish also to put
his future professional and material life on a secure basis. The immigrant who
comes to America may wish to see the world (new experience), make a fortune
(security), have a higher standing on his return (recognition), and induce a
certain person to marry him (response).?4

The whole matter, as Thomas saw it at the time of writing, is
summed up very clearly in a passage near the close of this book:

All the types of wishes coexist in every person—the vague desire for new
experience, for change, for the satisfaction of the appetites, for pleasure; the
new experience contained in pursuit .... ; the desire for response in personal

* Loc. cit. p. 4. * Loc. cit., pp. 38-39-
relations; the desire for recognition; and the desire for security—the assur-
ance of the means and conditions for gratifying all the wishes indefinitely. And
all of these classes of wishes are general mental attitudes ready to express
themselves in schemes of action which utilize and are dependent upon the ex-
isting social values. These values may be material . . . . or they may be the
mental attitudes of others, as when a bogus nobleman imposes on the desire
for recognition of a bourgeois, or a scientist appeals to a philanthropic person
to endow an institution for medica] research.

The attitudes of a given person at a given moment are the result of his
original temperament, the definitions of situations given by society during the
course of his life, and his personal definitions of situations derived from his ex-
perience and reflection. The character of the individual depends upon these
factors.

Any mobilization of energies in a plan of action means that some attitude
(tendency to action) among the other attitudes has come to the front and sub-
ordinated the other attitudes to itself for the moment, as the result of a new
definition of the situation. This definition may be the counsel of a friend, an
act of memory reviving a social definition applicable to the situation, or an ele-
ment of new experience defining the situation. . . . .25

It can be seen by a comparison of the relevant passages in The
Polish Peasant (1917, 1919) with those in The Unadjusted Girl
(1923) that Thomas’ own interest led him more and more away
from the “attitude” concept in the direction of a closer and closer
definition of the four classes of wishes. Park and Burgess have
made further contributions toward the definition of the “wish”
concept, in their Introduction to the Science of Sociology (1921,
revised 1924):

The wishes, as popularly conceived, are as numerous as the objects or
values toward which they are directed. As there are positive and negative val-
ues, so there are positive and negative wishes. Fears are negative wishes. The
speculations of the Freudian school have attempted to reduce all wishes to one,
the libido. In that case the wishes, as we know them and as they represent
themselves in consciousness, are to be regarded as offshoots, or perhaps better,
specifications, of the one wish. As the one wish is directed to this or that ob-
ject, it makes of that object a value, and the object gives its name to the wish.
In this way the one wish becomes many wishes.

Science demands, however, not a theory of the origin of the wishes, but a
classification based on fundamental differences which it is necessary to take
account of in explaining human behavior. Thomas’ fourfold classification ful-
fills this purpose. The wish for security, the wish for new experience, the wish

* Tbid., p. 241.
for response, and the wish for recognition are the permanent and fundamental
unconscious motives of the person which find expression in the many and con-
scious wishes. As wishes find expression in characteristic forms of behavior,
they may also be thought of in spatial terms as tendencies to move toward or
away from their objects... ..

The fundamental value for social research of the classification inheres in
the fact that the wishes in one class cannot be substituted for wishes in an-
other. The desire for response and affection cannot be satisfied by fame and
recognition, or only partially so. The wholesome individual is he who, in some
form or other, realizes all the fundamental wishes. The security and perma-
nence of any society or association depends upon the extent to which it per-
mits the individuals who compose it to realize their fundamental wishes. The
restless individual is the individual whose wishes are not realized even in
dreams.?6

E. B. Holt, in The Freudian Wish,” has made one of the more
helpful statements of the wish doctrine, and also, in effect, of the
concept “attitude,” although he does not use the latter term as a
label for a scientific concept. Park and Burgess have quoted a
passage from this book which embodies in concise form a defini-
tion of the wish that does much to clear up the relation of wishes
to attitudes, a matter which seems to have occasioned considerable
difficulty to Thomas and those of his followers who have tried to
use this set of concepts as tools of sociological research.

An exact definition of the “wish” is that it is a course of action which
some mechanism of the body is set to carry out, whether it actually does so or
does not. All emotions, as well as the feelings of pleasure and displeasure, are
separable from the “wishes,” and this precludes any thought of a merely he-
donistic psychology. The wish is any purpose or project for a course of action,
whether it is being merely entertained by the mind or is being actually exe-
cuted—a distinction which really is of little importance. We shall do well if
we consider this to be, as in fact it is, dependent upon a motor attitude of the
physical body, which goes over into overt action and conduct when the wish is
carried into execution.?8

In the book from which the foregoing passage is quoted, Holt
has set forth at length a theory of human behavior which may be
referred to by his term “specific response.” He points out that

* Loc. cit. p. 442 (1924 ed.).

*E.D. Holt, The Freudian Wish—A Treatise in Ethics, 1915.

* Park and Burgess, loc. cit. (1924 ed.), p. 479 (quoting Holt, The Freudian
Wish).
the psychology of the past has sought to explain behavior largely
in terms of the reflex arc or stimulus-response co-ordination; the
human organism has been thought of, as has indeed every other
animal organism, as a bundle of potential responses to stimuli.
When we observe the behavior of human beings as such, however,
we find that the distinguishing feature is what he calls the “specific
response,” the power to correlate two or more stimuli and to deal
with them in an act which is no longer a response to a stimulus
simply, but a “specific response” which has reference to some
phase or aspect of the environment. Holt’s language in this ac-
count has perhaps not been as felicitous as one could wish, but in
his “specific response” he has practically the same concept which
Park and Burgess have developed as the “attitude.” Their most
formal definition of the attitude is “the tendency of the person to
react positively or negatively to the total situation.’””® Their ex-
planation proceeds as follows:

Attitudes are as many and as varied as the situations to which they are a
response. It is, of course, not to be gainsaid that instincts, appetites, habits,
emotions, sentiments, opinions, and wishes are involved in and with the atti-
tudes. Attitudes are mobilizations and organizations of the wishes with refer-
ence to definite situations. My wishes may be very positive and definite in a
given situation, but my attitude may be wavering and undetermined. On the
other hand, my attitude may be clearly defined in situations where my wishes
are not greatly involved... . . The wishes enter into attitudes as compo-
nents..... The fundamental wishes, we may assume, are the same in all situ-
ations. The attitudes and sentiments, however, in which the wishes of the indi-
vidual find expression are determined not only by those wishes, but by other
factors in the situation, the wishes of other individuals, for example.®°

What we arrive at, then, is this: The wishes—elementary be-
havior tendencies presumably having some basis in the physical
organism in the form of mechanisms which can be set in operation
by appropriate external or internal stimuli—are in a certain ulti-
mate sense, from the viewpoint of this theory, the most elementary
motives. But we can get at the wishes only by an intellectual
process of inference and analysis. In general, it is possible to
observe no wishes, and no one has seen the significant nerve con-
nections under the microscope. For purposes of observation, then,

” Loc. cit. p. 438 (1924 ed.). * Loc. cit., pp. 438-39 (1924 ed.).
the attitude is elementary, and attitudes can be observed; for we
can define an attitude as an observable behavior pattern, capable
of being described in terms of approach, withdrawal, and other
simple features of objective performance. Any account of the
wishes as elementary neural mechanisms or connections is outside
the scope of sociology, and must be left for the further researches
of the psychologists. The sociologist, gua sociologist, however, is
constrained for his own purposes to make use of such categories of
wishes as will stand the pragmatic test—they must be able to ac-
count for all forms of social behavior, and they must be such that
a wish in one category cannot be entirely realized through values
corresponding only to the other categories. The classes of wishes
are therefore elementary for sociological purposes; but so also, for
another phase of sociological analysis, are the attitudes. For we
can classify attitudes as such, i.e., we can classify them according
to their general direction and form. Park and Burgess have made
the beginnings of such a classification in the following passage. So
far as is known to the present writer, systematic analysis of atti-
tudes along these lines has been carried no further by anyone up
to the present time, though doubtless distinctions among the forms
of behavior which might be made use of for the amplification of
such a classification are to be found in the literature of psychology.

If the attitude may be said to play the réle in sociological analysis that
the elementary substances play in chemical analysis, then the réle of the
wishes may be compared to that of the electrons.

The clearest way to think of attitudes is as behavior patterns or units of
behavior. The two most elementary behavior patterns are the tendency to ap-
proach and the tendency to withdraw. Translated into terms of the individual
organism, these are tendencies to expand and to contract. As the self expands
to include other selves, as in sympathy and fellowship, there is an extension of
self-feeling to the whole group. Self-consciousness passes over, in the rapport
thus established, into group consciousness. .. . .

The simplest and most fundamental types of behavior of individuals and
of groups are represented in these contrasting tendencies to approach an object
and to withdraw it. If, instead of thinking of these two tendencies as unre-
lated, they are thought of as conflicting responses to the same situation, where
the tendency to approach is modified and complicated by the tendency to
withdraw, we get the phenomenon of social distance. There is the tendency to
approach, but not too near... .. Where the situation calls forth rival or
conflicting tendencies the resulting attitude is likely to be an accommodation,
in which what has been described as distance is the determining factor. When
an accommodation takes the form of the domination of A and the submission
of B, the original tendencies of approach and withdrawal are transformed into
attitudes of superordination and subordination.*+

That is, more simply stated, we have a fourfold classification of
attitudes: (1) attitudes of approach or expansion; (2) attitudes
of withdrawal or contraction; (3) attitudes of domination or
superordination; and (4) attitudes of subordination or submis-
sion. Ideally, if we are to make use of the conceptual equipment
thus provided, sociological analysis of behavior would proceed,
first to describe and classify the attitudes, and then to analyze the
attitudes in terms of the fundamental wishes which underlie them
and the definitions of the situation which have reacted with the
wishes to produce the attitudes observed.

Before we leave this subdivision of our study, notice should be
taken of the attempt which Park has made to standardize for so-
ciological purposes and to correlate with the wish and attitude
concepts the notion of sentiments. Like “wish” and “attitude,”
“sentiment” has long been a term freely used in common-sense
and literary descriptions of human behavior. Some years ago
Shand gave an objective definition of “a sentiment” in his Foun-
dations of Character, a definition which was adopted and discussed
by McDougall in Social Psychology. That definition is concisely
expressed in the following passage:

Mr. Shand points out that our emotions, or, more strictly speaking, our
emotional dispositions, tend to become organized in systems about the various
objects and classes of objects that excite them. Such an organized system of
emotional tendencies is not a fact or mode of experience, but is a feature of
the complexly organized structure of the mind that underlies all our mental
activity. To such an organized system of emotional tendencies centered about
some object Mr. Shand proposes to apply the name “sentiment.”?

Now it is clear that a sentiment involves some sort of tendency to

act, and it is also a well-known fact that any particular sentiment

—patriotism or parental affection, for instance, frequently be-
* Loc. cit., pp. 439-41 (1924 ed.).

* Adapted in Park and Burgess (1924), p. 465, from McDougall, An Introduc-
tion to Social Psychology (1916).
comes embodied in quite definite behavior patterns, so that when-
ever the sentiment is excited by certain common types of situa-
tions which could be described in general terms, the behavior pat-
tern is released quite automatically or spontaneously. In com-
menting upon the nature of opinions as rationalizations—justifica-
tions to one’s self and to others of the attitude taken, Park has
invented another category for the designation of the type of mo-
tivation involved, the “sentiment-attitude.”** Adding this to the
list of terms which we have surveyed in this section, we have then
some eight more or less closely defined categories constituting a
theory of human motives as “social forces.” These categories are
(1) the wishes, (2) the four classes of wishes, (3) the attitudes,
(4) the sentiment-attitudes, (5) the social values (objects), (6)
situations, (7) definitions of situations, and (8) opinions. It is, of
course, quite possible to co-ordinate with these concepts a number
of others which could be fitted into a comprehensive theory of
social causation, and this is, in effect, one of the tasks which Park
and Burgess have attempted in their Introduction to the Science
of Sociology. The whole theory is too new to make possible con-
fident prediction as to the influence it may have in the further
development of sociological theory and research.

* Robert E. Park, Principles of Human Behavior (pamphlet, 1915), quoted in
Park and Burgess, p. 478 (1924 ed.).
