Social Control. XX. The Vicissitudes of Social Control

Author(s): Edward Alsworth Ross

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 6, No. 4 (Jan., 1901), pp. 550-562
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2762291

Accessed: 09-05-2016 04:17 UTC
THE VICISSITUDES OF SOCIAL CONTROL.

NEVER do we find the social pressure uniform through a long
period. There are times when society holds the individual as
in a vise, and times when he wriggles almost from under the
social knee. There are epochs when the corporate will is ascend-
ant, and epochs when the individual is more and more. In other
words, social control is in no wise fixed, but varies between
strong and weak, between more and less. To describe and
to account for these vicissitudes is the purpose of this chapter.

The most likely and obvious cause of such vicissitudes is
change in social need. The function of control is to preserve that
indispensable condition of common life, social order. When this
order becomes harder to maintain, there is a demand for more
and better control. When this order becomes easier to maintain,
the ever-present demand for individual freedom and for tolera-
tion makes itself felt. The supply of social control is evoked,
as it were, by the demand for it, and is adjusted to that demand.

The changes that rack the social frame, and so lead to a
tightening of all the nuts and rivets init, are nearly all connected
with economic conditions. The multiplication of numbers or
the decline of prosperity may make the struggle for existence
more wolfish and harder to keep within bounds. New methods
of production which sharpen the economic contrasts within the
social group may relax the natural bonds among men, and so
throw more strain on the artificial bonds. A static condition of
industry may allow differences in wealth to be aggravated
by accumulation through a number of generations. A bad insti-
tution —a defective system of land tenure, or inheritance, or tax-
ation—working worse and worse as time goes on, may require
stronger props to support it. Alien ethnic elements introduced
among a people, one in blood and culture and hence fitted to get
along smoothly, may increase the tension among them. Social

550
mis-selections which hinder the survival of the best breeds of
men may in the course of centuries weaken character and
necessitate the application of a moral truss. The common
perils of war or mass migration may call for stricter corporate
discipline. An influential class finding an inviting point of
attachment may fasten itself upon the rest and turn parasitic.
It must then guard and perpetuate this parasitic relation by a
more stringent discipline.

Whatever the provoking cause may be, the increase of control
is attended by a long cortége of social phenomena. It is impos-
sible to restrict the movements of the social molecule without
effecting a number of parallel changes. The operation of putting
“starch” into church and state is at once delicate and interesting.

It might be supposed that the best way to gauge a change in
the volume of control is to watch the ordinary man and see what
happens to him. Is he freer or less free? Does his personal
interest, bent, whim, taste, or idiosyncrasy prevail more than it
did or less? But there is a better way than this.

The lessening of freedom that invariably follows an increase
in control is felt, not so much by plain, inconspicuous Doe or
Roe, as by the man who stands nearest to and has the most to do
with those activities which are in the nature of control. In order
to double the pressure on the average person it may be neces-
sary to decuple the pressure upon those who as artists, speakers,
preachers, teachers, peace officers and officials are in stations of
authority or influence. They receive and transmit the impulses
emanating from the elders, the notables, the mandarins, and
other opinion-forming sections of society. They constitute the
dial plate upon which we may read a magnified record of what
the humbler folk are experiencing in the way of restraint or lib-
erty. We have but to watch them to measure the fluctuations
of social discipline.

In the religious field access of control chokes up the fountains
of inspiration. The prophet is frowned upon, and the enthusiast
discouraged. Dogma and ritual grow rank. The legal side of
religion comes forward, while the mystic, inspirational side falls
into the background. The clerical profession is less open to the
man with a “call” or “vision.’”’ From the whole mass of beliefs
there splits off a body of accredited beliefs which comes to con-
stitute “orthodoxy.” Heresy is dreaded and banned. Con-
formity becomes a more radiant virtue, dissent a blacker sin. The
layman loses his immediate touch with the Unseen. Hierarchy
rears its crest. The offices of the clergy are magnified. The
laity as a whole retreats before the growing insistence on the
spiritual eminence of the priests. The prophet yields to the
scribe, the curé to the prelate, the local cleric to the central.
The pastor becomes less dependent on his flock and more
dependent on the higher powers. His opinions are more looked
after, and the unsound are ruthlessly routed from all posts of
influence.

Art is affected in the same way as religion. In times of little
control the artist works as the plowboy whistles—from sheer
pleasure in free self-expression. But in times of tightening con-
trol the artist is impressed with his “ responsibility.” The irregu-
lar is deprecated and pursued. Canons and conventionalities
multiply which he cannot evade. In increasing degree the art
that is allowed to succeed is churchly, or courtly, or official, or
under patronage. The censor reappears, the press is licensed,
and the drama becomes a state function.

In the sphere of opinion the confidence that truth in open
combat can always vanquish error declines. It is deemed
needful to give a fillip to correct opinions and a handicap to the
erroneous ones. The maxim that “every sober adult is respon-
sible for his acts” is abandoned in order that the agitator may
be held responsible for his diatribes and incitements. More-
over, tendencies are everywhere sharply looked after. Certain
branches of learning are “safe,” while others are “unsettling.”
The curriculum of studies becomes less elastic. Classicism lords
it inthe schools. Experiments are frowned on and a pedagogical
orthodoxy arises. The direct relation of teacher to pupil and
parent decays, and central authorities appear for the supervising
and unifying and regulating of education. Even in the higher
schools the teacher learns to value the favor of the appointing
powers more than that of the men he teaches. The freedom of
teaching is restricted, and more concern is shown for the sound-
ness of professors than for their ability.

In the field of physical coercion there is an increase in the
number of lictors, bailiffs, police, and soldiers told off to catch,
prod, beat, and hold fast recalcitrants, and they are brought
under a stricter discipline. They are more specialized for their
work, and an esprit de corps is carefully cultivated among them.
Executive and judicial officers are appointed rather than elected,
and so made answerable to their superiors rather than to the
people they work among. Locally chosen persons are displaced
by the nominees of a central government. For the immediate
control of the local community over the officials in its midst is
substituted a general and remote control of the entire people
over the whole governmental machine. The military becomes
more independent of the civil power, the executive more inde-
pendent of the legislature, the cabinet more independent of the
party that supports it, the party organization more independent
of the voter. The suffrage is restricted, or else its results are
repeatedly decantered and filtered by means of degrees of
election.

All this does not happen by simple fiat of the social will.
Certain groups of persons—executive, cabinet, the central gov-
ernment, the party machine, the higher clergy, the educational
hierarchy, “authorities” of every kind, in short—are always
striving for more power. When the need of a more stringent
control makes itself felt they find the barriers to their self-
aggrandizement unexpectedly giving way before them. For-
merly they were held in check, while now they find encroachment
strangely easy.

On the other hand there are certain deep-seated social
changes which lessen the tension between man and man, and
make for a milder discipline. Time assimilates juxtaposed
races to one another and fits them to think and feel alike.
Inventions make industry dynamic and the calcareous parts of
the social organization are silently dissolved away. Changes in
production or trade, lifting the base or depressing the apex of a
conical society, purge out of control the element of class rule.
Prosperity, outrunning the growth of wants, softens the economic
struggle. Long peace, melting down the tough masses cast in the
iron mold of war, gives men the freedom of molecules in liquid.

What happens in such cases is just the opposite of that
described above. Trammels of every kind—moral, legal,
religious—relax, the greatest relief in this respect being
enjoyed by those who handle the instruments of control. More-
over, in this movement, as in the other, the changes are not
anonymous. They are brought about, not directly by the social
mind, but chiefly by those groups which are most cramped and
which are pressing hardest against the yoke. They are the
work of artists, laymen, the lower clergy, the teaching rank and
file, the intellectuals, the civilians, the commoners. These find
the very stars in their courses fighting with them in their
struggle for relief.

Next to change in social need, the vicissitudes of control are
connected with partial dissolution due to the rise and strife of classes.
Normally “society” presents itself as a congeries of lesser and
greater groups, an interlinking of narrower and wider circles,
each playing its part in the task of control, each spinning some
of the ties that bind persons into a social tissue. The outcome
of these joint operations is social order. But there are times of
ill health when these natural associations cease to lend one
other confirmation and support. In the bosom of society there
appear tangent groups, each having its distinctive public opinion,
creed, personal ideals, moral standards, mass suggestions, and
fascinating personalities—in short, a more or less complete
apparatus of control of its own. Groups of this sort are sects.
When such sects are at variance with one another, the more
absolute the control they exercise over their adherents the
greater the strain on the social fabric.

The growth of fresh social tissue is in itself good. Like the
budding of unicellular organisms, it is a sign of health, and
when fission takes place it amounts to a kind of social reproduc-
tion. In the course of this century hundreds of such embryo
societies have formed on European soil, detached themselves,
migrated to roomy America, and burst into vigorous life.
But when the substance of these tangent associations so
nterpenetrates that they cannot secede and lead a separate
existence, that is to say, when they are interdependent social
classes with conflicting economic interests nursing each its
antagonism to the other, the danger to order is very great. The
sect ethos saps the life of the social ethos. In many directions
control is paralyzed. Society loses in contractile power. There
remains sometimes no bond but the hard outer shell of military
force, which may or may not be strong enough to hold together
in peace the hostile classes that have formed within it.

Now, under what conditions does society split up into jar-
ring groups? The first condition, of course, is sharp conflict of
interest. But this alone is not enough. There is conflict of
interest between merchants and farmers, between taxpayers and
tax-eaters, yet these do not form the true sects. The second
condition is great contrast of means, resulting in extremes of
misery and luxury. Especially important is this when the
misery or uncertainty from which a class suffers appears to rise
out of the social organization rather than to flow from nature.
But this is still not enough. Such contrast does not always
beget class consciousness and solidarity. The third and decisive
condition is a great inequality of opportunity, coinciding with a
great inequality of possessions.

For observe that the poor do not generate a militant ethos
of their own if their dite are able to escape upward. In the
zone of new lands that belts western civilization the doors of
opportunity stand open, and the spectacle of mountainous wealth
does not, of necessity, breed envy and wrath. The capable
poor, the natural founders of a sect within the proletarian class,
acquiesce in the status guo, because they hope to be possessors
themselves some day. On the white man’s frontier, the Far
West, Alaska, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Siberia, property
is easy to defend and order easy to maintain, because, in spite
of economic contrast, opportunities abound. The social sub-
stance running smooth and unbroken from top to bottom, social
control may be moral and mild. In older countries, however, the
good places are occupied, escape from one’s lot is more hopeless,
and social order implies a formidable enginery. Here the insti-
tutions of control bear the stamp of harshness, illiberalism, and
oligarchy.

But even here there is a see-saw between static and dynamic
epochs. In the latter, inventions subvert old fortunes and create
new wealth, enterprise thrives, and the high capillarity of the
social strata permits the ascent of the ablest. In the static
epoch, on the other hand, opportunity is chiefly for those who
hold the strategic points and own the instruments of production.
Accordingly, the inner tension is not relieved.

It is in obedience to this fundamental law that the decline of
public spirit, the decay of social solidarity, and the rise of the
class as a moral authority are, as has often been remarked, the
peculiar malady of an old society. For the society that is old
is likely to be economically developed. This implies that its
natural resources are about all taken up, and that its industry is
carried on with the aid of capital which, accordingly, claims all
the product beyond bare wages.

A society, then, may escape this disease of age if it becomes
once more dynamic. In this century England, providing a wide
field for enterprise by means of her colonies and by means of
the industrial revolution which cast the riches of the world’s
commerce into her lap, has staved off the strife of classes, and
in a democratizing time has been able to strengthen the institu-
tion of property without diminishing her heritage of freedom.
But countries like Italy or Spain, lacking opportunities, have
become seats of class strife, and hence of repressive institutions.
To ease the upward pressure by founding colonies and by foster-
ing industry and commerce, is the true policy for a government
that feels the deck leaping beneath its feet. It is likely, then,
that when capitalistic production has everywhere put its full
rending strain on social tissue, the static portions of the earth
will become coercive or socialistic, or both, while the dynamic
lands alone will be able to remain at once individualistic,
property-respecting, and free.

When class spirit has sapped social spirit and rent society in
twain, the first effect is a weakening of social control and a
drifting toward disorder. Anarchy is, however, so insupportable
that a very little experience of it stimulates powerfully the
regulative organs of society. The more that past security has
tempted property and economic organization to expand, the
fiercer is the demand that the apparatus of control be reconsti-
tuted and order restored. Civil wars led the Greek cities to
welcome the Roman yoke. The Social War in Rome paved the
way for Cesar and the empire. The French Revolution made
Napoleon acceptable. The disorders after the close of the
American Revolution provoked the establishment of a federal
government. But this revived control is likely to be less suasive
than the old, trusting more to the sword, and less to ideas and
ideals. At times, indeed, institutions will be bathed and the
recesses of the nation flooded, with the sense of a common life.
There will come gusts of national feeling, when souls are as
straws in the wind. But if conditions continue static, we are
likely to get at the end a society like that of the later Roman
empire, split into classes and devoid of public spirit and patriot-
ism, yet enduring, because held in the massive framework of a
centralized state.

Another cause of vicissitude in social control is change in the
culture and habits of a people. The beliefs in the Unseen, religious
convictions, personal ideals, canons, maxims, ceremonies, moral
philosophies, and social valuations, which serve for control, are
a secular growth and as such are adapted to collective needs.
Let these be greatly deranged by fresh knowledge, new ideas,
foreign influences, or novel experiences, and there will ensue
during the time of convalescence an outburst of individualism.
There will be a temporary emancipation from restraints and a
reversion toward primitive and egoistic modes of behavior. In
such cases we have what might be called molecular dissociation,
that is, an increase of evil, crime, and strife, without any cleav-
age of the social mass.

With the partial paralysis of social control, whether from
the fading of ideals, the decay of religion, or the degeneration
of the state, there is found normally a greater energy of indi-
vidual reaction against wrong. The unbinding of the ego makes
for the aggression of man on man, and hence invariably revives
primitive practices of personal vengeance. Along with the
individualism of the Italian Renaissance, for instance, went a
demoniac energy of self-help.

Among the symptoms of triumphant egoism are the decline
of patriotism and public spirit. In degenerate Italy, in dying
Greece, in decrepit Egypt, the state, unable to rouse her citizens,
fights her battles with condottiert. The cosmopolitan spirit pre-
vails over the national spirit. Men expatriate themselves cheer-
fully for the sake of comfort or security. Foreign domination
is endured or even welcomed. The claims of the community
rank below the claims of caste. Money-getting is more attract-
ive than public life. Politics is followed as a lucrative trade.
Justice and administration become hopelessly rotten because
enough good men cannot be found. The phrases and trappings
of public spirit being retained after the sentiment has fled,
hypocrisy infects all civic life.

Again, the family bonds are less rigid. The young are ear-
lier freed from paternal authority. Women are emancipated
without being uplifted. Enamored of self, men shrink from
marital obligations. Increasing divorce shows that the family is
felt to be a means of pleasure rather than a social organ. But
while functional associations such as family, local community,
city, and fatherland lose their hold on the individual, there is an
efflorescence of associations like the religious sect, the fraternal
order, the guild, the club, the social circle—all those unions, in
fact, which spring from free inclination and gratify social crav-
ings. Men unite, if at all, on a purely human basis, so that the
sweetest flowers of friendship blossom in the eager atmosphere
of individualism. Such times sound the heights and depths of
human nature.

In these crises, when the ego has been unleashed by the
decay of old regulative beliefs and the ruin of old ideals,
recourse is had, whenever possible, to that amalgam of con-
science and egoism, che sense of honor. In an era of individualism,
whether in the Rome of the Stoics, the Italy of the Renais-
sance, the England of the Restoration, the France of this
century, or the Japan of today, the conserving forces of society
conspire to whet this sentiment to the utmost keenness. In
explaining why the moral solidarity of a society is now and then
broken by a brief orgie of the natural man, it is necessary to
observe that there is no fixed cycle of changes through which a
system of social control normally passes. A phase of control
is determined, not by the previous phase, but by social facts of a
more primary order. Law and morality have no career of their
own, but yield at every moment to the shaping pressure of other
forces in social life.

If undisturbed, a people builds the knowledges, ideas, and
experiences in its possession into a “world-view” which agrees
with and supports its social control. They are brought into har-
mony with those ideas about the other world, about the ends of
life, about the worth of things, and about the honorableness
and dishonorableness of actions which society drills into its
members. In other words, the form of culture, which is a tri-
fling affair, is subdued to the purposes of regulation, which is a
very important affair. Now anything that shatters this rigid
confining crust that forms upon a society weakens all that con-
trol which does not depend on direct agencies like force, public
opinion, etc., and thereby ushers in an era of individualism.

The accumulation of new knowledge does this. In Greece at
her prime the rapid gains in a scientific apprehension of things
undermined the old religious and moral views and brought on a
moral crisis. Similarly, modern science has destroyed the theo-
logical systems which subordinated knowledge to regulative ideas,
and has fostered among the enlightened classes of today an
extraordinary freedom of spirit. This, be it remarked, is an
emancipation of wholly different origin from that which has
resulted from the economic conditions of the New World. Let
one but compare the individualism which the free exercise of the
reason has generated in the cultivated part of European society
with that which has always characterized the Americans of our
frontier.

The borrowing of new knowledge has the same effect as the
rapid accumulation of it. That direct taking over of the
unmoralized knowledge and ideas of classical antiquity which we
call he Italian Renaissance produced a brief but astounding burst
of neo-pagan individualism which in its intellectual and artistic
manifestations has charmed the world, but which in its moral
results has excited only its horror. As the new learning filtered
from Italy into northern lands it was partially mastered by the
conservative forces in society, and became an intellectual ferment
rather than a moralsolvent. A similar effect has been wrought
within the educated class in India by too immediate a taking over
of western science and culture. If in Japan morals have suffered
less from the same process, it is perhaps because for the support
of character Japan relies on ¢deals rather than ideas.

The wholesale acquisition of exotic wants likewise disrupts the
system of social control. Intercourse with abroad acquaints a
people with foreign luxuries and implants new cravings. The
sudden growth of the standard of consumption beyond the
means of satisfying it sharpens the struggle for wealth, under-
mines old personal ideals, and subverts the social valuations of
things. As tastes and appetites are more catching than the
moralities that hold them in check, heavy borrowings from a
foreign culture are apt to demoralize for a time the upper classes
of the people. The Greek moralists deplored the rage for
Asiatic luxuries which whetted the greed for gold and led
Greeks to take the pay of the Persian king. Cato bewailed the
sapping of Roman simplicity and virtue by insidious Greek
fashions and oriental pleasures. In the sixteenth century the
Italians, in the seventeenth century the Spaniards, in the eight-
eenth century the French, and in the nineteenth century the
English, have been reproached as the corrupters of peoples.
Fruitful as is the intercourse of nations, necessary as it is for
the rise of universal religions and universal moral systems, it is
undeniable that wholesale importations from abroad let loose
the world and the flesh and tend to social decomposition.
Laxity reigns until the group-soul has mastered the materials
thrust upon it and out of them has built a new fabric of regulative
ideas,

New experiences may likewise unbridle the ego. In times of
movement, when men break away from home and family, village
and custom, in order to swarm into El Dorados, into rising
marts, or into industrial towns, there is a kind of moral inter-
regnum. They have passed from the spell of the old, and the
new grouping has not yet woven its spell. The city is sometimes
an amorphous, uncohering horde of this kind, and so arises the
legend that life in the city can only demoralize and egoize men.
But the fact is that every association is able in time to loyalize
and subdue its members to corporate ends. When men come
into newly formed social classes, there is likewise a demoraliza-
tion until traditions are formed. Old landed gentries, for
example, love to contrast their fine sense of responsibility with
the raw egoism of codfish aristocracies, bonanza kings, “swagger”
sets, and other parvenu societies.

Chronic internecine strife by subjecting men to anti-social
experiences rends the social web in which they have been
enmeshed. ‘ War,” says Thucydides, ‘‘which takes away the
comfortable provision of daily life, is a hard master, and tends
to assimilate men’s characters to their conditions.” Of the
bloody civil wars in Greece he goes on to say:

Thus revolution gave birth to every form of wickedness in Hellas. The
simplicity which is so large an element in a noble nature was laughed to
scorn and disappeared. An attitude of perfidious antagonism everywhere
prevailed: for there was no word binding enough nor oath terrible enough to
reconcile enemies. Each man was strong only in the vonviction that nothing
was secure; he must look to his own safety and could not afford to trust

others.”

The Thirty Years’ War and the civil commotions in southern
Europe early in this century merit a similar indictment. War,
when it is the shock of great groups, brings the individual more
under the sway of corporate aims. But when it enters all the
intimate minor groupings of men, when it tears apart and dis-
solves the family, the neighborhood, the church, and the social
circle, then it converts the social man into the lone wolf.

The physiologist, in explaining the codrdinating work of the
human cerebellum, does not presume to account for those convul-
sive, muscular contractions that follow a bayonet thrust or a

1 THUCYDIDES, Jowett’s translation, III, chaps. 72, 73.
lightning stroke. Confining himself to states of health or of
definite disease, he declines to frame a theory for such catastro-
phes. Likewise, the sociologist who explains the growth and
principal variations of the social-equilibrating apparatus does
not thereby bind himself to account for all the moral phenomena
in history. Actual societies, and with them their systems of
control, have been so shattered, mutilated, and deformed by war,
famine, depopulation, immigration, race degeneration, and class
conflict that no laws can be framed for them that shall hold true
of all cases and situations.
