The Literary Interests of Chicago. III and IV

Author(s): Herbert E. Fleming

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 11, No. 4 (Tan., 1906), pp. 499-531
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2762563

Accessed: 09-05-2016 04:38 UTC
THE LITERARY INTERESTS OF CHICAGO. III AND
IV

HERBERT E, FLEMING
University of Chicago

Ill. LITERARY PERIODICALS FOLLOWING THE CHICAGO FIRE

“T found Chicago wood and clay,” a mighty Kaiser said,
Then flung upon the sleeping mart his royal robes of red.

And so the swift evangels ran by telegraphic time,

And brought the cheer of Christendom from every earthly clime;
Celestial fire flashed round the globe, from Norway to Japan,
Proclaimed the MANHoop of the race, the BROTHERHOOD of man!

They all were angels in disguise, from hamlet, field and mart,

Cuicaco,s fire had warmed the World that had her woe by heart.

“Who is my neighbor?” One and all: “We see her signal light,

And she is our only neighbor now, this wild October night!”

—Benj. F. Taylor, in the Lakeside Monthly, October, 1873.

The whole nation and the whole world centered attention
upon Chicago on October 8 and 9, 1871. On these days flames,
starting on the West Side, swept through the heart of the busi-
ness district to the very shore of the lake, like prairie fire
through stubble; then leaped over the Chicago river, traversed
the North side, died away there; and left the lusty, young
giant city of marvelous growth burned and prostrate. A
stream of sympathy from the people of the New World and the
Old World poured in upon the citizens of Chicago. The effect
is shown in the pages of the literary periodicals which survived
the catastrophe, and in those of the many new ones started
in the years of the seventies following the fire. From them it
may be seen that the fire melted some of the barriers of western
sectionalism. The world-wide sympathy caused the Chicago
literary men to feel after a world-wide point of view, more

499
consciously than they had done before under the merely
nationalizing influence of the Civil War.

The outside aid was a great stimulus to local energy, helping
the ambitious rebuilders of the city to start upon a remarkable
period of business enterprise; a period which, along with success
in more material lines, led to the establishment of literary
periodicals of kinds that were money-makers. Not only food and
clothing for the sufferers, but goods for the merchants on long-
time credit, and capital on easy terms,'came in large quantities
from other parts of America and from Europe. All this, added
to their own determined spirit, led Chicago men not merely to
rebuild on a larger scale, but also to launch new enterprises.
Among such were papers of the “family-story” literary order.

That the typical ventures of this period were not of a higher
literary type is explained by the fact that the “family-story”
paper was the most promising for quick returns in cash. In fact,
it is because investments in high-grade publishing in general do
not yield returns more quickly that the development of serious
publishing has continued to be comparatively slow in Chicago.
In an article on “Chicago as a Publishing Center” in “The Com-
mercial Association Number” of the Chicago Evening Post,
March 8, 1905, Mr. T. J. Zimmerman, managing editor of
System, a successful Chicago magazine of information on busi-
ness, puts this point as follows:

The whole history and present condition of the publishing business in
Chicago may be summed up in this statement: the westerner is looking for
quick profits; when he makes an investment of money and labor, he wants
to know what it is going to bring, and he wants to see the results at once.
In the publishing business—that is, real, sincere publishing—this is impos-
sible. The initial investment in a book or magazine is heavy. And not only
this; returns are spread over a long period of time. Westerners have not
gone into the publishing field to a greater extent, because there have been
so many opportunities at hand for quick returns into which their energies
could be turned.

Twenty years before the Chicago fire it had been discovered
in New York that a popular story paper would bring returns to
an investor. And we have already seen in the Chicago periodi-
cals of the sixties a drift toward this “family-story” type. In
1872 the Chicago Ledger was founded in direct imitation of the
New York Ledger. Concerning the “Popular Story Papers,”
in a section on “The Weekly Literary Press,’ Mr. S. N. D.
North, commissioner for the special Census Report on “The
Newspaper and Periodical Press” (1880), says in part:

The most notable successes attained by American publications not of
a purely news character are found in the type of periodical of which Robert
Bonner, of the New York Ledger, may be said to have been the fortunate
discoverer. Mr. Bonner purchased the Ledger in 1851, and shortly there-
afier converted it from a commercial sheet into a family newspaper, excluding
from its contents everything relating to the business and news of the day,
and substituting therefor a series of continued and short stories, not
generally of the highest class of fiction. But he attracted public attention to
his venture by engaging the best-known literary men of the country to
write for the Ledger over their own signatures. It rapidly rose to an enor-
mous circulation, which at times has reached as high as 400,000 per issue. The
Ledger may be said to be the original of that class of literary publications.
The imitations of the Ledger have been numerous, and frequently their
publication has been attended with great pecuniary success.

The Chicago Ledger has met with such success.

This paper was begun in connection with a newspaper plate
supply business. For about twenty years Samuel H. Williams, a
man of ability, was the editor. Like the New York Ledger,
the Chicago Ledger, during its first few years, made a leading
feature of stories which were literary in the accepted sense of
that word. Containing this grade of literature, printed on
cheap paper, and sold at $1 for fifty-two numbers, it met with
immediate favor, especially in the rural districts, during the
seventies. By 1879 the Chicago Ledger had a circulation of
10,000, which was a paying start for it.

Little by little, however, the higher class of well-written
fiction was dropped. One reason for this was competition intro-
duced by the advent of the “Lakeside Library,” published by
Donnelly, Lloyd & Co., 1875-77. The books of this “library”
were tri-monthly pamphlets, the first of the kind, containing
cheap reprints of standard fiction, selling at ten cents per copy
and attracting millions of readers. The stories of the Chicago
Ledger took on that more thrilling tone which is retained by
those appearing in the current issues of 1906. Aithough selected
by an editor who is the author of contributions accepted by
high-grade magazines, their form is unfinished. The contents,
however, are not of an immoral tone. In fact, the stories, like
the melodramas of the cheap theater, often point a moral, with a
not harmful effect.

The motto of the W. D. Boyce Co., the present publishers,
as stated by Colonel William C. Hunter, the secretary and active
manager of the Chicago Ledger, is: “The higher the fewer.”
In more positive terms it might be put: “The lower the more.”
At any rate, this paper, listed in the newspaper annuals as
“literary,” has, according to their figures, since 1900 enjoyed a
regular circulation of nearly 300,000 a week. For “Boyce’s
Weeklies’—the Chicago Ledger and the Saturday Blade, a
weekly imitation of a metropolitan daily—an average circulation
of 631,869 copies is claimed; and for the Woman’s World, a’
monthly which has grown out of the success of the Ledger,
829,982 copies. Although but few of the residents of Chicago
have ever heard of these periodicals, these figures show the
banner circulation of “literary” periodical publishing in Chicago.
It was not until in 1891 that Mr. Boyce acquired the Chicago
Ledger. Since then its growth has been remarkable. It is the
basis of success with a paper mill and a city office building,
which fact, like many of the points already made in this series
of papers, again shows the engraftment of interests.

In “the trade” such periodicals as the Chicago Ledger have
come to be more commonly called “mail-order” papers than
“family-story” papers. It is thus recognized that they are run
primarily for revenue. With the development of houses selling
all kinds of goods direct to people in country homes, on orders
by mail, the Chicago Ledger and the “mail- order” papers have
been used for advertising by such firms. These mail-order
houses, of which the original, that of Montgomery Ward & Co.,
started during the same year as the Chicago Ledger, in 1872,
were among the new ventures in the period of enterprise after
the fire. Their proprietors wanted to reach the country popu-
lation. The Chicago Ledger managers often point out that 69
per cent. of the people of the United States live outside of
the cities, and that the circulation of the “mail-order” papers is
in the country towns, villages, and rural communities. In the
seventies the percentage of the population classed as rural was
even larger. And since the Chicago Ledger and the “family-
story” papers have never been much read in the cities, they were
used from the start to get advertisements to the country people.
The general advertising agencies were becoming an important
factor in certain lines of business by the late seventies. For the
large campaigns which they conducted, the first mediums they
used, after the local newspapers eyerywhere, were the “family-
story” papers, whose publishers were thus saved from great
outlay in their organization for securing advertisements. This
aided greatly in a quick realization of profits.

However sensational the call for a reader’s attention, and
despite the country reader’s interest in the advertisements, the
Chicago Ledger still appeals to the esthetic interest broadly
defined—to the interest in story. Incidentally this journal has
lived for thirty-three years, and maintained its identity, char-
acter, and name. No other Chicago periodical having some sort
of a dominant literary character can boast as much.

Thirty per cent. of the literary periodicals begun in Chicago
during the period after the fire were of this “family-story” type,
a larger percentage than the figures for those of its kind started
in any decadal period since then. Among the ventures of this
class in Chicago following the fire were the following papers:
Our Fireside Friend, 1872-75; the Cottage Monthly, 1873;
Turner's Minaret, 1873-75; Western Home, 1874-75; the Old
Oaken Bucket, 1876; and Sunset Chimes, 1876-87. One of the
newspaper annuals contained a standing line which described the
contents of these and similar periodicals as “entertaining
literature.”

The relative permanence of the literary periodicals started in
Chicago after the fire, including those of the higher as well as
those of the lower literary orders, is one notable feature of the
period, despite the fact, pointed out by E. Steiger, of New York,
in a compilation of American periodicals for the “ephemeral
intellectual department” of the Vienna exposition in 1873, that
in general “literary enterprises are ephemeral”—a generalization
also brought out by the census of 1870. Statistics compiled in
the course of study for these papers show that eight of the
forty-seven periodicals of a literary character started in Chicago
after the fire and before 1880 lived for more than fifteen years,
and that four started in that period are extant. This is all the
more remarakable when it is pointed out that, as the result of
the financial panic of 1873, a dozen periodicals died. But in
1876, in Rowell’s list prepared for the national Centennial Expo-
sition, there were titles of twenty literary Chicago periodicals.
Following the panic there was a new spurt of energy injected
into the business activity which followed the fire.

In the establishment of the profitable, low-grade story
periodicals the indirect influence of world-wide assistance to the
burned-out city has been traced. Its more direct effects, through
enlarging the point of view of Chicago editors, may be found in
the journals and periodicals of a higher literary order during
the fire decade.

The most notable direct aid from the Old World to the literary
interests of Chicago came in a gift from England, a contribution
which was the beginning of the Chicago Public Library.
In the fire the semi-public libraries were destroyed, and the
people lost the books of their homes. Moved by the thought of
such a loss, Thomas Hughes, the author of Tom Brown at
Oxford, led his countrymen in collecting a large library of fiction
and general works. This was sent to Chicago and accepted
gladly, the whole community being deeply impressed by an act
of such refined sympathy.

Dr. W. F. Poole, a pioneer in the public-library movement,
was called as librarian. And in October, 1874, with the bookwise
doctor as editor, W. B. Kern, Cooke & Co., booksellers and pub-
lishers, brought out a three-column folio entitled the Owl, and
subtitled “A Literary Monthly.” In No. 1, to be found in a file
at the Newberry Library, there appeared a dialogue, in which
the Public said to the Owl: “Qui vive?” The Owl gave the
countersign ‘A pure literature.” And the Public said: “All
right, and all hail,’ As “an organ of all that is good and
true, and an enemy of all that is bad and false in this age and
country,” the Owl was devoted chiefly to new books. The
essays by Dr. Poole were a feature in which he carried out his
policy of impressing on the community high standards, and at
the same time a belief in popular fiction reading, an influence
from him which was recently acknowledged by the Dial.

There were many manifestations of the striving toward
metropolitan breadth of view-point in Chicago literary periodical
ventures during the later seventies. This was so, notwithstand-
ing the fact that in population Chicago was not yet the
metropolis of the Mississippi valley. St Louis, with 310,864
inhabitants, outranked Chicago, the fifth in the list of cities, with
298,977 at the census of 1870. The Inland Monthly Magazine,
1872-77, advertised as “the only magazine of the West and
South devoted to literature, science, art, humor, sketches, etc.,”
had its main office at St. Louis, and merely a branch in Chicago.

By 1873 Chicago had reached such a stage of metropolitan
sophistication as to have its first periodical devoted exclusively
to humor. “Carl Pretzel’ was the nom de plume of C. H.
Harris, the editor. He began with Carl Pretzel’s Magazine
Pook, in which the sketches, like all his works, were written in
the style of Leland’s Hans Breitmann. This Pook was a weekly
folio, filled with good fun on local topics, phrased in a pseudo-
German-English lingo. In this form of expression is to be seen
one influence of Chicago’s large and important German popula-
tion. Many anglicized German expressions and many ger-
manized English phrases -have made fun in the ordinary
conversation of Chicago people. Hence “Carl Pretzel’s“ form
of humorous expression met with a specially ready welcome.
In attitude his humor was of the comic variety, which, as is seen
in the current work of Ade, McCutcheon, and Dunne, is the
characteristic Chicago humor—the comic as against the cynic of
more sophisticated New York. Mr. Francis F. Browne, Mr.
John McGovern, and Mr. John R. Walsh, from their varying
points of view, agree in recollections that “Carl Pretzel’s”
“stuff” was decent, clever humor, not in the least coarse. The
only file of his periodicals available, a sample of Der Leedle
Vanderer, 1876, in the “Number 1 Book” at the Historical
Society Library, gives the same impression.

From his beginning with the use of local material, Mr. Harris
branched out, and in 1874 established Carl Pretzel’s National
Weekly, which later had the word “illustrated” in its title to
advertise its cartoons, and was published regularly until 1893.
After a time “Carl Pretzel” was more or less written out, and
his paper gave considerable attention to politics, Robert G.
Ingersoll and John A. Logan being among the contributors. It
also became an organ of some secret society interests. It never
reached a circulation of more than 5,500, which shows that its
constituency was more local than national. In 1886 an advertise-
ment showed that it kept something of its original character.
This announcement read as follows:

Subscription price, $2 for one year, or $150 for 100 years. By subscribing
for 100 years, subscribers can save $50. Anyone can see that here is an
excellent opportunity to save money. Twelfth year and the largest circula-
tion of any weekly newspaper in Chicago.

Changes made in the name of a journal devoted to stories
and news of sportsmanship, which was begun in 1874 and is
continued today, are significant of movements toward a wider
outlook. The founder, Dr. N. Rowe, who always signed himself
“Mohawk,” first called this periodical Field and Stream. The
next year he changed the name to the Chicago Field. Then in
1879 it became the American Field; and from 1883 on it has
been dated from New York as well as Chicago, although the
main office,has been in the Masonic Temple at Chicago. Since
the death of its founder several years ago, the periodical has
been carried on with Mrs. N. Rowe as editor.

Another sign of the stir toward metropolitanism was seen in
a literary periodical based on the social stratification then
developing. There was a joining of interest in literature, art,
and music with the news of the local society sets, in this journal.
the Saturday Evening Herald, founded in 1874 by Lyman B.
Glover, who later became a newspaper dramatic critic, having
a wide following. This paper is still published, although devoted
almost exclusively to society. In its first years. however, with
John M. Dandy and G. M. McConnell doing editorial work in
addition to that of Mr. Glover, the paper was distinguished for
essays and other literary efforts of excellent quality. Among
the quasi-literary journals of Chicago it was, in its day, one of
the most influential.

More important, however, as an index of an expanding point
of view, was the advent of a periodical founded in 1873, by a
group of liberal, literary preachers—Professor David Swing,
Rev. Robert Collyer, Dr. Hiram A. Thomas, and others. To
symbolize their getting together, they named the periodical
the Alliance. It contained a faint religious dye. But it was
first of all colored with an effort at literary expression, chiefly
in the essay form. The denominational religious press in
Chicago, although it has been most successful and has been
marked by the incidental use of material appealing to the
literary interest, is not a subject for treatment here. In a more
general account of the esthetic interests of Chicago such
religious-literary periodicals should be given attention, because
the purely religious desires and the most purely esthetic desires
are closely allied. But the main features of the denominational
papers are the items of church news. The Alliance, however,
was primarily literary—so distinctly literary that, at one time,
Mr. Francis F. Browne, in the latter part of the decade, con-
sented to be its managing editor. At the inception of the
Alliance the literary clergymen attempted to settle their editorial
problems in meetings as a board of editors. This proved fatal
to any progress. Soon Professor Swing became the editor-in-
chief and chief contributor. His weekly essay was one of the
literary treats of the period, and was later continued when the
Alliance was merged with the Weekly Magazine in 1882.
According to the testimony of those concerned, the Alliance lost
its identity from deliberate wrecking by its business manager,
who is alleged to have taken advantage of the allied ministers’
lack of business experience.

A western magazine from the newer West moved east to
Chicago in 1879, drawn by the centripetal force the city was
exerting as the growing metropolis of the West. This was the
Western Magazine—the third in Chicago to bear that name.
It had been established in Omaha three years before. The
periodical was of regular magazine form, with two columns of
neatly printed matter on each page, and many excellent wood-
cuts illustrating mountain scenery and the towns from “British
Columbia to the Gulf of Mexico.” It was divided into two
departments, whose character was told by the following headings :
“The Original Department of ‘The Western Magazine,’ con-
taining Select Articles from Our Best Western Writers;” and,
“The Eclectic Department of ‘The Western Magazine,’ contain-
ing the Cream of European Literature.” Although containing
original stories, the leading feature of the “original department”
was illustrated articles and historical sketches on the towns of
the western states, in the form of travel letters from John H.
Pierce, the publisher. One of these referred to Kansas City as
“the new Chicago of the West.” These articles were accom-
panied by local advertisements from the places written up, and
thus brought the publisher his principal receipts, which were
augmented by subscriptions secured in these towns, at $1 a year.
Like Chicago’s pioneer literary journals, the Western Magazine,
while at Omaha, said, May, 1879:

Give a prompt and willing support to the only periodical that illustrates
our western country; and in the not far distant future we will furnish a
magazine equal in size and variety of attractions to the standard monthlies
of the eastern states.
the position. Mrs. Starrett, who today conducts a school for
girls in Chicago, teaches literature, and writes poetry for an
accredited New York publisher, gave many interesting sug-
gestions on the period treated in this paper.

The files of the Western Monthly show an immediate
improvement in its literary quality after its transferrence to
Chicago. The Burlington (Iowa) Hawkeye, in the reviewers’
comments, reprinted by the Western Magazine, said: “Mrs.
Starrett is eminently qualified and will be to the western literary
interests what Mary Mapes Dodge and other eminent lady
editorial workers are to eastern literature.’ The same paper
quoted the Chicago Tribune as declaring that the Western Maga-
zine would be “the foundation of great things in the literary
history of Chicago.”

“A Welcome Suggestion,” from a ““Well-Wisher and Reader,”
which is most significant of the Chicago desire for a literary
organ of metropolitan character, was published in the September,
1880, issue of the Western Magazine. It turned out that this
anonymous suggestion had come from Frederic Ives Carpenter,
now a professor of English literature at the University of
Chicago, at that time a Chicago high-school boy. The contribu-
tion said, in part:

Since the days of the Lakeside Monthly and the Chicago Magazine, it
has seemed to many of the literary and semi-literary people of this city as
though the day must be a long way off when Chicago might hope to have
any exclusively literary organ of its intellectual interests.

Now, your magazine is the rising sun of our hopes. Will it be long
before the Western Magazine is recognized as a worthy representative of
our literary interests, before you allow it to become metropolitan?

Rushing, trade-maddened Chicago is well supplied with periodicals that
uphold its myriad trade and labor and religious fields of activity. Yet not
a sheet for its literature. Why should New York have its Scribner's and
Harper’s, Boston its Atlantic, Philadelphia its Lippincott’s and we only our
dailies and the denominational religious weeklies?

The Western Magazine can make a career. Broaden your interests;
admit fiction (the modern home of geniuses) and literary criticism; or at
least, if we are not ready for that—literary gossip. Do this for the sake of
the cosmopolitan culture that any metropolis like this possesses, and which
calls for this.
The publication of this significant communication was made
the occasion for opening a new department in the magazine,
called “The Club.” Mrs. Starrett declared editorially that
there was “no more significant sign of social progress than the
spread of literary and social organizations known as clubs,
whether woman’s clubs, art clubs, social science clubs, or study
clubs.” The Chicago Philosophical Society, really a literary
society in which Mr. Franklin Head, Mr. Lyman J. Gage, and
other prominent business and professional men interested in
reading, met for discussions, was the most important club in
Chicago at the time. The Saracen Club, the Fortnightly, the
Chicago Woman’s Club, and the Athena, of which Mr.
Carpenter’s mother was president, were notable, the woman’s-
club movement having become well started. Mrs. Starrett says
that Chicago people interested in letters were much more closely
associated in those days than has since been possible in the
enlarged city.

A sub-title was added to the name of the Western Magazine
announcing it to be “A Literary Monthly.’ The editor was
flooded with manuscripts from local writers and from writers in
other cities, for both “The Club” department and the general
literary pages. Much of the material was amateurish. But some
of it was done in promising style by authors, who, through their
start in this medium, later attained some prominence, among
them being Lillian Whiting. After one of the later issues,
Professor Swing sent a note to Mrs. Starrett in which he said:

There is no better-edited magazine, nor one containing finer writing,
east or west or anywhere, than our little magazing which has just come to
my desk.

But at that time the interests of Mrs. Starrett, who had
previously found 75,000 readers for an article on “The House-
keeping of the Future,” in the Forwm, turned more keenly to
social and economic questions than to form in literature. The
contributions to “The Club” department soon were almost
exclusively along these lines—the reproductions of essays read
at club meetings by studious women. For this reason, among
others reflecting the general situation, it is not surprising that
on merging the Alliance in March 1882, the Western Magazine
became the Weekly Magazine, and announced that thereafter it
would

present to its readers each week the same choice collection of literary matter,
with an added department of great interest devoted to discussions, by able
and well-known writers, on the important political, social, and economic
topics.

While the weekly sermon-essay by Professor Swing, written
after the manner of Addison in The Roger de Coverly Papers,
was the leading literary feature, and there were some stories and
poems, the main source of interest in the contents of the Weekly
Magazine came more and more to be inquiry about social ques-
tions. A regular letter from) Washington was sent by Gail
Hamilton. James G. Blaine contributed an article on “The
South American Policy of the Garfield Administration.” Mr.
William A. Starrett, Mrs. Starrett’s husband, at first associate
editor, wrote such acceptable reviews of political events that in
the later numbers his name was put above Mrs. Starrett’s in the
lines naming the editors.

The circulation of the Weekly Magazine reached 23,450 in
1883, not equaling, however, the 50,000 credited to the Western
Magazine in 1880. It was backed to an extent by prominent
Chicago business men. George M. Pullman and C. B. Farwell
contributed $1,000 each for stock, and Marshall Field $500.
The editors had no part in the business management. The
business manager, who had previously been in charge of the
Alliance, got the affairs of the Weekly Magazine into such a
hopeless tangle that it became bankrupt, and ended its, career in
1884.

The history of the Western Magazine and the Weekly Maga-
gine gives another example of the diverting of the esthetic
literary interest to the knowledge interest. But the story of its
attraction to Chicago from the farther West, and of its develop-
ment thereafter, shows the movement toward metropolitanism
in Chicago, and carries us over into a period of greater develop-
ment toward that characteristic in the eighties.
IV. JOURNALS FOR LETTERS IN THE MARKET METROPOLIS,
1880-90
“Tt is universally conceded that Chicago is rapidly achieving world-wide
reputation as the great literary center of the United States.”—From Culture’s
Garland, Being Memoranda of the Gradual Rise of Literature, Art, Music and
Society in Chicago, and Other Western Ganglia, by Eugene Field (Ticknor &
Co., Boston, 1887).

Chicago arrived at the rank of a metropolis during the decade
of 1880. A position of metropolitan character was reached, as
far as the groundwork of materialistic supremacy in a large terri-
tory is concerned. In tracing the origin and character of the
literary periodicals outcropping in these years, and the interplay
of literary and other interests, the first requirement is a picture of
Chicago as a material metropolis.

It has often been said by the citizens of older centers that a
nation can have only one metropolis, only one “ mother-city.”
Unquestionably, New York city has been the metropolis of
America for many decades. But the essential idea of metropolis
is that of the relation of the city center to an expanse of its sur-
rounding country. The United States covers so large a sweep of
country that several European cities of metropolitan rank, along
with their supporting empires, could be set down in it. In posi-
tion Chicago is the center of the most fertile and extensive expanse
of valley and prairie in the North Temperate Zone—a territory
which by 1880 had become populous. And in every way before
the close of the eighties Chicago had become the chief city of the
West, and also the first of the nation, and' indeed of the world in
not a few phases of business and commercial command.

The foremost of the chief positions of which Chicago men
could and did boast was the rank attained as the greatest railroad
center. Ever since the prairie days Chicago had been growing
rapidly as a railroad center. This growth had come out of the
food-supply industry, and had been reared on the bringing of
wheat and cereals to Chicago for shipment over the lakes, and of
live stock to the Union Stock Yards, the greatest wholesale meat-
market in the world. Established in 1865, after commissary
work for the Civil War had demonstrated the importance of
Chicago as a point for supplies, this market had grown to
immense proportions by 1880. On the bread- and meat-supply
business had been built the so-called “Granger Railroads,” and
their development was followed by the locating in Chicago of
manufacturing plants for the making of all sorts of goods. All
this called for more railroads.

Seven new main lines were built into the city during the
eighties. This made the total number of trunk lines with ter-
minals in Chicago an even twenty, which, according to Blanchard,
was the full quota of “railroads entering Chicago on their own
tracks August 1, 1900.” Chicago became not only a receiving
point for raw materials, but the growth of the railway systems
made the city the center of a most striking example of that which
was defined by Herbert Spencer in his elaborate analogy between
the structure of society and that of an animal organism, as the
“social distributing system.”

As it took a multitude of people to handle all this market,
manufacturing, and railway business, the number increased so
rapidly that by 1880 Chicago had, in population, become the
metropolis of the West. The census of 1880 showed that in num-
bers of people Chicago had far surpassed St. Louis, which had
before led in the states west of the Alleghanies. In that year
Chicago’s population was more than half a million by several
thousand. This meant a large distribution of any marketable
commodity for consumers within the city itself. But the popu-
lation of the Middle West, Northwest, and Southwest, increasing
proportionately, made a larger market. Chicago became the chief
inland distributing center, not only for life-sustaining products —
food, clothing, druggists’ supplies, and lumber for housing—but
also for material luxuries, and finally for those classes of goods
designed to satisfy the esthetic interest.

Among the many jobbing-houses which had grown to large
proportions by 1880, one of the most notable was that of a firm
whose largest business was in book-jobbing. This was the
McClurg house, known since 1886 by the firm name of A. C.
McClurg & Co., which today, in a nine-story building, does,
besides a large retail book-selling business and a good amount of
original publishing, the most extensive book-distributing business
for all publishers by any single house in the United States. In
1880 this house was the most conspicuous among three large
book-stores in adjoining buildings on State Street, known to
residents of the city, to visitors from the Middle West, and to
tourists as “ Book-Sellers’ Row.”

The immense book-distributing business of the McClurg firm
was built up in conjunction with, and as an engraftment upon,
another line of jobbing. The retail book-sellers of the small
towns throughout the West are the druggists, who, in addition
to proprietary medicines and drugs, sell a varied line of sundries.
Such a retailer would often ask the McClurg company to deliver
an order of books to some Chicago house jobbing these sundries,
so that shipment could be made in one box. Therefore the firm
decided to supply these articles direct. And today, in addition to
a Monthly Bulletin of New Books, A, C. McClurg & Co. send out
a large annual volume, the cover of which says: Catalogue of
Blank Books and Tablets, Stationery, Typewriter Paper and Sup-
plies, Hair and Tooth Brushes, Druggists’ Sundries, Pocket-
Books, Pipes, Pocket Cutlery, etc.” More than one floor of their
large building is filled with such prosaic supplies.

Directly out of this book-distributing agency, so built up,
ramifying to drug-stores and book-stores in all towns of the West,
and centered in the McClurg house, there originated a journal of
literary criticism—the Dial. In 1880 the McClurg firm started
this periodical in conjunction with Mr. Francis Fisher Browne,
who from its first number until the last of the current volume in
1905 has been in charge of its editorial management. At the
time, Mr. Browne, whose work in editing and publishing the
Lakeside Monthly had been so notable, was connected with the
book-house as literary adviser in its publishing department, which
General A. C. McClurg was then personally making special
efforts to develop.

Devoted exclusively to literary criticism and information con-
concerning new books, the Dial did not and does not make the
appeal of literary form direct to the zsthetic interest, although
the style of its contents is excellent. Its appeal is to the interest
in knowledge about the form and contents of literary works.
The Dial was raised up for keeping time on the knowledge of
current productions of literature.

Nevertheless, the Dial is significant of Chicago and western
literary interests as they devloped in the decade of its founding,
and as they have grown to be since then. With Chicago having
attained a metropolitan prominence in materialistic things, one
characteristic of the majority of Chicagoans in the eighties
became self-confident boasting about their city. It was the crass
clamor of a puissant metropolitanism of the market-place. When
this note became most strong, many citizens, with material
achievements accomplished, began to have some doubts as to
whether business success is all of greatness possible. The appear-
ance of the Dial marked the fact that the central inland market
for grosser products had become a great central market for liter-
ary goods. In a section where literary appreciation was much
more predominant than the creative literary interest—writing
and publishing—it is perhaps remarkable that such a journal as
the Dial did not come earlier. The West was buying books. The
West began to criticise books. And incidentally other journals
of literary criticism, among them being a short-lived magazine
called the American Critic, were started at this time. Of course,
from the earliest days of periodical-publishing in Chicago there
had been some literary criticism. But the attitude of appraising
quality had not been a characteristic of Chicago until the decade
of the eighties, when this element found a place in the public mind
of a community which had reached a material metropolitanism,
and was growing toward a broader and higher metropolitan
spirit.

The history of the Dial during the eighties and later tells of
the advance toward, not only breadth, but also independence in
the judgment of letters. During the entire decade of the eighties,
and for two years in the nineties, the business success of the Dial
was made easy because A. C. McClurg & Co. were heavy whole-
sale purchasers from all of the large publishing-houses of the
East. Naturally the publishers were quick to place advertise-
ments in the Dial. Furthermore, the Dial, published by Mc-
From the first, Mr. Browne, though a prophet of Western
literature, had maintained, besides a broad critical outlook, the
high ideals of editorial independence for which he had been
respected while editing the Lakeside Monthly. With Mr. Browne
small. The character of the editor, and the fact that experts on
1906, it stands as the only authoritative American journal devoted
exclusively to literary criticism that is not connected with a book-
publishing house. While in the eighties its circulation was in
largest part western, today it is national, although not large as
compared with the popular magazines, because the constituency
of publishers, reviewers, librarians, teachers, ministers, and gen-
eral readers deeply interested in literary criticism is relatively
small. The character of the editor, and the fact that experts in
special topics are paid for reviews expressing their opinions
freely, have made the independence of the journal have meaning.
It is safe to say that the Dial, although published in the inland
metropolis, is the leading journal of literary criticism in the
nation.

After all is said about the Dial as a symbol of the growing
metropolitan independence of criticism in Chicago, that which
stands out as most striking concerning the developments of the
eighties is its origin in a book-distributing agency erected, like
other freight-distributing houses, along with the railway systems
which made the dot on the map marked “Chicago” a metro-
politan center.

The distributing of people as well as packages by the railway
systems centering here brought the Arkansaw Traveler and Opie
Read, who had founded this periodical at Little Rock in 1882, to
Chicago in 1887. It might appear that the name Arkansaw
Traveler was given in a punning mood, because its contents were
prepared for the amusement of railway travelers. But it was
taken from a tune made familiar in Arkansas by a local character,
one “Sandy” Faulkner, who as a candidate for the legislature
had gone about the state playing a “fiddle” and reciting a
monologue. The contents of the paper were of a humorous char-
acter —sketches and jokes, drawn chiefly from the lives of
southern dialect characters, with whom Mr. Read had made him-
self familiar when local editor of the Little Rock Gazette. While
during the early eighties the comic papers of New York were,
according to Frederick Hudson, the authority on American jour-
nalism, first becoming successful, the Arkansaw Traveler, still at
Little Rock, leaped into popularity, first in the Southwest and
then through the North, attaining a circulation of 85,000 in its
second year. The year 1887, in which the headquarters of the
Arkansaw Traveler were removed to Chicago, was one in which
the last two of the seven lines of railroad caming into Chicago
in the eighties were opened. Mr. Read, in an interview given to
contribute material for these papers, said:

Chicago had become the great railway center. Our paper was sold chiefly
on railway trains. We moved to Chicago so as to be in position for reaching
the largest number of railway passengers most easily. The mailing facilities
of Chicago, as the central point in a spider’s web of railways, also led us here.
In those days schoolboys were not used extensively for the sale of weekly
papers. Besides making sales on the trains through the news companies, we
had a subscription list. For years Chicago had been a great point for the sale
of subscription books. For our weekly of general circulation the business
manager, P. D. Benham, my brother-in-law, found that it was not possible to
get advertising in the same proportion to the number of subscribers as with a
local newspaper. The advertising patronage came from the general agencies,
and in those days magazine advertising was not done so generally as it is
today. We counted on sales and subscriptions.

For five years after its migration to the western railway
metropolis, the Arkansaw Traveler held its own. In fact, it is
still brought out regularly from a bookkeeping supply house.
But it has lost its unique characteristics, and has an insignificant
circulation.

Mr. Read resigned from the editorship in 1892, and has not
since contributed to the paper. His resignation was made partly
because some promoters acquired control of the organization of
the periodical, converted it into a stock company, and proposed to
put Mr. Read, its creator, on salary. But a more important rea-
son was that Mr. Read had come to the conclusion that humor
and character sketches put into ephemeral form in a weekly
periodical were more or less wasted. He aspired to write books,
and had been encouraged by Ticknor & Co., of Boston, who had
already published one of his southern dialect productions, entitled
“Len Gansett.” For thirteen years, since resigning from the
periodical whose interests brought him here, Mr. Read has been
in Chicago writing for publications chiefly in book form. He has
probably been the most prolific user of the fiction form working
continuously in Chicago since the eighties. A score of his books
of fiction are to be found in the Public Library. Most of them
have been published, by Chicago printing-houses, between paper
covers. The news-company boys on passenger trains east and
west will tell you that Opie Read is the author most popular
among train readers. He has held and enlarged the audience
before which he secured his first hearing with sketches and jokes
in the Arkansaw Traveler. And recently eastern magazine and
book publishers have solicited and secured his output.

From the day of his arrival, Mr. Read has been the personi-
fication of the fact that the growing mid-American metropolis has
been constantly drawing to itself men with unique points of view
— writers whose outlook is first of all that of some other locality.
To busy Chicago Mr. Read brought the point of view of quaint
and quiet southern life, the eye and ear of an interpreter of the
dialect characters in the region from which he came. Always
picturesque in character, wearing a long black coat, black string
tie, long locks, and a broad-brimmed hat, Mr. Read has visited
the Press Club almost daily, and, meeting the younger news-
paper men, as well as those of “the old guard,” in avowed and
democratic freedom and simplicity, has imparted his point of view
to others. Men from other places in America having distinct
local color have brought other variations in point of view. The
attraction of such men was specially notable in the eighties.
Since then more men trained to the cosmopolitan view of letters
and art derived in Europe have come to the Chicago field. But in
that decade these various local view-points, along with the atti-
tude of men versed in classic English literature, such as Mr.
Browne of the Dial, fused with the virile mercantilism through
which those in the roar of Chicago’s busy streets saw life into a
new composite metropolitan outlook. It affected the writers and
publishers of Chicago in the eighties.

The conspicuous patronage of artistic endeavor, in various
mediums, by citizens who had acquired wealth with the city’s
growth into rank as a great mart, worthy of satire as it was in
some aspects, was another factor in creating a metropolitan
attitude. The Art Institute by 1882 had a brick building, and in
1887 erected for school and museum the excellent four-story
Romanesque structure of brown stone, on Michigan Boulevard,
at the southwest corner of Van Buren Street, now occupied by
the Chicago Club. There, in the heart of the market city, on a
boulevard which was fast becoming the fine-arts avenue of Chi-
cago, was a material temple fixing in the public mind the idea of
art. Theodore Thomas and his orchestra, besides filling winter
engagements in Chicago, had been giving long series of summer-
night concerts in the Exposition Building which stood on the
Lake Front until 1887. Grand opera was annually presented by
foreign companies, and the drama, exceptionally well patronized
for years, was presented by the best of visiting American and
English actors. All this told on the attitude of the literary
workers and publishers of periodicals.

But the most interesting expression of the growing metro-
politan literary consciousness of the decade was “the Saints’ and
Sinners’ Corner.” Engene Field, the poet and prose humorist,
who had been in newspaper work in Missouri and Colorado for
ten years before he was drawn to Chicago, in 1883, was the
voice of this unique group. The “Saints and Sinners” were a
score of bibliophiles—clergymen, general readers, and literary
workers—who held meetings, imaginary for the most part, in
the rare-book corner of the retail department of the house of
A. C. McClurg & Co., from another section of which, as we
have seen, there emanated a journal of literary criticism. It
was really a corner in the Daily News, where Field had a
column devoted to gossip about “The Saints and Sinners,” and
local literary and artistic topics, under the caption “Sharps and
Flats.” This was widely read and had a great effect on the ideas
of the community. From it, in 1887, Field culled selections,
which were published in book-form by Ticknor & Co., of Boston,
under the title: Cultwre’s Garland — Being Memoranda of the
Gradual Rise of Literature, Music and Society in Chicago, and
Other Western Ganglia.

The garland with which Field wreathed Chicago culture, as
shown in a frontispiece, was a string of sausages. He made a
reference to the time “when Chicago’s output of pork swept the
last prop from under the old Elizabethan school at Cincinnati;”
and said, on p. 168:

Here in Chicago “a hand well known in literature” is a horny, warty

but honest hand which, after years of patient toil at skinning cattle, or at
boiling lard, or at cleaning pork, has amassed sufficient to admit of its mas-
ter’s reception into the créme de la créme of Chicago culture.
Besides the extreme expression of satirical criticism which he
gave to sham in literary patronage, Field also played with super-
ficiality in efforts at literary and artistic production, including
some fun at the expense of three ambitious literary periodicals
started in Chicago during the decade. All this was the expres-
sion of an attitude that is typical of metropolitan centers, and
which in older, cosmopolitan capitals attains a degree of frigid or
flippant cynicism never yet reached by Chicago.

The three periodicals noticed by Field, while not devoted to
satire, were more metropolitan in character than any which had
preceded them in the succession of those started in Chicago.
These were the Current, a weekly begun in 1883 and lasting until
1888 ; Literary Life, a monthly magazine, 1884-87; and America,
a literary and political weekly journal, 1888-91.
The Current was the creation of Edgar L. Wakeman, a
brilliant newspaper man. Magazinedom is a kingdom of heaven
of which many newspaper men, in Chicago as elsewhere, often
fondly dream. Mr. Wakeman’s venture stands as one of the
most conspicuous efforts to get over the wall. As Chicago corre-
spondent for the newspaper of Colonel Henry Watterson, Mr.
Wakeman had, by the use of postal cards which he sent out to
prominent people, saying, “You will be interested in such and
such a number of the Louisville Courier,’ attracted much atten-
tion to his work in a paper that allows scope for individuality.
Both in promotion and character the Current was sensational.
In an early number the Current declared that it was “the weekly,
literary, news, and family journal of our time.”’ Its ambitious
ideal was stated as follows: “The Current is yet a model of
brevity and does every week what the pretentious magazines aim
to do once a month.”

While a family journal, the Current was far above the plane
of the “family-story”’ type of papers in literary quality. Its con-
tents had distinct literary merit. And yet they were not of the
classic character approached in such a magazine as the Lakeside
Monthly. It was a magazine of popular literature. It may with
approximate accuracy be listed as the first of that type undertaken
in Chicago. And by Mr. Forrest Crissey, the western editor for
two current eastern magazines of the popular literature type, its
career of five years is rated as the most significant of efforts at
periodical publishing in Chicago prior to those of the present
decade. Its popular character is to be seen by dipping into a file
at the Public Library. For example, a serial story by E. P. Roe,
entitled “ An Original Belle,” is to be found in its pages.

The field from which Mr. Wakeman gathered serials, short
stories, poems, and articles was not confined to the city limits, nor
by the boundaries of the Middle West, nor yet by those of
America. The management of the Current was the first among
Chicago publishers to seek manuscripts from England. While
not so well favored with results as has been the editor of the
Red Book of the present day, the effort shows a metropolitan
breadth approached by Chicago publishers in the eighties.
In securing contributions from American authors of estab-
lished reputation the Current was more successful. James B.
Cable, with “ Southern Silhouettes,” James Whitcomb Riley, and
Joaquin E. Miller were among the contributors. In its early
career the Current was reported to have $100,000.00 worth of
excellent manuscripts pigeon-holed. From the first, however,
Chicago men were important contributors. Eugene Field, Ernest
McGaffey, Colonel William Lightfoot Visscher, and John Mc-
Govern were among them. Field played with the pretentions of
the editor of the Current in the report of a “Convention of West-
ern Writers” at Indianapolis, where he said literary workers
would be asked: “But have you never written anything for the
Current? He remarked that the implication was: “If you
have, you must be all right.

In 1885 Mr. John McGovern, a vivid imaginative writer,
who honestly believes that the “West is in literary rebellion
against the East,” and that “General McClurg’s chief office was
to command a literary blockhouse and keep down the Indians of
the frontier,’ became editor of the Current. The periodical
became an avowed exponent of the literary interest of the people
in Chicago and the West, and their support was asked. As an
experiment to see if such support could not be secured, in 1885 a
beautiful Easter edition was prepared. With the enterprise
backed by Mr. George Wiggs, a member of the Board of Trade
interested in the patronage of local letters, 100,000 copies, four
times the normal number, were printed. The paper bill alone
was $3,000. But the bulk of the issue went to the ragman.

Under Mr. Wakeman’s administration the circulation and
advertising had been sufficient to give promise of success. With
the magnetism of enthusiasm, Mr. Wakeman had interested able
financial supporters. But by the end of his second year the
finances were in a tangle. Mrs. Starrett, who characterizes the
Current as “a flash in the pan,” says that Mr. Wakeman pro-
posed to sell the Current to the owners of the Weekly Magazine,
which had grown in metropolitan character and was continued
until 1884. The proposition was rejected. Mr. Wakeman left
town. The Current, embarrassed financially and narrowed to
“its chosen field as a representative of western literature”
dragged out a profitless existence until 1888, when it was
merged with America.

In the meantime, Literary Life, a contemporary of the
Current, attracted attention. It appeared in regulation form,
and was advertised as “an illustrated magazine for the people;
only $1 a year, ten cents a copy.” Charles Dudley Warner was
quoted as having written to the publisher saying: “Iam amazed
that you can afford to publish such a very handsome periodical at
so little cost to the subscriber.”

There was nothing local about the contents of Literary Life.
Essays on literary topics, biographical sketches and portraits of
well-known authors in America and England, with engravings
to show their “homes and haunts,” appear to have made up the
material sought for the magazine, which also announced a
somewhat broader ambition—namely, to be “the Century of the
West.” To what degree the aspirations it advertised were
realized cannot be ascertained in Chicago. There is no reliquary
file in the libraries here.

The name of Rose Elizabeth Cleveland, sister of President
Grover Cleveland, was conspicuously connected with Literary
Life. Miss Cleveland was the editor of some of the early num-
bers. But although a Boston organ was quoted as saying,
“ Literary Life helps to make Chicago one of the literary centers
of the country,” Miss Cleveland never came to this literary center.
All her work as editor was done at her home in New York state.
Perhaps this arrangement for long-range editing may be inter-
preted as a sign of a broad, metropolitan outlook on the part of
A. P. T. Elder, the publisher.

Miss Cleveland, in a letter recently sent for use in these
papers, said:

I was interested in Literary Life for three months, and then dropped it
because of a wide divergence between myself and its business manager as to
policy in its management. During the three months in which I did my rather
amateurish “editing” it was quite successful, and would in the hands of a
more discriminating manager, or a less fastidious editor, have been a profitable
enterprise.
The close of its career was chronicled by Field in 1887, with the
following paragraph:

For the information of our public we will say that the Atlantic Monthly
is a magazine published in Boston, being to that intelligent and refined com-
munity what the Literary Life was to Chicago before a Fourth Ward con-
stable achieved its downfall with a writ of replevin.

The efforts of the editor-publishers of America, the literary-
political weekly, 1888-91, are of more interest in many ways than
any others by periodical publishers at Chicago in the eighties.
Mr. Slason Thompson and Mr. Hobart Chatfield-Taylor were
the founders of America, and Mr. Thompson stuck to it as editor
and publisher to the end of its career. At the time of its founding,
Mr. Thompson, as he is today, was a strong journalist. Mr.
Chatfield-Taylor, now a novelist and prominent society man, was
then a recent college graduate of independent means, just begin-
ning a career of literary endeavor.

Mr. Thompson is one of the men drawn to Chicago by the
growing importance of the north-central American metropolis.
Educated for the bar at the University of New Brunswick, ad-
mitted to practice in that Canadian province, and later to the bar
in California, he had entered journalism at San Francisco, served
on the New York Tribune, and, after coming to Chicago as agent
for the New York Associated Press, had been one of the founders
of the Chicago Herald, and had held numerous important editorial
positions. While in San Francisco, Mr. Thompson had been an
admirer of the Argonaut, published there by Frank Pixley. He
believed that if a serious literary periodical published on the
Pacific coast could succeed, one brought out in Chicago should
surely do so. Mr. Thompson was one of the “Saints and
Sinners,” an intimate friend of Field, and in later years the
collator of some of that author’s writings. In “Sharps and
Flats,” Field, referring to an imaginary sale of pews in the
famous corner, made the following remark:

Mr. Slason Thompson, boiling over with indignation, declared that if the
Rev. Mr. Bristol and General McClurg intended to form a trust on pews,

they must expect to feel the castigatory torments of the nimble pen and sar-
castic pencil wielded by the facile editor of America.
In America Mr. Thompson was strong in writing castigations.
His supreme interest was in political questions, and he made them
all hinge on one —that of immigration.

Mr. Taylor had just come home. to Chicago from Cornell
University, where he had been connected with the undergraduate
journals. Today he laughingly says: ‘‘ Having been on the col-
lege papers, I thought I could set the world on fire.” Mr. Taylor
was not greatly interested in political and sociological questions.
His supreme interest, as an editor, was in literary form.

Although the endeavor to combine the literary and political
interest was a striking phenomenon in America, during the first
few months a remarkably strong, cosmopolitan literary character
in a large part of its contents was the feature which attracted
wide attention. The greatest array of contributions from noted
American authors ever secured for a Chicago periodical was
spread in the pages of America during the first few weeks of its
publication. Some, also, were from England. The file in the
Chicago Public Library would please any reader fond of the
works of American authors. A poem by James Russell Lowell,
contributions from Charles Dudley Warner and Julian Haw-
thorne, and an instalment of a serial by Frank R. Stockton are
among the contents of the first number. Hawthorne conducted
a department of literature for many weeks, and was succeeded in
that by Maurice Thompson. Andrew Lang, the English essayist,
was a frequent contributor. Swinburne was among the authors
of poems. Poetry by Holmes, Scollard, Morris, McGrath, Riley,
Garland, and Waterloo was printed. Eugene Field wrote his
“Little Boy Blue” for America. Ella Wheeler Wilcox and
Louise Chandler Moulton were among the contributors. The
aim of Mr. Taylor was not to secure material with which to make
the popular type of magazine, but to get for America the best of
the current American literary output. Fabulous prices were paid
for these contributions. For Bret Harte’s “Jim” the sum of
$500 was given. Mr. Taylor is said to have sunk from $50,000
to $100,000 in the America venture; and a good part of that sum
went for manuscripts. America’s outlook over American litera-
ture was broader than that of any literary magazine containing
fiction and poetry undertaken in Chicago during the eighties.

The publication of this representative American literary out-
put, secured at such extravagant prices, was continued for only a
few weeks. It did not pay. But few copies of America circulated
east of the Alleghanies. ‘Literary trade-winds blow from the
east,” says Mr. Thompson today. The circulation of America
was for the most part western, and at no time did it exceed
10,000. After the period of high prices for contributions, Mr.
Taylor wrote nearly all of the literary contents under a series of
noms de plume. In recounting this part of his experiences with
America, Mr. Taylor said: ‘That is where I gained my literary
training.”

Two local writers who have since attained national promi-
nence in lines of artistic production were assistant editors of
America during parts of its career as a training school—
Reginald De Koven, composer, and Harry B. Smith, light-opera
librettist. Writing as “Quaver,” Mr. De Koven conducted a
department of musical criticism. Of Mr. De Koven’s column,
Belford’s Magazine, a Chicago contemporary of America, said:

His notes will be read with much interest, for he is an eminently qualified
musician; a graduate of Oxford University, England, and essentially cosmo-
politan as regards his education.

Mr. Smith, who was beginning his literary work, was at first
listed as assistant editor and later as business manager, although
Slason Thompson says’ the periodical never had any business
management in the present-day sense. Mr. Smith was a frequent
contributor of verse.

While starting out with a notable character as to genuine
American literature, America from the first was distinguished for
the virile political interest and the vigorous personality of Mr.
Thompson, which stood out in its pages most emphatically. The
very title, while suggesting the literary interest, was conspicuous
for its political significance, and a sub-title declared America to be
“a journal for Americans.” Articles by Seth Low on “ American
Patriotism,” and by Theodore Roosevelt on “Americans Past
and Present, and the Americanization of Foreigners,’ appeared
and other propositions for the protection of “ America’s free
schools, American morality, and American nationality.” To
enforce these ideas, in some of the later numbers there was a use
of cartoons, the first and only illustrations published in America.
One of these was sublined, “ America for the Irish.” Another, a
lurid thing with much black ink, done by the famous Thomas
Nast, was called “Foreign Thrones among Us.” But the
advocacy of such sentiments did not prove popular enough to
bring large business returns, and with the number of Septem-
ber 24, 1891, the transfer of America and all that pertained to it,
except the “personal opinions of the editor,” was announced by
Mr. Thompson. In penning his farewell editorial he said: “In
respect to several subjects too much slighted in the daily press,
America has been a voice crying in the wilderness ;” and declared
that the policy had been to put forth “a firm but moderate opposi-
tion to the political and educational policy of the Roman Catholic
church in the United States,” and to give expression to faith in
the American common school as an “alembic” for the varied
nationalities represented in American population.

While the mixture of representative American literature and
national political policy in America makes it stand as an index
of the growing metropolitan spirit of Chicago in the eighties, it
was this mixture, and the gradual increase of the political element
—the advocacy of a cause— which brought failure to America.
Mr. Taylor says:

Besides our inexperience, the fact that the periodical was published in
Chicago and not in New York kept it from gaining a sure foothold.

Mr. Thompson, also, says:

Of course, there was a prejudice against a journal from Chicago; and the
labor organizations here made prices of printing higher than in New York.
But these magazine failures are not peculiar to Chicago. There has been no
greater extinction here than those of Putnam’s and the Eclectic in New York.

Nevertheless, the chief reason for the disappearance of America
remains the decline of its appeal to the pure literary interest, and
the phenomenal persistence and increase in its appeal to interest
in one political idea. In forsaking literature to follow the anti-
immigration will-o’-the-wisp, America followed the line of
extinction taken in Chicago in the earliest period by the Literary
Budget, founded in 1852 and transformed in 1855 to the short-
lived Native Citizen. It is difficult to make a literary tree grow
out of a political platform.

That America in dying was transferred to the Graphic was in
line with the developments of periodical publishing at Chcago in
the decade following the eighties. The Graphic was an Illustrated
weekly of about the same age as America. “With the World’s
Columbian Exposition coming,” said America’s editorial valedic-
tory, “during the next two years, the Graphic, having the facili-
ties, will render valuable service to Chicago.”

Other weeklies with metropolitan earmarks springing up in
the eighties were those of the smart variety. These contained a
melange of clever comment on current events and local society
news, verse, and other material of interest for its form of expres-
sion. The Rambler, started in 1884, by Reginald De Koven and
Harry B. Smith, and carried on until 1886 by Elliott Flower, was
the most interesting of these weeklies. It was “A Journal of
Men, Manners, and Things.” Mr. Flower, in an interview for
these papers, said:

We wanted to do for Chicago what Life does for New York. The

manager of the Western News Co. said: “Put a New York date line on it,
or the West won’t take it.” We did not do so. But he was right.
The Rambler never secured more than 5,000 readers, and the
experiment cost its promoters several thousand dollars. Its chief
result of permanence was the training Mr. Flower had through
it for writing the humorous sketches and fiction which he has
since contributed to magazine- and book-publishers elsewhere.
Vanity Fair was the name of a “literary and society weekly”
which was of sufficient interest to be listed in the newspaper
annuals for 1885 and 1886. Appleton’s In the Swim, a “literary,
travel, and society weekly,’ engrafted on an advertising trav-
elers’ bureau, flourished from 1887 to 1891. And a “pictorial
weekly ” having the name Life was attempted in 1889, but did not
survive. A monthly in regular magazine form, designated the
Society Magazine, and filled with selections from the periodicals
of England, came out during the entire calendar year 1888, and
left a file in the Public Library.

A most creditable monthly for “gentlemen of wealth and
culture,” as its advertising read, was Wildwood’s Magazine,
edited by “Will Wildwood” (Fred E. Pond), and undertaken in
Chicago in 1888. During its first year it was devoted to “the
higher literature of manly sport.” ‘To readers seeking reflection
of the charms of woodcraft we offer the work of contributors
whose genial essays partake of the breezy character of forest and
field,” said the initial number, which commented on the expansion
of the literature of sport during the twenty years just then past.
Perusal of a file in the Newberry Library shows that the magazine
contained charming tales, essays, and memoirs of sportsmen.
Both in subject-matter and in form its pages made a pleasing
appeal to the play instinct, which some of the authoritative psy-
chologists say is essentially the same as the esthetic interest. But
at the end of a year, Charles Hallock, the former editor of Forest
and Stream, became associated in the editorship, a philosophy of
the serious interest in outdoor activity was announced, the name
was changed to Recreation, and “ geological picnics” were organ-
ized from a branch office at Washington. This brought public
ridicule. An editorial retort in the magazine listed the national
capital as “the graveyard of journalism,’ and a delightful
zesthetic publication of high literary quality went to pieces on
the dry rocks of a knowledge interest.

A phase of the increasing complexity in the character of
Chicago—complexity growing out of the industrial magnitude
of the city in the eighties — was reflected in the starting of several
magazines devoted to serious subjects but appealing to the popu-
lar literary interest through the form of essays, supplemented
with fiction and, in some, with illustrations. Questions on the
relations of capital and labor began to be the subject of much talk
and action in Chicago — questions whose consideration has since
grown to such importance here as to make the city one of the
caldrons in which much of social import is seething. In 1886 a
violent manifestation of this came in the anarchist riots at Hay-
market Square, which, it may be mentioned incidentally, were
pictured with large wood cuts in the Illustrated Graphic News,
published simultaneously in Chicago, New York, Cincinnati,
Detroit, and Kansas City, in that year. But the riots and the
execution of the anarchists were merely the extreme expression
of elements constantly stimulating serious thought.

A monthly magazine called the Commonwealth, started in
1888, was recorded in the newspaper annuals until 1892. But
Belford’s Magazine, of which No. 1, June, 1888, bore the imprint
“Chicago, New York, and San Francisco,” is the most significant
serious periodical of the decade which is represented among the
files. It appears that, during its second year, the periodical was
issued from New York, that in 1892 its headquarters were moved
back to Chicago, and that it died in 1893. A statement on
American life and serious periodicals was made by the editor, in
June, 1889. In an editorial he said:

When the best blood of Europe sought these shores as laborers or pirates,
they sought to conquer a continent. The victory achieved between the first
landing and now is simply a marvel of industry, endurance, energy, and
enterprise. In this struggle of man versus matter we have become materialists.
Out of sixty odd millions of population, about three million read books, and
these mainly novels. To attempt the publication of a monthly devoted to the
discussion of grave subjects, to be to the thoughtful reformer of this country

what the Westminster of London has been to the Liberals of England, would
be commercial insanity. Successful American magazines are devoted to
pictorial exhibits, which, although they are artistically done, yet make only
picture-books, to be looked at, not read.

The file shows, however, that in Belford’s Magazine an
endeavor to popularize serious subjects was made. On the occa-
sion of locating in Chicago again in 1892, the magazine editorially
declared that “the literature of the West has been acted, it has
been ,done”’ —not written.

Another type of serious magazine broadly to be classed as
literary, which grew up in the eighties at Chicago, was the home-
study journal. Some of these were: the Correspondence Uni-
versity Journal, monthly, 1884-86; the University, 1885-86,
biweekly, claiming to be a successor to the Weekly Magazine;
the Home Library Magazine, monthly, 1887; and the National
Magazine, published by a so-called “ National University” from
1889 to 1894.
