The Rivalry of Social Groups

Author(s): George E. Vincent

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 16, No. 4 (Tan., 1911), pp. 469-484
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763006

Accessed: 09-05-2016 05:23 UTC
THE RIVALRY OF SOCIAL GROUPS

GEORGE E. VINCENT
The University of Chicago

The materials for the psychological interpretation of indi-
vidual and social phenomena have been accumulating rapidly. A
mere enumeration of terms and phrases brings up a panorama
of theories: “Social growth,” “social evolution,” “the general
mind,” “co-operation,” “coercion,” “social control,” “contact,”
“contract,” “consciousness of kind,” “the dialectic of personal
growth,” “the social self,” “the looking-glass self,” “the social
nature of conscience,” “the dialectic of social growth,” “imi-
tation, opposition, invention,” “the individual an abstraction,”
“social consciousness,” “the social mind,” “the persistence of
social groups,” “the rdle of unconsciousness,” “the cake of
custom,” “the folkways” and “the mores,” “instinct and habit,”
“psychic planes,” “mob-mind,” “like-mindedness,” “conflict and
rivalry,” “group struggle,” “social selection,” “survival value,”
“crisis,” “adaptation,” “the élite as the social brain,” “making
up the group mind,” “ the social process.” To one who knows
the field these ideas are familiar, many of them commonplace.
At first they may seem fragmentary and detached; but they
quickly arrange themselves into something like order and unity.
They are seen to be parts, aspects of a general theory which has
been growing increasingly illuminating.

The idea of the group as a means of interpretation is emerging
more clearly. Society is too vague and abstract a concept. It is
useful for symbolic purposes and for generalized description, but
to have any vividness of meaning it must be translated into more

29 66.

1My obligations to all social psychologists are so obvious that I have not
attempted to refer specific points to individual men. The ideas of Bagehot,
James, Baldwin, Tarde, Brinton, Ross, Cooley, Sumner, Dewey, Tufts, Thomas,
McDougall, Novicow, Gumplowicz, Bryce, Ellwood, et. al., will easily be recog-
nized, as will the more general theories of Ward, Giddings, and Small.

469
concrete terms: nation, community, class, sect. Large social
unities fall apart under examination into a multiplicity of con-
stituent groups. Each of these step by step disintegrates until
only the person remains. But this individual may be further
analyzed into subordinate selves, and even into thoughts and
desires. These elements, however, are quite as abstract at this
extreme as society at the other. The mind harks back.toward
some manageable idea which keeps attention fixed upon the facts
of life in common. The group concept meets this need, for the
group is at once a subdivision of society and the nidus of person-
ality. Groups get their meaning from encompassing societies;
the individual gets his meaning from his groups.

The idea of the group involves three fundamental things:
first, there must be a common interest, whether this be a past
experience, a present crisis, or a future purpose. A memorial
association lays stress upon the past; a union on strike fixes its
gaze upon a present problem; the “Boston in 1915” movement
looks to the future. Yet these distinctions are only the shifting
of emphasis. In the genuine, persistent group all three types of
common interest are to be found. In the second place, each mem-
ber of a group, at least in times of crisis, has a sense of the
group as such; ie., he is able to visualize or to represent to
himself in some way the group as a unity, as something set off
from, or over against, other groups. In the third place, the
members of the group are aware of the common interest and
know that this image of the group is shared by their fellows. It
is this sense of team-work which goes by the name of group
consciousness.

There are many ways in which groups may be classified.
Degree of complexity is a criterion by which groups may be said
to be primary like the family or compound like the nation. Ac-
cording to the proximity of members groups may be face-to-face
or comrade groups or they may be dispersed publics. Again the
type of control may be made the test. From this point of view
groups may be instinct-habit groups or sympathy groups or ra-
tional purpose groups. Moreover, as indicated above, groups may
be thought of as backward looking or forward looking. All
these discriminations have some value. For our present purpose,
however, we are chiefly interested in the life-processes common
to all groups, the underlying laws which manifest themselves
alike in the boys’ gang, the labor union, the church, the coterie,
the village, or the nation.

Conflict, competition, and rivalry are the chief causes which
force human beings into groups and largely determine what goes
on within them. Conflicts like wars, revolutions, riots still per-
sist, but possibly they may be thought of as gradually yielding
to competitions which are chiefly economic. Many of these
strivings seem almost wholly individual but most of them on
careful analysis turn out to be intimately related to group com-
petition. A third form, rivalry, describes struggle for status,
for social prestige, for the approval of inclusive publics which
form the spectators for such contests. The nation is an arena
of competition and rivalry.

Much of this emulation is of a concealed sort. Beneath the
union services of churches there is an element, for the most part
unconscious, of rivalry to secure the approval of a public which
in these days demands brotherliness and good will rather than
proselyting and polemics. Many public subscriptions for a com-
mon cause are based upon group rivalry or upon individual com-
petition which is group-determined. The Rhodes scholarships
are in one sense a means of furthering imperial interests. Christ-
mas presents lavished upon children often have a bearing upon
the ambition of the family to make an impression upon rival
domestic groups. In the liberal policy of universities which by
adding to the list of admission subjects desire to come into closer
relations with the public schools, there is some trace of compe-
tition for students and popular applause. The interest which
nations manifest in the Hague Tribunal is tinged with a desire
to gain the good will of the international, peace-praising public.
The professed eagerness of one or both parties in a labor dispute
to have the differences settled by arbitration is a form of com-
petition for the favor of the onlooking community. Thus in
international relationships and in the life-process of each nation
countless groups are in conflict, competition, or rivalry.
This idea of the group seeking survival, mastery, aggrandize-
ment, prestige, in its struggles with other groups is a valuable
means of interpretation. Let us survey rapidly the conditions of
success as a group carries on its life of strife and emulation. In
order to survive or to succeed the group must organize, cozen,
discipline, and stimulate its members. Fortunately it finds
human nature in a great measure fashioned for control. This
human nature is itself a product of a group selection which has
been going on through long ages of struggle. Instinct, habit,
imitation, suggestion, all mean more when these are connected
not only with individual but with group survival. Suggestion
and imitation are the means by which imagery is quickly dis-
tributed to the members of a group. Human packs, hordes, and
tribes which worked out this sympathetic telegraphy most effect-
ively bested their more slowly adjusting competitors. Group
control consists chiefly in the formation and dissemination of sur-
vival-serving ideas. It is by suggestion and imitation that
images useful to the group are imposed upon, or insinuated into,
individual consciousness. The group furnishes slides for the
magic-lantern minds of its members; it supplies records for
almost automatic human phonographs; music rolls for personal
pianolas.

Habit and sentiment are significant as aids in the formation
of permanent types of reaction, the character, standing opinion,
the “mores” of a group. These lower layers of unconsciousness
in persons are bearers of the relatively permanent prejudices,
standards, the reflexes of the collective life. In spite of much
that is fallacious, irrational, even positively harmful, the group
character is on the whole a product of repeated adaptation to a
conflict or rivalry situation. It takes time for such character to
form. Tammany has a strongly militant character created and
transmitted through decades of political strife. Proverbial phi-
losophy, maxims, saws, superstitions, along with a mass of in-
consequential, erroneous, outgrown ideas, carry many elements
which have a survival and success value that is sometimes obvious
but often concealed.

Collective pride or group egotism is an essential source of
strength in conflict. Every efficient group cultivates this sense
of honor, importance, superiority, by many devices, of symbol,
phase, and legend as well as by scorn and ridicule of rivals. The
college fraternity’s sublime self-esteem gives it strength in its
competition for members and prestige. There is a chauvinism of
“boom” towns and religious sects, as well as of nations. What
pride and self-confidence are to the individual, ethnocentrism,
patriotism, local loyalty are to social unities. Diffidence,
humility, self-distrust, tolerance are as dangerous to militant
groups as to fighting men.

Then too the group works out types of personality, hero types
to be emulated, traitor types to be execrated. These personality
types merge into abstract ideals and standards. “Booster”
and “knocker” bring up pictures of a struggling community
which must preserve its hopefulness and self-esteem at all hazards.
“Statesman” and “demagogue”’ recall the problem of selection
which every self-governing community must face. “Investiga-
tor” and “mere teacher” bring to mind the academic community
torn by the conflicting claims of a double duty in its rivalry with
other groups. “Defender of the faith” and “heretic” are elo-
quent of the church’s dilemma between rigid orthodoxy and
flexible accommodation to a changing order. “Bully-boy,”
“goody-goody,” and “tattle-tale” are controlling types in the
child group as it joins battle with other gangs, or holds its own
against adult conventions and tyranny. Many types are mere sur-
vivals from the past, but others have obvious relation to the
present needs of the competing community.

With a shifting in the conflict or rivalry crisis, types change
in value or emphasis, or new types are created in adjustment to
the new needs. The United States at war with Spain sought
martial heroes. The economic and political ideals of personality,
the captains of industry, the fascinating financiers, the party
idols, were for the time retired to make way for generals and
admirals, soldiers and sailors, the heroes of camp and battle-ship.
The war once over, the displaced types reappeared along with
others which are being created to meet new administrative, eco-
nomic, and ethical problems. The college fraternity having in
the autumn used its football members to triumph over com-
petitors brings forward for the winter campaign its dancing men
and society favorites. The competing church retires its militant
and disputatious leaders in an age which gives its applause to
apostles of concord, fraternal feeling, and co-operation. At a
given time the heroes and traitors of a group reflect its com-
petitions and rivalries with other groups.

Struggle forces upon the group the necessity of cozening,
beguiling, managing its members. The vast majority of these
fall into a broad zone of mediocrity which embodies group
character, and represents a general adjustment to life-conditions.
From this medial area individuals vary, some in ways which
aid the group in its competition, others in a fashion which
imperils group success. It is the task of the group both to pre-
serve the solidarity of the medial zone and to discriminate be-
tween the serviceable and the menacing variants. The latter
must be coerced or suppressed, the former encouraged and given
opportunity. In Plato’s Republic the guardians did this work of
selection which in modern groups is cared for by processes which
seem only slightly conscious and purposeful.

First of all let us consider the solidarity of the wide zone of
mediocrity. This majority must be kept in a state of resignation,
if not one of positive contentment, i.e., there must not be too
wide a gap between the actual and the hoped for. When such
a contrast does exist some philosophy must supply imagery to
conceal or to harmonize the disparity. To this end the group
devises theories and explanations to keep its members resigned
and contented, eg., “the dignity of manual labor,” “the
nobility of inconspicuous service,” “sacrifice of posterity,”
“there are no social classes in the United States” are familiar
examples of philosophies which make for acquiescence and
solidarity. Justice is in one sense a device for producing resig-
nation and contentment. Justice is relative always to the com-
petitive situation of the group. Russian justice differs from
English, French, or American. There is one justice for peace
and another for war. One test of justice is its service in keeping
the group unified, and efficient, which means resignation or con-
tentment for the many, suppression for the dangerous, and en-
couragement for the capable. Contentment is a positive form
of group loyalty; resignation, a passive thing. The ratio of the
contented to the resigned is an index of group vitality.

The competing group in seeking to insure acquiescence and
loyalty elaborates a protective philosophy by which it creates
within its members the belief that their lot is much to be pre-
ferred to that of other comradeships and associations. Western
Americans take satisfaction in living in a free, progressive,
hospitable way in “God’s Country.” They try not to be pharisai-
cal about the narrowness of the East, but they achieve a sincere
scorn for the hide-bound conventions of an effete society. East-
erners in turn count themselves fortunate in having a highly
developed civilization, and they usually attain real pity for those
who seem to live upon a psychic if not a geographic frontier. The
middle class have a philosophy with which they protect them-
selves against the insidious suggestions that come from the life
of the conspicuous rich. These, on the other hand, half sus-
pecting that simplicity and domesticity may have some virtue,
speak superciliously of middle-class smugness and the bourgeois
“home.” The less prosperous of the professional classes are prone
to lay a good deal of stress upon their intellectual resources as
compared with the presumptive spiritual proverty of the affluent.
Country folk encourage themselves by asserting their funda-
mental value to society, and by extolling their own simple
straightforward virtues, which present so marked a contrast to
the devious machinations of city-dwellers. These sophisticated
persons in turn stifle the feeling that country life must have
some advantages beneath a ridicule of “jays” and “hayseeds,”
and images of isolation, monotony, and uncouth rusticity.
Booker Washington’s reiterated assertion that if he were to be
born again he would choose to be a negro because the negro race
is the only one which has a great problem contains a suggestion
of this protective philosophy. This tendency of a group to
fortify itself by a satisfying theory of its lot is obviously related
to group egotism and is immediately connected with group
rivalry.
The competing group derides many a dissenter into con-
formity. This derision may be spontaneous, or reflective and
concerted. The loud guffaw which greets one who varies in
dress or speech or idea may come instantly or there may be a
planned and co-operative ridicule systematically applied to the
recalcitrant. Derision is one of the most effective devices by
which the group sifts and tests the variants. Few are able to
withstand this form of suggestion. It requires a sense of per-
sonal pride, a consciousness of support from another group, a
vivid imagining of future approval to enable one to resist the
compelling force of choral ridicule.

Upon the few who do hold out the group directs its batteries
of epithet. Epithets are general or specific, according as they
refer to large inclusive publics or to small specialized groups.
Epithets denote valued or despised types of personality and con-
duct which are imbedded in the mores and accepted as norms of
judgment. “Un-American,” “undemocratic” are familiar
examples of the appeal through epithet. Epithets like the stand-
ards to which they refer are in the main functionally connected
with the welfare and success of the competing group. By the
appeal through epithet to norms of conduct, individuals are
coerced into conformity and team play. In primitive groups and
among children, the negative epithets are usually more effective
than the positive. Fear of being a traitor or a “quitter” is a
surer motive than the desire to be a hero or to “die game.”

Upon the small number of rebels who turn a deaf ear to
epithets, ostracism is brought to bear. This may vary from the
“cold shoulder” to the complete “boycott.” Losing the friendship
and approval of comrades, being cut off from social sympathy,
is a familiar form of group pressure. Ridicule and derision are
a kind of evanescent ostracism, a temporary exclusion from the
comradeship. There are many degrees in the lowering of the
social temperature: coolness, formality of intercourse, averted
looks, “cutting dead,” “sending to Coventry” form a progressive
series. Economic pressure is more and more a resort of modern
groups. Loss of employment, trade, or professional practice
brings many a rebel to time. All coercion obviously increases as
the group is hard pressed in its conflicts, competitions, and
rivalries.

These crises and conflicts of a competing group present prob-
lems which must be solved—problems of organization, of
inventions of many kinds, of new ideas and philosophies,
of methods of adjustment. The group must discover among
its members the problem-solvers. These come from the mar-
gin of useful variants which it is an important task of the
group to find and select. A “drag-net” for the capable and
resourceful must be thrown out. Moreover leaders or prob-
lem-solvers when found must be given authority and prestige
by means of which their proposals can be distributed and made
effective within the group. Then, too, the group must discover
the stimuli, the economic rewards, the social esteem, the sense of
power, the satisfaction of achievement, etc., which will keep the
problem-solvers at work for the group as it seeks victory and
prosperity. Leaders, however, are not to be thought of as
passive. Most of them, by their magnetism, self-confidence, per-
sonal ascendency, offer themselves for selection.

The large public group more obviously, the small comrade
group, less clearly may be said to “make up its mind,” ie.,
readjust its standing opinion or mores through the modification of
its current or plastic opinion. The conditions of competition
or rivalry upset an equilibrium of habit and custom and a process
of problem-solving ensues. A typhoid epidemic forces the village
to protect itself against the competition of a more healthful rival.
The resourceful labor union facing a corporation which offers
profit-sharing and retiring allowances must formulate a protect-
ive theory and practice. A society clique too closely imitated by
a lower stratum must regain its distinction and supremacy. A
nation must be constantly alert to adjust itself to the changing
conditions of international trade and to the war equipment and
training of its rivals. The process of readjustment is modified
by the nature of the group and its type of organization. In a
self-directing group several stages in “making up the group
mind” are distinguishable. Spontaneous opinions rise in personal
minds, a period of talk sifts the many proposals, a few are
formulated, these gain adherents, a stage of discussion and prose-
lyting follows, two or three leading issues emerge, selection
takes place by ballot or by the gradual victory of one formula-
tion, or by a compromise which fuses two or more proposals.
The rapidity of this procedure depends upon the insistence of
the emergency. In a sharp crisis the decision must often be
made by a single leader who is vested with autocratic power.

But all this assumes too perfect a process. A group may
suffer from a collective insanity. It may fail to make up its
mind efficiently. Its character may be disorganized and unstable;
it may have too little knowledge; it may have inaccurate infor-
mation; it may be unable to use its knowledge successfully; it
may select incapable or self-seeking leaders; it may err in its
valuation of men and ideas; it may be swept away by mob mania;
it may be the victim of a fixed idea; it may cling to outgrown
traditions and standards; it may be misled by fallacious reason-
ing or by merely verbal suggestion. In competition and rivalry
such blunders spell weakness or disaster. Again it may be
pointed out that suggestion, imitation, invention, prestige, the
élite, all get their proper setting from the concept of the group
adjusting itself effectively or failing to meet the problems and
crises involved in competition and rivalry.

The methods of group competition and rivalry afford an in-
structive field for study. Subtle and indirect devices tend to
supplant the more open forms of struggle. Thus a group may
rob a rival of its leaders by winning them over to its own service.
The capitalistic groups are constantly attracting and absorbing
able men of the labor movement. To weaken the individuality
of an opponent group is an effective measure. Many groups
have lost a good deal of their distinctive position by yielding
little by little under the pressure of rivalry the things for which
they once stood steadfastly. Sowing discord in a competing
group is an insidious form of attack not unknown in the fields
of labor disputes and political conflict. To praise the traitors in a
rival group is a common device. The employing class extol the
“scab” as a hero who stands for liberty and human rights. The
Democrats make much of “insurgents’”’ as brave men who rebel
against party tyranny. A group may sometimes be ridiculed suc-
cessfully, although this often has the effect of consolidating the
derided comrades. Assuming a patronizing or tolerant attitude
toward a competing group implies a sense of power and superi-
ority which by suggestion has a marked effect. The leisure class
often baffles in this way the ambitious social climbers. The
appeal to the standards of the large encompassing public is the
chief resort. Almost all the methods resolve themselves into a
more or less direct reference to the mores and current opinions of
the onlooking many. Thus groups seek to put their rivals in
the wrong, to show that they are “unprogressive” or “undemo-
cratic,” or “socialistic,” or “class-conscious,” or “predatory” or
something else which the community or nation heartily despises.

The theory of group rivalry throws light upon the individual.
The person has as many selves as there are groups to which he
belongs. He is simple or complex as his groups are few and
harmonious or many and conflicting. What skilful management
is required to keep business and moral selves from looking each
other in the eye, to prevent scientific and theological selves from
falling into discussion! Most men of many groups learn like
tactful hosts to invite at a given time only congenial companies
of selves. A few brave souls resolve to set their house in order
and to entertain only such selves as can live together with good
will and mutual respect. With these earnest folk their groups
have to reckon. The conflicts of conscience are group conflicts.
Worldly amusements raise rivalries of strict family or church
groups which challenge the claims of “society”; modern doubt
reflects the antagonism of early training and later education;
self-sacrifice is subordination of a smaller group self to a larger.
Maeterlinck hesitating between renouncing his Belgian citizenship
to accept a seat in the French Academy offers a contemporary
instance. Can he give his country greater prestige by giving up
his citizenship or by retaining it and thus foregoing an honor
which would bring glory to Belgium? The reformer and martyr
sacrifice present popularity or even life itself for the sake of a
future approval, or supported by the sense of a heavenly host
which gives aid and comfort.
The individual’s ambitions are largely determined by the
needs of his dominant groups which control his imagery and
direct the play of his energies. In a given era the genius and
talent of a group will be drafted, beguiled, and bribed into
these forms of activity most useful to the community." Of such
guidance the élite themselves may be unaware, like thoughtless
children lured by skilful parents into serviceable play or work.
In Colonial days there was need of the Puritan ministry
into which the ablest men were drafted; Athens sent out a
“drag-net” for artists as well as for statesmen and gen-
erals; Sparta, holding in check a slave population, demanded
drill-masters and military experts; modern America offers prizes
for engineers, and for leadership to higher levels of efficiency
in world competition. Most seemingly man-to-man rivalry,
therefore, when it rises above the plane of semi-animal struggle
for subsistence becomes, with the development of civilization,
increasingly subject to group control. It is either a competi-
tion within the group for its prizes, which in general have a
survival or success value; or it is a clash between representa-
tives of conflicting groups. The apparently individual compe-
tition among the personnel of a great industry is, looked at
group-wise, a means of increasing the efficiency of the whole
business in the struggle with its rivals. Many personal rivalries
revolve themselves into encounters between families or cliques
or parties which are seeking influence or prestige.

Many different social phenomena may be profitably inter-
preted by the theory of group rivalry. Fashion, for example,
is in one aspect a form of group competition for distinction.
The leisure class seeks to set itself off from the middle class
which is eagerly appropriating the symbols of exclusiveness.
Much of the rivalry between leaders of the mode is of uncon-
scious service to the group in its struggle to maintain a differ-

*It is not to be understood that in the early stages of group formation the
privileges unconsciously allowed to egoistic men are purposeful stimuli applied
by the group. There are undoubtedly initial periods before groups have been
actually formed when group control is almost lacking. So soon, however, as
common interest, sense of the group, and awareness of team-work appear, the
individual becomes increasingly subject to collective guidance.
entiating prestige. Again fashion is a “drag-net” for ability. It
aids the group in its search for capable and inventive indi-
viduals. A fashion or fad spreads through a national group;
scores of thousands take up kodaking or motoring; hundreds
are thus discovered who contribute new elements to the art of
photography and to mechanical skill. Fashion is a wasteful
method, but so for that matter is the spawning of fish. Fashion
also plays a part in preserving the uniformity and solidarity
of the group by supplying common interests, stereotyped phrases,
topics of talk, etc. From another point of view fashion with
its shifting of attention protects a community against fixed
obsessions or a collective monomania which may impair the
poise, resourcefulness, and adjustability of the rivalry group.

Mob mind, although as a rule a menace to group sanity, has
at times and to a degree a functional value to the competing
group. This contagion of suggestion may put the group in the
power of an alert and resourceful problem-solver and thus make
possible a prompt and effective adjustment. Then too the crowd
spirit may contribute a temporary sense of group unity which
sometimes leaves a trace in the mores or character of the group.

Tolerance is a sign that once vital issues within the group
are losing their significance, or that the group feels secure, or
that it is slowly, even unconsciously, merging into a wider group-
ing. Theological liberality affords a case in point. In the
earlier days of sectarian struggle tolerance was a danger both
to group loyalty and to the militant spirit. Cynicism for other
reasons is also a menace. It means loss of faith in the col-
lective ego, in the traditions, shibboleths, symbols, and destiny
of the group. Fighting groups cannot be tolerant; nor can
they harbor cynics. Tolerance and cynicism are at once causes
and results of group decay. They portend dissolution or they
foreshadow new groupings for struggle over other issues on
another plane. Evangelical churches are drawing together with
mutual tolerance to present a united front against modern skep-
ticism and cynicism which are directed against the older faiths
and moralities.

The social nature and function of ridicule deserve greater
attention than they have received from the sociologists. Sully’s
essay on Laughter shows the possibilities in this field. Ridicule
both as a means of discipline within the group and as a weapon
of attack upon other groups has been already described. A study
of jests as functionally connected with both these processes
would prove fruitful. For example, the perennial mother-in-
law stories must have some bearing upon the maintenance of
family solidarity. They help to keep the peace by contra-
suggestion. Ridicule also tends to spread the “drag-net” by the
swift contagion of a popular jest. Laughter affords a relief
from undue strain; it prevents the group from taking itself too
seriously at all times; it mollifies group antagonism and helps to
keep it on a higher plane.

Education, free-speech, a free press, freedom of teaching, all
derive meaning from the group-rivalry hypothesis. Education
helps to fix group character as well as to extend the “drag-net”’
for ability. The Scottish tradition which sees to it that the
bright boy in the remotest countryside gets through to Edin-
burgh shows its result wherever trained abilities are in de-
mand. Freedom of speech and press is a condition of the
sifting and selection which enter into making up the group mind.
It is these apparently blind processes which do so crudely what
Plato’s wise guardians did so efficiently and unerringly: select
the ablest, train them for service, put them in authority, expur-
gate literature, censor the drama, decide what opinions shall
prevail. Yet beneath all the groping and confusion, all the
fallacies and irrelevancies, there runs a current of aim and
purpose, a striving of the group to hold together and to make
its way against other groups.

Such phrases as “the struggle of ideas,” “logical duels,” “the
survival of truth’ need the more concrete interpretation which
group rivalry supplies. As a matter of fact ideas have no power
to fight except in so far as they serve the needs of rival persons
and groups. Communities are often seeking for the “right word”
ie., the phrase or formulation which will solve a problem and
supply a serviceable working theory. Persons within the group
compete for the honor of saying this right word, whether it
be “sovereignty of the people,” or “Christian Socialism,” or
“inter-dependence,” or “the white man’s burden.” Again
groups in competition or rivalry struggle for the supremacy of
a theory, a language, or a literature. Thus not Polish and Ger-
man speech but Polish and German groups are in conflict in
the Prussian Provinces.

The subjective side of group rivalry offers an important study.
The reflection of the process of control in personal consciousness
is full of interest. A good deal has been done in this field,
especially in an analysis of the sense of the self and the mean-
ing of the J. The consciousness of isolation in the case of
ostracism has been picturesquely described by James. But the
subjective effect of ridicule, of epithet, of suggestion, of per-
sonal ascendency, of fashion, of mob excitement deserve more
careful attention than they have yet received. The use of all
these devices by the group for its own purposes affords at least
one’ clue to the study. The means by which the rebellious
variant protects himself against the coercion of his comrades
have been already suggested in the description of ridicule and
epithet. These protective methods resolve themselves into set-
ting one group against another in the mind of the derided or
stigmatized individual.

A national group is to be thought of as an inclusive unity
with a fundamental character upon the basis of which a mul-
titude of groups compete with and rival each other. It is the
task of the nation to control and to utilize this group struggle,
to keep it on as high a plane as possible, to turn it to the com-
mon account. Government gets its chief meaning from the
rivalry of groups to grasp political power in their own interests.
Aristocracy and Democracy may be interpreted in terms of
group antagonism, the specialized few versus the undifferen-
tiated many. The ideal merges the two elements of efficiency
and solidarity in one larger group within which mutual confi-
dence and emulation take the place of conflict. Just as persons
must be disciplined into serving their groups, groups must be
subordinated to the welfare of the nation. It is in conflict or
competition with other nations that a country becomes a vivid
unity to the members of constituent groups. It is rivalry which
brings out the sense of ‘team work, the social consciousness.

Among objections which may be raised to the theory out-
lined in this paper, four may be anticipated: (1) The material
is not new; the topics have been often treated, many of them
exhaustively; (2) the conflict idea is overemphasized; the tend-
encies are toward widening unity; (3) the group is personified in
an unwarrantable way; (4) the hypothesis does not account for
all the facts of social life. To these objections it may be re-
plied: (1) the only claim to novelty lies in the organization
of familiar ideas; (2) the larger groupings are recognized, but
within these rivalry continues to play a determining part; (3)
the personification is largely a time-saving device for which pre-
cedents might be cited; (4) the theory lays no claim to com-
plete explanation; it is offered as one of many ways of looking
at human life. All that is asserted is this: Whenever a man’s
actions, a social standard, or collective conduct are to be studied
it will be found worth while to ask: To what groups does this
man belong? At what are these groups aiming? What purpose
does this act, ideal, epithet, derision serve in helping a group
to carry on its competitive struggle?
