Sociology and the Social Sciences

Author(s): Robert E. Park

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 26, No. 4 (Jan., 1921), pp. 401-424
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2764494

Accessed: 10-05-2016 17:09 UTC
SOCIOLOGY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES

ROBERT E. PARK
University of Chicago

I. SOCIOLOGY AND ‘‘SCIENTIFIC” HISTORY

Sociology first gained recognition as an independent science
with the publication, between 1830 and 1842, of Auguste Comte’s
Cours de Philosophie Positive. Comte did not, to be sure, create
sociology. He did give it a name, a program, and a place among
the sciences.

Comte’s program for the new science proposed an extension to
politics and to history of the positive methods of the natural
sciences. Its practical aim was to establish government on the
secure foundation of an exact science and give to the predictions
of history something of the precision of mathematical formulae.

We have to contemplate social phenomena as susceptible of prevision,
like all other classes, within the limits of exactness compatible with their
higher complexity. Comprehending the three characteristics of political
science which we have been examining, prevision of social phenomena sup-
poses, first, that we have abandoned the region of metaphysical idealities,
to assume the ground of observed realities by a systematic subordination
of imagination to observation; secondly, that political conceptions have
ceased to be absolute, and have become relative to the variable state of civili-
zation, so that theories, following the natural course of facts, may admit of
our foreseeing them; and, thirdly, that permanent political action is limited

40
by determinate laws, since, if social events were always exposed to disturbance
by the accidental intervention of the legislator, human or divine, no scientific
prevision of them would be possible. Thus, we may concentrate the condi-
tions of the spirit of positive social philosophy on this one great attribute
of scientific prevision.!

Comte proposed, in short, to make government a technical
science and politics a profession. He looked forward to a time
when legislation, based on a scientific study of human nature, would
assume the character of natural law. The earlier and more ele-
mentary sciences, particularly physics and chemistry, had given
man control over external nature; the last science, sociology, was
to give man control over himself.

Men were long in learning that Man’s power of modifying phenomena
can result only from his knowledge of their natural laws; and in the infancy
of each science, they believed themselves able to exert an unbounded influence
over the phenomena of that science... .. Social phenomena are, of course,
from their extreme complexity, the last to be freed from this pretension:
but it is therefore only the more necessary to remember that the pretension
existed with regard to all the rest, in their earliest stage, and to anticipate
therefore that social science will, in its turn, be emancipated from the delusion.
.... It [the existing social science] represents the social action of Man
to be indefinite and arbitrary, as was once thought in regard to biological,
chemical, physical, and even astronomical phenomena, in the earlier stages
of their respective sciences... .. The human race finds itself delivered
over, without logical protection, to the ill-regulated experimentation of the
various political schools, each one of which strives to set up, for all future
time, its own immutable type of government. We have seen what are the
chaotic results of such a strife; and we shall find that there is no chance of
order and agreement but in subjecting social phenomena, like all others, to
invariable natural laws, which shall, as a whole, prescribe for each period,
with entire certainty, the limits and character of political action: in other
words, introducing into the study of social phenomena the same positive
spirit which has regenerated every other branch of human speculation.?

In the present anarchy of political opinion and parties, changes
in the existing social order inevitably assume, he urged, the char-
acter, at the best, of a mere groping empiricism; at the worst, of a
social convulsion like that of the French Revolution. Under the

1 Harriet Martineau, The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte, freely translated
and condensed (London, 1893), II, 61.

2 Harriet Martineau, o9. cit., II, 59-60.
direction of a positive, in place of a speculative or, as Comte would
have said, metaphysical science of society, progress must assume
the character of an orderly march.

It was to be expected, with the extension of exact methods of
investigation to other fields of knowledge, that the study of man
and of society would become, or seek to become, scientific in the
sense in which that word is used in the natural sciences. It is
interesting, in this connection, that Comte’s first name for sociology
was social physics. It was not until he had reached the fourth
volume of his Positive Philosophy that the word sociological is used
for the first time.

Comte, if he was foremost, was not first in the search for a
positive science of society, which would give man that control over
men that he had over external nature. Montesquieu, in his Spirit
of the Laws, first published in 1747, had distinguished in the organi-
zation of society, between form, “the particular structure,” and
the forces, “the human passions which set it in motion.” In his
preface to this first epoch-making essay in what Freeman calls
“comparative politics,” Montesquieu suggests that the uniformi-
ties, which he discovered beneath the wide variety of positive law,
were contributions not merely to a science of law, but to a science
of mankind.

I have first of all considered mankind; and the result of my thoughts

has been, that amidst such an infinite diversity of laws and manners, they
are not solely conducted by the caprice of fancy.

Hume, likewise, put politics among the natural sciences.? Con-
dorcet wanted to make history positive. But there were, in the
period between 1815 and 1840 in France, conditions which made
the need of a new science of politics peculiarly urgent. The Revo-
lution had failed and the political philosophy, which had directed
and justified it, was bankrupt. France between 1789 and 1815

1 Montesquieu, Baron M. de Secondat, The Spirit of the Laws, translated by
Thomas Nugent (Cincinnati, 1873), I, xxxi.

2 David Hume, Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Part II, sec. 7.

8 Condorcet, Esquisse d’un tableau historique des progrés de Vesprit humain (1795),
292. See Barth, Die Philosophie des Geschichte als Sociologie (Leipzig, 1897), Part I,
pp. 21-23.
had adopted, tried, and rejected no less than ten different con-
stitutions. But during this period, as Saint-Simon noted, society,
and the human beings who compose society, had not changed. It
was evident that government was not, in any such sense as the
philosophers had assumed, a mere artifact and legislative con-
struction. Civilization, as Saint-Simon conceived it, was a part of
nature. Social change was part of the whole cosmic process. He
proposed, therefore, to make politics a science as positive as
physics. The subject-matter of political science, as he conceived
it, was not so much political forms as social conditions. History
had been literature. It was destined to become a science.!

Comte called himself Saint-Simon’s pupil. It is perhaps more
correct to say Saint-Simon formulated the problem for which
Comte, in his Positive Philosophy, sought a solution. It was
Comte’s notion that with the arrival of sociology the distinction
which had so long existed, and still exists, between philosophy, in
which men define their wishes, and natural science, in which they
describe the existing order of nature, would disappear. In that
case ideals would be defined in terms of reality, and the tragic
difference between what men want and what is possible would be
effaced. Comte’s error was to mistake a theory of progress for
progress itself. It is certainly true that as men learn what is, they
will adjust their ideals to what is possible. But knowledge grows
slowly.

Man’s knowledge of mankind has increased greatly since 1842.
Sociology, “‘the positive science of humanity,” has moved
steadily forward in the direction that Comte’s program indicated,
but it has not yet replaced history. Historians are still looking
for methods of investigation which will make history “sciencific.”

No one who has watched the course of history during the last generation
can have felt doubt of its tendency. Those of us who read Buckle’s first
volume when it appeared in 1857, and almost immediately afterwards, in
1859, read the Origin of Species and felt the violent impulse which Darwin
gave to the study of natural laws, never doubted that historians would follow
until they had exhausted every possible hypothesis to create a science of
history. Year after year passed, and little progress has been made. Perhaps

1 Ocuvres de Saint-Simon et d’Enfantin (Paris, 1865-78), XVII, 228. Paul Barth,
op. cit., Part I, p. 23.
the mass of students are more skeptical now than they were thirty years ago
of the possibility that such a science can be created. Yet almost every suc-
cessful historian has been busy with it, adding here a new analysis, a new
generalization there; a clear and definite connection where before the rupture
of idea was absolute; and, above all, extending the field of study until it
shall include all races, all countries, and all times. Like other branches of
science, history is now encumbered and hampered by its own mass, but its
tendency is always the same, and cannot be other than what it is. That
the effort to make history a science may fail is possible, and perhaps probable;
but that it should cease, unless for reasons that would cause all science to
cease, is not within the range of experience. Historians will not, and even
if they would they can not, abandon the attempt. Science itself would admit
its own failure if it admitted that man, the most important of all its subjects,
could not be brought within its range.!

Since Comte gave the new science of humanity a name and a
point of view, the area of historical investigation has vastly widened
and a number of new social sciences have come into existence—
ethnology, archaeology, folklore, the comparative studies of cul-
tural materials, i.e., language, mythology, religion, and law, and in
connection with and closely related with these, folk-psychology,
social psychology, and the psychology of crowds, which latter is,
perhaps, the forerunner of a wider and more elaborate political
psychology. The historians have been very much concerned with
these new bodies of materials and with the new points of view which
they have introduced into the study of man and of society. Under
the influences of these sciences, history itself, as James Harvey
Robinson has pointed out, has had a history. But with the inno-
vations which the new history has introduced or attempted to
introduce, it does not appear that there have been any funda-
mental changes in method or ideology in the science itself.

Fifty years have elapsed since Buckle’s book appeared, and I know of
no historian who would venture to maintain that we had made any consid-
erable advance toward the goal he set for himself. A systematic persecution
of the various branches of social science, especially political economy, sociology,
anthropology, and psychology, is succeeding in explaining many things;
but history must always remain, from the standpoint of the astronomer,
physicist, or chemist, a highly inexact and fragmentary body of knowledge.
. .. . History can no doubt be pursued in a strictly scientific spirit, but

1Henry Adams, The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma (New York, 1919),
p. 126.
Il. HISTORICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL FACTS

Sociology, as Comte conceived it, was not, as it has been char-
acterized, “a highly important point of view,” but a fundamental
science, i.e., a method of investigation and ‘“‘a body of discoveries
about mankind.’? In the hierarchy of the sciences, sociology, the
last in time, was first in importance. The order was as follows:
mathematics, astronomy, physics, chemistry, biology, including
psychology, sociology. This order represented a progression from
the more elementary to the more complex. It was because history
and politics were concerned with the most complex of natural
phenomena that they were the last to achieve what Comte called
the positive character. They did this in sociology.

Many attempts have been made before and since Comte to
find a satisfactory classification of the sciences. The order and
relation of the sciences is still, in fact, one of the cardinal problems
of philosophy. In recent years the notion has gained recognition
that the difference between history and the natural sciences is not
one of degree, but of kind; not of subject-matter merely, but of
method. This difference in method is, however, fundamental. It
is a difference not merely in the interpretation but in the logical
character of facts.

Every historical fact, it is pointed out, is concerned with a
unique event. History never repeats itself. If nothing else, the
mere circumstance that every event has a date and location would

1James Harvey Robinson, The New History, Essays Illustrating the Modern
Historical Outlook (New York, 1912), pp. 54-55.

2 James Harvey Robinson, of. cit., p. 83.
give historical facts an individuality that facts of the abstract
science do not possess. Because historical facts always are located
and dated, and cannot therefore be repeated, they are not subject
to experiment and verification. On the other hand, a fact not
subject to verification is not a fact for natural science. History,
as distinguished from natural history, deals with individuals, i.e.,
individual events, persons, institutions. Natural science is con-
cerned, not with individuals, but with classes, types, species. All
the assertions that are valid for natural science concern classes.
An illustration will make this distinction clear.

Sometime in October, 1838, Charles Darwin happened to pick
up and read Malthus’ book on Population. The facts of “the
struggle for existence,” so strikingly presented in that now cele-
brated volume, suggested an explanation of a problem which had
long interested and puzzled him, namely the origin of species.

This is a statement of a historical fact, and the point is that
it is not subject to empirical verification. It cannot be stated, in
other words, in the form of a hypothesis, which further observation
of other men of the same type will either verify or discredit.

On the other hand, in his Descent of Man, Darwin, discussing
the réle of sexual selection in evolution of the species, makes this
observation: ‘Naturalists are much divided with respect to the
object of the singing of birds. Few more careful observers ever
lived than Montagu, and he maintained that the ‘males of song-
birds and of many others do not in general search for the female,
but, on the contrary, their business in spring is to perch on some
conspicuous spot, breathing out their full and amorous notes, which,
by instinct, the female knows and repairs to the spot to choose her
mate.’ ”

This is a typical statement of a fact of natural history. It is
not, however, the rather vague generality of the statement that
makes it scientific. It is its representative character, the character
which makes it possible of verification by further observation which
makes it a scientific fact.

It is from facts of this kind, collected, compared, and classified,
irrespective of time or place, that the more general conclusions are
drawn, upon which Darwin based his theory of the “descent of
man.” This theory, as Darwin conceived it, was not an inter-
pretation of the facts but an explanation.

The relation between history and sociology, as well as the
manner in which the more abstract social sciences have risen out of
the more concrete, may be illustrated by a comparison between
history and geography. Geography as a science is concerned with
the visible world, the earth, its location in space, the distribution
of the land masses, and of the plants, animals, and peoples upon
its surface. The order, at least the fundamental order, which it
seeks and finds among the objects it investigates is spatial. As
soon as the geographer begins to compare and classify the plants,
the animals, and the peoples with which he comes in contact,
geography passes over into the special sciences, ie., botany,
zodlogy, and anthropology.

History, on the other hand, is concerned with a world of events.
Not everything that happened, to be sure, is history, but every
event that ever was or ever will be significant is history.

Geography attempts to reproduce for us the visible world as
it exists in space; history, on the contrary, seeks to re-create for us
in the present the significance of the past. As soon as historians
seek to take events out of their historical setting, that is to say,
out of their time and space relations, in order to compare them and
classify them; as soon as historians begin to emphasize the typical
and representative rather than the unique character of events,
history ceases to be history and becomes sociology.

The differences here indicated between history and sociology
are based upon a more fundamental distinction between the his-
torical and the natural sciences first clearly defined by Windel-
band, the historian of philosophy, in an address to the faculty of
the University of Strassburg in 1894.

The distinction between natural science and history begins at the point
where we seek to convert facts into knowledge. Here again we observe that
the one (natural science) seeks to formulate laws, the other (history) to portray
events. In the one case thought proceeds from the description of particulars
to the general relations. In the other case it clings to a genial depiction of the
individual object or event. For the natural scientist the object of investiga -
tion which cannot be repeated never has, as such, scientific value. It serves
his purpose only so far as it may be regarded as a type or as a special instance
of a class from which the type may be deduced. The natural scientist con-
siders the single case only so far as he can see in it the features which serve
to throw light upon a general law. For the historian the problem is to revive
and call up into the present, in all its particularity, an event in the past. His
aim is to do for an actual event precisely what the artist seeks to do for the
object of his imagination. It is just here that we discern the kinship between
history and art, between the historian and the writer of literature. It is for
this reason that natural science emphasized the abstract; the historian, on the
other hand, is interested mainly in the concrete.

The fact that natural science emphasizes the abstract and history the con-
crete will become clearer if we compare the results of the researches of the
two sciences. However finespun the conceptions may be which the historical
critic uses in working over his materials, the final goal of such study is always
to create out of the mass of events a vivid portrait of the past. And what
history offers us is pictures of men and of human life, with all the wealth of
their individuality, reproduced in all their characteristic vivacity. Thus do
the peoples and languages of the past, their forms and beliefs, their struggles
for power and freedom, speak to us through the mouth of history.

How different it is with the world which the natural sciences have created
for us! However concrete the materials with which they started, the goal of
these sciences is theories, eventually mathematical formulations of laws of
change. Treating the individual, sensuous, changing objects as mere unsub-
stantial appearances (phenomena), scientific investigation becomes a search
for the universal laws which rule the timeless changes of events, Out of this
colorful world of the senses, science creates a system of abstract concepts, in
which the true nature of things is conceived to exist—a world of colorless and
soundless atoms, despoiled of all their earthly sensuous qualities. Such is the
triumph of thought over perception. Indifferent to change, science casts her
anchor in the eternal and unchangeable. Not the change as such but the
unchanging form of change is what she seeks.

This raises the question: What is the more valuable for the purposes of
knowledge in general, a knowledge of law or a knowledge of events? As far
as that is concerned, both scientific procedures may be equally justified. The
knowledge of the universal laws has everywhere a practical value in so far as
they make possible man’s purposeful intervention in the natural processes.
That is quite as true of the movements of the inner as of the outer world. In
the latter case knowledge of nature’s laws has made it possible to create those
tools through which the control of mankind over external nature is steadily
being extended.

Not less for the purposes of the common life are we dependent upon the
results of historical knowledge. Man is, to change the ancient form of the
expression, the animal who has a history. His cultural life rests on the trans-
mission from generation to generation of a constantly increasing body of
historical memories. Whoever proposes to take an active part in this cultural
process must have an understanding of history. Wherever the thread is once
broken—as history itself proves—it must be painfully gathered up and knitted
again into the historical fabric.

It is, to be sure, true that it is an economy for human understanding to be
able to reduce to a formula or a general concept the common characteristics
of individuals. But the more man seeks to reduce facts to concepts and laws,
the more he is obliged to sacrifice and neglect the individual. Men have, to
be sure, sought, in characteristic modern fashion, “to make of history a natural
science.” This was the case with the so-called philosophy of history of posi-
tivism. What has been the net result of the laws of history which it has given
us? A few trivial generalities which justify themselves only by most careful
consideration of their numerous exceptions.

On the other hand it is certain that all interest and values of life are con-
cerned with what is unique in men and events. Consider how quickly our
appreciation is deadened as some object is multiplied or is regarded as one case
inathousand. “She is not the first” is one of the cruel passages in Faust. It
is in the individuality and the uniqueness of an object that all our sense of
value has its roots. It is upon this fact that Spinoza’s doctrine of the conquest
of the passions by knowledge rests, since for him knowledge is the submergence
of the individual in the universal, the “once for all” into the eternal.

The fact that all our livelier appreciations rest upon the unique character
of the object is illustrated above all in our relations to persons. Is it not an
unendurable thought, that a loved object, an adored person, should have
existed at some other time in just the form in which it now exists for us? Is it
not horrible and unthinkable that one of us, with just this same individuality,
should actually have existed in a second edition?

What is true of the individual man is quite as true of the whole historical
process: it has value only when it is unique. This is the principle which the
Christian doctrine successfully maintained, as over against Hellenism in the
Patristic philosophy. The middle point of their conception of the world was
the fall and the salvation of mankind as a unique event. That was the first and
great perception of the inalienable metaphysical right of the historian to pre-
serve for the memory of mankind, in all their uniqueness and individuality,
the actual events of life.t

Like every other species of animal, man has a natural history.
Anthropology is the science of man considered as one of the animal

1 Wilhelm Windelband, Geschichte und Naturwissenschaft, Rede zum Antritt des
Rectorats der Kaiser-Wilhelms-Universitat Strassburg (Strassburg, 1900). The logical
principle outlined by Windelband has been further elaborated by Heinrich Rickert in
Die Grenzen der naturwissenschaftlichen Begriffsbildung, eine logische Einleitung in die
historische Wissenschaft (Tiibingen u. Leipzig, 1902). See also Georg Simmel, Die
Probleme der Geschichtsphilosophie, eine erkenntnistheoretische Studie (2d ed., Leipzig,
1915).
species, Homo sapiens. History and sociology, on the other hand,
are concerned with man as a person, as a “political animal,”
participating with his fellows in a common fund of social traditions
and cultural ideals. Freeman, the English historian, said that
history was ‘“‘past politics” and politics “present history.” Free-
man uses the word politics in the large and liberal sense in which
it was first used by Aristotle. In that broad sense of the word,
the political process, by which men are controlled and states
governed, and the cultural process, by which man has been domes-
ticated and human nature formed, are not, as we ordinarily assume,
different, but identical, procedures.

All this suggests the intimate relations which exist between
history, politics, and sociology. The important thing, however, is
not the identities but the distinctions. For, however much the
various disciplines may, in practice, overlap, it is necessary for the
sake of clear thinking to have their limits defined. As far as
sociology and history are concerned the differences may be summed
up in a word. Both history and sociology are concerned with the
life of man as man. History, however, seeks to reproduce and
interpret concrete events as they actually occurred in time and
space. Sociology, on the other hand, seeks to arrive at natural
laws and generalizations in regard to human nature and society,
irrespective of time and of place.

In other words, history seeks to find out what actually happened
and how it all came about. Sociology, on the other hand, seeks to
explain, on the basis of a study of other instances, the nature of
the process involved.

By nature we mean just that aspect and character of things
in regard to which it is possible to make general statements and
formulate laws. If we say, in explanation of the peculiar behavior
of some individual, that it is natural or that it is after all “simply
human nature,” we are simply saying that this behavior is what we
have learned to expect of this individual or of human beings in
general. It is, in other words, a law.

Natural law, as the term is used here, is any statement which
describes the behavior of a class of objects or the character of a
class of acts. For example, the classic illustration of the so-called
“universal proposition” familiar to students of formal logic, “all
men are mortal,” is an assertion in regard to a class of objects we
call men. This is, of course, simply a more formal way of saying
that “men die.” Such general statements and “laws” get meaning
only when they are applied to particular cases, or, to speak again
the terms of formal logic, when they find a place in a syllogism,
thus: ‘Men are mortal. This is a man.” But such syllogisms
may always be stated in the form of a hypothesis. If this is a
man, heis mortal. If@is 6, aisalsoc. This statement, “Human
nature is a product of social contact,” is a general assertion familiar
to students of sociology. This law or, more correctly, hypothesis,
applied to an individual case explains the so-called feral man.
Wild men, in the proper sense of the word, are not the so-called
savages, but the men who have never been domesticated, of which
an individual example is now and then discovered.

To state a law in the form of a hypothesis serves to emphasize
the fact that laws—what we have called natural laws at any rate—
are subject to verification and restatement. Under these circum-
stances the exceptional instance, which compels a restatement of
the hypothesis, is more important for the purposes of science than
other instances which merely confirm it.

Any science which operates with hypotheses and seeks to state
facts in such a way that they can be compared and verified by
further observation and experiment is, so far as method is con-
cerned, a natural science.
of law by the fact that it aims at nothing more than a description
of the behavior of certain types or classes of objects. A description
of the way in which a class, i.e., men, plants, animals, or physical
objects, may be expected under ordinary circumstances to behave,
tells us what we may in a general way expect of any individual
member of that class. If natural science seeks to predict, it is able
to do so simply because it operates with concepts or class names
instead, as is the case with history, with concrete facts and, to use a
logical phrase, “existential propositions.”

That the chief end of science is descriptive formulation has probably
been clear to keen analytic minds since the time of Galileo, especially to the
great discoverers in astronomy, mechanics, and dynamics. But as a definitely
stated conception, corrective of misunderstandings, the view of science as
essentially descriptive began to make itself felt about the beginning of the
last quarter of the nineteenth century, and may be associated with the names
of Kirchhoff and Mach. It was in 1876 that Kirchhoff defined the task of
mechanics as that of “describing completely and in the simplest manner the
motions which take place in nature.”” Widening this a little, we may say
that the aim of science is to describe natural phenomena and occurrences as
exactly as possible, as simply as possible, as completely as possible, as con-
sistently as possible, and always in terms which are communicable and veri-
fiable. This is a very different réle from that of solving the riddles of the
universe, and it is well expressed in what Newton said in regard to the law
of gravitation: “So far I have accounted for the phenomena presented to
us by the heavens and the sea by means of the force of gravity, but I have
as yet assigned no cause to this gravity... .. I have not been able to deduce
from phenomena the raison d’etre of the properties of gravity and I have not
set up hypotheses. ’’!

“We must confess,” said Prof. J. H. Poynting (1900, p. 616), “that
physical laws have greatly fallen off in dignity. No long time ago they were
quite commonly described as the Fixed Laws of Nature, and were supposed
sufficient in themselves to govern the universe. Now we can only assign
to them the humble rank of mere descriptions, often erroneous, of similarities
which we believe we have observed. .... A law of nature explains nothing,
it has no governing power, it is but a descriptive formula which the careless
have sometimes personified.” It used to be said that “the laws of Nature
are the thoughts of God”’; now we say that they are the investigator’s formulae
summing up regularities of recurrence.?

1 Newton, Philosophia naturalis principia mathematica, 1687.

2 J. Arthur Thomson, The System of Animate Nature (New York, 1920), pp. 8-9.
See also Karl Pearson, The Grammar of Science (2d ed.; London, 1900), chap iii,
The Scientific Law.
If natural law aims at prediction it tells us what we can do.
Moral laws, on the other hand, tell us, not what we can, but what
we ought to do. The civil or municipal law, finally, tells us not
what we can, nor what we ought, but what we must do. It is very
evident that these three types of law may be very intimately
related. We do not know what we ought to do until we know
what we can do; and we certainly should consider what men can
do before we pass laws prescribing what they must do. There is,
moreover, no likelihood that these distinctions will ever be com-
pletely abolished. As long as the words “‘can,” “ought,” and
“must” continue to have any meaning for us the distinctions that
they represent will persist in science as well as in common sense.

The immense prestige which the methods of the natural sciences
have gained, particularly in their application to the phenomena of
the physical universe, has undoubtedly led scientific men to over-
estimate the importance of mere conceptual and abstract knowledge.
It has led them to assume that history also must eventually become
“scientific” in the sense of the natural sciences. In the meantime
the vast collections of historical facts which the industry of his-
torical students has accumulated are regarded, sometimes even by
historians themselves, as a sort of raw material, the value of which
can only be realized after it has been worked over into some sort
of historical generalization which has the general character of
scientific and, ultimately, mathematical formula.

“History,” says Karl Pearson, “can never become science, can
never be anything but a catalogue of facts rehearsed in a more or
less pleasing language until these facts are seen to fall into sequences
which can be briefly resumed in scientific formulae.”! And Henry
Adams, in a letter to the American Historical Association already
referred to, confesses that history has thus far been a fruitless quest
for “the secret which would transform these odds and ends of
philosophy into one self-evident, harmonious, and complete
system.”

You may be sure that four out of five serious students of history who

are living today have, in the course of their work, felt that they stood on the
brink of a great generalization that would reduce all history under a law as

1 Karl Pearson, of. cit., p. 359.
The truth is, however, that the concrete facts, in which history
and geography have sought to preserve the visible, tangible, and,
generally speaking, the experiential aspects of human life and the
visible universe, have a value irrespective of any generalization or
ideal constructions which may be inferred from or built up out of
them. Just as none of the investigations or generalizations of
individual psychology are ever likely to take the place of biography
and autobiography, so none of the conceptions of an abstract
sociology, no scientific descriptions of the social and cultural pro-
cesses, and no laws of progress are likely, in the near future at any
rate, to supersede the more concrete facts of history in which are
preserved those records of those unique and never fully compre-
hended aspects of life which we call events.

It has been the dream of philosophers that theoretical and
abstract science could and some.day perhaps would succeed in
putting into formulae and into general terms all that was significant
in the concrete facts of life. It has been the tragic mistake of the
so-called intellectuals, who have gained their knowledge from text-
books rather than from observation and research, to assume that

1 Henry Adams, of. cit., p. 127.
science had already realized its dream. But there is no indication
that science has begun to exhaust the sources or significance of
concrete experience. The infinite variety of external nature and
the inexhaustible wealth of personal experience have thus far
defied, and no doubt will continue to defy, the industry of scientific
classification, while, on the other hand, the discoveries of science
are constantly making accessible to us new and larger areas of
experience.

What has been said simply serves to emphasize the instrumental
character of the abstract sciences. History and geography, all of
the concrete sciences, can and do measurably enlarge our experience
of life. Their very purpose is to arouse new interests and create
new sympathies; to give mankind, in short, an environment so
vast and varied as will call out and activate all his instincts and
capacities.

The more abstract sciences, just to the extent which they are
abstract and exact, like mathematics and logic, are merely methods
and tools for converting experience into knowledge and applying
the knowledge so gained to practical uses.
of widely scattered peoples, living under varied physical and social
conditions. What one gets from a survey of this kind is not so
much history as a study of human behavior. The history of
marriage, as of any other institution, is, in other words, not so
much an account of what certain individuals or groups of individuals
did at certain times and certain places, as it is a description of the
responses of few fundamental human instincts to a variety of social
situations. Westermarck calls this kind of history sociology.

It is in the firm conviction that the history of human civilization should
be made an object of as scientific a treatment as the history of organic nature
that I write this book. Like the phenomena of physical and psychical life
those of social life should be classified into certain groups and each group
investigated with regard to its origin and development. Only when treated
in this way can history lay claim to the rank and honour of a science in the
highest sense of the term, as forming an important part of Sociology, the
youngest of the principal branches of learning.

Descriptive historiography has no higher object than that of offering
materials to this science.”

Westermarck refers to the facts which he has collected in his
history of marriage as phenomena. For the explanation of these
phenomena, however, he looks to the more abstract sciences.

The causes on which social phenomena are dependent fall within the
domain of different sciences—Biology, Psychology, or Sociology. The reader
will find that I put particular stress upon the psychological causes, which
have often been deplorably overlooked, or only imperfectly touched upon.
And more especially do I believe that the mere instincts have played a very
important part in the origin of social institutions and rules.®

1 Prof. Robertson Smith (Nature, XLIV, 270), criticizing Westermarck’s History
of Human Marriage, complains that the author has confused history with natural
history. ‘The history of an institution,” he writes, ‘‘which is controlled by public
opinion and regulated by law is not natural history. The true history of marriage
begins where the natural history of pairing ends... . . To treat these topics (poly-
andry, kinship through the female only, infanticide, exogamy) as essentially a part of
the natural history of pairing involves a tacit assumption that the laws of society are
at bottom mere formulated instincts, and this assumption really underlies all our
author’s theories. His fundamental position compels him, if he will be consistent
with himself, to hold that every institution connected with marriage that has universal
validity, or forms an integral part of the main line of development, is rooted in instinct,
and that institutions which are not based on instinct are necessarily exceptional and
unimportant for scientific history.”

2 Edward Westermarck, The History of Human Marriage (London, 1901), p. 1.

3 E. Westermarck, oP. cit., p. 5.
This whole study is, in fact, merely an application of Durk-
heim’s conception of “collective representations.”

Robert H. Lowie, in his recent volume, Primitive Society, refers
to “ethnologists and other historians,” but at the same time asks:
“What kind of an historian shall the ethnologist be?”

He answers the question by saying that, ‘If there are laws of
social evolution, he [the ethnologist] must assuredly discover them,”
but at any rate, and first of all, “his duty is to ascertain the course
civilization has actually followed... . . To strive for the ideals
of another branch of knowledge may be positively pernicious, for
it can easily lead to that factitious simplification which means
falsification.”

In other words, ethnology, like history, seeks to tell what
actually happened. It is bound to avoid abstraction, ‘“over-
simplification,” and formulae, and these are the ideals of another
kind of scientific procedure. As a matter of fact, however, eth-
nology, even when it has attempted nothing more than a description

1 Jane Ellen Harrison, Themis, A Study of the Social Origins of Greek Religion
(Cambridge, 1912), p. ix.
of the existing cultures of primitive peoples, their present distribu-
tion and the order of their succession, has not freed itself wholly
from the influence of abstract considerations. Theoretical prob-
lems inevitably arise for the solution of which it is necessary to go
to psychology and sociology. One of the questions that has arisen
in the study, particularly the comparative study, of cultures is:
how far any existing cultural trait is borrowed and how far it is
to be regarded as of independent origin.

In the historical reconstruction of culture the phenomena of distribution
play, indeed, an extraordinary part. If a- trait occurs everywhere, it might
veritably be the product of some universally operative social law. If it is
found in a restricted number of cases, it may still have evolved through some
such instrumentality acting under specific conditions that would then remain
to be determined by analysis of the cultures in which the feature is embedded.
. ... Finally, the sharers of a cultural trait may be of distinct lineage but
through contact and borrowing have come to hold in common a portion of
their cultures... . .

Since, as a matter of fact, cultural resemblances abound between peoples
of diverse stock, their interpretation commonly narrows to a choice between
two alternatives. Either they are due to like causes, whether these can be
determined or not; or they are the result of borrowing. A predilection for
one or the other explanation has lain at the bottom of much ethnological
discussion in the past; and at present influential schools both in England and
in continental Europe clamorously insist that all cultural parallels are due
to diffusion from a single center. It is inevitable to envisage this moot-
problem at the start, since uncompromising championship of either alternative
has far-reaching practical consequences. For if every parallel is due to bor-
towing, then sociological laws, which can be inferred only from independently
developing likenesses, are barred. Then the history of religion or social life
or technology consists exclusively in a statement of the place of origin of
beliefs, customs and implements, and a recital of their travels to different
parts of the globe. On the other hand, if borrowing covers only part of the
observed parallels, an explanation from like causes becomes at least the ideal
goal in an investigation of the remainder.'

An illustration will exhibit the manner in which problems
originally historical become psychological and sociological. Tyler
in his Early History of Mankind has pointed out that the bellows
used by the negro blacksmiths of continental Africa are of a quite
different type from those used by natives of Madagascar. The

1 Robert H. Lowie, Primitive Society (New York, 1920), pp. 7-8.
bellows used by the Madagascar blacksmiths, on the other hand,
are exactly like those in use by the Malays of Sumatra and in
other parts of the Malay Archipelago. This indication that the
natives of Madagascar are of Malay origin is in accordance with
other anthropological and ethnological data in regard to these
peoples, which prove the fact, now well established, that they are
not of African origin.

Similarly Boas’ study of the Raven cycle of American Indian
mythology indicated that these stories originated in the northern
part of British Columbia and traveled southward along the coast.
One of the evidences of the direction of this progress is the gradual
diminution of complexity in the stories as they traveled into
regions farther temoved from the point of origin.

All this, in so far as it seeks to determine the point of origin,
direction, speed, and character of changes that take place in cul-
tural materials in the process of diffusion, is clearly history and
ethnology.

Other questions, however, force themselves inevitably upon the
attention of the inquiring student. Why is it that certain cultural
materials are more widely and more rapidly diffused than others?
Under what conditions does this diffusion take place and why does
it take place at all? Finally, what is the ultimate source of cus-
toms, beliefs, languages, religious practices, and all the varied tech-
nical devices which compose the cultures of different peoples?
What are the circumstances and what are the processes by which
cultural traits are independently created? Under what condi-
tions do cultural fusions take place and what is the nature of this
process?

These are all fundamentally problems of human nature, and as
human nature itself is now regarded as a product of social inter-
course, they are problems of sociology.

The cultural processes by which languages, myth, and religion
have come into existence among primitive peoples has given rise in
Germany to a special science. Folk-psychology (Vélkerpsycholo-
gie) had its origin in an attempt to answer in psychological terms
the problems to which a comparative study of cultural materials
has given rise.
From two different directions ideas of folk-psychology have found their
way into modern science. First of all there was a demand from the different
social sciences [Geisteswissenschaften] for a psychological explanation of the
phenomena of social life and history, so far as they were products of social
[geistiger] interaction. In the second place, psychology itself required, in order
to escape the uncertainties and ambiguities of pure introspection, a body of
objective materials.

Among the social sciences the need for psychological interpretation first
manifested itself in the studies of language and mythology. Both of these
had already found outside the circle of the philological studies independent
fields of investigation. As soon as they assumed the character of comparative
sciences it was inevitable that they should be driven to recognize that in
addition to the historical conditions, which everywhere determines the concrete
form of these phenomena, there had been certain fundamental psychical forces
at work in the development of language and myth.!

The aim of folk-psychology has been, on the whole, to explain
the genesis and development of certain cultural forms, i.e., lan-
guage, myth, and religion. The whole matter may, however, be
regarded from a quite different point of view. Gabriel Tarde, for
example, has sought to explain, not the genesis, but the transmission
and diffusion of these same cultural forms. For Tarde, communi-
cation (transmission of cultural forms and traits) is the one central
and significant fact of social life. “Social” is just what can be
transmitted by imitation. Social groups are merely the centers
from which new ideas and inventions are transmitted. Imitation
is the social process.

There is not a word that you say, which is not the reproduction, now un-
conscious, but formerly conscious and voluntary, of verbal articulations reach-
ing back to the most distant past, with some special accent due to your imme-
diate surroundings. There is not a religious rite that you fulfil, such as praying,
kissing the icon, or making the sign of the cross, which does not reproduce
certain traditional gestures and expressions, established through imitation of
your ancestors. There is not a military or civil requirement that you obey,
nor an act that you perform in your business, which has not been taught you,
and which you have not copied from some living model. There is not a stroke
of the brush that you make, if you are a painter, nor a verse that you write,

1 Wilhelm Wundt, Vélkerpsychologie, eine Untersuchung der Entwicklungsgesetze
von Sprache, Mythus und Sitte. Erster Band, Die Sprache, Erster Theil (Leipzig,
1900), p. 13. The name folk-psychology was first used by Lazarus and Steinthal,
Zeitschrift fiir Volkerpsychologie und Sprachwissenschaft, I, 1860. Wundt’s folk-
psychology is a continuation of the tradition of these earlier writers.
if you are a poet, which does not conform to the customs or the prosody of your
school, and even your very originality itself is made up of accumulated common-
places, and aspires to become common-place in its turn.

Thus, the unvarying characteristic of every social fact whatsoever is that
it is imitative. And this characteristic belongs exclusively to social facts.1

Tarde’s theory of transmission by imitation may be regarded,
in some sense, as complementary, if not supplementary, to Wundt’s
theory of origins, since he puts the emphasis on the fact of trans-
mission rather than upon genesis. In a paper, “Tendencies in
Comparative Philology,” read at the Congress of Arts and Sciences
at the St. Louis Exposition in 1904, Professor Hanns Oertel, of
Yale University, refers to Tarde’s theory of imitation as an alter-
native explanation to that offered by Wundt for ‘‘the striking
uniformity of sound changes” which students of language have
discovered in the course of their investigation of phonetic changes
in widely different forms of speech.

It seems hard to maintain that the change in a syntactical construction
or in the meaning of a word owes its universality to a simultaneous and inde-
pendent primary change in all the members of a speech-community. By
adopting the theory of imitative spread, all linguistic changes may be viewed
as one homogeneous whole. In the second place, the latter view seems to
bring linguistic changes into line with the other social changes, such as modi-
fications in institutions, beliefs, and customs. For is it not an essential char-
acteristic of a social group that its members are not co-operative in the sense
that each member actively participates in the production of every single ele-
ment which goes to make up either language, or belief, or customs? Distin-
guishing thus between primary and secondary changes and between the origin
of a change and its spread, it behooves us to examine carefully into the causes
which make the members of a social unit, either consciously or unconsciously,
willing to accept an innovation. What is it that determines acceptance or
rejection of a particular change? What limits one change to a small area,
while it extends the area of another? Before a final decision can be reached in
favor of the second theory of imitative spread it will be necessary to follow out
in minute detail the mechanism of this process in a number of concrete in-
stances; in other words to fill out the picture of which Tarde (Les lois de
Vimitation) sketched the bare outlines. If his assumptions prove true, then
we should have here a uniformity resting upon other causes than the physical
uniformity that appears in the objects with which the natural sciences deal.

1G, Tarde, Social Laws, An Outline of Sociology, translated from the French by
Howard C. Warren (New York, 1899), pp. 40-41.
It would enable us to establish a second group of uniform phenomena which
is psycho-physical in its character and rests upon the basis of social suggestion.
The uniformities in speech, belief, and institutions would belong to this second
group.

What is true of the comparative study of languages is true in
every other field in which a comparative study of cultural materials
has been made. As soon as these materials are studied from the
point of view of their similarities rather than from the point of view
of their historical connections, problems arise which can only be
explained by the more abstract sciences of psychology or sociology.
Freeman begins his lectures on Comparative Politics with the state-
ment that
the comparative method of study has been the greatest intellectual achievement
of our time. It has carried light and order into whole branches of human
knowledge which before were shrouded in darkness and confusion. It has
brought a line of argument which reaches moral certainty into a region which
before was given over to random guess-work. Into matters which are for the
most part incapable of strictly external proof it has brought a form of strictly
internal proof which is more convincing, more unerring.

Wherever the historian supplements external by internal proof,
he is in a way to substitute a sociological explanation for historical
interpretation. It is the very essence of the sociological method to
be comparative. When, therefore, Freeman uses, in speaking of
comparative politics, the following language he is speaking in
sociological rather than historical terms:

For the purposes then of the study of Comparative Politics, a political
constitution is a specimen to be studied, classified, and labelled, as a building
or an animal is studied, classified, and labelled by those to whom building or
animals are objects of study. We have to note the likenesses, striking and
unexpected as those likenesses often are, between the political constitutions
of remote times and places; and we have, as far as we can, to classify our
specimens according to the probable causes of those likenesses.”

Historically sociology has had its origin in history. It owes its
existence as a science to the attempt to apply exact methods to the

1 Hanns Oertel, ‘Some Present Problems and Tendencies in Comparative Phi-
lology,” Congress of Arts and Sciences, Universal Exposition, St. Louis, 1904 (Boston,
1906), IIT, 59.

2 Edward A. Freeman, Comparative Politics with the Unity of History (London,
1873), p. 23.
explanation of historical facts. In the attempt to achieve this,
however, it has become something quite different from history. It
has become like psychology with which it is most intimately related,
a natural and relatively abstract science, and auxiliary to the
study of history, but not a substitute for it. The whole matter may
be summed up in this general statement: history interprets,
natural science explains. It is upon the interpretation of the facts
of experience that we formulate our creeds and found our faiths.
Our explanations of phenomena, on the other hand, are the basis
for technique and practical devices for controlling nature and human
nature, man and the physical world.
