Christian Sociology. III. The Family

Author(s): Shailer Mathews

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Tan., 1896), pp. 457-472
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2761876

Accessed: 08-05-2016 23:13 UTC
I.

As one might expect @ priori, the family is regarded by
Jesus as one manifestation of the essential social character of
men. The sexes complement one another as the two halves of a
whole. This finds expression in his well-known use of the words
and incidents of Genesis. Marriage has a divine origin. Hus-
band and wife are joined together by God, so that they are
no longer two but one. It is noteworthy that Jesus thus
regards marriage as monogamous — not indeed as the result of
an evolving conventionality, but as the result of the divine
creative act.1 Monogamy is thus regarded by him as the only
normal, the only divine basis of family relations. By this
reaffirmation of the noble social teaching of Moses,? Jesus sets
his disapproval upon all forms of plural marriage, whether legal

*Matt. 19:5,6; Mark 10:6-8. No words reported as those of Jesus are more
certainly his than these concerning marriage and divorce.

2It should not be overlooked that in using the expression “twain” Jesus follows

the Septuagint rather than the Hebrew, which reads simply “them.”
457
or illegal. In none of his teachings have we greater economy
of expression, but in none is his meaning less in doubt.

But it would be an incomplete presentation of the position
of Jesus to stop at this point. If we attempt to arrange his
thought in any system, the union of two persons in marriage
becomes one factor in the union of the race; a union which
appears at once natural for mankind, and also a symbol of that
divine social order which is to come, when all men are to be sons
of God and society thus a brotherhood, It is not the creature
of law. Law can simply recognize and protect it. With Jesus
marriage on its physical side is an actual union of complement-
ing personalities —a forming of one flesh. It is one of the
primal facts of human life, and because it is a conditioning fact
and not a merely formal conception of the law books, it is espe-
cially sacred and inviolable. It is in itself a fraternity—- a micro-
cosmic kingdom of God.

On its physical side Jesus regards marriage —like the other
physical elements in the evolving social order—as an institution
to be found only in the present zon. The much-married woman
of the Sadducees’ riddle,? in the life beyond the grave was no
longer to be subject to the perplexing levirate law, for in the
resurrection humanity neither marries nor is given in marriage,
but is to be as the angels of heaven. And yet while Jesus thus
recognizes the physical basis of marriage, he never regards it as
in any way sinful or ignoble; so far is he removed from the
perversions that an ascetic faith has so frequently forced upon
humanity. As long as human nature and human relations are
as they are, so long will marriage be the first human tie. For it
ties otherwise the closest are to be broken. Filial dependence,
the family itself are to yield before the marital union and the
future family. But the physical is not the only, nor is it the
permanent element in marriage. This must be found in the
same fraternal spirit which guarantees a perpetuation of the
kingdom. Just as this ideal society is independent of physical
bounds and changing physical elements, so, we may infer, is the

™Matt. 22:23; Mark 12: 18-25; Luke 20: 27-36.
ultimate basis of the marriage relation to be found in spiritual
rather than physical unity. Between man and wife here is to
be a union in spirit that springs from a love that is not mere pas-
sion, but is volitional and moral. When physical surroundings
have passed away, then will the spiritual union, which must
have accompanied the physical, survive, and the completed
family become even more apparently like the completed society,
a psychical union. Until this consummation of human progress
comes, therefore, the dominant characteristics of the growing
kingdom are to be exhibited in this its typical and initial unity.

Thus here, as in other social relations, the spiritual union
must supplement and ennoble the physical. “If trust be incom-
plete, marriage, we know, cannot have its perfect work. If trust
be broken, marriage perishes. But by interchange of thought
and hope and prayer in marriage, trust ripens into faith.”*

It is unnecessary for the appreciation of this position
of Jesus to follow him in his terminology. It is of little
or no consequence whether the basis of this conception of
the marriage relation be regarded as a literal divine word or as
human nature itself; whether the institution itself be the out-
come of a creative fiat or of evolution. The one essential point
is its absolute truth from the point of view of both ethics and
human history. Marriage is indeed a fundamental human rela-
tion; it isin its normal condition when monogamous; it is some-
thing more than a living together of man and woman; it is a
psychical as well as a physical completion of individuals; and
as such it isin the largest sense of the term a fraternity that
depends for its perpetuation upon love.’
sion of the fundamental social nature of man in both its physical
and spiritual expression; and so long as it is monogamous, to
be characterized by the modesty that is possible alone in such a
relation; so long must it be unbreakable by statute. Divorce by
Jesus is regarded as impossible, except as a formal recognition
of an already broken union. As marriage gives rise to an actual
union of personalities, it can be broken only by an actual sev-
erance of this union. When this is not the case, law can no
more annul it than it canannul an arch. ‘What God has joined
together let no man put asunder.” In this again Jesus was in
contrast with his times. The astonishing laxity which prevailed
among the fashionable clique at Rome, even if all due allowance
be made for the natural exaggeration of moralists and poets, is
well known from the literature of the empire,’ to say nothing of
the early Christian writers.2 But the same tendencies were at
work among the less corrupt circles of Judea. There, too, the
general laxity in regard to divorce was quite as striking. The
liberal school of Hillel was here more the offender than that of
Shammai. By an exceedingly broad interpretation of Deut.
24:1 (the sole ground for divorce in the Mosaic code), it was
judged permissible to divorce a wife if she had spoiled her hus-
band’s dinner, and later, if we are to accept the words of
R. Akiba, even if the husband discovered a woman more to his
liking.3 Jesus was in fact opposed by his countrymen, to whom,
thanks to the popular teaching, his doctrine seemed fanaticism.
Moses, they objected,‘ had allowed divorce, had even commanded
that a “ bill of divorcement”’ should be given in case of separation.
See also p. 752 where he declares such a marriage to be “manifestly the ultimate
form.” So WESTERMARCK, The History of Human Marriage, p.510. DRUMMOND,
The Ascent of Man is here suggestive.

*See FRIEDLANDER, Sittengeschichte der Romer, I., ch. 5; DOLLINGER, Zhe
Gentile and the Jew, I1., 230 sg.

2 See, for instance, Clement of Alexandria and Jerome.

3 But there is here opportunity, as in the case of Juvenal, for a large allowance
for rhetoric. Yet the general ease of divorce is undeniable. The Talmud devotes an
entire tractate (Gzttiz) to the subject. (See EDERSHEIM, Life of Jesus the Messiah, I1.,
332 sg.; STERN, Die Frau im Talmud; Weit., La Femme Juive.)

4 Matt. 19:7.
Jesus was not to be shaken from his position by any quotation of
ancient authorities. He admitted that Moses had allowed
divorce as an expedient, a choice between two evils, but, appeal-
ing not to statute but to life, he protested in words his hearers
would have regarded as older even than the law of Moses, that
such permission was in violation of a primary fact of human
society, an undoing of the law of creation, a violation of
human nature.

It is a little remarkable, but indicative of the importance
Jesus accorded the family, that, not content with thus enun-
ciating a general principle, he should have gone into minuter
treatment of this one social relation. His position upon many
subjects which are of burning interest today, and, to judge from
the writings of the time, were often quite as much so in his own
day, is often non-committal, almost always reserved, although
occasionally, as in the case of ceremonial uncleanness, he
expresses in a pregnant sentence a specific principle. But in the
matter of divorce he has left us some of the most explicit legis-
lation the gospels have preserved. Under no circumstances,
provided that the marriage union is not actually broken through
the unfaithfulness of one of the parties, is a husband to divorce
his wife, or a wife her husband.* In case there is no such actual
breaking of the marriage tie, a husband who puts his wife away,
be it never so legally, causes her to be judged as belonging to
that class of women who have really given grounds for divorce ;
he brands her an adulteress.2_ If, on the basis of such divorce
she should marry, both she and the new husband commit sin.
The original union is still existent. Yet if adultery has actually
been committed, the guilty party may be divorced.3 In such a

*This addition is noteworthy. It had not been customary among the Jews for wives
to divorce their husbands, but about the time of Jesus we meet several cases of its occur-
rence among the official class. Thus Salome, sister of Herod I, divorced her husband
(JosErHus, Antiquities of the Jews, 15:8:10), and later Herodias, at least nominally,
divorced her husband Herod, in order to live with his brother, Herod Antipas. But
the custom was more Roman than Jewish.

2Matt. 5: 32.

3This view presupposes the exceptive clause in Matt. 5:32 and 19:9. This
position is not beyond question, especially since that clause does not appear in Mark
case it would appear as if the two parties became de facto unmar-
ried; since their union is broken, both in its physical and its
psychical aspects, they are no longer one flesh, nor is theirs a
community of love. They are not, therefore, forbidden by Jesus
to marry again."

But two things are here very evident: (1) Jesus does not
command a divorce even in the most extreme cases. His recog-
nition of the possibility of such a course of action is, so to
speak, parenthetic. The ideal of brotherhood and the need of
reconciliation would certainly favor a maintenance of old rela-
tions even after divorce is permissible. Forgiveness and recon-
ciliation are as much the supreme needs in the family as at the
altar. (2) There is nothing in his teachings that would lead us
to believe Jesus disapproved of the separation of a married pair
for other causes than the one which would justify divorce. But
remarriage on the part of either husband or wife who are thus
separated would be regarded by him as a violation of the mar-
riage union that still exists between them.

10:11, although Meyer may be correct in saying that it is there understood as a mat-
ter of course. It is also lacking in Luke 16:18, but the omission by Luke is not so
serious as that by Mark. Wenpr (Zeaching of Jesus, I., 354) judges this omission as
sufficient ground for the view that “the simple, unqualified statement ‘to put away a
wife on the ground of unchastity is not culpable adultery,’ does not correspond with
the meaning of Jesus.” This meaning being “that the obligation of marriage is
absolute, and no dissolution of it is possible without incurring the guilt of adultery.”
And it must be admitted that on critical grounds the addition of the clause by Matthew
(so Bleek, Weiss, Holtzmann, and others) is more probable than its omission by Mark.
Yet on the grounds stated in the text the exception does not appear foreign to the
thought of Jesus. Even were the clause omitted, we should have very possibly a
strong rhetorical statement like others of Jesus. (For example, Matt. § : 29, 30, 34.)
And in any case the main thought of Jesus would be unaffected. An interesting com-
mentary upon his position is to be seen in the interpretation put by Jesus upon the
status of the much married Samaritan woman, John 4:18.

See Hovey, The Scriptural Law of Divorce, and Studies in’ Ethics and Religion,
P- 321 sg., and commentaries (especially MEYER, and BroapDus) on the above passages.
See also Stronc, Philosophy and Religion, 431-442, and WOOLSEY, Divorce ana
Divorce Legislation, ch. 2, although so far as his interpretation of the teaching of
Jesus on this point is concerned, President Woolsey’s views were later reversed. (See
the essay by President Strong just mentioned.) The church has not generally favored
this interpretation. See SCHMIDT, Social Results of Christianity, p. 201 sg., and, espe-
cially for the Roman Catholic position, CoNVERS, Marriage and Divorce.
The ground for this definiteness is not difficult to discover.
Marriage, both in its lower and its higher aspects, is the basis of
family unity. Family life is the most sacred of all relations out-
side of the relation between God and man. It is not to be vio-
lated even in look and thought. Adultery may be committed
even when lust never passes beyond the licentious glance.* In
the same proportion as the natural sanctity of marriage is
injured, in the same proportion is the nature of man outraged
and ideal fraternity broken. To dishonor this first of human
relationships is to loosen the bonds of society, to lower present
social ideals, to do injury to the essential nature of both the
man and the woman. It was, therefore, not in the spirit of a
purist or a fanatic that Jesus thus put checks upon divorce, but
in that of the ethical and social philosopher. Nor—and this is
a remarkable thing — is there a trace of the current formal con-
ception that the husband had any property rights in his wife.
On the contrary, as will presently appear, Jesus, to a surprising
degree, anticipated today’s belief in the equality of the sexes.
It was this as well as the underlying principles of his ideal
society that led him in the face of popular opinion thus to form-
ulate these strict statutes. Modern sentiment, like the legislation
and the sentiment of the professional teachers of his day, is
opposed to such severity in the morals of matrimony. Marriage
is assuming much more the character of a legal status than of a
natural union. Its continuance is increasingly believed to be
dependent upon the desires of the parties concerned and the
decision of the courts. So far as mere legal separation of
unequally or ill-matched persons is concerned, the ideal described
by Jesus would not antagonize this modern tendency, but the
general consent of past and present moral teachers and states-
men agrees with his noble rejection of the admissibility of the
scandalous travesties of life’s most sacred union, to which now-
adays these separations generally lead. We are not now con-
cerned with the practicability of such an ideal; it may be too

*Matt. 5:27, 28. Of course the essence of this conception can be stated less
rhetorically.
1. It is characteristic of the sanity of Jesus that at this point he
introduces something in the nature of an exception to this gen-
eral teaching. Although marriage is thus sacred, and although
in it there is one of the nucleus points of the kingdom, yet all
men are not to marry. There is something pathetic as well as
humorous in the anxiety shown by the disciples over his stern
teaching.? It seems to them that if divorce be thus forbidden
it were better not to marry at all! Jesus, with characteristic
tact, grants them their conclusion, but supplies it with premises
of a much loftier standard, and in his treatment of the matter
presents one of the fundamental teachings of his entire system,
viz., that a good thing must always be sacrificed for a better
thing. No man, unless like Origen he be utterly blinded by an
ascetic and fanatic fervor, could ever misinterpret the intense
words in which Jesus expresses this axiom. They simply form
one of those characteristic additions with which he so often
modifies a truth otherwise absolutely stated. While marriage is
supremely good, yet if for any cause it stand in the way of
accepting the blessings of the kingdom of heaven, it is to be
avoided. The words are a restatement of the familiar teaching
of the sacrificed eye and hand.3 And Jesus himself practiced
this teaching.

2. But possibly another exception may be derived from the
admission by Jesus that Moses had yielded to the “ hardness of

1¥For an opposite view of the teaching of Jesus, see Tissot, Le Marriage et le
Divorce, ch. ix., and a careful statement by Carroll D, Wright in Crarts, Practical
Christian Sociology, 446-452. It should not be forgotten that the attempt is being
made here simply to discover the exact ideal of Jesus. The question of its practica-
bility and its gradual realization belongs to the discussion of sociological dynamics.

2Matt. 19:10.
3 Matt. 5:29, 30.
heart”’ on the part of the Jews,’ and had allowed divorce on
such grounds as might easily be made to permit no small lati-
tude. In the light of this recognition of an adjustment of
legislation to a people’s capacity, may we not have a modifying
clause of the ideal legislation?

The objection is weighty, but, disregarding the advisability of
admitting such an accommodation in case of reformatory legis-
lation, as a modification of an actual ideal of family life set
forth by Jesus, it is not to be admitted. Jesus is here con-
fessedly setting forth a social ideal for the present age and for
the very people he addressed. By his own statements it cannot
possibly apply to the perfect society of the age to come,
since then divorce like marriage will be a question outgrown.
To admit this modification would be to destroy his social ideal
of mutual fraternity. It would make him in the same breath
with which he declares the indissoluble union of two persons to
be the divine plan of creation, also declare that after all such a
union is not essential in all cases, but may be replaced by more
or less indiscriminate multiplication of partners. Such a con-
tradiction, it must be remembered, does not confront the man
who regards marriage as simply a contract which guarantees cer-
tain peculiar rights to the two consenting parties. In such a
conception law makes and law can unmake the union. But with
Jesus marriage is a fact, not a definition. God and nature join ;
man and law cannot separate. He may bea dreamer. He cer-
tainly is not inconsistent.?

3. Two further questions are, however, not answered:
(1) Would not this position of Jesus admit divorce in case the
marriage were broken in its psychical side, though not on its
physical; that is, in case of an utter destruction of conjugal
love, although neither husband and wife had otherwise broken
marital obligations ? (2) Would not the spirit if, indeed, not
the letter of Jesus be met in case of a divorce granted for an
absolute desertion; that is, would not Jesus so far favor the
position of modern law as to grant that desertion is, if not con-
structive adultery, at least a real severing of both physical
and psychical union ?

So far as the first of these questions is concerned, a moment’s
thought will convince one that this is precisely the thing Jesus is
attacking. Metaphysically, it may be, such a position would be
permissible. Practically, it would be free love. And, further,
it is necessary to remember that in this social teaching Jesus is not
dealing with the possible situations of isolated individuals, but
with society as such. He is here subject to the necessities that
surround all those who provide for the common good of society.
It is not to the point, therefore, to plead a resulting hardship in
specific cases. But it is not so easy to answer the second of these
two questions categorically. It is evident that desertion might
easily be regarded as a redefinition of “adultery,” and that it has
good reasons for being admitted on the very grounds by which
Jesus establishes his general position. In this case, therefore, we
have a question of interpretation of legislation, and there will
always be opportunity for question. But it nevertheless seems
tolerably clear that, except perhaps in extreme cases, such redef-
inition is at once repugnant and dangerous. Waiving the exceed-
ingly important considerations as to the ease by which such a
conception of adultery could be abused, it seems sufficient to say
that as a general interpretation this view is to be rejected. It
involves conditions too similar to those which Jesus immediately
attacked, and it is a too severe strain upon the plain meaning of
the term? used by Jesus; it is hinging too many possibilities upon
an exceptive clause which is itself omitted by an orignal source.

But it should again be said that at present we are not so much
concerned with the applications of the teaching of Jesus as with
the discovery of his conception of the ideal forms of social life.
It may very likely yet appear that in an attempt at realizing this
ideal, legislators and reformers must, like Moses, concede much
to the hardness of men’s hearts.

* mopvela.
It follows from this noble conception of marriage that woman
is placed by Jesus upon a plane of equality with man. She is
neither the creature of his fancy, nor is she in a relation of
either real or formal subjection. Here, it is true, Jesus was less
out of accord with the tendencies of his time. Throughout the
Roman empire there was an appreciable advance in the position
of women. Except in the case of the Essenes, among the
Jews the wife had always held a relatively high position, and
among the Romans this was increasingly true through the
neglect of the forms of marriage involving i manu relations.
But even after this has been said, no person acquainted with
Jewish or Roman life of the first century would deny that Jesus
gives woman a position essentially different from that accorded
her by either philosophy or custom.

While among the Romans the steady emancipation through
which woman was passing was winning only the contempt of the
professional moralist and the laughter of the writer of comedy;
and while in Judea the noble ideal of motherhood was being low-
ered by the ease by which divorce might be obtained; with Jesus
there is neither a recognition of a past subjection of woman, an
attempt at her emancipation, nor a lament over the difficulties to
be foreseen in the enforcement of his teaching in regard to mar-
riage. He simply treats woman as an equal—equal in the
matter of marriage and divorce equal as a companion. More
than once is the despicable conceit of some Pharisee or disciple
rebuked by his exhibition of unconventional sociability. They
might wonder or complain; but none the less he taught and
loved. All through the gospel story we find a surprisingly
high position accorded women. The life of Jesus was to give
something more than protection to women. It made them the
companions of men— equally privileged members of the new
human brotherhood. It was a virgin who bore the Savior; a
woman to whom he, as a child, was subject, and by whom, in all
probability, he was trained and educated;* to a woman, so far as

1 Luke 2:52.
we have any record, he gave the first clear proclamation of his
Messiahship.: His first miracle was wrought because of the
faith and at the solicitation of his mother.2 A woman, who
because of her grateful faith poured over him the costly oint-
ment, is the only person to whom he promised an immortality
of remembrance.3 Women ministered to his needs and supplied
him the means of support. Among the last words Jesus spoke
upon the cross were those with which he commended Mary to
the care of his beloved disciple.’ A woman was the first at the
tomb,° the first to see the risen Christ,? the first to believe on
him, and the first to bear testimony to the resurrection.2 And
is it altogether without suggestiveness that he should have car-
ried his teaching into the heart of housewifely cares and have
lifted women’s life above cooking as he lifted men’s above
money-getting ?9

The by no means improbable story” of his encounter with
one unfortunate woman, which so long held a position in our
canonical collection is a natural outgrowth of the thought of a
generation upon which his infinite tact and delicacy had madea
profound impression. And it was but an application of his noble
conception of the dignity of womanhood and wifehood when
the apostles and early Christians refused to break irregular
though real marriages that were found to exist among converts
from heathenism at the time of their entrance into the church.”

And throughout the gospel story the same equality is
observed. He made them members of his society with no dis-
tinctively low position, and within the early church their worth
was recognized and their needs supplied as in the case of men.
As he says who more than all the New Testament writers

tJohn 4:7 sg. 6 Matt. 28:1; Mark 16:1; John 20:1.
2John 2:4 sg. 7 Matt. 28:9; John 20:11.

3 Mark 14:9. 8John 20:18.

4 Luke 8:3. 9 Luke 10 : 38-42.

5John 19: 26, 27.

roJohn 7:53-8:11. [t is not, perhaps, without significance that dyamdw is the
word used to describe the attitude of Jesus toward women. Luke 7:47; John 11:5.

uy Cor. 7:10, 113 1 Tim. 3:2.
has appreciated the real significance of the work of Jesus, ‘In
Christ there is neither male nor female.” *

Two objections may be raised to this position: (1) On the
one hand it may be urged that he sometimes spoke brusquely to
women—even to his mother. But this objection is trivial
and would doubtless never have been raised except for the
unusually awkward and harsh expression in our English ver-
sion, (2) On the other hand, it may be urged with far more
force that Jesus never expressly attacked those social customs
that force woman into infamy, or those conventionalities that
have for centuries made her politically and legally the inferior of
man; in short, that he never poses as the champion of the rights
of women. But neither does he expressly attack many other
social sins and injustices. _Nor—and time has proved this —
was it needful that he should. The genus includes the species,
and if once men get to incorporating the social principles he has
enunciated, special forms of evil will of necessity disappear.
To demand that the friend of Mary Magdalene and the eulogist
of the heathen mother and the self-sacrificing widow should
preach woman suffrage; or to complain because he whose life
was a continuous argument for equality and fraternity among
men and women did not revise the Old Testament until it
accorded with the Christian conceptions of today, is to ask that
which is as absurd as it is impossible and needless.
his words over the little children who were forbidden by the dis-
ciples to come to him, he has lifted childhood into a type of
character, and has given children their share in the kingdom of
God.?_ In fact with Jesus the vocabulary of the family becomes
one of choicest affection. His disciples are his “little children,”
doubly dear when he is about to leave them.? All earnest mem-
bers of his divine brotherhood are his family.3

In the comparisons of Jesus we again see clearly the under-
lying Christian ideal of the family. Here, as in the case of
women, among his words there is no exhortation to either pater-
nal or filial love. The apostle, less filled with a profound con-
fidence in the inmost nature of man and more concerned with
halting converts, bids sons obey their parents and fathers not
to provoke their children to wrath. But such commands were
impossible for Jesus. With him paternal love is as human and
natural as life. To command it would have been to make the
holiest of instincts the product of effort. From the very method
of his teaching Jesus must needs have started with some absolute
ideal to which he might compare spiritual relations, and which,
already understood, would make intelligible that which was diffi-
cult to understand. Other teachers have felt the same need, and
this highest type of holiest relations has been found in many
things—numerical harmonies, nature, the state. Jesus found
it in the family. Even among evil men the paternal instinct
gives good gifts and the deception of a child is unthinkable.’
Love and kindliness between brothers are spontaneous and their
absence is a type of all that is selfish and ungodlike.? To give
up family relations is the supreme test of loyalty. Thus it is
that, as has already appeared is his habit, Jesus here using the
noblest forms and words for his noblest teaching, makes the mem-
bers of the divine society brothers; while paternal love is his
representation of the love of God, and the family as a unit, his

tMatt. 19:13-15; Mark 10:13-16; Luke 18:15-17.

2John 13:33; Mark 10:24. 6 Matt. 5:47; John 8:42.
3 Matt. 12: 49, 50. 7 Luke 15:25, 32; cf Matt. §:22; 10:21.
4Eph. 6:1, 4; Col. 3:20, 21. 8 Matt. 19: 29.

5 Matt. 7:9-11; Luke 11: 11-13. 9 Luke 15:11 sg.
type of that divine society toward which humanity with a Christ
within it must move.

It is because of this supreme position of family relations,
assigned and presupposed by Jesus, that he has no need to prescribe
any minute regulations as to education and the other duties owed to
and by children. His own day was full of educational opportuni-
ties for boys and girls, both Roman and Jew, but this was not the
cause of his omission of this phase of child-life. Asinthe case of
the position of women, his ideal of the family is dynamic. Here,as
in so much of his work, the real significance of Jesus lies farthest
from that of a mere tabulator of duties. He could afford to
leave his ideal society with its details not filled in, because with
the ideal he gave also evolutionary forces. Once possessed by the
ideal of brotherhood, and once, be it never so feebly, under the
influence of these spiritual forces, each generation could be trusted
to transform the world in which it lived into a greater or less
approximation to the kingdom. In this disregard of the tem-
porary, and in his sublime trust in the salvability of human society
and especially in the possibility of recuperation that lies in
the health and goodness of social instincts if once they are
allowed a normal spiritual environment, Jesus stands infinitely
removed from even the best of his followers. They argue
where he believes. They legislate where he inspires. The
office of each is necessary, for the apostles, like the Christians
of subsequent epochs, must needs incarnate the principles of
Jesus inthe midst of different social forces They thus form one
stage in successive approaches to that new society whose ideal
Jesus set before humanity. But he is the architect; they are the
craftsmen, the hewers of wood and stone.
clearly the supreme social ideals of divine sonship and human
fraternity to this first great union of humanity. He has shown
that such applications involve above all unity of the family and
therefore the sanctity of the marriage tie and the dignity
of woman. The carrying of such principles into the details
of human relationship, with the accommodation of them to
the needs and possibilities of an imperfect society, was left by
Jesus especially to his immediate followers. But his words
were enough. Through all the difficulties that such accom-
modation involved they kept fast hold upon the noble parallel
of their Master. As with him the new social order was to be a
family with God as its father and men as its children, so with them
the church was the bride of the Lamb, and every fatherhood
and family in heaven and on earth was named of that great
Father before whom they daily bowed the knee.
SHAILER MatHEws.
