Lithuanian Immigrants in America

Author(s): Joseph Slabey Roucek

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 41, No. 4 (Jan., 1936), pp. 447-453
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2768955

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:54 UTC
ABSTRACT

The Lithuanians in America form one of the least known immigrant groups. The
census of 1930 gives 193,606 foreign-born Lithuanians and 245,589 of foreign or mixed
parentage. Lithuanians claim that 750,000 is a minimum estimate. Until 1910 Lithu-
anians were not counted in the census, and many are still listed as Poles, Russians, or
Germans. Migration began about 1850, owing to a famine in Lithuania; others came in
1867 following an insurrection; by 1880 the tide increased, reaching its peak about
1896. In America they tend to form settlements and organize numerous societies, asso-
ciations, and co-operatives. They exhibit the typical immigrant tendency to perpetuate
Old World factional divisions. They do not assimilate easily, though the process is
faster in the second generation.

Accurate information concerning Lithuanian immigration to
America is lacking until 1850." In that year Lithuania suffered from
famine and a former cleric, Petras Svotelis, headed a company of
new immigrants. The exodus became more marked after the second
Polish-Lithuanian insurrection in 1863. The insurrections of 1867
and 1868 occasioned other group migrations. Those coming at that

1 For literature on Lithuanians see V. K. Ratkauskas, “Lithuanians in America,”
in Lithuania 1928, ed. E. J. Harrison (London: Hazell, Watson & Viney, 1928), pp.
85-91. The editor of this general reference handbook is also the author of the best single
book in English on a sympathetic survey of Lithuanian history, economic life, literature,
etc.: Lithuania Past and Present (New York: McBride, 1922). For further details on
Lithuanian immigration see Joseph F. Doherty, Lithuanians (a pamphlet edited by
Joseph Mayper, and “Prepared for Distribution by America’s Making, Lithuanian
Section,” n.d.); unsigned, “The Land of Amber,” Interpreter (Foreign Language In-
formation Service), VIII, No. 7, 10-14; Mary M. Kizis, “Lithuanians on the Land,”
ibid., IV, No. 4, 4-5; A. Kaupas, “Lithuanians in America,” Charities and the Commons,
XIII (December 3, 1904), 231-35; E. Hughes, “Chicago Housing Conditions: The
Lithuanians in the Fourth Ward,” American Journal of Sociology, XX (November,
1914), 289-312; K. Bercovici, “The Lithuanians in the United States,” Century Maga-
zine, CXI (1925), 36-42 (this article is obviously based on Doherty’s article, or vice
versa); F. S. Kemesis, “Cooperation among Lithuanians in the United States,” Month-
ly Labor Review, XIX (August, 1924), 466-68; Donald Young, American Minority
Peoples (New York: Harper, 1932), passim; H. G. Duncan, Immigration and Assimila-
tion (Boston: D. C. Heath, 1933), pp. 109-11, 731-36; R. E. Park, The Immigrant Press
and Its Control (New York: Harper, 1922), passim; V. Barluka, Les Lithuaniens
@’ Amérique (Lausanne: Bureau d’Information de Lithuanie, 1918); anonymous, Emi-
gration lithuanienne aux Etats-Unis et la renaissance nationale (Lausanne: Bureau d’In-
formation de Lithuanie, 1918).
time—termed “Dzukas,” “Zanavykas,” and “Kapsas” in Lithuania
—went to the farms in and near New York City, but they were soon
attracted to the road-construction work of the Philadelphia and
Reading Railway, which was building its roadbed from Shamokin
to Sunbury, and of the Delaware, Lackawanna, and Western, which
was then laying the tracks of its Bloomsburg division. Still others
secured work in the nearby anthracite mining districts of Shamokin,
Mount Carmel, Shenandoah, Pottsville, Hazleton, Wilkes-Barre,
Scranton, and other mining towns of Pennsylvania. By 1880 the
flow of Lithuanian immigrants had increased, composed largely of
“Zemaitiai,” or “lowlanders” living in the western part of the gov-
ernment of Kaunas, north of the river Niemen. The economic and
political conditions under the Russian régime increased the inflow
in the early nineties, especially because during this period Lithua-
nian rye, wheat, and flax could find no markets abroad. In 1883 it was
estimated that there were between fifteen and twenty thousand
Lithuanians in this country. The peak of the Lithuanian immigra-
tion was reached in 1896.

Lithuanian writers estimate that, prior to 1899, 275,000 Lithua-
nian immigrants had arrived in the United States. Before that year
they were not classified as Lithuanians in the immigration statistics
of the United States, so that official data are not available. From
1899 to 1914, however, 252,294 additional Lithuanians entered this
country. According to the census of 1930, there are in the Unit-
ed States 193,606 foreign-born Lithuanians and 245,589 “native
white of foreign or mixed parentage.” But these statistics, as well
as the figures of the census of 1920, are open to objection. The Lithu-
anian critics point out that many Lithuanians are listed as Poles,
Russians, and Germans. Until 1910 there was no separate column
for Lithuanians in the census list. The registration thereafter largely
depended upon the answers given by the Lithuanians themselves.
Prior to the World War many carried Russian passports and were
registered as such. On the other hand, many declared themselves
Roman Catholics and were registered in the Polish column. Thus
the census of 1920 fixed the total number of the Lithuanians at
135,068. The Lithuanian convention in New York, in March, 1918,
after an investigation, adopted 750,000 as the minimum estimate.
Allowance was not made in these figures for those who returned to
their native country and those who died, so the figures are too
high.

Although the majority of the Lithuanians have farming for their
background, only a minority of them have pursued that occupation
in America. They are scattered in the states of Maine, New Hamp-
shire, Connecticut, New York, Michigan, and Indiana.” Most Lithu-
anian immigrants associate farming with the ruinous taxes and un-
profitable drudgery experienced by them in Lithuania, so they have
turned to industrial work, both skilled and unskilled. Although the
depression has seriously affected the Lithuanians, as all other groups,
they are foundrymen in western Pennsylvania; textile weavers in
the mills of New England; silk weavers in Paterson, New Jersey;
packing-house workers in Chicago, Kansas City, and Omaha; tan-
ners in Philadelphia; hat-makers in Newark; dock workers in Cleve-
land; and tailors in Brooklyn, Baltimore, and Chicago. Many are
employed in the oil and sugar refineries in the region around New
York, and others work in the shoe factories in Binghamton, New
York, and Brockton, Massachusetts. In general, they belong to the
laboring class, and in large cities they are especially represented in
the tailoring trades. The inclination of this immigrant group is to
rise from the laboring class into professional classes, especially the
second or American-born generation, rather than to enter commer-
cial lines. There are few large Lithuanian companies and corpora-
tions in America, with the exception of some banks. On the other

2 Colonization projects have been exploited among them from time to time, but
have generally failed—such as a project in Prairie County, Arkansas, and the effort of
William F. Cody (‘Buffalo Bill”) to colonize on his land in Wyoming. According to
Mary M. Kitzis (“Lithuanians on the Land,” Interpreter, IV, No. 4, 4-5), the largest
agricultural colony of Lithuanians exists in Mason, Lake, and Oceana counties in
western Michigan, concentrated around the following towns: Ludington, Scottville,
Hart, Custer, Fountain, Free Soil, Brench, Peacock, and Irons. “The Lithuanians are
divided into three different parties here. The majority are Independents. Next in
number are the Catholics. The latter have three small parishes and three mutual benefit
organizations. Each parish owns its little church. The Independents have three farmers’
organizations. There is also one communistic organization. Altogether we have seven
organizations. Before the Socialistic Party split, the people used to read socialistic
newspapers, now these have been replaced by other newspapers. We receive practically

every Lithuanian newspaper published in America. Every family in the colony receives
at least one, and most, two newspapers.”
hand, there are numerous smaller concerns such as shops, restau-
rants, tailoring establishments, and building and loan associations.

Lithuanians, in general, dwell in colonies, although the official
American figures are regarded by the Lithuanians as inaccurate. In
Brooklyn the census gives only 4,985 Lithuanians, while Mr. Rac-
kauskas estimates that the real figure is double the number. About
half of them support four populous parishes, with schools, halls, and
six priests. Colonies are found in Amsterdam, Rochester, Utica,
Schenectady, Albany, Binghamton, Niagara Falls, Herkimer, and
other cities of the state of New York. In Chicago they have twelve
churches; in Pittsburgh, five; in Detroit, three; altogether they have
one hundred and twenty-five churches in America.3

The largest colony of Lithuanians is in Chicago, where their popu-
lation is estimated at 100,000. In Pennsylvania they present large
groups in Scranton, Wilkes-Barre, Pottsville, Shenandoah, Shamo-
kin, Mehanoy City, and Mount Carmel. In Spring Valley and
Westville, Illinois, the Lithuanians hold most of the public offices.
The same applies to Shenandoah and Vandergrift, Pennsylvania.
Their colonies can also be found in such industrial centers as Phila-
delphia, Indiana Harbor, Cleveland, Gary, Detroit, Boston, East
St. Louis, Waterbury, St. Louis, Des Moines, Kansas City, and
Oregon City; and in smaller industrial towns of Pennsylvania, West
Virginia, and Illinois.

The greater number of Lithuanians are of the Catholic faith, but
there are also a number who are Lutherans.

The tendency of the Lithuanians to form settlements enables
them to organize their social life through social, literary, religious,
beneficial, and co-operative societies, imitating as far as possible
their social institutions at home. Mr. Rackauskas states that “a
conservative estimate” would place the number of charitable and
mutual-aid organizations at over two thousand. The two national
organizations, the Lithuanian National Alliance of America (Ameri-
kos Lietuviu Susivienijimas) and the Lithuanian Roman Catholic
Alliance in America (Amerikos Lietuviu Rymo-Kataliku Susivieni-
jimas) boast of more than three hundred branches, with a total mem-
bership of 20,000-22,000 members for each organization and joint
capital of not far from $2,000,000. The Lithuanian Patriotic Society
is devoted chiefly to educational purposes. There are, in addition to
seventeen additional national societies, numerous local societies and
clubs. There is a Lithuanian Medical Association, a Lithuanian
Pharmaceutical Association, a Lith-American University Associa-
tion, a Labor Association, the Lithuanian Labor Association, the
Lithuanian Roman Catholic Women’s Association, the Lithuanian
Women’s Association, the Knights of Lithuania (comparable to the
Knights of Columbus), the Lithuanian Literary Association, the
Lithuanian Lawyers’ Association, and others.

There is hardly a Lithuanian colony without one or more co-
operative societies, clubs, and stores—a situation which reflects the
conditions in Lithuania where co-operative stores are operated in
nearly every city, town, and village. The first step in this direction
was taken in 1885 in Waterbury, Connecticut, when a co-operative
store was opened there as a result of the efforts of a Lithuanian
priest.

As is typical, however, with other immigrant groups, the Lithua-
nians carry over their political and religious differences from their
native land into America, and these elements are very important
disrupting factors in Lithuanian societies and organizations. A spirit
of factionalism and the helplessness of the Lithuanians in the face of
adversity handicap their co-operative societies, as well as numerous
financial losses in “fake” co-operative enterprises and the excessive
propagation of the “American” individualistic spirit. Furthermore,
these co-operatives are threatened more and more by the chain-store
competition. Originally fourteen co-operative societies were organ-
ized in Massachusetts: but none has survived. The peak of the co-
operative movement was reached in 1919-20. Thereafter the inter-
est of the Lithuanians centered in developing trade and industry in
their newly formed country in Europe.

There are over one thousand mutual-benefit societies, providing in
most cases only sick and funeral benefit. The tendency has been to
amalgamate smaller societies with one of the two central bodies of
Lithuanian alliances. The building and loan associations are very
popular with the Lithuanians. There are twenty of them in Illinois,
four in Pennsylvania, three in Maryland, three in New Jersey, one
in Ohio, and one in Massachusetts, with ‘“‘pre-depression” combined
assets of about ten million dollars.

Possibly because the Lithuanians had to fight for their national-
ism so long under so many adverse circumstances, Lithuanian immi-
grants do not assimilate speedily. Even though the economic and
political conditions of Lithuania have driven hundreds of thousands
of its sons and daughters away from its shores, asking them to shift
for themselves as best they could, it has nevertheless somehow or
other managed to keep their love and loyalty. The American-
Lithuanians consider themselves superior to most other immigrant
nationalities in this country, pointing out that they have not become
submerged by the more powerful nations in Europe and that they
have preserved, in spite of adversity, their language, and have con-
served their traditions. A great deal of the revival of Lithuanian na-
tionalism was promoted and financed in America. Lithuanian immi-
grants in America contributed heavily to the funds for winning inde-
pendence, and thousands of them returned home as soon as inde-
pendence was won. In spite of the dividing religious and political
lines, the Lithuanian nationalistic spirit is kept up by frequent con-
tacts with their homeland and by the numerous societies mentioned.
In every colony, interest in Lithuanian literature, drama, painting,
and other forms of art is kept up. Dramatic performances are pre-
sented frequently in various Lithuanian parishes, where these immi-
grants still sing the old “dainos,” chant their ancient “dirges,” and
dance the traditional dances. Native ballads, dances, operas, and
operettas still find favor, especially with the foreign-born Lithua-
nians.* The Knights of Lithuania are making efforts to revive and
popularize Lithuanian prose, poetry, music, and folk songs.

A very important réle in this nationalistic spirit of the Lithuanians
is played by the Lithuanian-American press. The first Lithuanian
newspaper in America was the Gazieta Lietuviska, published in New
York on August 16, 1879. The text was Polonized Lithuanian. The

4 The Lithuanians have their own light operas, including Springtime and Harvest
Time, composed by Mikas Petrauskas, Stasys Simkus, and others.
first Lithuanian newspaper in pure text was the Vienybe Lietuuninku,
which appeared in Plymouth, Pennsylvania, in 1884. It was later
transferred to Brooklyn, and is now published as the Vienybe. Today
Lithuanian publications are printed in the ancient language in all its
original purity.

There are altogether twenty-six Lithuanian periodicals published
in America. They also reflect the lines dividing the Lithuanian immi-
grants, as seen from the political character of the principal ones:
Amerikos Lietuvis (American Lithuania), weekly, non-party (Wor-
cester, Mass.); Darbininkas (Worker), twice weekly, Christian Dem-
ocrat (Boston, Mass.); Dirva (Field), weekly, non-party (Cleveland,
Ohio); Draugas (Friend), daily, Christian Democrat (Chicago, Ill.);
Garsas (Sound), weekly, Christian Democrat (Brooklyn, N.Y.);
Keleivis (Traveler), weekly, Social Democrat (Boston, Mass.); Laisvé
(Freedom), daily, Communist (Brooklyn, N.Y.); Naujienos (News),
daily, Social Democrat (Chicago, Ill.); Sandara (Concord), weekly
(Boston, Mass.); Saulé (Sun), twice weekly, non-party (Mahanoy
City, Pa.); Tévyné (Fatherland), weekly, non-party (New York,
N.Y.); and Vienybé (Unity), twice weekly, non-party (Brooklyn,
N.Y,).

Nevertheless, the Americanization process is making more and
more serious inroads into the Lithuanian ranks, especially as far as
the American-born generation is concerned. The Lithuanian lan-
guage used in this country is already becoming sprinkled with words
which are understandable only to the Lithuanians living in this
country, but would be a foreign language to the Lithuanians living
in their native country in Europe. We hear such words as jardas
for “yard”; sirytas for “street”; oranzis for “orange”; amé for “ham”
auzas for “house’’; dortas for “‘dirt”’; etc.

But the hold of Lithuania on her sons in America is still strong, as
indeed it always remains in the case of any immigrant from any
land. Assimilation can hardly be expected of the first generation.

New York UNIVERSITY
