Recent Sociological Tendencies in France

Author(s): James H. Tufts

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Jan., 1896), pp. 446-456
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2761875

Accessed: 08-05-2016 23:09 UTC
It is the purpose of the present article to call attention to
some of the recent tendencies in sociological discussion in
France, and to offer some comments from the point of view of
psychology and the history of thought.

Recent discussions* in France, as is indicated by the titles
cited, have dealt largely with the province and methods of soci-
ology. The works of Tarde and Durkheim? are the most
thoroughgoing in this respect and have occasioned most of the
other literature here noticed. What then are the conceptions of
the distinctive characteristic of social facts, the subject matter
for sociology?

M. Tarde, as is well known, finds the characteristic of social
phenomena to be imitation.3 He is especially concerned in the
first of the two works under consideration with the problem of
marking off sociology from the history of societies and from
biology. As opposed to certain evolutionists who regard all insti-
tutions (law is the special institution here taken for illustration
of the general principles) as having passed through the same
stages under the influence of biological causes, Tarde holds
that these causes are by no means the only forces at work.
Social facts may be the effect of invention and discovery or of

* Les transformations du droit, G. TARDE, 2 igme ed., Alcan, 1894. Review of the
above, R. BERTHELOT, Revue de metaphysique et de morale, 1893, pp. 507-18.  L’Jmi-
tation et la logigue sociale, R. BERTHELOT, 22d. 1894, pp. 93-7. Le probleme de la
sociologie, G. SIMMEL, ibid, 1894, pp. 497-504. Les régles de la méthode sociologique,
E. DurKHEIM, Revue philosophique, May—August, 1894. La sociologie: ses conditions
a existence, son importance scientifique et philosophique, M. BERNES, Revue de met. et
de morale, March 1895. Sur la méthode de la sociologie, M. BERNkS, Revue philos.,
March and April 1895. LZ’ Année sociologique, 1894, P. LaPIe, Revue de met. et de la
morale, May 1895. La logigue sociale, G. TARDE, Paris, Alcan, 1895.

2 His articles cited above are a sort of methodological supplement to his work Za

Givision du travail social,
3 Les lois de Pimitation, 1890.
imitation. In the first case we seek explanations for similar social
facts in the problems set man by his environment and in the
response due to his constitution, This is to explain by physical
and physiological (why not psychological?) laws. In the second
case we have the data for a “ pure” as opposed to a “ general”
sociology since we have to do only with social causes. These
social causes all falling under the principle of imitation may be
of two sorts, logical or non-logical. Imitation may be called
logical when a given invention is imitated because more useful,
4. é., according better with the end fixed by the desires, or because
it is believed to be truer, ¢. ¢., more in accord with the principle
underlying the beliefs of the imitator. When, on the other hand,
imitation is caused by a preference due to the origin or date of
an invention it may be called non-logical.

M. Berthelot in his review of Tarde objects that to limit
social facts to those in which imitation is involved is to beg the
question. If we are to refer every conscious activity other than
imitation to the mental and this in turn to the physiological consti-
tution, why is it not equally true that imitation is itself to be
biologically explained? We cannot escape biology in this way.
There are many inventions necessary for the existence of society
and due to the influence of the social group. These are the true
subjects for investigation by a ‘‘pure” sociology, and should
form the content of social logic. Imitation comes into the sphere
of sociology just so far as it is thus necessary. It should be
subordinate to social logic, not the first principle under which
social logic is ranged as a minor part. To make imitation the sole
principle is to use it as the Ionic philosophers used water, air, etc.

Simmel also attempts to delimit the sociological from the
social in a broad sense. If sociology embraces all that happens
in society and simply reduces the individual to the social, it
would be merely a general method as, e. g., induction —not a
special science. But just as in psychology we separate out the
content of the mental states and consider only the form, so soci-
ology must isolate the distinctively social, and consider the form
of association as such, leaving the content, 7. e., the objects and
interests realized by association, to be the subject-matter of the
specific historical and material sciences. This “form” in ques-
tion is reciprocal action, association. We are to study the special
forms of subordination, concurrence, imitation, opposition, divis-
ion of labor, found in the various types of social groups. But
we must bear in mind that phenomena are not social merely
because they are parallel, nor do similarities and regularities
established by statistics belong to our science if each has an indi-
vidual cause. Not what takes place iz society but what takes dy
society is the field of sociology.

The criticism which Berthelot applies to Tarde above might
also be applied to the criterion for social facts propounded by
Durkheim. According to the latter a social fact comprises every
kind of action, whether fixed in definite law or not, which is capa-
ble of exercising an external constraint upon the individual, or it
may be otherwise defined as one which is general throughout a
given society and has a proper existence of its own, independent
of its individual manifestations. Language, laws both statute
and moral, religious beliefs, financial systems impose themselves
upon the individual. They are general because collective (i. ¢.,
obligatory) and not vice versa. A collective sentiment which
flashes into life in an assembly is something quite other than the
common element of all the individual sentiments. It is a prod-
uct of the common life.

M. Durkheim then goes on to an elaborate and comprehen-
sive exposition of the methods to be employed by sociology.
These methods include—

(1) Rules relating to observation of social facts. These
rules are: (a) consider social facts as things. Bacon’s “idols”
all find their counterparts in social science at present. Comte,
with his law of the historical development of humanity, Spencer,
with his idea of codperation, spontaneous or imposed, as the
essential characteristic of society, make preconceived theories

* The following résumé, as well as some other portions, of this article, is expanded

from accounts which I have given in the Psychological Review for May, July and
November, 1895.
rather than actual facts the starting point. (4) In defining and
grouping phenomena such as crime, the family, etc., use at first
external marks only, not what may be deemed the essential char-
acteristic. This last should be left to emerge as the result of
our investigation, not assumed at the outset, nor should we fix
on merely a part of the class of facts and test the rest by a
standard so derived. (c) Study especially the consolidations of
social facts in law, proverbs, modes, etc., ¢. g., the law of suc-
cession for determining the actual view of the family relations
which has found a permanent form.

(2) Rules for distinguishing the pathological from the nor-
mal. It is a much mooted question whether sociology shall rest
with a scientific ascertainment of facts, or whether it shall
attempt to become of practical value by telling what should be.
It is of course evident that social health is desirable; can we
point out in what it consists? The ordinary method is to assume
some criterion of health at the start (freedom from suffering,
adaptation to environment), but these are either arbitrary or
impracticable. The true objective method is to take for our cri-
terion at the outset only an external mark, viz., define the nor-
mal, merely as the general. Hence normal=the mean, dis-
eased =the exceptional. But it is evident that greater fre-
quency must ordinarily be due to superiority, to health.
(Durkheim here obviously either must leave out the notion
of moral or esthetic superiority, or make them equivalent to
physical superiority, or, assume that survival of the fittest will
secure the morally fittest—assumptions as serious as those to
which he objects); hence (@) we may control our results by
seeking the cause of the generality of a given phenomenon in its
relation to the general conditions of life in the type in question,
and (4) this becomes especially important in the case of a social
species in a transitional stage.

(3) For making the classification into social types the
objective principle to be adopted as our standard is that of sim-
plicity, 7.¢., we ask whether a given group is made up of units
which enclose other units more simple than itself.
(4) Rules for explaining social facts. (@) It is common to
find the reason of a fact in its utility. This is to confound final
with efficient causation and is no more admissible here than in
natural science. Function and cause must be examined sepa-
rately, (But as M. Bernés insists in his article, a distinguishing
mark of society is intelligent action. While then it by no means
follows that the actual use was foreseen and so consciously aimed
at by the social group, it is nevertheless quite possible that this
may have been the case. To exclude all teleological explana-
tion from history is to assume that social facts are in no wise
different from physical facts; it begs the question in advance.)
(2) the cause of a social fact must always be sought in preced-
ing social facts, not in states of individual consciousness, (c) The
function of a social fact should be sought in the relation it sus-
tains to some social end. (d) The first origin of every social pro-
cess should be sought in the constitution of the internal social
medium. This will depend upon two factors: (a) the number
of social units, the ‘volume ” of society; (@) the degree of con-
centration, the “dynamic density,” which is in turn a function of
the number of individuals who are in commercial and social rela-
tions. If we do not adopt this plan we are reduced to explain
social progress by “tendencies” instead of by real causes ; and
further we are forced to treat all as one species in greater or less
stages of advancement.

(5) Methods of induction. (a2) The doctrine of plurality of
causes, bound up with Mill’s philosophic presuppositions is to be
rejected. The same effect is not produced by different causes.
(6) The most valuable of the inductive methods for our purpose
is that of concomitant variations, for which we may draw our
facts either from a single unique society at different times, or
from several societies of the same kind, or from several of differ-
ent kinds.

The three articles of M. Bernés are devoted in part to a crit-
icism of Durkheim but develop also the author’s own views of
the province and method of the science. The two dominant
characteristics of contemporary sociology are declared to be, (a)
imitation of natural science, especially biology, and (4) absolute
opposition to subjective (psychological) sociology under all its
forms, in particular the refusal to attribute any réle to the
reflective will of the members of society. These two character-
istics are sources of fundamental errors. To make sociology
purely “objective” is to deprive it of its essential character. The
common fault of both subjective and objective sociology is to
identify the subjective with the individual, whereas by looking
within we may pass the bounds of individuality as truly as by
looking without. The society of which we form a part is within
us as truly as we are within it. Sociability, more or less con-
scious, is as truly an element in the social reality of the present
as is any objective social phenominon. Society is a ‘ becoming,”
as well as a thing. In proportion as it more nearly approaches
coérdinate, conscious action and corresponds better to its defini-
tion— in proportion, that is, as it creates itself——it becomes
more completely an object of science ; buta science whose laws
are at once objective and ideal.

M. Tarde’s Logigue Sociale is too important a work for adequate
notice here. I may mention, however, its relation to his former
work and its general purpose. As indicated by its title it aims
to discover the necessary conditions of society. As Kant’s logic
asked ‘“‘ How is knowledge possible?” so social logic asks ““ How
is society possible?” and finds its social categories, permanent,
necessary conditions of stable equilibrium of society. These are
either (a) logical, viz., language and the deity, or (0) teleological,
conceptions of good and evil. We study, then, the judgment and
will at work in society. Society began when the judgments and
wills of individuals came consciously into contact in agreement
or discord. Beliefs and desires constitute the body of our con-
scious life and so the sources of social phenomena. Imitation is
but the social memory, an indispensable condition, but not the
most prominent feature of social consciousness. After a prelim-
inary chapter on individual logic the categories cited above are
studied as conditions of society, various analogies are discovered
(or in some cases one is tempted to say invented) between the
social and the individual consciousness, the laws of the great
inventions by which society progresses are studied, and then the
author passes to the applications of his principles to language,
religion, political economy, art, and the sentiments (/e coeur). It
is scarcely probable that the catagories announced will maintain
themselves as the only or correct ones, but the attempt to dis-
cover and develop these systematically can hardly fail to make
for real progress.

From the discussions already noted, and from the charac-
ter of other works noted by Lapie in his summary, it is evident
that there is a general tendency to recognize a more intimate
relation of sociology to psychology. As in America it has been
claimed that it is the “‘psychic factor” which is most important
(Ward) or that sociology is really a part of psychology (Gid-
dings), so French writers are becoming dissatisfied with mechan-
ical and biological conceptions and seeking for more adequate
categories, The prevailing opposition to subjective (psycholog-
ical) sociology, in particular the refusal to attribute any réle to
the reflective will of members of society is declared to be fatal
to an appreciation of the really distinguishing mark of society,
viz., intelligent action. Lapie admits the prevalence hitherto of
biological conceptions but sees in nearly all the literature of the
past year the signs ofa new era. This is shown (a) in the grow-
ing dissatisfaction with the word “organism,” (6) in the defini-
tion of social facts and (c) in the views as to what constitutes
explanation of social facts.

It is objected that the word “ organism” is a biological term
which has exercised a seductive but unfortunate influence on
sociological thought, nor is the objection met entirely by pre-
fixing the adjective “social.” Societies are rather étres spirituels.
This dissatisfaction has been commented upon by the editor in a
former number of this journal. Some remarks from another
point of view suggest themselves. It is undoubtedly unfortunate
to use an inappropriate category. Nothing can speak more
eloquently on this point than the history of psychology itself.
The tabula rasa, the “association” of ideas, the “Statik und
Mechanik der Vorstellungen” have drawn the psychologist into
numerous snares. But on the other hand it should be remem-
bered that nearly all psychical terms (e. g. ‘psychical ”’ itself)
bear within them the history of the development of the con-
cept for which they stand. If the sociologists give a new
content to the conception of society it will not be difficult to
put a new meaning into the term. Nor would this be so much
putting a new meaning into the term as bringing out the implied
significance of the word itself. For as Kant pointed out? when
alluding to the use of the term “organization” to denote the
body politic, this is appropriately used for a state in which every
member is both means and end to others and to the whole just
because we can understand any organized structure of nature
only by the aid of categories drawn from the mental life. Even
though we may be obliged to say that our concept is an analogy
merely, and not a constitutive category, it remains true that our
only way of conceiving an organized and self-organizing being
is by the idea of the reciprocal relation of parts and whole, and
we can conceive the unity of a manifold only in terms of
consciousness.? The term then may well enough be retained
if we are careful to recognize its implications.

But there are conceivable advantages from making a wider
use in sociology than has been customary of another term more
distinctly set apart for the psychological sphere, viz., the term
person. This may at once suggest the objection that we are
hypostatizing an abstraction if we speak of society as a person,
since society is composed of individuals and has no distinct
existence. But it should be scarcely necessary to explain that I
use the word in its present psychological sense and not in its old
metaphysical sense of ‘simple substance.” The “person”
exists im the various states, feelings, etc., not apart from them,
and these in turn are no longer conceived as though independ-
ent entities, coming into association, inhibiting each other and

*Kr. d. Urtheilskraft, § 65, H. V. 387.

2So the demand for some principle that should afford the unity seen in organic

beings led Leibniz to revive the entelechy of Aristotle as the monad. Cf WINDEL-
BAND, History of Philos, p. 422, note 6.
so on, but rather as phases of a continuous activity, isolated for
convenience in treatment. The “self,” as Professor James has
brilliantly shown, is a very complex and even, so to speak, plural
being. Personality, regarded as the purposive, interrelated and
unified activity of various desires may thus be of all grades
according to the degree to which impulses have passed into
conscious desires, and desires in turn have become systematized
into unity of steadfast purpose. With this in mind Wundt*
urges, that the social person is as “real” as the individual per-
son; “so viel Actualitét, so viel Realitét” is true in either sphere.

Taking such a conception of personality as an analogy or
guiding clue, many fruitful suggestions, it seems to me, may
come to the sociologist. True it is that in individual and in
society the early life is impulsive, unrelated, with little conscious
unity of purpose, yet with language and religion and art, with
industrial and intellectual codéperation, many a people has come
to “know what it wants,” and to act unitedly in order to get it.
As Bernés puts it, “Every collective aspiration which by its
realization results in consolidating the group, in making it more
complex, more plastic, more conscious of itself, becomes thereby
a cause of progress. Society corresponds better to its definition
in proportion as it creates itself.” This consideration of the
developing social consciousness will determine the categories
which we are to apply to the explanation of its movements.
We examine, of course, the reactions of structure and function,
we observe the influence of natural selection upon choices (Gid-
dings), but we bear in mind that ‘response to environment” in
the case of conscious intelligence may mean a response which
transforms the environment as well as a response which is modi-
fied by it. Just in proportion as man individually or collectively
comes to consciousness must we use the category? of purpose or

1See his Log7&, 2te Auf. 1895, Bd. IL, Abth. IL., pp. 291 ff., and 611 ff., for dis-
cussion of these conceptions.

7Mr. Warp, in his “Psychic Factor in Civilization,” has emphasized this stage
of the “social person,” but the stage is only a rudimentary one.

3Cf, for the use of the category of “Zweck” in explaining history, A. RIEHL,
Science and Metaphysics, last chapter.
end in explaining his activity. Just in so far can we look
for voluntary change of activity. Society, like the individual,
can move forward, if it will, but to “will” means for society, as
for the individual, a completely intelligent and ‘mediated”
desire, not a mere impulse nor a blind though intense feeling.
Numerous other principles will suggest themselves, such as the
relation of sociological theory to practice where evidently the
greatest current need is that felt by Socrates for the individual,
self-examination and an insight into the true good of life that
shall afford a criterion of the value of particular acts and aims.
But I pass on to notice another illustration of the psychological
tendency, viz., the definitions offered of social facts.

Here indeed the intimate relation to psychology seems often
to be felt as an embarrassment. If, as by some, social facts are
defined as psychical facts, how shall we distinguish them from
the facts studied by psychology? Where draw the line between
social and individual psychology? In some cases, at least, the
difficulty seems due to a lack of clearness on the relation between
the individual and the social, which has its counterpart in the
history of thought in the controversies over the particular and
the universal. A statement like that of Durkheim’s, quoted
above, that a ‘collective sentiment which flashes into life in an
assembly is something quite other than the common element of
all the individual sentiments,” seems to be aimed at such state-
ments as those of Mill, ‘men are not, when brought together,
converted into another kind of substance ;” “human beings in
society have no properties but those which are derived from and
may be resolved into the laws of the nature of individual man.”
But it really suffers from the same individualism. There is no
individual man for ethics, for psychology, for logic, or for sociol-
ogy, except by abstraction,—that is if by individual man we
mean a being not influenced by social forces,—mor are there any
feelings, thoughts or volitions in any man which are independent of
such forces. On the other hand, there is no social or collective
sentiment which exists except in the medium of individual con-
sciousness. In the words of Sigwart, ‘there are no thoughts
which think themselves, no language which has existed except
in the speech of the individual, no belief and no science which
has shone like a universal sun above the heads of individuals, no
constitution which has existed elsewhere than in the conscious-
ness, the will, the feeling of duty or fear, of the particular citi-
zen.”* Social psychology will not then look for an entirely
different set of psychical states from those which individual psy-
chology studies (of course it may be interested in some more
than in others); it will rather study a different aspect of the con-
crete facts of life of which other aspects are studied by individ-
ual psychology,” just as social logic may study the same con-
crete facts as the philosophy of law or political science. Rous-
seau’s ecstatic trance when the thoughts of his first discourse
came before him is of interest to psychologist, historian, and
sociologist, not to say physiologist and alienist.

The third respect in which the psychological tendency
appears is in the general inclination to find explanations in psycho-
logical laws. This is seen by Lapie in several works of the past
year, the most notable exception being Durkheim. Here too
there is room for a careful criticism and clearing up of just what
is meant by explanation, but this would lead beyond the limits
of the present paper.

Jauce WW TTripre
