The Need of a Sociological Approach to Problems of Sex Conduct. I. Radical Practices
Cannot Be Justified by Merely Biological Data

Author(s): Charles W. Margold

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Jan., 1926), pp. 455-473
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/27647 44

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:27 UTC
THE NEED OF A SOCIOLOGICAL APPROACH TO
PROBLEMS OF SEX CONDUCT

I. RADICAL PRACTICES CANNOT BE JUSTIFIED BY MERELY
BIOLOGICAL DATA

CHARLES W. MARGOLD
Michigan State Normal College

ABSTRACT

I. It is not the task undertaken in this study to make a stand for or against the
radical views regarding sex morality maintained by Mr. Havelock Ellis and other
writers. It is rather to criticize the individualistic presuppositions and the general
biological and physiological point of view of these writers which leads them to urge
that in sex conduct only acts of procreation are social.

II. Contemporary scientific sociology posits in sex conduct things social as as
much original data as are things individual, and sees the social as the collective
aspect of the whole of human life. It considers the biologically given as not the ade-
quate source for conduct. To it, conduct, sexual and other, is necessarily social,
never individual alone.

I

It is not the purpose of this study to take a position either for
or against the radical views regarding sex morality which appear to
be making such headway at the present time, but rather to criticize
certain points of view or presuppositions of the writers of the radi-
cal school, and to suggest that their conclusions, in so far as they
are based on such points of view and presuppositions, may be
unsound.

Probably the most scientific and authoritative, as well as the
most exhaustive, of these writers is Mr. Havelock Ellis; certainly
he has no rival among them as regards influence with the English-
speaking peoples. It is unnecessary, and might well be thought pre-
sumptuous, for the present writer to attempt a general estimate of
the value of Mr. Ellis’ monumental work, in six volumes, on “The
Psychology of Sex.” It is certainly learned, thorough, careful, en-
gaging, and marked by a high courage and idealism—a signal con-
tribution to knowledge. Its author is especially notable among
writers of the biological school as being a man of the widest liter-

455
ary, historical, and aesthetic culture, a fact of immense advantage
in treating phenomena so pervasive of all aspects of life as are those
of sex.

Mr. Ellis, however, is not in any technical sense a social psy-
chologist. That is, he is not primarily interested in, nor has he,
perhaps, much insight into, the processes of interaction between the
person and the social medium in which he lives. His point of view,
in this regard, is prevailingly biological, and (although he by no
means ignores social influences) he tends on the whole to see the
individual as somewhat independently developed from biological
sources, and to see society as a distinct and antithetical influence
affecting this development, for better or worse, in a rather exter-
nal way.

This fact is the chief basis, so far as theory is concerned, for
the exception to his and similar views which will be taken in this
essay. He is an individualist in the sense that he sees human life
in the manner just described, and especially in that he applies this
view to matters of conduct in such a way as to throw almost the
whole burden upon a somewhat vague and unregulated individual
responsibility. He does not think in terms of an organic union be-
tween the social and individual processes of life.

I can best convey Mr. Ellis’s characteristic attitude by quoting
a passage from his chapter on “Sexual Morality,” in which he is
advocating, quite persuasively for the most part, an increased
moral autonomy for women:

Sexual union, for a woman as much as for a man, is a physiological fact;
it may also be a spiritual fact; but it is not a social act. It is, on the contrary,
an act which, beyond all other acts, demands retirement and mystery for its ac-
complishment. That, indeed, is a general human, almost zodlogical, fact.
Moreover, this demand for mystery is more especially made by woman in vir-
tue of her greater modesty which, we have found reason to believe, has a
biological basis. It is not until a child is born or conceived that the community
has any right to interest itself in the sexual acts of its members. The sexual
act is of no more concern to the community than any other private physiolog-
ical act. It is an impertinence, if not an outrage, to seek to inquire into it. But
the birth of a child is a social act. Not what goes into the womb, but what
comes out of it, concerns society. The community is invited to receive a new
citizen. It is entitled to demand that that citizen shall be worthy of a place in
its midst and that he shall be properly introduced by a responsible father and
a responsible mother. The whole of sexual morality, as Ellen Key has said, re-
volves round the child.

In this passage he says most emphatically that sexual union is
not a social act, meaning, apparently, that it is not properly sub-
ject to any sort of social control, either formally or through the in-
formal action of opinion; and readers of his works know how
drastically he applies this conception in attempting to overthrow
prevailing ideas upon this and other sexual subjects.

Without inquiring how far the withdrawal of control which he
advocates is desirable, the writer believes that the underlying the-
oretical conception of a sexual life existing apart from control,
more or less effective, by the public opinion and the mores of the
community, is unreal, incompatible with human nature, never re-
alized or capable of being realized in any society past or future. To
advocate it amounts, in practice, to advocating the rejection of
such moral standards as we have without putting any others in
their room.

It is not asserted that this idea of an individuality responsible
only to itself and independent of social control is a clearly defined
theory consistently adhered to by Mr. Ellis and other radical writ-
ers; they write now from one point of view and now from another,
as suits their purpose. But since they use it freely, frequently, and
emphatically in urging their practical views regarding sex matters,
since, moreover, it is widely adopted and used as a justification for
radical conduct in such matters among the general public, we are
certainly called upon to take it seriously and subject it to criticism.
That it lends itself easily to a somewhat anarchic pursuit of im-
pulse (little, it would seem, as this result would be intended by so
high-minded a moralist as Ellen Key, or as practical a meliorist as
Mr. Ellis) seems fairly obvious from the fact that it throws the
individual back upon personal responsibility without indicating ef-
fectively what he is responsible to.

It will be maintained in this study that conduct of this sort, as
of all sorts, must become subject to social control of some kind in

* Sex in Relation to Society, Vol. VI of his “Studies in the Psychology of Sex,”
Pp. 417.
so far as society achieves any moral organization at all, and that it
is desirable that this control be exercised through conventions care-
fully worked out, inculcated by education and enforced by public
opinion.

An attempt will be made to show that the sex conduct of man,
the ways or modes of behaving, the ideas and ideals, the sentiments
and beliefs, and so on, that men and women have and manifest in
their sex life are not individual alone, but also social as well. I shall
maintain that man’s sex behavior marks group ways of doing and
viewing things, that individual sexual acts and practices can be
seen as phases in a general social process, that they are by no
means individual alone.

Mr. Ellis and the other writers of his school, their writings
show, rely chiefly, as a general position, upon a biological source of
conduct in sex. In seeming to see little need for social control, Mr.
Ellis would trust Nature’s laws and man’s “natural expressions.”
In matters of sex, as in all things biological, man’s instincts, he be-
lieves, tend “under natural conditions to develop temperately and
wholesomely.’” “Nature,” he says, “maintains a gracious equilib-
rium.” Sex instincts, when left completely free from all social sug-
gestion, will follow “a biological norm of monogamy.”*

Says Mr. Ellis as regards this question:

Sexual relationships, in human as in animal societies, follow a natural
law, oscillating on each side of the norm. If all artificial “laws” could be abol-
ished, the natural order of the sexual relationship would continue to subsist
substantially as at present.®

He tells us further:

The Line of Nature is a curve that oscillates from side to side of the norm.
Such oscillations inevitably occur in harmony with changes in environmental
conditions, and, no doubt, with peculiarities of personal disposition. So long
as no arbitrary and merely external attempt is made to force Nature, the vital
order is harmoniously maintained... . :' © Among certain species of ducks
when males are in excess, polyandric families are constituted, but when the
sexes become equal in number, the monogamic order is restored. The natural

? Sex in Relation to Society, p.115.
* Ibid., p. 216. ° Ibid., p. 425.
‘Ibid., p. 494. ° Ibid., pp. 491-92.
human deviations from the monogamic order seem to be generally of this char-
acter.”

Throughout his works, and in his “Studies,” especially, he ac-
cordingly states his conviction of the importance of “natural,” that
is, socially uninfluenced, expression in sex, as if that were at all
possible in human living, arguing both directly and indirectly that
the highest morality and the truest education are those which leave
greatest possibility to individuals for spontaneous impulse.* He
reminds us:

The wiser psychoanalists insist that the process of liberating the individual
from outer or inner influences that repress or deform his energies and impulses
is effected by removing the inhibitions on the free play of his nature. It is a
process of education in the true sense, not of the suppression of natural im-
pulses, nor even of the instillation of sound rules and maxims for their control,
not of the pressing in, but of the leading out, of the individual’s special tenden-
cies. It removes inhibitions, even inhibitions that were placed upon the indi-
vidual, or that he consciously or unconsciously placed upon himself, with the
best moral intentions, and by so doing it allows a larger, and freer, and more
natively spontaneous morality to come into play.®

This attitude and belief in the adequacy for conduct of the bi-
ologically given or of man’s instinctive nature, however, does not,
in their opinion, preclude the necessity for sexual education. Mr.
Ellis, in fact, gives to it an important place.”° But the instruction
that he would have the young get in sex is, apparently, to consist of
information of the elements of physiology,”** and of “initiation into
the knowledge of the great central’? facts of sex.” Except, possibly,
some special sexual initiation ceremonies at puberty, of somewhat
the same nature as take place among primitive peoples,** he would,
apparently, have no moral instruction, no inculcation of the tradi-

" Ibid., p. 492.

* Cf. his “Studies,” III, 365; I, 282; VI, 115; VI, 216; also The Task of Social
Hygiene, p. 398.

° Little Essays of Love and Virtue, pp. 130-31.

*See The Task of Social Hygiene, chap. viii; also Vol. VI of his “Studies,”
chap. ii.

* Sex in Relation to Society, chap. ii.

* That is, presumably, biological and physiological.

* Cf. op. cit., pp. 84-90.
tionally ideal sex ways or group attitudes. Children, he argues,
“are to be taught to be a law unto themselves,’* and furnished
with “enlightenment concerning the sexual sources of life.” “The
young,” he explains, “are often very hostile to merely conventional
moral maxims, and suspect their hollowness, not always without
reason.””* “Certainly,” he continues, “knowledge can never be im-
moral, but nothing is gained by jumbling up knowledge and moral-
ity together.’”*

The fact is that Mr. Ellis, in his “Studies,” and more especially
in his sixth volume treating Sex in Relation to Society, touches
upon the specifically higher psychic aspects involved in man’s sex
conduct only in a somewhat general and unconvincing way.’’ His
whole work, he tells us in fact, is an elucidation of the workings of
the sex instinct, or of “the neuro-psychic phenomena of reproduc-
tion which man shares with the lower animals.”

Even in his volume on Sexual Selection in Man," a psychologi-
cal study leading up to important and emphatically urged propo-
sals regarding love, marriage, and family life, where one would ex-
pect some treatment of the higher mental factors involved, of the
results in human living of acting according to ideal, aesthetic, or
moral considerations, as compared with the mere yielding, more
immediately, to the impulses of sense, he directs almost his whole
discussion—though no more than in any of his other volumes—
rather upon the immediate expressions and physical relations of
love between the sexes. Throughout, his prevailing point of view
might be said to be biological and physiological, rather than psy-
chological and sociological, in the contemporary meaning of these
terms.
Customs, conventions, institutions, the common ways of sex
life, Mr. Ellis and the other writers of the radical school treat as if
they were in their nature unnecessary. In accordance with their
general position as to the sufficiency of the biological sources of
guidance it is natural for them almost invariably to speak of these
as if they were unavoidably narrowing, necessarily rigid; as in
their nature external, arbitrary,” and for this reason undesirable.

Mr. Ellis says:

Every great and vitally organized person is hostile to the rigid and narrow
routine of social conventions, whether established by law or by opinion; they
must ever be broken to suit his vital needs. Therefore the more we multiply
these social routines, the more strands we weave into the social web, the more
closely we draw them, by so much more are we discouraging the production
of great and vitally organized persons.*+

Concerted action and social foresight-—through a voluntarily
constituted “socialistic”? state—he considers as necessary, so far
as sex relations are concerned, in order to protect the children in-
volved. “Socialism” is proper, desirable, and necessary in regard
to acts of procreation, to provide for the young.”* “There is a per-
fect division of labor between Socialism and Individualism,” says
Mr. Ellis. “We have only to remember that the field of each is dis-
tinct. No one needs Individualism in his water supply, and no one
needs Socialism in his religion.”’”* And he would probably add—as
by implication he seems to do throughout his writings—no one
needs socialism, or co-operative endeavor, in the higher spiritual
matters of sex.

He tells us:

We can scarcely doubt that we are approaching a time when it will be
generally understood that the entrance into the world of every child, without
exception, should be preceded by the formation of a marriage contract which,
while in no way binding the father and mother to any duties or any privileges

” Cf. Sex in Relation to Society, pp. 367, 373, 408, 406, etc.

* The Task of Social Hygiene, p.392.

“Cf. ibid., pp. 63 ff., 386 ff.; also Sex in Relation to Society, pp. 487, 494,
507, etc.

* Cf. esp. The Task of Social Hygiene, p.64; also Sex in Relation to Society,
Pp. 488, 505, etc.

*The Task of Social Hygiene, pp. 398-94.
By way of refutation of the doctrine of Mr. Ellis and the radi-
cal school that sexual conduct as such can and should be free from
social control, this essay will endeavor to show:*”

1. The inherent social nature of man’s mental life, and conse-
quently of all his acts and practices.

2. The invariable presence of social control in man’s sexual life.

3. The intrenched reality of group sex standards.

To the degree that this aim is attained, it will become clear,
first, that all of the individual’s sexual acts and practices, whether
or not they result in offspring, and whatever the manner by which
society controls them, invariably, by the very nature and working
of human life, have social or collective aspects; secondly—and fol-
lowing from the foregoing—that the alleged claim of distinction
between acts with offspring, as social, and acts without offspring,
as private, and not social, is not tenable; and that, with or without
contraceptive methods, the radical innovations sought to be justi-
fied remain unsupported, individual autonomy in sex being shown,
in the nature of human life, as in fact impossible, the justification
for innovations in current ways or social controls in sex being left
to depend on other grounds than the alleged private nature of sex-
ual acts.
of the social which sociological science has found necessary to dis-
card. As Professor W. B. Bodenhafer, in a rather elaborate and
convincing study bearing on this point has shown,”* contemporary
scientific sociology has found it warrantable so to extend the rdle
of the group concept that today this science holds “that the indi-
vidual and the group are but different aspects of a group or social
situation,” or of human life, as Professor Charles H. Cooley, gen-
erally recognized as a leading American sociologist, describes the
matter.

Contemporary sociology, in fact, abandons the traditional in-
dividualistic approach and accepts the group, that is, social life, as
as much a datum, inherent in the nature of things, as is individual
life. It demonstrates that group life is as genuinely fundamental,
and no less all-inclusive of things, interests, or concerns human, no
more derived, secondary, or belonging to any special “sphere” or
province’? than is individual life.

Society, it points out, is rather the larger unity of life, the
whole of human kinship and co-operation, inherently unified by
direct and indirect personal intercourse, by a common descent, and
by common principles of existence. “The real thing,” says Pro-
fessor Cooley, “is human life, which may be considered either in
an individual aspect or in a social, that is to say a general, aspect;
but is always, as a matter of fact, both individual and general.”**
Things social and things individual, “society” and “individuals,”
“are simply collective and distributive aspects of the same thing,
the relation between them being like that between other expres-
sions, one of which denotes a group as a whole, and the other mem-
bers of the group, such as the army and the soldiers, the class and
the students, and so on.”** Professor Cooley, indeed, presents this

* Cf. his study “The Comparative Réle of the Group Concept in Ward’s Dy-

namic Sociology and Contemporary American Sociology,” in the Amer. Jour. Sociol.,
November, 1920—May, 1921.

® Amer. Jour. Sociol. (May, 1921), p. 719.

° Cf. Human Nature and the Social Order (1922 ed.), pp. 36 ff.
See Havelock Ellis, The Task of Social Hygiene, esp. p. 398.
* Ibid., p. 394; also Sex in Relation to Society, esp. p. 417.

8 Op. cit., pp. 36-37. * Ibid., p. 37.
fact of the dual aspect—social and individual, in which the one
reality, human life, manifests itseli—as the central thesis through-
out his writings.*°

Matters of sex conduct, marriage, procreation, love, are of
course, necessarily included in the social nature of man’s life.
They, too, may be seen as pertaining both to individual organiza-
tion of life, and no less truly, also, to the larger aspects of life of
which individuals are but participating members.

As in all phases of human life, the mental factors in sex, the
various thoughts, sentiments, desires, hopes, anticipations, ways of
sexual living, can be seen as both social and individual. These
surely have a place in some particular individual’s personal life.
But they have also larger relations as well. In origin, function, and
organization they are necessarily more than individual alone.
“There is probably no such thing,” says Professor Cooley, “as an
idea that is wholly independent of minds other than those in which
it exists.”*° There is hardly an element in man’s mental life, ordi-
narily viewed as especially individual, which upon examination is
not also someone else’s. Mind, individual and social, is all one
growth. And its phases may be seen as functioning in impersonal
ways, as doctrines, tendencies, institutions, mores, customs; link-
ing individuals, fashioning their acts and practices, and directly or
indirectly constituting one whole of human life.

And whether a given aspect of human life is seen as individual
or as social depends not upon separateness in the nature of the
mental phases nor upon some inherent characteristic which renders
them individual or social, but rather upon the point of view by
which their functioning is observed.

According to contemporary scientific sociology, society in its
widest aspect is this collective functioning of the interrelated men-
tal life of men and women. Society is the total organization of
mental functioning, of mental interstimulation and co-operation
taking place in men’s minds because of men’s inherent social na-

® Cf. ibid., esp. chap. i.
* OD. cit., p. 134.
THE BIOLOGICALLY GIVEN NOT THE ADEQUATE SOURCE FOR CONDUCT

Accordingly, instead of ruling things mental out of the sphere
of the social,*® contemporary scientific sociology stresses the men-
tal as peculiarly social. Likewise, instead of making biological
heredity the all-important source of acts and practices, and of con-
sidering “natural” liberation and spontaneous expression based
upon innate endowment as the fundamental in human living, soci-
ology sets forth the importance of other factors.

The point of view in contemporary sociology, however, is syn-
thetic. It sees human life in its complexity, essentially as it is, vital,
dynamic, and psychically organic, as a highly intricate working
whole, with biological, social, economic, physiological, and physi-
cal factors and functions, all working together, and each of the
principal ones essential to the others.*° Thus, while man’s human
life and sexual conduct is not seen as individually generated from
the biologically given, innate endowment and biological factors are
not, nevertheless, depreciated.

** Charles H. Cooley, ibid., chap. iii; also C. A. Ellwood, Society in Its Psycho-
logical Aspects, pp. 11 ff.

* Ob. cit., p. 134.

® Cf. Havelock Ellis, The Task of Social Hygiene, pp. 394, 398 ff.

“Cf. Charles H. Cooley, Social Organization: A Study of the Larger Mind,

chap. xxviii, etc. Also his discussion in Publications of the American Economic Asso-
ciation (3d ser.), V, 182-87. Also his Social Process, p. 44n.
In man, sociology points out, innate endowment for mental life
takes on a distinctively human character. It is no longer—as is
so very largely the case among animals—fixed or innately adapted
to function in specific, or biologically predetermined, ways. Its va-
rious expressions come to life in response to stimuli of diverse sorts,
and in their highest form are quite remote from what they might be
if they were mere realizations of the biologically pre-established.
Any explanation, it maintains, of human living that claims biologi-
cal equipment as alone being fundamental is not adequate to the
observable facts of human life.

That biological factors alone are inadequate for conduct, it
would seem, is becoming established and conceded more and more,
even by biologists themselves. The hypothesis of Weismann of the
non-transmissibility through the germ plasm of acquired, or “use”
traits,*? and the now so much upheld principles of Mendel of the
chance selection** in the germ plasm of unit characters, emphasize
the inherent necessity of another source than mere innate equip-
ment for the organization and development of man’s characteristic-
ally “adaptational” and “instrumentational” ways of living.**

Anthropologists, moreover, are demonstrating the importance
of cultural factors by facts and considerations which indicate a
comparative equality in innate mental endowment of all known

“J. A. Thomson, Heredity, chap. xiv; ibid., What is Man?, pp. 149 ff.; E. G.
Conklin, Heredity and Environment in The Development of Man, chap. iv, etc. Also
many others.

“W. E. Castle, Genetics and Eugenics, pp. 370 ff., and others.

“T. H. Morgan, A Critique of the Theory of Evolution, final chapter; also W.
Bateson, Mendel’s Principles of Heredity, chap. xv, etc.

“Says John Dewey: “With civilized man, all sorts of intermediate terms come
in between the stimulus and the overt act, and between the overt act and the final
satisfaction. Man no longer defines his end to be the satisfaction of hunger as such.
It is so complicated and loaded with all kinds of technical activities, associations and
deliberations and social divisions of labor that conscious attention and interest are
in the process and its content. Even in the crudest agriculture means are developed
to the point where they demand attention on their own account, and control the
formation and use of habits to such an extent that they are the central interests,
while the food process and enjoyment as such is incidental and occasional.” In “In-
terpretation of Savage Mind,” Psychol. Rev., 1X, 221; also L. T. Hobhouse, Mind in
Evolution, chap. xviii; also L. T. Hobhouse, Morals in Evolution, chap. viii; A. A.
Goldenweiser, Early Civilization, Introduction.
races, and during all times—in spite of the evident difference of
actual achievement from race to race.**° The evidence that they
adduce discredits the alleged biological inequality between modern
and primitive man in either sense perception, in capacity for ab-
stract thought, or in innate possibility for achievement in the arts
of civilized man.

This whole conception of man’s biological nature has, indeed,
been searchingly criticized more directly on its psychological
side.** The explanatory value of a theory of instincts, or of posit-
ing innately predisposing ways of human behavior as the bases of
conduct has long been under dispute.** And now even Professor
William McDougall, whose writings** are so largely responsible
for the vogue the theory of instincts has had in psychology, has,
in his Outline of Psychology,*® so modified his account as to allow
a larger réle to society in molding men’s conduct.

The larger considerations, if there were no more direct evidence
that render untenable the claim that ready-made, inborn mechan-
isms alone—individually matured and developed—are adequate
for man’s conduct, are many and convincing. Among these—to
mention here a few—are the facts growing out of man’s undoubted
necessity, in view of the complexity of his life and of the diversity
of its conditions, continually to reconstitute his conduct by repeat-

*F, Boas, The Mind of Primitive Man; A. A. Goldenweiser, op. cit.; J. R.
Angell, Evolution of Intelligence in the Evolution of Man; Charles H. Cooley,
“Genius, Fame, and the Comparison of Races,” Pub. Amer. Ac. Pol. and Soc. Sc.
Vol. CXCVII; John Dewey, of. cit., p. 223.

“Cf. L. L. Bernard’s study, Instinct, a Study in Social Psychology, 1924.

“The articles on this point are very many. Among the more suggestive are:
L. L. Bernard, Psychol. Rev., March, 1921; C. H. Cooley, the Introduction to his
Human Nature and the Social Order, 1922 ed.; John Dewey, Human Nature and
Conduct, esp. Part II; J. R. Kantor, Psychol. Rev., 1920; C. C. Josey, The Social
Philosophy of Instinct; Zing Yang Kuo, Journal of Philosophy, XVIII, 645-64; C.
A. Ellwood, Sociology in Its Psychological Aspects, chap ix; E. C. Hayes, Introduc-
tion to Sociology (1921 ed.), chap. xiii; Ellsworth Faris, Amer. Jour. Sociol. (Sep-
tember, 1921), pp. 184-96; J. Arthur Thomson, What Is Man?, pp. 149-54.

* His Introduction to Social Psychology, first published in 1908.
* Published in 1923.
© Cf., ibid., Preface, p. xii, and p. 114 on the specificity of instinct.
ed readjustments and controls." Says Professor Cooley: “Human
functions are so numerous and intricate that no fixed mechanism
could provide for them: they are also subject to radical change,
not only in the life of the individual, but from one generation to
another. The only possible hereditary basis for them is an outfit of
indeterminate capacities which can be developed and guided by
experience as the needs of life require.”*”

In sex, especially, man has in his conduct almost infinite possi-
bilities for enhanced harmonization and refinement of expression.
And, if this is so, it is rather the socially maintained conditions and
opportunities and the socially inculcated ideals and controls than
the mere “leading out’’* of innate equipment, or the giving im-
pulses “natively spontaneous expression,’”* that can effect it.

The fact is that the so-called instincts, in themselves, are actu-
ally no more than “instinctive emotions,” or simply “impulses,” as
Professor Cooley*® and Professor Dewey” respectively, prefer to
call innate predispositions to behavior. They are, according to
Professor Dewey, only “highly flexible starting-points for activi-
ties which are diversified according to the ways in which they are
used. Any impulse may become organized into almost any disposi-
tion, according to the way it interacts with surroundings.”** The
actual expression in acts and practices that they get depends not
upon innate equipment alone, but also upon how they are inter-

* John Dewey, The Study of Ethics, pp.15 ff.; E. A. Ross, The Principles of
Sociology, chap. xliv; also L. M. Bristol, Social Adaptation, esp. pp.3-11; John

Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct, p.131; E. C. Hayes, Sociology and Ethics,
chap. v; also L. T. Hobhouse, Mind in Evolution, pp. 5-6, etc.

@ Human Nature and the Social Order, p 21.

Cf. J. I. Dealey, The Family in Its Sociological Aspects; E. T. Devine, The
Family and Social Work; Dewey and Tufts, Ethics, chapter on “The Family”; H.
Drummond, The Ascent of Man; C. A. Ellwood, The Reconstruction of Religion,
chap. vii; Anna Galbraith, The Family and the New Democracy; T. W. Gallaway,
The Sex Factor in Human Life; J. M. Gillette, The Family and Society; Anna G.
Spencer, The Family and Its Members; J. H. Tufts, “The Ethics of the Family,” in
Int. Jour. Ethics, XXVI, 223-40, etc.

“Cf. Havelock Ellis, Little Essays of Love and Virtue, p. 131.

* Ibid.

Op. cit., p. 24.

"Cf, Human Nature and Conduct, p.105 n. °8 Ibid., p. 95.
woven, systematized, given direction, relation, and human meaning
in social life. In themselves, if we want to view them abstractly,*®
they must be conceived as being mere urges, in their nature plastic
and organizable, yet blind and precipitant.

The alleged “gracious equilibrium of Nature,” it would seem,
is a fact, if a fact at all, only if man’s life is seen, as contemporary
sociology sees it to be, a social or collective human process with its
inevitable molding, controlling, and reciprocities in men’s conduct.
Only if heredity and environment—to use the common phrase, if
biological equipment and social heritage are viewed as essentially
complementary, that is, if man’s social life is seen as no less pri-
mary, as no less an inescapable part of nature than is his biological
life, can man control his own development.

Without the social life as an inherent phase in the human life-
process, nature has no “norms,” whether of monogamy or anything
else, nor any “equilibrium” of acts and practices. And any specu-
lation as to a freedom sought without regard to the existing envi-
ronment finds, in the words of Professor Dewey, “a terminus in
chaos.”
and so on,® the human offspring is born into family life. His first
reactions and expressions, accordingly, take place in a group situa-
tion. The family home, where, as a matter of fact, social life is
most intimate, complete, and effective, is the only place where the
child can thrive physically and mentally. It is here, in face-to-
face association and co-operation, that the individual acquires his
fundamental attitudes, his life-long sentiments and interests, and
the host of primary habits or fundamental ways of doing things.°”

Indeed, man’s very human nature, so important as a basis in
all his conduct, can only here have its genesis. In these primary
groups of the family, the playground, and the neighborhood, some-
what alike in all societies, says Professor Cooley, “human nature
comes into existence. Man does not have it at birth; he cannot
acquire it except through fellowship, and it decays in isolation.”*
“Human nature,” he continues, “is not something existing sepa-
rately in the individual, but a group-nature, or primary phase of
society, a relatively simple and general condition of the social
mind.””*°

The primary ideals of human living, such as the ideals of truth,
service, loyalty, lawfulness, freedom, moral unity, and so on—
without which, what can sex conduct be?—find their original
source and ever continued renewal in primary group life. And the
typical characteristics of human nature so fundamental in human
life, such as affection, ambition, vanity, resentment, are inconceiv-
able apart from life with others.” “A congenial family life,” Pro-
fessor Cooley points out, “is the immemorial type of moral unity,

* Cf. esp. E. C. Hayes, Introduction to the Study of Sociology (1921 ed.), pp.
218 ff.

“ Cf., among others, Henry D. Chapin, in Jour. Amer. Med. Assoc. LXIV
(January 2, 1915), No. 1; Edward T. Devine, The Normal Life, pp. 66 ff. Conclu-
sions of the White House Conference of 1909, and of the Children’s Bureau Confer-
ence of 1919 on child-welfare standards.

* Cf. Charles A. Ellwood, The Reconstruction of Religion, chap. vii.

® Social Organization, p.30; see also Human Nature and The Social Order, pp.
31 ff.

© Social Organization, pp. 29-30. Italics in the original.

” Cf. C. H. Cooley, of. cit., p. 30.
and source of many of the terms—such as, brotherhood, kindness,
and the like—which describe it. The members become merged by
intimate association into a whole, wherein each age and sex partici-
pates in its own way. Each lives in imaginative contact with the
minds of the others, and finds in them the dwelling-place of his so-
cial self, of his affections, ambitions, resentments, and standards of
right and wrong. Without uniformity there is yet unity, a free,
pleasant, wholesome, fruitful common life.””*

Whether individuals are conscious of it or not, the fact is that
their reference to self,” their anticipations, sentiments, attitudes,
as well as their actual acts and practices, have each a double aspect,
purporting both social and individual life. A man’s whole conduct,
indeed, can be seen as the result of group influences, either of direct
suggestion, social interstimulation, and co-operation, or, no less
truly, as a phase of the social process, as molded and controlled
through memories of group standards and ideals inculcated, of acts
previously approved, of sentiments and attitudes built up.

Always and necessarily individuals are guided in one way or
another by the activities of others, by social ties and personal rela-
tions affording each other a source of renewed radiation and psy-
chic reinforcement. Thus, as Professor J. M. Baldwin puts it,
“Man is always in his greatest part also someone else... . .
When he acts quite privately, it is with a boomerang in his hand;
and every use he makes of this weapon leaves its indelible impres-
sion both upon the other and upon him.”

This conclusion, namely, that man’s mental life is completely,
inherently, and unavoidably social, that while individuals depend
upon biological heredity for capacity they must get conduct from
society, does not, however, it is clear, deny the specifically individ-
ual aspect in human conduct. It only denies that the “naturally”
biological is self-sufficient, or that conduct can ever be, whether in
its content or effects, individual alone.

™ Ibid. p. 34.

@ Cf. C. H. Cooley, Human Nature and the Social Order, chaps. v. and vi.

® Social and Ethical Interpretations in Mental Development, pp.87-88.
Man’s mental life and sex conduct is inherently social, even
though acts and practices, in a sense, issue immediately from per-
sons, and though each person does in a way form a unique organi-
zation of life, unique both in the germ plasm,” and in the “number,
variety, and quality of social contacts.” It is quite true that an
individual’s fund of knowledge, his specific developmental experi-
ences, and conduct can never be identical with that of his fellows.
The quality of his personal expressions, of his outlooks, of his atti-
tudes, and so on is, in a way, his own. In democratic and more en-
lightened civilized life, moreover, with its stress upon the higher
principle of unity of underlying meaning rather than mere outward
conformity of acts and practices” as its basic form of social organi-
zation, men and women are infinitely more than mere “chips of the
block.” In fact, nowhere are they mere “pieces of society,” nor do
they ever altogether mechanically accept, or blindly follow, group
ways.

However, to perceive that modern life is relinquishing the uni-
form solidarity attributed to primitive life,” and that the present
tendency is toward an increased amount of individual choice and
rational control rather than mere acceptance and external author-
ity, should not obscure the fact of its inevitable social nature and
its fundamentally collective working. Individual organizations of
life, no matter how desirable, are still but participating phases in a
total common situation. No individual can, after all, be conceived
in his sexual conduct as a separable independent agent. Nor are his
acts and practices ever without social effects upon the general hu-
man life.

Indeed, the more human, as distinguished from merely animal
or sensuous, individuals’ acts and practices are, the more, that is

™ Cf. T. H. Morgan, A Critique of the Theory of Evolution, chap. ii.

* Cf, E. S. Bogardus, “Man’s Margin of Uniqueness,” Jour. Applied Sociol.,
XVII, No. 4, 207.

™ Cf. A. H. Lloyd, Amer. Jour. Sociol., VIII, 337-59.

™ Cf., however, John Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct, pp. 103 ff.; also
“Interpretation of Savage Mind,” Psychol. Rev., IX, 221, 223 ff.
to say, that they are the conduct of personality with its characteris-
tic mental conditions and functions, the more mutually interde-
pendent and reciprocating they must be. For without socially ac-
quired, vigorous imaginations, the appropriation of a group’s
cumulatively built-up fund of ideas and ideals, without the common
moral sustenances and encouragements in social group life,"* with-
out the mutual disciplining and co-operative reinforcements in a
common life, men can have no personalities” nor any conduct.

™ C. H. Cooley, of. cit., p. 389.
Cf, Park and Burgess, Introduction to the Science of Sociology, esp. p. 70.
