An Anthropological Analysis of War

Author(s): Bronislaw Malinowski

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Jan., 1941), pp. 521-550
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769922

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:13 UTC
AN ANTHROPOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF WAR
BRONISLAW MALINOWSKI

ABSTRACT

It is confusing to regard individual acts of violence and primitive feuds as general
antecedents of modern warfare and fallacious to regard war as a necessary result of
man’s biological nature. In human societies the impulse of anger is usually tranformed
into attitudes of hostility or into acts of violence which are culturally determined. With-
in an institution conflicts are subject to the norms of custom, technique, ethics, and law.
Warfare is culturally productive when it creates a new institution, a nation-state.
The economic motive is not present in warfare until there has developed a body of
portable wealth; until food can be preserved and transported and until the productive
arts have advanced so that one man can produce more than he consumes. The most
important cultural effect of conquest is an enrichment in national life through a division
of function between conquerors and conquered and through the development of new
institutions in which the conquerors provide the political element and the conquered,
the economic efficiency. The note of totalitarianism, in so far as it saps the resources of
culture and destroys its structure, is incompatible with the constitution of human socie-
ties for the normal business of producing, maintaining, and transmitting wealth,
solidarity, reason, and conscience, all of which are the real indices and values of civiliza~
tion.

I, WAR THROUGH THE AGES

In any symposium of social sciences on war a place might be
rightly claimed for anthropology, the study of mankind at large.
Obviously the anthropologist must not appear merely as an usher,
heralding the advent of war in the perspective of human evolution;
still less as the clown of social science, amusing the symposium with
anecdotes on cannibalism or head-hunting, on preposterous magical
rites or quaint war dances.

Anthropology has done more harm than good in confusing the
issue by optimistic messages from the primeval past, depicting hu-
man ancestry as living in the golden age of perpetual peace. Even
more confusing is the teaching of those who maintain or imply that
war is an essential heritage of man, a psychological or biological
destiny from which man never will be able to free himself.

1 The view of the primeval pacifism of man is associated with the names of Grafton
Elliot Smith, W. J. Perry; of Fr. W. Schmidt and the other members of the Vienna
school. The studies of R. Holsti, van der Bij, and G. C. Wheeler show that the “lowest
savages” did not live in a state of “perpetual warfare.” This is substantially correct.
It does not, however, justify generalizations such as Elliot Smith’s: ‘‘Natural man ....

is a good-natured fellow, honest and considerate, chaste and peaceful.”
The view that war has been, is, and will remain the destiny of mankind has been

521
There is, however, a legitimate role for the anthropologist. Study-
ing human societies on the widest basis in time perspective and
spatial distribution, he should be able to tell us what war really is.
Whether war is a cultural phenomenon to be found at the beginnings
of evolution; what are its determining causes and its effects; what
does it create and what does it destroy—these are questions which
belong to the science of man. The forms, the factors, and the forces
which define and determine human warfare should, therefore, be
analyzed in a correct anthropological theory of war.

All these problems have their practical as well as theoretical bear-
ing. As a member of a symposium on war, inspired by pragmatic as
well as philosophical interests, the anthropologist himself must be
fully acquainted with the present circumstances of warfare and the
practical problems which arise out of our contemporary crisis. There
is no time to be wasted on fiddling while Rome burns—or, more cor-
rectly, while Rome assists Berlin in burning the world.

Dictated by common sense, indispensable to sound statesman-
ship, running through abstract and philosophic reflection, persistent
in and above the battle cries of intrenched armies and scheming
diplomacies, the main problem of today is simple and vital: shall we
abolish war or must we submit to it by choice or necessity? Is it
desirable to have permanent peace and is this peace possible? If it is
possible, how can we implement it successfully? There is obviously a
price and a great price to be paid for any fundamental change in the
constitution of mankind. Here, clearly, the price to be paid is the
surrender of state sovereignty and the subordination of all political
units to world-wide control. Whether this is a smaller or greater
sacrifice in terms of progress, culture, and personality than the dis-
asters created by war is another problem, the solution of which may
be foreshadowed in anthropological arguments.

I think that the task of evaluating war in terms of cultural analy-
sis is today the main duty of the theory of civilization. In demo-

elaborated by S. R. Steinmetz and supported by such anthropological authorities as
Sir Arthur Keith and Professor Ralph Linton. It has been partly accepted, among other
leaders in social science, by Dr. J. Shotwell and Professor Quincy Wright. A balanced
and clear as well as essentially sound presentation of the beginnings of warfare and its
real determinants is to be found in the article on ‘‘War” in the Encyclopaedia of the
Social Sciences, written by Professor Alvin Johnson.
cratic countries public opinion must be freed from prejudice and
enlightened as regards sound knowledge. The totalitarian states are
spending as much energy, foresight, and constructive engineering on
the task of indoctrinating the minds of their subjects as in the task of
building armaments. Unless we scientifically and ethically rally to
the counterpart task, we shall not be able to oppose them. At the
same time the full cultural understanding of war in its relation to
nationality and state, in its drives and effects, in the price paid and
advantages gained, is necessary also for the problem of implementing
any fundamental change.

The problem of what war is as a cultural phenomenon naturally
falls into the constituent issues of the biological determinants of war,
its political effects, and its cultural constructiveness. In the follow-
ing discussion of pugnacity and aggression we shall see that even
preorganized fighting is not a simple reaction of violence determined
by the impulse of anger. The first distinction to emerge from this
analysis will be between organized and collective fighting as against
individual, sporadic, and spontaneous acts of violence—which are
the antecedents of homicide, murder, and civic disorder, but not of
war. We shall then show that organized fighting has to be fully dis-
cussed with reference to its political background. Fights within a
community fulfil an entirely different function from intertribal feuds
or battles. Even in these latter, however, we will have to distinguish
between culturally effective warfare and military operations which
do not leave any permanent mark either in terms of diffusion, of
evolution, or of any lasting historical aftereffect. From all this will
emerge the concept of ‘“‘war as an armed contest between two inde-
pendent political units, by means of organized military force, in the
pursuit of a tribal or national policy.”? With this as a minimum
definition of war, we shall be able to see how futile and confusing it
is to regard primitive brawls, scrimmages, and feuds as genuine
antecedents of our present world-catastrophe.
intrinsically biological motives. Such expressions as “war is older
than man,” “war is inherent in human nature,” “war is biologically
determined” have either no meaning or they signify that humanity
has to conduct wars, even as all men have to breathe, sleep, breed,
eat, walk, and evacuate, wherever they live and whatever their
civilization. Every schoolboy knows this and most anthropologists
have ignored the facts just mentioned. The study of man has cer-
tainly evaded the issue concerning the relation between culture and
the biological foundations of human nature.3

Put plainly and simply, biological determinism means that in no
civilization can the individual organism survive and the community
continue without the integral incorporation into culture of such
bodily functions as breathing, sleep, rest, excretion, and reproduc-
tion. This seems so obvious that it has been constantly overlooked
or avowedly omitted from the cultural analyses of human behavior.
Since, however, the biological activities are in one way determinants
of culture, and since, in turn, every culture redefines, overdeter-
mines and transmutes many of these biological activities, the actual
interrelation and interdependence cannot be left outside anthro-
pological theory. We shall have briefly to define in what sense cer-
tain phases of human behavior are biological invariants and then
apply our analysis to aggression and pugnacity.

Every human organism experiences at intervals the impulse of
hunger. This leads to search for food, then to the intake, that is, the
act of eating, which, in its wake, produces satiety. Fatigue demands
rest; accumulated fatigue, sleep; both followed by a new state of the
organism which the physiologist can define in terms of the conditions
of the tissues. The sex impulse, more sporadic in its incidence and
surrounded by more elaborate and circumstantial cultural deter-
minants of courtship, sex taboos, and legal rulings, nevertheless
leads to a definite joint performance—that of conjugation, which
again is followed by a state of temporary quiescence as regards this
impulse. Conjugation may start a new biological sequence of events:

3 The above phrases within quotation marks have been taken from current scientific
literature concerning war. The theoretical problems of basic human needs and their
satisfaction in culture have been fully treated in my article, “Culture,” in the Encyclo-
paedia of the Social Sciences, and in an essay on “The Group and the Individual in
Functional Analysis” published in this Journal, XLIV (May, 1939), 938-64.
conception, pregnancy, and childbirth, which must occur regularly
within any community if it is to survive and its culture to continue.

In all these simple and “obvious” facts there are a few theoretical
principles of great importance. Culture in all its innumerable vari-
eties redefines the circumstances under which an impulse may occur,
and it may in some cases remold the impulse and transform it into a
social value. Abstinences and long-drawn fasts may slightly modify
the workings of the organism as regards sex and hunger. Vigils and
prolonged periods of intensive activity make rest and sleep deter-
mined not merely by organic but also by cultural rulings. Even the
most regular and apparently purely physiological activity of breath-
ing is linked up with cultural determinants—partly in that housing
and sleeping arrangements somewhat condition the amount of oxy-
gen available and the rate of breathing and partly in that the act of
breathing, identified with life itself, has been the prototype of a
whole set of practices and beliefs connected with animism. What,
however, can never be done in any culture is the full elimination of
any of these vital sequences, imposed on each culture by human
nature. We can condense our argument into the form of the simple
diagram:
producing activities and the tribal or national commisarist, in re-
sponse to hunger—they are in one way biologically determined, in
that they have to incorporate each integral vital sequence with all its
three phases and links between them, intact and complete.

Can we regard pugnacity and aggressiveness and all the other
reactions of hostility, hate, and violence as comparable to any vital
sequence so far discussed? The answer must be an emphatic nega-
tive. Not that the impulse of aggression, violence, or destruction be
ever absent from any human group or from the life of any human
being. If the activity of breathing be interrupted by accident or a
deliberate act of another individual, the immediate reaction to it is a
violent struggle to remove the obstacle or to overcome the human
act of aggression. Kicking, biting, pushing, immediately start; a
fight ensues, which has to end with the destruction of the suffocated
organism or the removal of the obstacle. Take away the food from
the hungry child or dog or monkey and you will provoke immediate-
ly strong hostile reactions. Any interference with the progressive
course of sexual preliminaries—still more, any interruption of the
physiological act—leads in man and animal to a violent fit of anger.

This last point, however, brings us directly to the recognition that
the impulse of anger, the hostilities of jealousy, the violence of
wounded honor and sexual and emotional possessiveness are as pro-
ductive of hostility and of fighting, direct or relayed, as is the thwart-
ing in the immediate satisfaction of a biological impulse.

We could sum up these results by saying that the impulse which
controls aggression is not primary but derived. It is contingent upon
circumstances in which a primary biologically defined impulse is
being thwarted. It is also produced in a great variety of nonorganic
ways, determined by such purely cultural factors as economic owner-
ship, ambition, religious values, privileges of rank, and personal
sentiments of attachment, dependence, and authority. Thus, to
speak even of the impulse of pugnacity as biologically determined is
incorrect. This becomes even clearer when we recognize, by looking
at the above diagram, that the essence of an impulse is to produce a
clear and definite bodily reaction, which again produces the satis-
faction of the impulse. In human societies, on the contrary, we find
that the impulse of anger is in almost every case transformed into
chronic states of the human mind or organism—into hate, vindictive-
ness, permanent attitudes of hostility. That such culturally defined
sentiments can lead, and do lead, to acts of violence, simply means
that acts of violence are culturally, not biologically, determined. In-
deed, when we look at the actual cases of violent action, individual,
or collective and organized, we find that most of them are the result
of purely conventional, traditional, and ideological imperatives,
which have nothing whatsoever to do with any organically deter-
mined state of mind.

It is interesting to find that when the argument for a biological or
psychological determinism of aggressiveness as something inherent
in man’s animal nature is put forward, examples from prehuman
behavior are easy to find. It is easy to show that dogs, apes, ba-
boons, and even birds fight over females, food, spatial or territorial
rights. The study of immature children in primitive tribes, or in our
own nurseries, discloses that the argument by violence is very often
used and has to be constantly watched over and regulated by adults.4
This, indeed, might have suggested to any competent observer that
the elimination of violence and of aggression, and not its fostering, is
the essence of any educational process.

When we are faced with the question where, how, and under what
circumstances, acts of purely physiological aggression occur among
human adults, we come again to an interesting result. Cases of
sound, normal people attacking, hurting, or killing one another
under the stress of genuine anger do occur, but they are extremely,

4Cf., for instance, the arguments and factual documentation given in the books by
E. F. M. Durbin and John Bowlby, Personal Aggressiveness and War (London: K. Paul,
Trench, Trubner & Co., 1938), and by Edward Glover, War, Sadism and Pacifism
(London: G. Allen & Unwin, 1933). Both these books can be taken as examples of the
incorrect and insufficient analysis of what aggressiveness really is, and of the tendency
to confuse the issues by blaming “human nature’? for the present catastrophic incidents
of collective, mechanized slaughter, which we like to call “World War II.” Good ex-
amples without faulty interpretation will also be found in Frustration and Aggression,
by John Dollard and others, published by the Institute of Human Relations, Yale
University (1939). To my colleagues at this Institute, to Dr. John Dollard and Dr. Neal
A. Miller, I am greatly indebted for the benefit derived in discussions on aggressiveness
and instinctive behavior. Part of the present argument was read as a paper before the
Monday Evening Group of the Institute, and the suggestions and criticisms of Pro-
fessors Mark A. May, Clark L. Hull, and Robert M. Yerkes have been incorporated
into this article.
indeed, negligibly, rare. Think of our own society. You can adduce
an indefinite number of cases from a mental hospital. You can also
show that within very specialized situations, such as in prisons or
concentration camps, in groups cooped up by shipwreck or some
other accident, aggression is fairly frequent. Such a catastrophe as a
theater on fire or a sinking boat has sometimes, but not always, the
effect of producing a fight for life, in which people are trampled to
death and bones broken through acts of violence, determined by
panic and fear. There are also cases in every criminal record, primi-
tive or civilized, of homicidal injuries or bruises which occur under
outbursts of anger and hatred, or a fit of jealousy. We see that “ag-
gressiveness” within the framework of an adult cultural group is
found under the headings of “panic,” “insanity,” “artificial propin-
quity,” or else that it becomes the type of antisocial and anticultural
behavior called “crime.” It is always part and product of a break-
down of personality or of culture. It is not a case of a vital sequence
which has to be incorporated into every culture. Even more, since it
is a type of impulsive sequence which constantly threatens the nor-
mal course of cultural behavior, it has to be and is eliminated.
discussing some plans or some issues of their daily life. The actual
occurrence, however, of bodily violence is so rare that it becomes
statistically negligible. We shall see shortly why this is so.

Those who maintain that “natural aggressiveness” is a permanent
cause of warfare would have to prove that this aggressiveness oper-
ates more as between strangers than between members of the same
group. The facts taken from ethnographic evidence give an entirely
different answer. Tribal strangers are above all eliminated from any
contact with one another. Thus, the Veddas of Ceylon have arrange-
ments by which they can transact exchange of goods and give sym-
bolic messages to their neighbors—the Tamils and Singhalese—
without ever coming face to face with them. The Australian Abo-
rigines have an elaborate system of intertribal avoidances. The same
applies to such primitive groups as the Punans of Borneo, the Fire-
landers, and the Pygmies of Africa and Malaysia.

Besides the avoidances there are also to be found clear and legal-
ized forms of contact between tribes. In Australia and in New
Guinea, all over the Pacific, and in Africa we could find systems of
intertribal law, which allow one group to visit another, to trade with
them, or to collaborate in an enterprise. In some regions an intru-
sion on the part of a stranger, against the rules of intertribal law, and
breaking through the normal dividing line, was dangerous to the
intruder. He was liable to be killed or enslaved; at times he served
as the piéce de resistance in a cannibal repast. In other words, the
execution of such a trespasser was determined by tribal law, by the
value of his corpse for the tribal kitchen, or of his head to the collec-
tion of a head-hunting specialist. The behavior of the murderers and
of the murdered has, in such cases, obviously nothing to do with the

sCf. C. G. and B. Z. Seligman, The Veddas (Cambridge, 1911), and G. C. W. C.
Wheeler, The Tribe and Intertribal Relations in Australia, A full ethnographic analysis
of factual data cannot be given in this article. The professional anthropologist will be
able to assess the documentary evidence of the references. I hope soon to publish a
memoir with full ethnographic material in support of the present argument. I am
under a great debt of obligation to the Cross-Cultural Survey, organized by Professor
G. P. Murdock at the Institute of Human Relations, Yale University. In this survey
evidence concerning war and intertribal relations is fully collected and classified under
rubrics 43-44. It is accessible to all students of anthropology. Dr. Stephen W. Reed

and Dr. Alfred Métraux have assisted me greatly in discussing the anthropological prob-
lems and facts bearing on my approach to war.
psychology of anger, pugnacity, or physiological aggressiveness. We
have to conclude that, contrary to the prevailing theoretical bias,
aggression as the raw material of behavior occurs not in the contact
between tribal strangers but within the tribe and within its com-
ponent co-operative groups.

We have seen already that aggression is a by-product of co-opera-
tion. This latter organizes human beings into systems of concerted
activities. Such a system, or institution, as we can call it, is the
family. A small group of people are united under the contract of
marriage. They are concerned with the production, education, and
socialization of children. They obey a system of customary law, and
they operate conjointly a household—i.e., a portion of environment
with an apparatus of implements and consumers goods. The clan
and the local group, the food-producing team and the industrial
workshop, the age grade and the secret society are one and all sys-
tems of concerted activities, each organized into an institution.®

Let us try to understand the place of aggressiveness within an
institution. There is no doubt at all that, within these short-range
co-operative and spatially condensed forms of human organization,
genuine aggressiveness will occur more readily and universally than
anywhere else. Impulses to beat a wife or husband, or to thrash
children, are personally known to everybody and ethnographically
universal. Nor are partners in work or in business ever free of the
temptation to take each other by the throat, whether primitive or
civilized. The very essence of an institution, however, is that it is
built upon the charter of fundamental rules which, on the one hand,
clearly define the rights, prerogatives, and duties of all the partners.
A whole set of minor and more detailed norms of custom, technique,
ethics, and law also clearly and minutely lay down the respective
functions as regards type, quantity, and performance in each dif-
ferential activity. This does not mean that people do not quarrel,
argue, or dispute as to whether the performance or prerogatives have
not been infringed. It means, first and foremost, that all such dis-

6T have suggested, in the above-mentioned article “Culture,” that this concept of
institution is, in anthropological analysis, preferable to that of culture complex. This
point will be more fully elaborated in a forthcoming article entitled “The Scientific

Approach to the Study of Man,” to appear in a volume entitled Man and Science, of the
“Science and Culture Series,” edited by Dr. R. N. Anshen.
putes are within the universe of legal or quasilegal discourse. It also
means that the dispute can always be referred, not to the arbitra-
ment of force, but to the decision of authority.

And here we come upon the fact that the charter—the fundamen-
tal customary law—always defines the division of authority in each
institution. It also defines the use of force and violence, the regula-
tion of which is, indeed, the very essence of what we call the social
organization of an institutionalized group. The patriarchal family
supplies the father with the right to rule and even with the imple-
ments of violence. Under mother-right the father has to submit, to a
much larger extent, to the decisions and influences of his wife’s
family, notably of her brother. Within the institution of the clan,
quarrels and dissensions are very stringently proscribed, for the clan
in many cultures acts as the unit of legal solidarity. The myth of the
perfect harmony of all clansmen, however, had to be exploded.7
Nevertheless, quarrels within the clan are rapidly and effectively
eliminated by the definite, centralized, and organized authority
vested in the leaders and the elders. The local group not only has
the right to co-ordinate the activities and the interests of its com-
ponent households and clans; it also has the means of enforcing its
decisions if violence has to be used or prevented. The tribe, as the
widest co-ordinating group, has also its legal charter, and it has often
also some executive means for the enforcement of decisions bearing
upon quarrels, disputes, and feuds within the group.

It is characteristic once more that most fighting on the primitive
level occurs between smaller units of the same cultural group. The
members of two families or two clans or two local groups may come
to blows. We have instances of such fighting among the Veddas, the
Australian Aborigines, and other lowest primitives.* Such intratribal

7 Cf. my Crime and Custom in Savage Society (New York, 1926), among other contri-
butions to this problem.

8 Perhaps the best and most detailed account of a type of fighting in which one clan
functions as a social unit against another is to be found in Lloyd Warner’s book on the
Murngin entitled A Black Civilization (New York: Harper & Bros., 1937). His evi-
dence shows that such armed disputes, though at times destructive and lethal, are
carried out with strict rules, over definite issues of clan interests; and are concluded
in a peace ceremony, which re-establishes the order of tribal law after an infraction by

one of the clan members. All the data, well assembled and classified, can be easily
studied in the Cross-Cultural Survey at Yale.
fighting is always the result of the infraction of tribal law. A member
of a clan or a family is killed. A woman is abducted or an act of
adultery committed. Only in the rarest of cases, a spontaneous brawl
or fight ensues immediately. For there exist rules of tribal law which
define the way in which the dispute has to be fought out. The whole
type of fighting between families, clans, or local groups is conven-
tional, determined in every detail by beliefs and elements of material
culture, or by values and agreements. The collective behavior in
such fighting, which is characteristic of the primitive level of lowest
savages, is guided at every step and is controlled by factors which
can be only studied with reference to the social organization, to cus-
tomary law, to mythological ideas, as well as to the material ap-
paratus of a primitive culture.?

When there is a strong rivalry between two groups, and when this
leads to a general state of mind—generating frequent outbursts of
anger and sentiments of hatred over real divergences of interest—we
find an arrangement in which occasional fights are not only allowed,
but specially organized, so as to give vent to hostile feelings and re-
establish order after the feelings have been overtly expressed. Such
occasional tournament fights take sometimes pronouncedly peaceful
form. The public songs of insult, by which the Eskimo even up their
differences and express hatred, grievances, or hostility, are a well-
known example of this. In Central Europe the institution of Sunday
afternoon drinking and fighting fulfils the function of an organized
and regulated exchange of insults, blows, at times injuries and
casualties, in which accumulated resentments of the week are evened
up. We have a good description of such regulated fights within the
group among the Kiwai Papuans, among the Polynesians, and
among the South American Indians.

Anthropological evidence, correctly interpreted, shows, therefore,
that there is a complete disjunction between the psychological fact of
pugnacity and the cultural determination of feuds and fights. Pug-
nacity can be transformed through such cultural factors as propa-
ganda, scare-mongering, and indoctrination into any possible or even
improbable channels. We have seen the change in France: the pug-
nacity of yesterday has overnight become a lukewarm alliance, and
the friendship of the most recent past may, at any moment, flare up
into the pugnacity of tomorrow. The raw material of pugnacity does
admittedly exist. It is not in any way the biological core of any type
of organized violence, in the sense in which we found that sex is the
core of organized family life, hunger of commissariat, evacuation of
sanitary arrangements, or the maintenance of bodily temperature a
biological factor around which center cultural adjustments of cloth-
ing and housing. Anger and aggressiveness may flare up almost at
any moment in the course of organized co-operation. Their incidence
decreases with the size of the group. As an impulse, pugnacity is
indefinitely plastic. As a type of behavior, fighting can be linked
with an indefinitely wide range of cultural motives.

Everywhere, at all levels of development, and in all types of cul-
ture, we find that the direct effects of aggressiveness are eliminated
by the transformation of pugnacity into collective hatreds, tribal or
national policies, which lead to organized, ordered fighting, but pre-
vent any physiological reactions of anger. Human beings never fight
on an extensive scale under the direct influence of an aggressive im-
pulse. They fight and organize for fighting because, through tribal
tradition, through teachings of a religious system, or of an aggressive
patriotism, they have been indoctrinated with certain cultural values
which they are prepared to defend, and with certain collective ha-
treds on which they are ready to assault and kill. Since pugnacity is
so widespread, yet indefinitely plastic, the real problem is not
whether we can completely eliminate it from human nature, but how
we can canalize it so as to make it constructive.
tionalism and imperialism, and even totalitarianism—in my opinion,
a phenomenon of cultural pathology—must be supplied with their
evolutionary background and their ethnographic antecedents.

We have already seen that when two clans or two local groups
fight with each other within the framework of the same tribal law, we
deal with cases of legal mechanisms, but not with antecedents of war.
We have to face now the question of how to define, in terms of social
organization and of culture, the groups which can legitimately be
regarded as pursuing some prototype of international policy, so that
their battles can be considered as genuine precursors of warfare.

The concept of tribe and of tribal unity would naturally occur to
every anthropologist or student of social science. An ethnographic
map of the world shows, on every continent, well-defined boundaries
which separate one tribe from the other. The unity of such a tribe
consists de facto in the homogeneity, at times identity, of culture. All
tribesmen accept the same tradition in mythology, in customary law,
in economic values, and in moral principles. They also use similar
implements and consume similar goods. They fight and hunt with
the same weapons and marry according to the same tribal law and
custom. Between the members of such a tribe communication is pos-
sible because they have similar artifacts, skills, and elements of
knowledge. They also speak the same language—at times divided
by some dialectical varieties—but generally allowing free communi-
cation. As a rule, the tribe is endogamous, that is, marriage is per-
mitted within its limits but not outside. Consequently, the kinship
system usually welds the whole tribe into a group of related and
mutually co-operative, or potentially antagonistic, clans. The tribe
in this sense, therefore, is a group of people who conjointly exercise a
type of culture. They also transmit this culture in the same lan-
guage, according to similar educational principles, and thus they are
the unit through which the culture lives and with which a culture
dies.

In the terminology here adopted, we can say that the tribe as a
cultural entity can be defined as a federation of partly independent
and also co-ordinated component institutions. One tribe, therefore,
differs from the other in the organization of the family, the local
groups, the clan, as well as economic, magical, and religious teams.
The identity of institutions, their potential co-operation due to com-
munity of language, tradition, and law, the interchange of services,
and the possibility of joint enterprise on a large scale—these are the
factors which make for the unity of a primitive, culturally homo-
geneous group. This, I submit, is the prototype of what we define
today as nationality: a large group, unified by language, tradition,
and culture. To the division as we find it between primitive cul-
turally differentiated tribes there correspond today such divisions as
between Germans and Poles, Swedes and Norwegians, Italians and
French. In our modern world these divisions do not always coincide
with the boundaries of the state. Hence, all the contemporary politi-
cal problems of nationalism, imperialism, the status of minorities,
and of irredentist groups are covered by the principle of national
self-determination. All such problems hinge obviously on the rela-
tion between nation and state.

The principle of political unity or statehood can also be found—on
a primitive level—in creating divisions as well as in establishing
unity. We know already that authority, as the power to use physical
force in the sanctioning of law, exists even at the lowest level of
development. We have seen that it is the very essence of the con-
stitution of organized systems of activities, that is, institutions. We
have seen that it also functions as the basis for a wider territorial
control of the relations between institutions. At the lowest level we
found the local group as the widest co-ordinating unit with political
prerogatives. If we were to survey the political conditions at a some-
what higher level of development, we would find in most parts of the
world, in Melanesia and Polynesia, in Africa and parts of America,
that political power is wielded by much larger regional groups, united
on the principle of authority and, as a rule, equipped with military
organization, the duty of which is partly internal policing, partly
external defense or aggression. Much of my own field work has been
done in the Trobriand Islands, where such politically organized
regions were to be found and where a clear prototype of a politically
organized state could be seen at work.

We have thus introduced another concept for which the word
“tribe” is also used in anthropology. I submit that the distinction
between political and cultural units is necessary. To implement it
terminologically, I suggest that we coin the two expressions “tribe-
nation” and “tribe-state.”’ The tribe-nation is the unit of cultural
co-operation. The tribe-state has to be defined in terms of political
unity, that is, of centralized authoritative power and the correspond-
ing organization of armed force. It is clear from all that has been
said that the tribe-nation is an earlier and more fundamental type of
cultural differentiation than the tribe-state. The two do not coin-
cide, for we have many instances of the tribe-state as a subdivision of
the tribe-nation. The Maori of New Zealand, the Trobriand Island-
ers, the Zulu before European advent, as well as many North
American tribes, could be quoted as examples of this. Among them
the tribe-nation embraces many tribe-states. On the other hand, we
could adduce from East and West Africa examples in which two or
more tribe-nations are united within the same tribe-state. I have in
mind the kingdoms of Unyoro and Uganda, such political units as the
Masai or the Bemba, all of whom have “subject minorities” within
their dominion.”

The two principles of statehood and nationality must, therefore,
be kept apart in theory, even as they are different in cultural reality.
Nevertheless, there has always existed a convergence of the two prin-
ciples and a tendency toward the coalescence of the two groups—the
nation and the state. In Europe this tendency, under the name of
nationalism, has made its definite appearance in political aspira-
tions and as a cause of wars and rebellions ever since the French
Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars. Its main exponents were Ger-
many, Poland, and Italy, where the disjunction of the two principles
had been most pronounced. Many historians regard nationalism in
this sense as an entirely new phenomenon of recent European his-
tory. In reality nationalism is probably as old as an early appear-
ance of political power. On the one hand, a primitive nation, that is,
a tribe carrying a homogeneous culture, is best protected against

10 Such conditions can clearly be paralleled from the map of historical and even con-
temporary Europe. Austro-Hungary was a monarchy in which some fourteen or fifteen
nationalities were federated. Germany before the Napoleonic Wars was a nation di-
vided into many small states. Italy was also parceled out and partly subject to foreign
rule before its unification in 1871. Poland for one hundred and fifty years was a nation

partitioned among three large states. Switzerland is a political entity embracing four
component nationalities.
V. WAR AND PRIMITIVE POLITICS

We can now return to the role played by fighting in the early
crystallization of statehood and nationality. As a working hypothe-
sis, we might suggest that once a strong local group developed a
military machine, it would use this in the gradual subjugation of its
neighbors and extension of its political control. Ethnography sup-
plies us with the evidence that fighting between local groups of the
same culture does exist. It also supplies us with a clear picture of
conditions in which fairly extensive political units, which form states
within a larger nation, are in existence. The study of the status quo
and of fragments of history among the Maori of New Zealand,
among several African tribes, as well as all we know about the pre-
Columbian history of Mexico and Peru, points to the fact that once
armed military operations start in a region, they tend to the forma-
tion of the nation-state. The archeologist and historian concerned
with the Mediterranean world might show that analogous develop-
ments produced the Roman state, some of the Greek political units,
and the empires of Egypt, Babylonia, Assyria, and Persia. Wars of
nationalism, therefore, as a means of unifying under the same ad-
ministrative rule and providing with the same military machine the
naturally homogeneous cultural group, that is, the nation, have al-
ways been a powerful force in evolution and history.

Warfare of this type is culturally productive in that it creates a
new institution, the nation-state. Obviously, since the political unit
extends to embrace the cultural one, both assume a different char-
acter. The co-ordination of any subdivisions of such a group,
whether regional or institutional, become standardized and organ-
ized. Moreover, a nation-state usually assumes a much more pro-
nounced control over economics and man-power, over contributions
to the tribal exchequer and public services rendered. It can also en-
force its decisions, that is, sanction administrative activities and cus-
tomary law. It is legitimate, therefore, to regard fighting of this type
as a genuine antecedent of certain historical wars. For fighting here
functions as an instrument of policy between two tribe-states, and it
leads to the formation of larger political groups, and finally, of the
tribe-nation.

It is necessary to remember that organized fighting at higher
stages of savagery or barbarism does not always present this politi-
cally significant character. Most of the fighting at this stage belongs
to an interesting, highly complicated, and somewhat exotic type:
raids for head-hunting, for cannibal feasts, for victims of human
sacrifice to tribal gods. Space does not allow me to enter more fully
into the analysis of this type of fighting. Suffice it to say that it is
not cognate to warfare, for it is devoid of any political relevancy; nor
can it be considered as any systematic pursuit of intertribal policy.
Human man-hunting in search of anatomic trophies, the various
types of armed body-snatching for cannibalism, actual or mystical,
as food for men and food for gods, present a phase of human evolu-
tion which can be understood in terms of ambition, thirst for glory,
and of mystical systems. In a competent analysis of warfare as a
factor in human evolution, they must be kept apart from construc-
tive or organized systems of warfare.”

So far we have dealt with fighting organized on political principles
and performing a political function, and we have dealt briefly with
sportive types of human man-hunting. Where does the economic
motive enter into our problem? It is conspicuously absent from the
earliest types of fighting. Nor are the reasons difficult to find. Under
conditions where portable wealth does not exist; where food is too
perishable and too clumsy to be accumulated and transported; where
slavery is of no value because every individual consumes exactly as
much as he produces—force is a useless implement for the transfer of
wealth. When material booty, human labor, and condensed wealth
—i.e., precious metals or stones—become fully available, predatory
raids acquire a meaning and make their appearance. Thus, we have
to register a new type of fighting: armed expeditions for loot, slave

11 “The Deadly Issue,”’ Atlantic Monthly, December, 1936.
wars, and large-scale organized robbery. We could quote examples
from East and Southeast Africa, where cattle raiding was a lucrative
industry associated with war. Among the northwestern tribes of
America, slavery is found perhaps in its simplest type and furnishes
one of the main motives of intertribal feuds. Nomadic tribes who, as
organized robber bands, controlled some of the caravan routes in
North Africa and in Asia, developed and used their military ef-
ficiency for a systematic levy of tribute, and for loot at the expense
of their wealthier sedentary, mercantile or agricultural, neighbors.
We have, in the above analysis, made one or two distinctions,
perhaps too sharply, but for the purpose of isolating the principles
which lead to the appearance of genuine, purposeful warfare. We
have spoken of nationalism as an early tendency leading to political
wars and the formation of primitive nation-states. We spoke of or-
ganized raids carried out under the economic motive. These types of
fighting very often coincide. It is even more important to realize
that nationalism, as the tendency of extending political control to
the full limits of cultural unity, is never a clear-cut phenomenon.
Nationalism seldom stops at the legitimate cultural boundaries of
the nation. Whether it be a Hitler or a Chaka, a Napoleon or an
Aztec conqueror, a Genghis Khan or an Inca ruler, he will readily
and naturally overstep the boundaries of his nation. Nationalism
readily turns into imperialism, that is, the tendency of incorporating
other nations under the political rule of the military conqueror.
Here we arrive at a new phenomenon which has played an im-
portant role in the development of mankind. Conquest, the integral
occupation of another cultural area by force, combines all the bene-
fits of loot, slavery, and increase in political power. Conquest is a
phenomenon which must have played an enormous part in the prog-
ress of mankind at the stage where, in a parallel and independent
manner, we had the establishment of large agricultural communities
and militarily strong nomadic or cattle-raising tribes. From the con-
ditions found in various parts of the ethnographically observable
world and from the records of history we can retrace and reconstruct
the main characteristics of culturally constructive conquest. The
best ethnographic areas for this analysis are to be found among the
East African tribes, where we still can study the symbiosis of invad-
ing Hamitic or Nilotic cattle breeders and nomads with sedentary
agricultural Bantus. Or, we could turn to some parts of West Africa,
where we find extensive monarchies, in which the sedentary agricul-
tural West African Negroes live under the rule of their Sudanese
conquerors. From the New World the histories of the Mexican and
Peruvian states embody rich material for this study of conquest.

The most important cultural effect of conquest is an all-round
enrichment in national life through a natural division of function
between conquerors and conquered and through the development
and crystallization of many additional institutions. The conquerors
provide the political element; those conquered, as a rule, supply eco-
nomic efficiency. This also means that the conquerors, in exploiting
the subject community, organize a tribal exchequer, institute taxes,
but also establish security and communication, and thus stimulate
industry and commerce. Under the impact of two different cultures,
the customary law of each tribe becomes formulated, and often a
compound system of codification is drawn up. Religious and scien-
tific ideas are exchanged and cross-fertilize each other.

War as an implement of diffusion and cross-fertilization by con-
quest assumes, therefore, an important role in evolution and history.
Such war, let us not forget, made a very late appearance in human
evolution. It could not occur before such high differentiation in
types of culture as that of nomadic pastoralism and sedentary agri-
cultural pursuits. No fruits of victory were obtainable in any eco-
nomic, political, or cultural sense before slavery, loot, or tribute
could be effected by violence.
of an impulse but to collective forms of sentiment and value. As a
mechanism of organized force for the pursuit of national policies war
is slow in evolving. Its incidence depends on the gradual develop-
ment of military equipment and organization, of the scope for lucra-
tive exploits, of the formation of independent political units.

Taking into account all such factors, we had to establish, within
the genus of aggression and use of violence, the following distinc-
tions: (1) Fighting, private and angry, within a group belongs to the
type of breach of custom and law and is the prototype of criminal
behavior. It is countered and curbed by the customary law within
institutions and between institutions. (2) Fighting, collective and
organized, is a juridical mechanism for the adjustment of differences
between constituent groups of the same larger cultural unit. Among
the lowest savages these two types are the only forms of armed
contest to be found. (3) Armed raids, as a type of man-hunting
sport, for purposes of head-hunting, cannibalism, human sacrifices,
and the collection of other trophies. (4) Warfare as the political
expression of early nationalism, that is, the tendency to make the
tribe-nation and tribe-state coincide, and thus to form a primitive
nation-state. (5) Military expeditions of organized pillage, slave-
raiding, and collective robbery. (6) Wars between two culturally
differentiated groups as an instrument of national policy. This type
of fighting, with which war in the fullest sense of the word began,
leads to conquest, and, through this, to the creation of full-fledged
military and political states, armed for internal control, for defense
and aggression. This type of state presents, as a rule, and for the
first time in evolution, clear forms of administrative, political, and
legal organization. Conquest is also of first-rate importance in the
processes of diffusion and evolution.

The types of armed contest, listed as (4) and (6) and these two
only, are, in form, sociological foundations, and in the occurrence of
constructive policy are comparable with historically defined wars.
Every one of the six types here summed up presents an entirely
different cultural phase in the development of organized fighting.
The neglect to establish the differentiation here introduced has led
to grave errors in the application of anthropological principles to
general problems concerning the nature of war. The crude short-
circuiting—by which our modern imperialisms, national hatreds, and
world-wide lust of power have been connected with aggression and
pugnacity—is largely the result of not establishing the above dis-
tinctions, of disregarding the cultural function of conflict, and of
confusing war, as a highly specialized and mechanized phenomenon,
with any form of aggression.

We can determine even more precisely the manner in which
anthropological evidence, as the background of correct understand-
ing and informed knowledge, can be made to bear on some of our
current problems. In general, of course, it is clear that since our
main concern is whether war will destroy our Western civilization or
not, the anthropological approach, which insists on considering the
cultural context of war, might be helpful.

Especially important in a theoretical discussion of whether war
can be controlled and ultimately abolished, is the recognition that
war is not biologically founded. The fact that its occurrence can-
not be traced to the earliest beginnings of human culture is sig-
nificant. Obviously, if war were necessary to human evolution; if it
were something without which human groups have to decay and by
which they advance; then war could not be absent from the earliest
stages, in which the actual birth of cultural realities took place under
the greatest strains and against the heaviest odds. A really vital in-
gredient could not, therefore, be lacking in the composition of primi-
tive humanity, struggling to lay down the foundations of further
progress.

War, looked at in evolutionary perspective, is always a highly
destructive event. Its purpose and raison d’étre depend on whether
it creates greater values than it destroys. Violence is constructive, or
at least profitable, only when it can lead to large-scale transfers of
wealth and privilege, of ideological outfit, and of moral experience.
Thus, humanity had to accumulate a considerable stock of trans-
ferable goods, ideas, and principles before the diffusion of those
through conquest, and even more, the pooling and the reorganization
of economic, political, and spiritual resources could lead to things
greater than those which had been destroyed through the agency of
fighting.

Our analysis has shown that the work of cultural exercise is as-
sociated with one of the two widest groups, the tribe-nation. The
work of destroying and also of reconstructing in matters cultural is
associated with the tribe-state. Here, once more, it will be clear to
every social student that, in giving this ethnographic background to
the concepts of state and nation, of nationalism and imperialism, we
may have contributed to the theoretical clarification of the corre-
sponding modern facts.

What matters to us today, as ever, is human culture as a whole, in
all its varieties, racial and religious, national or affected by regional
differentiation of interests and of values. Nationhood in its manifold
manifestations, today as always, is the carrier of each culture. The
state should be the guardian and the defender of the nation, not its
master, still less its destroyer. The Wilsonian principle of self-deter-
mination was scientifically, hence morally, justified. It was justified
to the extent only that each culture ought to have full scope for its
development—that is, every nation ought to be left in peace and
freedom. Self-determination was a mistake, in that it led to the arm-
ing of new nations and more nations, while it ought to have meant
only the disarming of dangerous, predatory neighbors. Self-deter-
mination can be perfectly well brought about by the abolition of all
states, rather than by the arming of all nations.

Thus, the general formula which anthropological analysis im-
poses on sound and enlightened statesmanship is the complete
autonomy of each cultural group, and the use of force only as a
sanction of law within, and in foreign relations, a policing of the
world as a whole.
World war, that is, total war, is, in the light of our anthropological
criteria, as distinct from the historical wars up to 1914 as these were
different from head-hunting or slave-raiding. The influence of pres-
ent warfare on culture is so total that it poses the problem whether
the integral organization for effective violence—which we call to-
talitarianism—is compatible with the survival of culture.

Culture, as we know, is exercised in each of its varieties by the co-
operative working of partly independent, partly co-ordinated insti-
tutions within the group, which we defined as the nation. It has been
thus exercised and transmitted from the very beginnings of human-
ity, right through to the beginnings of this century. The foundations
of the industrial, liberal, and democratic era which, as I am writing
this, still survives in the United States and in a few Latin-American
countries, were laid on the very same structure of institutional dif-
ferentiation and co-ordination by the state, which controlled the
development of human civilization as a whole. The principle of to-
talitarianism, black or red, brown or yellow, has introduced the most
radical revolution known in the history of mankind. In its cultural
significance it is the transformation of nationhood and all its re-
sources into a lethal, “technocratic’” instrument of violence. This
becomes a means justified by the end. The end is the acquisition of
more power for one state, that is, more scope for organizing violence
on a larger scale and for further destructive uses. Thus, the end of
totalitarianism, in so far as it gradually saps all the resources of cul-
ture and destroys its structure, is diametrically opposed and com-
pletely incompatible with the constitution of human societies for the
normal, peaceful business of producing, maintaining, and transmit-
ting wealth, solidarity, reason, and conscience, all of which are the
real indices and values of civilization.

The war of 1914-18 was, I submit, different in all fundamentals
from the historical wars of constructive conquest. In its technique,
in its influence on national life, and also in its reference to the inter-
national situation it became a total war. Fighting goes on now not
merely on all the frontiers geographically possible; it is waged on
land, on sea, and in the air. Modern war makes it impossible to dis-
tinguish between the military personnel of an army and the civilians;
between military objectives and the cultural portion of national
wealth, and the means of production, the monuments, the churches,
and the laboratories. Lines of communication, seats of government,
centers of industry, and even centers of administrative, legal, and
scientific activity are rapidly becoming targets for destruction, as
much as garrisons, fortified lines, and airdromes. This development
is not only due to the barbarism of a nation or of a dictator. It is
inevitable, for it is dictated by the modern technique of violence.

The total character of war, however, goes much further. War has
to transform every single cultural activity within a belligerent na-
tion. The family and the school, the factory and the courts of law,
are affected so profoundly that their work—the exercise of culture
through autonomous self-contained institutions—is temporarily par-
alyzed or distorted. It is enough to look at the statistics of mobiliza-
tion in man-power, in activity, and in public opinion to realize that
at present it has become possible to transform some hundred million
human beings into one enormous war machine. And it is obvious
that when two war machines of this size are launched against each
other, the one with the less perfect and total mobilization is bound to
succumb.”

12 Fuller data illustrating the complete remolding of all national life during war and
as preparedness for war, will be found in Professor Willard Waller’s symposium on
War in the Twentieth Century (New York: Dryden Press, 1940). The four essays on
economy, the state, propaganda and public opinion, and on social institutions in war
time should, in my opinion, be read carefully by all students of the subject. They show
that total war completely transforms the substance of modern culture. The reader,
pursuing them in the light of our present analysis, may be able to draw even more point-
ed conclusions, especially in assessing that totalitarianism is nothing but the constitu-
tion of the nation on a war-time basis. That this effect of war is not generally under-
stood or appreciated can be seen from the final essay in Professor Waller’s volume, in
which Dr. Linton, a competent authority upon all matters anthropological, seems to
minimize the destructiveness of war and of its profound influence on culture. Speaking
of modern war, he affirms that “‘its uniqueness, especially as regards potentialities for
destruction, has been greatly overrated... .. The principles upon which successful
war must be waged have not changed since the dawn of history, while the destructive
intent of war has certainly diminished. ... . In Europe . . . . still other factors. ...
will keep intentional destruction toa minimum. ... . It seems safe to predict... . that
.... there will be no swift victories against large or powerful nations” (What about
France? of. cit., pp. 535-38). Such opinions, and they are by no means exclusive to
the writer quoted, show how easy it is to miss the real issue. Even if we admitted that
the toll of some twenty million human lives taken by the last World War was of no great
importance; nor yet the fifty million maimed and rendered useless, we would have to
assess the disorganization in economic matters, the lack of security as regards wealth
The stupendous, almost miraculous successes of Hitler’s Germany
have so dazzled the public opinion of neutrals and belligerents alike,
that some of the real lessons have not yet been learned. In the min-
gled reaction of horror and admiration which followed the Blitzkrieg
against Poland, the “conquest” of Denmark and Norway, with the
implicit subjugation of Sweden, the campaign against the Low Coun-
tries, and the shattering collapse of France, many of us had to fight
hard against the feeling that, after all, totalitarianism is “a better
and bigger” regime than “the decaying demo-plutocracies.”’ Sound
anthropological understanding of these facts as cultural phenomena
teaches something else. An organized gang of criminals will always
gain the upper hand in an armed attack on a bank. The only chance
the bank has is, not in fighting the gang, but in having a police force
to protect it. And the police will be really efficient if it prevents the
formation of an armed gang with such instruments of violence at its
disposal, as would make defense impossible, or at least costly and
destructive. Prepared aggression will always get the better of unpre-
pared defense. Defense must be prepared so as to prevent aggres-
siveness, rather than fight it.

And here we come to the most important element in the cultural
assessment of totalitarianism. Born out of the first World War, it
was, in principle, nothing less and nothing more than the application
of the political techniques developed between 1914 and 1918 as the
type of political, economic, educational, and propagandist regime,
suitable to the carrying-out of a major war.

Nazi Germany developed a system of values which could, through
the technique of modern propaganda and under the sanction of a
perfectly organized police, be made to become the doctrine of the
whole nation. The system of values was based on the superiority of
one race, of one nation within this race, and of one organized gang
within the nation. Such a doctrine, it can be seen easily, is function-
ally adapted to the creation of highly artificial, but nevertheless
effective, sentiments of superiority, aggressiveness, national egoism,

 

 

 

 

and life, and the general debasement of civic and ethical principles. The real issue, how-
ever, discussed in the text, is whether the integral influence of preparedness for, and the
use of, violence do or do not disorganize the texture of modern civilization.
and a morality which fits perfectly well into a universal barrack-
room drill. Parallel to indoctrination, there had to go the complete
reorganization of social life. The family, the municipality, the
schools, the courts, the churches, and all the institutions of intellec-
tual and artistic production were put directly under the forced and
armed control of the state. Never before in humanity has the autono-
mous working of component institutions been so completely sub-
mitted to state control. Never, that is, has the exercise of culture
become so completely paralyzed. This means, in terms of individual
psychology, that any differential initiative, any formation of inde-
pendent critical judgment, any building-up of public opinion through
discussion, controversy, and agreement, has been replaced by a pas-
sive acceptance of dictated truths. As regards the social structure of
the nation, the control from above has had the effect of replacing
spontaneous solidarity between husband and wife, between parents
and children, among friends or partners, by a mechanically imposed
“spirit of unity,” to be accepted regardless of any personal impulse,
reasonable judgment, or ruling of conscience.

We know well how the results of individual research, the teaching
of the various religions, and the creation of artists have been pre-
scribed, limited, and directed. In religion, notably, we can see that
Naziism is trying to substitute its own dogmatic system, its ritual,
and its ethics for those of Christianity, as well as for the established
ethics of Western civilization and the convictions of scientific judg-

ment.
It is not necessary to inveigh against the totalitarian system; cer-

tainly this is not a place for moral indignations or partisan views.
Scientific ethics, in any case, must be limited to a clear statement of
the consequences of a type of action, whether this be a small-scale
enterprise or a world-wide system. The science of man, however, has
always the right and the duty to point out what the consequences of
a cultural revolution will be. This is the foundation of all applied
science. Social science must not be afraid of predicting, anticipating,
and developing some ethics of reason. This does not mean that we
have the duty or the liberty of condemning certain ends on moral
grounds. We can, however, point out, if this is the result of our con-
sidered opinion and analysis, that totalitarianism must lead to the
destruction of the nation with which it is associated and, later on, to
destruction on international scale.

Totalitarianism is an extreme expression in the shift of balance
between state and nation. It is extreme because modern means of
mechanical mobilization of man-power, economic resources, and
spiritual values have become so dangerously effective that it is now
possible to refashion whole communities—consisting of hundreds of
millions—and to change each of them from a nation, exercising,
transmitting, and developing culture, into a belligerent machinery
supreme in war, but unsuited, perhaps unable, to carry on the na-
tional heritage of culture. The German nation, once leading in sci-
ence and in art, rich in a highly differentiated regional folklore, peasant
life, and economic diversity, has now been changed into a large-scale
barracks. It would be an important historical task to show how
much of Germany’s greatness was due to the racial, regional, and
traditional differences of its component parts. The progressive ex-
tinction of this diversity is the price which Germany, as a nation,
had to pay in order to make Germany, the state, so powerful.
Nationalism in this modern totalitarian form is pernicious because it
has become the greatest enemy of the nation itself.

And what is the place of totalitarianism in international policies
and politics? It is obvious that humanity is now faced with two
alternatives—the final victory, in the long run, of totalitarianism or
democracy. No state organized on a peace basis, that is, for the full-
est and most effective exercise of civilization, can compete with a
state organized for efficiency in war. Nazi victory can be final only if
Hitler’s nation-state, one and alone, assumes full control of the
whole world. If this were probable or even possible, we might well
argue that once humanity is submitted to one conqueror, the condi-
tions of creative and constructive conquest will set in, with the usual
beneficent results, obtained at a great price, but finally acceptable.

The possibility of a complete victory of one state does not exist. If
Germany wins, she will have at least three more totalitarian powers
to reckon with—Italy, Russia, and Japan. When Italy falls out and
becomes a mere appendage of Hitlerism, the United States of Amer-
ica may have to enter the ranks of totalitarian countries. For, on the
assumption that Great Britain is beaten and absorbed into the Ger-
man-led totalitarian block, as France has become, the United States
must continue in isolation. This will mean, again, either embracing
totalitarianism or withdrawing into a precarious state of semi-inde-
pendence in matters political, economic, and cultural. Fortunately,
Great Britain is still fighting the battle of liberty and civilization
and, as its habit has always been, it may remain beaten in all battles
except the final one.

Totalitarianism, unless it becomes the universal empire of one
single power, is not a source of stability but of age-long periodic
world wars. Anthropological analysis supports those who believe
that war must be abolished. Nationalism, in the sense of a demand
for cultural autonomy within each group united by language, tradi-
tion, and culture, is legitimate and indispensable to the carrying-out
of the very business of culture. Such cultural autonomy of the com-
ponent parts of present-day humanity is, or was, the principle of the
national life of Switzerland and of the old Austro-Hungarian empire;
of the relations between the powerful United States and its Latin-
American neighbors, who would be entirely unable to defend their
cultural autonomy by force, but enjoy it, with all-round benefits, by
the policy of the “good neighbor.”

We are now living in a world where fashions come and go, and
where the soundest ideals and principles are discredited because they
are considered to have become worn out or worn too long. This atti-
tude in itself is almost as pernicious as certain germs of totalitarian-
ism. The student of social science ought to fight against it. I would,
therefore, reiterate the beliefs which inspired some of the finest
thinkers and best fighters of the last war. I believe that war can
legitimately be fought only to end war. I believe that the future
peace of mankind is possible only on a principle of a commonwealth
of nations. I believe that in a humanity still divided by races, cul-
tures, customs, and languages, a full tolerance in racial relations, in
the treatment of nationalities, and national minorities, and in the
respect for the individual, is the very mainspring of all progress and
the foundation of all stability. The great enemy of today is the sov-
ereign state, even as we find it in democratic commonwealths—cer-
tainly as it has developed into the malignant growth of totalitarian-
ism. The real failure of the Wilsonian League of Nations was due to
the fact that its very builders refused to pay the price which it ob-
viously imposed. They were not prepared to abrogate one ounce of
their national sovereignty, forgetting that this was the very material
out of which the League had to be constructed.

Unless we courageously, resolutely, and with due humility, take
up the principles, the ideals, and the plans which originated at
first in America and were also first denounced by this country, we
shall not be able to overcome the major disease of our age. This may
be called total war, or totalitarianism, or extreme state sovereignty,
or injustice in matters racial, religious, and national. It always
results in the substitution of force for argument, of oppression for
justice, and of crude, dictated mysticism for faith and reason.

InstiTuTE or HuMAN RELATIONS
‘YALE UNIVERSITY
