Municipal Review 1909-1910

Author(s): Clinton Rogers Woodruff

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 16, No. 4 (Jan., 1911), pp. 485-518
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763007

Accessed: 09-05-2016 05:27 UTC
MUNICIPAL REVIEW 1909-1910

CLINTON ROGERS WOODRUFF
Philadelphia, Pa.

The social phases of the municipal question are each year
receiving an ever-increasing amount of attention, in many places
to the exclusion of the political and administrative phases. This
tendency is due in no small part to the changing standards of
efficiency and perspective. The medical officer of the English
Local Government Board, Dr. Arthur Newman, has pointed
out that a careful study of infant mortality makes it clear that
it is greater under urban life. Moreover, urban life is more
destructive under ordinary circumstances for children than for
adults. In the counties of Glamorgan, Durham, Lancashire, the
West Riding, and Staffordshire, England, the high infant mor-
tality, and in the counties of Oxford, Hereford, Berkshire, and
Dorset, the low infantile mortality, are ascribable, in Dr. New-
man’s judgment, chiefly to the fact that in the former the popu-
lation lives in houses which are closely massed to a preponderant
extent in large villages, or in small or large towns; while in the
latter the houses are largely scattered in lonely homesteads,
hamlets, and small villages. It is not that any special virtue
appertains to the sanitary authorities of the rural counties; it
is rather that the sanitary authorities of the counties having high
infant mortality have not realized that the risks of urbanization
can only be obviated by strenuous and continued effort on their
part.

That they can be overcome, that there is no necessary associa-
tion between dense massing of population on a small horizontal
area and a high infant mortality, is shown by the exceptional
experience of the Peabody Buildings. These dwellings are
occupied by families whose average earnings are under 22
shillings a week. They have eight times as many persons to the
acre as London as a whole, and yet in the years from 1905 to

485
1909 the infant mortality in them was 23 per cent lower than
that of London. Substantially the same conclusion may be drawn
from American experience.

In an address before the Society of Chicago’s Native Sons
and Daughters, Chief Sanitary Inspector Ball said that the
Chicago of the ’7o’s had a death rate of 24 to the thousand,
but the Chicago of 1909 has seen this cut to 14 per thousand.
The average age of those who died when the “native sons and
daughters” were children was 14 years, but the average age of
those who die today is 33. It would be hard, indeed, to exagger-
ate the gain.

But Chicago has tasks of which the Chicagoans of a former
generation knew but little. As the Evening Post pointed out:
The city has not cut the mortality down without a great effort,
and to keep it down is becoming not easier but harder. It takes
more vigilance, more scientific research, more administrative
machinery. The city is crowded in very closely and the con-
ditions in many wards are pretty serious. “There are several
tasks,” the Post said, “pressing upon the health department, and
Mr. Ball’s remark that Chicago could no longer maintain the
health-fight of a city of the first class on the budget of a city
of the second or third class was exactly true. The city council
cannot afford to scale down appropriations that mean health and
an increased longevity.

Trinity Corporation in New York City has made a compre-
hensive study of its New York tenements, and has adopted a
policy which will serve not only to correct the difficulties and
evils that have grown up in past years, but is a striking example
of effective dealing with the important question of housing.

Our growing foreign population constitutes another factor
in the development of interest in the social phases of the mu-
nicipal problem. Some idea of the importance of this particular
aspect may be gathered from the statement that 37 per cent of
the population of New York, 47 per cent of Fall River, Mass.,
45 per cent of Lawrence, Mass., 42.6 per cent of Manchester,
N.H., 46.4 per cent of Passaic, N.J., and 44.4 per cent of Woon-
socket, R.I., to mention only a few typical cases, are foreign
born. Moreover organizations like the bureau of municipal re-
search, the federation of women’s clubs, and the educational asso-
ciations are giving thought and attention to social questions to
a degree that is making for a wider appreciation of the need for
more attention to these questions. James P. Heaton in dis-
cussing the social aspect of city economy in The Survey expresses
himself as follows:

That the city government plays the most important part in the plans for
social betterment may be little thought of by most people, but it is increas-
ingly recognized by various organizations interested in special phases of
social work. Each year their directing officials scrutinize most carefully the
municipal activities, in so far as these affect their particular fields.

To illustrate one phase of this growth we may quote one fur-
ther paragraph from Mr. Heaton’s plea for additional appropria-
tions:

The Department of Health has asked for a little over $4,000,000 or an
increase of over $1,300,000. Of this $316,000 is to enable the department to
get 266 additional nurses and 48 medical inspectors so that they can examine
the children in all free schools and care for newly born babies and their
mothers. The Bureau of Child Hygiene has demonstrated its value and its
work is being watched with approval all over the country. The other large
increases requested are $115,000 for the division of contagious diseases, for
new inspectors; $488,000 for the division of hospitals, and $96,000 for the
tuberculosis sanatorium at Otisville. This last is particularly needed to
follow up the good work in stamping out tuberculosis to which the depart-
ment has devoted so much attention this past year. Minor increases that
are very desirable are $51,000 for improved milk inspection and $12,000 for
the Bureau of Records which is in need of a thorough reorganization.
None of these needs can be adequately met if an increase is not granted
the Health Department. The department requires generous funds to perfect
further the system of visiting consumptives monthly in their tenement homes,
of inspecting the patients from the hospital to homes where conditions are
not proper for their reception. The department would also like to open
milk stations to take the place of those closed by Mr. Straus.

In reporting on the local developments in his city, the Secre-
tary of the Syracuse Chamber said that if he were to make any
comment upon the municipal changes in his city within recent
years, he would inevitably be attracted to the increase of the
functions which the municipal government in his city was being
called upon to perform. The extension of the work of the
various departments into which our city government is divided
is such as to attract attention. It brings the people closely in
touch with their government and is a step toward securing that
interest in municipal affairs among the voters and residents of
the town without which municipal government will not improve
however perfect may be its framework. When municipal gov-
ernment performed for its citizens comparatively few functions,
and these having little to do with the ordinary run of people, it
was not to be expected that the “plain voter’ would give time,
attention, and thought to the selection of men to fill public offices.

Today, however, municipal government in this city supplies water to the
citizen; educates his children with kindergarten, primary, and high schools;
it removes his garbage; cleans his streets; quarantines his home with diseases
with which it formerly had nothing to do; it examines his children and
insists that they shall be in proper physical condition before it admits them
to school; it compels him to submit his building plans, his plans for
plumbing, his plans for electrical lighting for its approval; it insists upon
sanitary keeping of his premises; it furnishes parks and children’s play-
grounds and provides concerts for his amusement and it removes him from
his family if he is tubercular; and in a thousand and one ways it makes
itself felt in the lives of each of the inhabitants of the city. It cannot then
but be expected that the municipal government will be a vital matter to each
of the voters and that these voters will take an interest in it which they did
not feel when its functions were less extended.
The Republican candidate was supported by the saloon element and was
elected by injecting the Sunday base ball issue into the campaign.

Everything then ran wide open, with the enforcement of no liquor laws,
until almost two years ago when a county option election was brought on.
For a few weeks before this election the saloons closed on Sundays and
said they had closed their wine-rooms.

The county voted the saloons out. The city and county officials were all
Republicans and the Republican organization was in close sympathy with the
liquor organization. There was a concerted movement to ignore the liquor
laws and no effort was made for their enforcement, except by a body of
citizens styling themselves the Civic League.

With the county officials asleep and the city officials in league with the
law violators and trying to make a joke of the liquor statutes, the arrests
for drunkenness under the first year of no legalized saloons decreased
fifty-two per cent from the previous year.

Some of the leading members of the Civic League have had their
homes and factories dynamited, assaults have been made on the streets upon
citizens interested in the law enforcement, and many threats have been made
by the liquor interests, but the work goes on regardless of the mayor and
police. Violators of the liquor laws are taken before the mayor of a village
in the country and there fined. Charges have been filed with the Governor
of the state against the mayor of this city for non-enforcement of law and
his trial will soon be held.

It has been stated, and it is probably true, that the saloon element is not
violating the laws to nearly so great an extent as when the saloons were
legalized. They have had their own way for so long that any restraint is
burdensome and the direct encouragement given to them by the city officials
has made conditions dangerous to life and property.
In police matters the complete exoneration by the Cleveland
Civil Service Commission of Chief of Police Fred Kohler
on every accusation made against him is deserving of men-
tion in view of the prominence which Chief Kohler has attained
by reason of his efficient administration of his department and
the introduction of some radical ideas in regard to arrests. Fol-
lowing his reinstatement Chief Kohler once more put in practice
his “golden rule,” declaring to his force that bygones were
bygones, that he cherished no enmity against detectives who
testified against him, and that each man’s job was secure so
long as he delivered the goods. Another interesting event in
police matters during the year was Mayor Gaynor’s letter to
his new commissioner of police, in which he outlined plans and
policies that should be subserved in the management and con-
trol of a great metropolitan police force. It constitutes a sub-
stantial addition to police literature, and helps to clarify the
situation not only in New York but elsewhere. Even though
one may not agree with all of his conclusions, it is the sincere
effort of an honest man to state clearly and effectively the
principles which should be followed in administering the police
force and executing the great mass of sumptuary laws which
have found their way into the statute books of the city and state.

A movement to secure home rule in police matters in Mis-
souri cities is making satisfactory progress.

The subject of control of public-service corporations and the
valuation of their property is receiving attention at the hands
not only of economists, but of city officials and municipal stu-
dents generally. A number of important reports on various
phases of the question have been published during the year, as
well as a variety of significant magazine articles. In addition
Dr. Delos F. Wilcox is putting through the press a book on
municipal franchises embodying his experience and studies as an
expert connected with the Public Utilities Commission No. 1 of
New York, and his long years of study of this question.

A significant development of the past year in connection with
franchises was the institution of a suit in March last by the
receiver of the New York City Railway Company to recover
from the Metropolitan Securities Company directors the sum of
$2,797,200 lost from the City Railways treasury between 1902
and 1904 by the discount of its ten-year notes at 70 and their
early redemption at par. The same directors also have been
compelled to pay back other large sums of money, the exact
amount of which has not been publicly disclosed, in settlement
of their methods of “high finance.” That exploits in “high
finance” among public-service corporations were not confined to
the metropolis but have been widespread and reached into the
affairs of many of the corporations in smaller communities was
shown in the investigation conducted by the New York Public
Service Commission, No. 2. As a result of Governor Hughes’s
far-reaching policy the franchise problem in New York munici-
palities is being placed upon a higher and more substantial plane.
Mr. Kennedy, the secretary of the commission, in his review of
the work of the commission, has declared that the law is now
firmly intrenched and among the solidest of the statutes of the
state.

Generally speaking, the opinion of the people of the state without any
considerable number of exceptions, and of the corporation managers is that
the great powers of the statute have been wisely administered by the commis-
sion. There can be no reason why each succeeding year will not add to the
usefulness of the work which can be accomplished under the law, and great
benefit accrue alike to the corporations and to the public which they serve.
.... The provision of capitalization had had but one effect, that of
enforcing sound and honorable principles in corporate management. It is
the fact, repeatedly testified to before the commissions, that securities
authorized by commissions command a preimum from the bond houses
and investors.

Cleveland’s street railway settlement went into effect about
March 1 last. Since then the wages of the men have been
increased in the judgment of some almost abnormally, making
them higher than in any of the large cities within 300 miles of
Cleveland. The three-cent fare with one cent for transfer has
thus far stood the strain. In the opinion of those who have fol-
lowed the situation carefully the most serious danger facing the
continuance of this low fare arises from the fact that although
the settlement provided five cents per car mile for maintenance
and depreciation, which is more than is expended by any street
railway in the United States, with possibly two or three excep-
tions, the company has hitherto kept the road in a somewhat
run-down condition, and will endeavor to have arbitration under
the lease for the raising of the rate per car mile in order to im-
prove the road out of the maintenance fund, as it claims the
franchise permits. If this is done fares will probably have to be
raised somewhat for a year or two.

The Minneapolis gas situation has been cleaned up satis-
factorily to the interests of the public, and Kansas City has
defeated a proposal to extend its street railway franchises for
an undue time. Denver seems to be in the way of settling its
long-pending water question. At a regular city election held
May 17, the offered franchise of the Denver Union Water
Company was defeated by about 5,000 majority. At the same
election an amendment to the charter of the city was adopted
by a majority something over 2,000. This provided that three
persons therein named should constitute a public utilities commis-
sion for the term of two, four, and six years respectively, and that
it should be their duty to offer the water company $7,000,000
in bonds of the city as a compromise, for this is estimated to
be much in excess of the real value of the plant, some of which
is now over 20 years old; and if this offer should not be ac-
cepted, then to proceed to construct a new plant, and for that
purpose, or in the event of the acceptance of the offered price,
the question should be submitted to the people of voting $8,000,-
ooo in bonds at a special election to be held on the first Tues-
day in September. The company refused to offer $7,000,000
in bonds, and is negotiating with the commission for a further
settlement.

In San Francisco what is known as the Geary Street bond
issue carried by a vote of 31,185 for to 11,694 against the
proposition. This will enable the city to operate a trunk line
of considerable importance. Public opinion was somewhat di-
vided over the proposition, but the majority no doubt voted for
the bonds, not because they were primarily in favor of munici-
pal operations, but because they were so much irritated against
the poor service given by the United Railroads, which operates
most of the lines in the city. As usually happens in such cases,
the whole matter has been thrown into the courts through an
effort by one of the parties operating the present road to enjoin
the city from selling the bonds as authorized.

Los Angeles has made some interesting contributions to
franchise matters, and through its recently appointed Board of
Public Utilities has done some effective work in settling long-
standing local difficulties and in securing some favorable court
decisions. Its first annual report represents a very useful year
of service.

Graft charges during the year have not diminished, but on
the contrary, they seem to have increased, but unlike previous
occasions, they have been followed by indictments, proofs,
and convictions. To illustrate: the finances of Middlesex
County, Mass., in which the city of Cambridge is located, are
having a much-needed overhauling. The investigation of them
has developed some very interesting facts. Here are several:
$243 as paid for a cow, $147.10 for a range (the salesman
of the Cambridge Gas Company, when asked what sort of a
range could be had for that amount, asked if it was to be gold-
plated), $23.73 for hanging pictures in the jail, $614.32 for
a private bathroom for a woman prisoner, $2,073 for unspeci-
fied extras. One of the principal assessors of the city has been
tried and convicted on various counts of larceny, his prosecu-
tion growing out of the complaints preferred and prosecuted by
the Tax Payers’ Association of Cambridge.

Lawrence, Mass., enjoys the unpleasant notoriety of having
its mayor sentenced to three years in the penitentiary, convicted
of conspiracy to bribe other city officials. Three other officials
convicted at the same time were given various terms in prison.

Mayor Gaynor has inflexibly set himself against graft, large
and small. Many of his most important reforms have been in
the direction, not so much in the way of exposing graft as in
eliminating the sources of it. In this way he has effected a
saving of large sums to the city, and introduced a new tone
into public service. Economy and efficiency have certainly been
to the forefront under his administration. As illustrating the
care with which he has watched such matters may be cited the
letter he wrote to the Commissioner of Corrections, in which
he said:
to look over your entire department and see if such things are not occurring
everywhere. Such miserable thievery has to be got rid of in some way.

Pittsburgh’s shame and that of Illinois have been widely
recounted. There is this striking difference, however, between
the two cases: Pittsburgh has been sending its grafters to jail,
while Chicago and Illinois have been acquitting them. Possibly
the reason for this difference may be scented in the conviction
of two men before the Cook County Grand Jury. One was a
juror in the second trial of Lee O’Neill Brown on the charge
of buying a vote for Lorimer for senator. The other was the
man who procured the corruption of the juror. Their stories
revealed how they had been paid $250, $125 each, by one of
the defendant’s trio of lawyers, in return for the juror’s vote to
acquit the defendant.

San Francisco has so. long been the center of graft charges,
graft crusades, and graft prosecution that former Mayor Taylor
of that city was fully justified in asking a committee of public-
spirited men to investigate the situation which had given rise
to the series of criminal prosecutions which have been known in
current literature as “the graft prosecution.”

The mayor called together a leading lawyer, a prominent
business man, one of the foremost Presbyterian clergymen in
the state, William Kent, whose work in Chicago is still remem-
bered with gratitude, the dean of one of the medical colleges,
a conservative labor leader, and a Roman Catholic priest. Such
a committee, as the California Weekly pointed out, was securely
above any suspicion of wilful misstatement, hasty judgment, or
the charge of being disgruntled or irresponsible agitators. Their
stake in the community was too large for these things. The
careful and thorough report which this committee presented is
sure to attract widespread attention, not only local, but general,
as its recommendations are of a perfect and searching character.
Perhaps its most striking recommendation was to the effect that
a law should be enacted making it a crime for any newspaper to
publish as news

any matters for which compensation is directly or indirectly paid, unless
the fact that such compensation has been paid or agreed to be paid is
indicated by some plainly distinguishing mark next the news so printed.
The jury or judge should be given liberal power of inferring complicity
from considerations indirectly given. A person paying such compensation
should be permitted to recover the consideration given by him, and immunity
granted him, if he discloses the crime. A part of the punishment should
consist in forbidding the publication of the paper for a period fixed by the
judge. [It also urged that] laws should be enacted for the cancellation of
franchises procured by fraud or crime of the owners of the franchises, or
of their predecessors in interest. These laws should be of a civil nature,
cognizable in a court of equity, so that the extreme technicality of our
criminal procedure will not embarrass their enforcement. The mayor and
the district attorney, each on his own motion, should have the right to
initiate such proceedings in the name of the municipality upon which the
fraud has been committed. Their power should be concurrent with that of
the state to take similar action in quo warranto proceedings.

It was pointed out that the trial of Mr. Calhoun had dis-
closed that a considerable number of citizens who, when
examined under oath as to their qualifications for jury service,
complacently declared that they would not convict a man for
bribery however convincing the facts, if, since his crime, he had
successfully broken a strike which was threatening his invest-
ments. As the committee trenchantly points out, a system of
public education which produces such men holding such views
must be radically defective in both its ethical and political teach-
ing. It declared,

It is believed that no child should be permitted to leave the grammar
school until he has had thoroughly instilled into him a strong sense of his
obligation to the state to set aside all prejudice or private interest and act
as juryman in any case in which he may be summoned. He should be
taught that this obligation is sacred, and that its performance is the highest
kind of public service, outranking the mere physical courage and devotion
of a soldier.

Among the other recommendations of the San Francisco
commission is one to the effect that non-partisan municipal elec-
tions should be established, that there should be a separate
tribunal of a personal character for the judicial determination
of the rates and charges of municipal utilities, for the cancela-
tion of franchises procured by fraud, and that the law of
evidence should be so changed as to compel corporations to
give evidence against themselves.
A new spirit is taking hold in American cities. This has
been demonstrated in more than one direction during the past
year, not alone in the defeat of men who were responsible for
corrupt conditions; not alone in the conviction of those who had
participated in graft, but in a sounder public sentiment, a sounder
tone in public life. There has been an encouraging multiplica-
tion of the agencies working in this direction. The bureaus of
municipal research have been in the forefront in the way of
securing and publishing accurate knowledge concerning the
situation. They are bringing about a healthful change of atti-
tude in the treatment of these questions. Under the old régime
denunciation was the chief stock in trade. The one who could
hurl the greatest number of opprobrious epithets at a wrongdoer
or at an opponent was regarded as the most sincere and suc-
cessful reformer. All this is changing. In its place we find the
careful investigation of facts, the equally careful formulation of
charges, and their persistent pressing before the proper tribunals,
leaving to the public to apply their own designation to the facts
after they are presented to them in a clear-cut, impartial, effect-
ive way, by those who know what they are talking about.

In the creation of sound public sentiment another factor is
to be found in the increasing effectiveness of the literature put
out by civic bodies. The day of the formal, poorly printed
report or pamphlet is passing rapidly. Now the highest sort of
skill is exercised in so placing the issues before the people that
they can easily inform themselves about them. The reports
of civic and business bodies are to an increasing degree illus-
trations of the highest skill in the presentation of facts. More-
over the movement has been greatly assisted by the increase
of publications, weekly and monthly, devoted to the enuncia-
tion of sound principles and the elucidation of pertinent facts.
Some of these publications are issued by the cities themselves.
Many are issued by civic bodies.

By way of illustration, during the past year Boston has seen
the birth of two intelligent efforts in this direction in the issu-
ance of New Boston by the “Boston-1915” movement and the
publication of the Boston Common. The former is an intelligent
effort to present, not only to the supporters of “Boston-1915”
but to all citizens of that metropolitan community, the issues
involved in that organization’s campaign. The primary purpose
of the Boston Common is “public service rather than private
profit, and to secure for the public absolute freedom from par-
tisanship, sectarianism, prejudice, and the controlling of muzzling
influences.” The need for such publications is growing. Na-
poleon is said to have declared that he feared three newspapers
more than a hundred thousand bayonets. That is the fear of
every evildoer in pyblic office. Publicity is a sure guaranty to
the people. At the same time one must look the facts clearly in
the face and realize that there are many American newspapers
that fail of having the influence they deserve. This is due
either to the fact that they are not believed to be free or that
they are partisan, that they are interested more in the moment
than they are in the permanent solution of difficulties and
problems.

There was one feature of the recent municipal election in
Milwaukee that was worthy of very thoughtful attention. Mr.
Berger, the leading socialist of the city, in commenting on the
election of Mr. Seidel as mayor, said:

With six English, two German, and two Polish dailies fighting us, with
every inch of space they could spare in their news columns and editorial
pages, and all the advertising the Democrats and Republicans could afford
to pay for, we won in a walk.

A Topeka dispatch in the Kansas City Journal, describing a
municipal election in that city, said,

More than 11,000 of the 13,000 voters in Topeka cast their ballots. All
of the newspapers supported Mr. Green. His opponent had to push his
candidacy through the advertising columns and on billboards. Nevertheless
he was elected by a very large majority.

Unfortunately these instances are typical. They explain,
however, the growth in popularity, in numbers, and in influence
of such publications as we have already referred to. There
is no denying that the American electors are informing them-
selves as never before, both through such publications as have
been mentioned and through specially designed publications like
those issued by state and municipal voters’ leagues. Publicity is a
growing factor in political campaigns. As has already been
pointed out, the era of denunciation is passing, and in its place
voters are demanding definite information concerning men and
issues. This is as it should be.

As illustrating how effective the work of voters’ leagues
is, we may cite the following: For years the Minnesota legis-
lature was dominated by an organization of the most unpro-
gressive politicians. These men saw that the publication of the
story of the Minnesota legislature of 1909, with its complete
unanswerable exposure of the personnel and purposes of the ma-
chine, would end their political careers. A representative from
one of the interior counties, one of the worst offenders, when he
first saw a copy, was moved to exclaim, “I think it is an outrage
that a man is allowed to print and circulate such a thing. The
man seems to be demented, but he goes on indiscriminately
assassinating character.” This man’s fears were fully realized.
He was defeated for re-election and with him there fell prac-
tically every member of the old organization through which the
special interests and politicians dictated legislation. In the words
of the report of the Minnesota Citizens’ League, “in all 31
such senators and representatives either did not dare to face
their records or did so and were defeated at the primaries.”

Organizations of business men are giving more and more
attention to municipal problems. They are beginning to realize
what has so often been pointed out in meetings of the National
Municipal League and similar bodies, that good government is
about the best asset a city can have. During the last decade
Detroit has enjoyed a remarkable growth, as shown by the census
figures relating to its population. During the ten years period
her growth was 63 per cent, which is a more rapid rate of
increase than is shown by any other city of similar size. The
population figures for Detroit are 465,766. In 1900 she was
thirteenth in the order of American cities; today she probably
stands in the eighth place. Pittsburgh’s gain during the same
period was 18.2 per cent; Milwaukee thirty-one per cent; St.
Louis 19.4 per cent.
Various reasons have been assigned for this remarkable and
substantial growth, but as the Chicago News said at the time
the figures were announced, the part played by progressive busi-
ness organizations and the influence of conditions of municipal
government must not be overlooked. Detroit’s organizations
have worked hard for the upbuilding of their community. The
reputation of the city for efficiency of government and for
economy and honesty in public expenditures is good as com-
pared with American municipalities generally. The efforts of
Pingree to promote honest government in Detroit doubtless are
responsible to a considerable degree for the present industrial
progress of the city. It is significant that the cities reputed
to have the worst municipal government are not in the judg-
ment of the News the ones showing the most rapid growth.
Manufacturers who are not in search of special privileges
naturally establish themselves in cities having the most eco-
nomical government and furnishing the best living conditions
for the working population.

Another interesting development of the year has been the
disposition shown by the smaller chambers of commerce and
boards of trade in cities ranging in size from 12,000 up to
50,000, to take up civic work and to employ competent and
trained men to carry it on. At a recent meeting of the com-
mercial secretaries in Grand Rapids one of the speakers urged
that the association unite with the National Municipal League
in broadening the civic-service work. He stated that the move-
ment would receive greater impetus and accomplish greater
results if the business men as represented in the commercial
organizations were behind it. He furthermore suggested that
the national association take up this matter and employ a secre-
tary to devote his time and efforts to the work, an expert who
would go about the country promoting civic work in the
various communities and in the boards of trade and other com-
mercial organizations.

In the words of one of the officials of one of the most effect-
ive business organizations in the country:
There is a growing tendency to give civic work a more important place
in their scheme of things than it has had. I do not know, however, that this
is a development of the past year. Rather it seems to me to be a develop-
ment extending over even four or five years in most cases and even longer
in such exceptional cases as that of the Cleveland Chamber of Commerce.
Prophesying is a dangerous business, but I would not be surprised to have
some of these business organizations soon officially announce that they
consider civic work the most important with which they have to deal.

In Chicago a Women’s City Club has been organized, which
is destined to become a most influential civic body. The forma-
tion of this club is typical of the growing interest of women
in civic affairs. We find them taking up questions of house-
cleaning and adornment and education in an effective way.
Indeed, women are coming to realize more and more in each
passing year that they can even more effectively than men, in
many instances, create the civic standards of a community
through close contact with the growing agents and through
influence over the teaching forces of a community. More-
over women are coming to feel that they are charged in a
special sense, because of their special qualifications in the
matter of housekeeping, with the cleanliness of a community.
We find in all the leading cities of the country the women are
in the forefront in the effort to clean up the streets and keep
them clean.

Mrs. Caroline Bartlett Crane’s work is equally typical. She
is going about the country stirring up the women, and the men
for that matter, to their duty and responsibility in the matter
of clean and healthy cities. Her lectures are those of a public
housekeeper, simple and untechnical. She has visited city after
city in the East and West, looking into nooks and crannies and
into various things that men, with their far different points of
view and perspective, are apt to overlook. As an outsider she
has been able to report upon what she found without fear,
favor, or partisanship. At the close of her inspection she has
written out a full report and submitted it to the bodies directly
concerned, with suggestions how to overcome the conditions
which she described.

Boston’s Women’s Municipal League has been conducting a
campaign of education in sanitary matters and working in co-
operation with various settlements to relieve conditions in the
congested parts of the city. Moreover, it has charged itself
with the inspection of streets and alleys. In December last it
held an exhibit which on the sanitary side showed contrasting
models of dirty ones. Moreover, it is actively spreading a prop-
aganda in regard to the prevention and cure of tuberculosis
and similar dread diseases.

The continued, rapid, and widespread interest in the com-
mission form of municipal government and in the question of city
charter reform generally, has been the most conspicuous single
development during the past year in the realm of city govern-
ment. A straight commission form of government, in the
opinion of Dr. Eliot, one of the most active advocates of the
system, requires a commission composed of five elected mem-
bers, one of whom is called the mayor and acts as chairman
of the commission, but has no veto power or any other special
power not shared by the other members of the commission. The
commission so elected is the source of all authority in the city,
makes all ordinances, appoints all officials, collects taxes, and
makes all appropriations.

As set forth by its advocates, the significant features of the
plan, in addition to those already mentioned, are: Assignments
of the important divisions of the city government to individual
members of the commission, each of whom is directly respon-
sible for the best conduct of his particular department; ade-
quate compensation to the members of the commission for their
time and labor, the city employing all the commissioners at
living salaries; regularity, frequency, and publicity of the meet-
ings of the commissioners; all employees selected from eligible
lists based on examinations, oral and written, carefully devised
to develop merit and fitness; recommendations after examina-
tion by an independent civil service commission; the retention
in office of all employees so appointed during good behavior;
the recall; the granting of all public franchises to be submitted to
a vote of the electors.?

2See analysis prepared by the Charleston, S.C., Community Club.
Two other most important features are the introduction of
the principle of the short ballot and the elimination of ward
lines. In the judgment of long-time students of city affairs
these are considered, together with the concentration of au-
thority, as the most effective features of the system.

Some idea of the growth of the commission form of gov-
ernment may be measured by the extent of its adoption within
the past four years: Iowa, Kansas, North Dakota, South Dakota,
South Carolina, Mississippi, Minnesota, Illinois, Wisconsin,
Louisiana, Kentucky, and Oklahoma have commission laws
relating to all or certain classes of cities within their respective
borders. The list of cities operating under some form of com-
mission government approximates one hundred. There have been
numerous modifications of the plan. In some the terms of all
the commissioners expire at one and the same time. In others
they expire one each year, thus creating the shortest possible
ballot and preventing a complete overturn of the government.
In certain cities the voters elect commissioners to have charge
of certain departments or bureaus; in others the commissioners
themselves assign the duties. Keokuk, Iowa, has but three com-
missioners, but the great majority of cities have five. There
are several methods of election: by the non-partisan primary,
as in Des Moines; by the French system of two elections, as in
Berkeley, Cal.; and by the preferential voting, as in Grand
Junction, Colo.

So far the movement has been confined to the smaller com-
munities of the country. The larger ones adopting it are: Glou-
cester and Haverhill, Mass.; Memphis, Tenn. ; Burlington, Cedar
Rapids, Des Moines, and Sioux City, Ia.; Kansas City, Leaven-
worth, Wichita, and Topeka, Kan.; Colorado Springs, Colo.;
St. Joseph, Mo.; Austin, Dallas, Fort Worth, Galveston, Hous-
ton, and Waco, Tex. A number of other cities like Buffalo,
N.Y., Mobile and Birmingham, Ala., have, through a vote of
their electors, expressed a desire for commission government, but
so far they have been denied their request by their state
legislatures.

The general trend of the more important cities of Massa-
chusetts, outside of Boston, has been toward a commission form
of government either with absolute power as in the case of
Chelsea or subject to the initiative, referendum, and recall, as
under the Des Moines plan. In New York bills providing for
a commission form of government in Mount Vernon and Mel-
zinga were passed by the last session of the legislature, but
failed for reasons which did not involve the merit of the legis-
lation. Pennsylvania has a full-fledged movement for the estab-
lishment of the system in the third-class cities of that state, a
formal organization having been established for this purpose.
In Virginia a similar movement is on foot, having for its object
the amendment of the Virginia constitution, to make possible
the establishment of the commission form by such cities as desire
to have it. Efforts are pending in Georgia, Alabama, and
Tennessee to secure the enactment of state laws. There are 128
cities now considering the question of the adoption of some form
of commission government, either in the way of an election to
adopt a charter under existing state legislation or to secure the
necessary power from the state legislature.

This form of city government is still too new in its applica-
tion to enable one to speak with any degree of finality concern-
ing its merits. That it will solve off-hand all the problems to
which a municipality is heir is absurd. In fact the movement is
likely to suffer in the near future unless its advocates modify
their claims. Within the year claims have been made by its
advocates that it had effectually eliminated the social evil, citing
the closed town policy of Des Moines. As a result of a change
in the personnel of the commission in that city there was a less
rigorous enforcement of the laws dealing with this subject, and
as a result the enemies of the system heralded the fact from one
end of the country to the other that it had broken down and
failed. As a matter of fact both claims were wrong. The
merit of the commission form was that it enabled the people
of Des Moines to establish, with little or no delay, what officials
were responsible for the changed conditions of affairs, and
through the exercise of public sentiment to bring about a needed
enforcement of the laws.
On the other hand it is not fair to regard the movement for
the establishment of the commission form of government in
American cities as a passing fad. It represents a deep-seated
desire on the part of the American people to set their municipal
houses in order and simplify their governmental machinery, to
concentrate responsibility, and to establish municipal business on
a new, firmer, and substantial basis.

Wherever charter reform has been an issue at recent elec-
tions the progressive element in the community have won grati-
fying victories. Boston, for instance, after a vigorous campaign
voted by a small majority last December in favor of what is
known as plan No. 2, embodying the recommendation of the
original finance commission. Under it national party designa-
tions on the ballot disappear and with them all the machinery
of the caucus, convention and primary, which have hitherto stood
between the voter and his final choice at the polls.

Charter revision continues to be the dominant issue in New
York City. Governor Hughes during his term of office sought
to bring about a complete and satisfactory revision of the
charter of the city, steadfastly setting his face against piece-
meal tinkering with the form of government. The Ivins Com-
mission appointed by him did what many regarded as one of
the most complete and systematic pieces of work ever turned
out by a charter commission. It failed of indorsement by the
legislature, which was under reactionary influences. That body
preferred instead to appoint a committee of its own which con-
sidered the Ivins report and expressed its agreement with some
features and its disagreement with others. It failed, however,
to grasp the fundamental features that Mr. Ivins and his col-
leagues so carefully worked out. The joint committee announced
that it could not accept the basic principles on which the Ivins
commission charter was constructed, although it adopted many
of its specific suggestions.

Pittsburgh enjoys the reputation of being intensely practical.
For years it has been studying itself, or at least some of its most
public spirited men have. It has had a series of charters, each
an improvement over the former. It has experimented with
commissions in charge of municipal improvements and man-
agement. It has had government by the council with the mayor
as a figurehead. Now it possesses a mayor who as chief execu-
tive is supreme, and with this Pittsburgh seems to be satisfied,
but it has found its two chambers of councils with ward repre-
sentation productive only of bad government. There is there-
fore a strong demand that the councilmanic and ward systems of
representation be reformed. This idea was prominently in view
when 48 of its councilmen were indicted for bribery, and within
a week after the final graft exposure 5,000 of its citizens met
and appointed a committee in the interest of charter legislation.
This committee has completed its work and its plan has been
approved by the commercial and civic bodies of the city. This
is the Pittsburgh plan:

The mayor is to retain his supreme administrative authority.
He now appoints and can remove the heads of every department
with the exception of the comptroller, which is elective. He is
personally responsible for the administration of every depart-
ment of the city government. Pittsburgh has not always been
satisfied with its mayor by any means, but it has never charged
his personal shortcomings to the charter. It is with the legisla-
tive branch of the government that the plan chiefly deals and
the changes proposed are radical. Instead of two chambers
of council, one with 27 and the other with 40 members as at
present, a single body of nine members is proposed. The coun-
cilmen are to be elected by the city at large for the term of
four years, five at one biennial election and four at another.
They are to receive a salary of $6,500 annually. A referen-
dum is possible on all ordinances upon petition of 10 per cent
of the voters at the last municipal election, and the initiative
is to be granted on the petition of 15 per cent of the voters.
Nominations of all city officers are to be made by petition of
5 per cent of the voters. The ballot is to be non-partisan, with-
out party names or symbols, and the recall may be demanded
upon a petition of 25 per cent of the voters.

West Virginia has had a municipal code commission at
work for upward of a year. In its recently published report
provision is made for a large measure of local autonomy. The
present governing body of any municipality has the right under
the proposed law to name a charter commission, which in turn
submits to the direct vote of the people either of the various
forms of government above outlined. The functions of the
governing bodies, however, are definitely fixed. The method
of taxation, the granting of franchises, ordinances, elections,
registration, duties of officers in the collection and disburse-
ment of the funds of the municipality are also definitely fixed
by the proposed law and cannot be changed. Generally speak-
ing, however, these proposed codes increase the charter powers
of a city, centralizing power and responsibility, and reduce the
number of elective officers.

An important development in charter reform is the growth
of public sentiment in behalf of municipal home rule. As Dr.
Fairlie pointed out at the Pittsburgh meeting of the National
Municipal League, the principle of home rule has come to be
more generally recognized even in special legislation. A signifi-
cant event of the past year was the large measure of attention
given to the subject of municipal home rule by the League of
American Municipalities at its meeting in St. Paul. Mayor
Mahool, of Baltimore, in a thoughtful paper indorsing the
principles of the National Municipal League’s Municipal Pro-
gram, declared even if the legislature
In many places the commission form of government is
enacted as a result of home rule provisions in the legislative
enactment or in the state constitution. In fact, the present
movement for the commission form of government seems to
be in the direction of passing a general law the provisions of
which may be availed of by any city in the state upon an
affirmative vote of its electors. There is doubt of the consti-
tutionality of such enactments in a few states like Pennsyl-
vania, for instance, but even there, there are not wanting those
well versed in the law who maintain that such home rule pro-
visions are not contrary to the requirements of the fundamental
law of the state.

As a result of the discussion at the St. Paul meeting of
the League of American Municipalities that organization unani-
mously adopted the following resolution :

Resolved, That the League of American Municipalities reaffirms its firm
belief in the principle of municipal home rule, as being the one absolutely
vital measure needful for the prosperity, progress, and moral well-being of
the American city, and to remove from it such reproach as now Clings to
it; and be it further

Resolved, That this league, speaking in the name of cities extending
from the Atlantic to the Pacific and from Hudson Bay to the Gulf of
Mexico, respectively but earnestly protests to the legislatures of such states
and provinces as are concerned, against the denial of a right, which is fully
conferred upon business corporations, and the perpetuation of a system that
throttles progress, stifles aspiration, and encourages political corruption and
brigandage.
So successful have been the methods followed by the New
York Bureau of Municipal Research that similar bureaus have
been established in other cities: Philadelphia, 1908; Cincin-
nati, 1909; Memphis, 1909; Hoboken, 1910; Boston, 1910;
Chicago, 1910; Milwaukee, 1910; St. Paul, 1910; Minneapolis,
1g10. Their introduction has resulted in the saving of consider-
able sums of money to the city in the annual budget as well as
greater efficiency in all the departments of the city government,
and in New York in the formulation and adoption of an intelli-
gent municipal budget.

A budget exhibit was arranged in 1909 by the New York
Bureau as a matter of public enterprise and instruction. It
proved so helpful and so successful that the city’s board of esti-
mate and apportionment officially secured $25,000 of the city’s
money with which to give a public budget exhibit in 1909. In
this way New York has established a precedent in getting
closer than any other city in America to a working ideal of
municipal administration, where unit cost can be determined
and its reasonableness intelligently considered. With this infor-
mation in hand budget making need not longer be mere guess-
ing as is at present the case in a vast majority of cities. The
officer making an appropriation must show not only how much
he spent in the past year, what he spent it for, and what he
accomplished by the expenditure, but he must show just what
he intends to accomplish in the course of the coming year, how
he intends to accomplish it, why the proposed work is necessary,
and just what it will cost. All of this is important, but still more
important is the fact that the exhibit put this information in such
graphic and practical form that the public could readily see and
understand and reach a conclusion whether they were getting
their money’s worth, and if not, who was responsible for the fail-
ure. As Municipal Facts pointed out, never in New York’s
history has there been an administration like the present one.
“Never was there such a board of estimates. In one and the
same breath it shows the taxpayers how their money is being
spent and tells the department heads not to spend so much of it.”

Boston’s bureau of municipal research is an official one. The
New York organization is a voluntary affair of private citizens,
who felt that the city’s business was not always conducted in a
businesslike way, who gave their money, their experience, and
their time to the work they set themselves to do, and beyond
mere researching they offer suggestion, help, and co-operation
to department heads who want it, or appear on investigation
to need it. The cost of all this, calculated in terms of money
expended alone, has been $100,000 a year, but the results
have been worth so many times that sum that the citizens of
other places have been moving to imitate their example. Bos-
ton’s bureau is quite different. As sensed by its finance com-
mission, Boston’s real need is not so much of accountants as
of men who can direct accountants if it becomes necessary to
employ them; not of men skilled in working out unit cost sys-
tems so much as of men who can see through all the peculi-
arities of concealing systems, of a man who finally can read
department reports and make sane and logical comments on
them.

Chicago, through the initiative of its City Club, has organ-
ized a bureau of public efficiency. It is an unofficial organiza-
tion supported by private citizens to scrutinize the systems of
accounting in the eight local departments of Chicago, to examine
the methods of purchasing materials and supplies and letting
and executing contracts in these bodies, to examine their pay-
rolls, with a view to determining the efficiency of such expendi-
tures, to make constructive suggestions for improvements, and
to co-operate with public officials in the installation of improved
methods, to furnish the public with exact information regarding
public revenues and expenditures, and thereby promote efficiency
and economy in the public service.

During the year the Merriam commission on city expendi-
tures has been conducting an investigation into the finances of
the city government, and within a few months will publish its
report covering this field in a general way.

Accompanying the development of the idea of municipal re-
search and coincident with it, has been the growth of the demand
for municipal reference bureaus. As the national Municipal
League has from the beginning of its work in 1894 persis-
tently maintained, the value of comparative data in dealing with
municipal questions can hardly be overestimated, especially when
so many new problems are constantly arising. A department
of this kind would prevent many ill-advised measures from be-
coming laws, and would often save the city an actual loss by
preventing the passage of ordinances which have proved unsatis-
factory in other cities.

This idea of a municipal reference library is by no means
a new or untried one. Departments or bureaus of this descrip-
tion have already been established in Baltimore, Milwaukee,
Newark, N.J., and departments of statistics have for some
years existed in a number of cities, notably New York, Chicago,
and Boston. Los Angeles has a privately maintained bureau.
A number of states have also established similar bureaus,
among them Wisconsin, New York, Rhode Island, California,
Indiana, Pennsylvania, Michigan, and bills have been introduced
in other legislatures providing for their adoption. ‘Foreign
cities years ago recognized the necessity of such departments in
some form.

American cities have little or no latitude given them in the
matter of taxation. The constitutions of 75 per cent of the
states require uniform taxation of all property under what is
known as the general property tax system. Few statute laws
have been passed during the year touching upon the matter of
municipal taxation. A most significant occurrence, however,
was the introduction into the New York Legislature of a bill
asked for by Mayor Gaynor’s administration and the New York
Merchants’ Association, to exempt from taxation personal prop-
erty in the city of New York. Although the request was
denied, the action of the mayor and of the association was
generally regarded as an official recognition of the breakdown
of the idea of local taxation of personal property.

The most notable changes in municipal taxation are occur-
ring in Canada, where in several provinces cities have been
granted a large measure of home rule. In British Columbia
a general statute has for years permitted municipalities to assess
improvements at a lower percentage than the land. A recent
statute fixed a maximum assessment of 50 per cent for improve-
ments, while allowing a lower rate or an entire exemption by
vote of the local council. Vancouver, in March, 1910, exempted
improvements entirely, while assessing land at 100 per cent of
its value. This followed a progressive reduction of assess-
ments on improvements extending over some years, beginning at
a 75 per cent assessment, then 50 per cent, then 25 per cent.
Several other cities in British Columbia have also gradually re-
duced the percentage, while they now exempt improvements
entirely.

In the Province of Alberta the larger cities have for some
years exempted improvements, raising their revenues chiefly from
a tax on land values with a slight business tax and a tax on
franchises of public-service corporations when these are not
municipally owned. Most of the new villages asking for incor-
poration are also requesting this same power of exemption which
is granted upon petition to the local authorities.

In Ontario the local taxation of personal property was
abolished in 1903, a business tax being substituted. At the
present session of the provincial legislature a petition was pre-
sented, signed officially by over two hundred municipalities,
asking for the same right of home rule in the partial or total
exemption of improvements as exists in British Columbia.

Prince Rupert is starting its municipal career without tax-
ing improvements. Vancouver and Prince Rupert are probably
destined to grow with tremendous rapidity. Doubtless they
would grow tremendously if they had the worst system of taxa-
tion in the world, because they are the ports of Western
Canada and the terminals of great railway systems; but in the
judgment of tax reformers by the policy of not penalizing im-
provements they are certain to grow with all the greater ra-
pidity, and land speculation will be, to a considerable extent, dis-
couraged, to the great advantage of the growing communities.

A notable taxation settlement was that providing for the
arrearages of franchise taxes due the City of New York from
the Metropolitan Street Railway Company and other corpora-
tions arrived at in May last. The basis of the settlement is
practically on the 65 per cent allowance, on which the Third
Avenue Railroad has settled its total franchise indebtedness.
The Metropolitan at the date of the May settlement had paid
$2,640,000 into the city treasury on account, and under the
agreement the total will be increased to $6,390,000. This is
exclusive of the Manhattan Elevated Company, the Second
Avenue and Central Park, and the North and East River lines,
whose indebtedness will be settled, it is expected, on much the
sarrie basis. With the final approval of this plan of payment
practically all the arrearage franchise taxes due the city will
have been settled, with the exception of the claim against the
New York Central Railroad.

This being the year of the taking of the decennial census, the
newspapers and periodicals generally have been filled with statis-
tics concerning the cost of municipal government and the
growth of population. In addition the Census Bureau’s annual
reports have furnished the usual quota of interesting figures.
The bulletin issued on July 7 last showed that $405,000,000
had been spent in 1908 in maintaining and operating the depart-
ments of the 158 cities having an estimated population of 30,000
or more. The maintenance of schools and the protection of
life and property by the police represented 55 per cent of this
total. For the whole group of cities the average per capita ex-
pense for schools was $4.70, for police departments, $2.25, for
fire departments, $1.72. The increased cost of maintaining the
administrative departments in recent years is illustrated by the
fact that in 147 cities of over 30,000 population in 1902 the
cost was $13.36 per capita, while for the same cities in 1908
it was $16.81.

The general financial transactions of the 158 cities involved
the receipt and expenditure of more than $1,250,000,000. Pay-
ments amounted to $1,284,000,000 and receipts to $1,336,000.-
000. The excess of the receipts over payments was due to large
loans by cities during the year, and is reflected in the cash on hand
at the close of the year.

Payments on account of outlays for new purposes or new
work by the 158 cities above mentioned amounted for 1908 to
$275,003,695, as compared with $244,117,298 in 1907. Over
one-third of the 1908 expenditures was paid by New York City.
The figures are as follows: New York, $83,417,149, Chicago,
$18,093,086, and Philadelphia, $14,473,184.

The total net indebtedness of the 158 cities at the close of
1908 was $1,718,000,000, and of this amount 39.8 per cent, or
$684,000,000, is credited to New York City alone. That city
had more than seven times the indebtedness of any other city
and more than one-half the total of the 29 largest cities of the
country. The per capita net debt of New York City was $157.74:
and the only other cities having a per capita net indebtedness of
over $100 were Cincinnati, Boston, Galveston, Portland, Newton
(Mass.), Pueblo (Colo.), and Pawtucket. The increase in the
net debt for the fiscal year 1908 was $185,877,856 as compared
with a total increase for 1907 of $120,930,631. As the census
report pointed out, in any discussion of indebtedness it should
be remembered that the value of public improvements, and
especially the amounts expended on public service enterprises,
should be taken into consideration. Many cities own their
water works, some their lighting plants, and a considerable pro-
portion of the indebtedness of such cities may be incurred in
the purchase or construction of such plants.

Kansas City is establishing some new civil service prece-
dents that are likely to prove of usefulness. In the first place
the new commission which Mayor Brown appointed began its
examinations with the highest positions of the several depart-
ments that were not exempted under the law. This policy was
adopted, first because it was thought that it would obtain men
having authority in each of the departments, who being selected
on the merit system would be entirely in sympathy with its
purposes. It was also thought it would result in more loyalty
in employees to their superior officers if they knew the man in
charge had already passed the test to which they later would be
subjected, rather than the reverse. This was indeed a wise
idea, for if the merit system is to be accepted heartily by the
rank and file they must be persuaded that it represents merit
all along the line, rather than in spots, and that it applies to all,
high and low alike. The commisson has adopted the idea of
having for each group of examinations a committee of three
experts to conduct the examination and grade papers. This is
a wholesale adoption of the plan worked out by the Chicago
commission at the time it held its examination for librarian of
the Public Library. It is believed it will work out well.

The results have been highly satisfactory. Good men have
been chosen, party lines have been wiped out, and the merit
system established in the respect and confidence of the office-
holding class and of the people.

Boston’s civil service experience is proving interesting and
illuminating. It will be recalled that under the new charter
the appointment of all heads of departments must be submitted
by the mayor to the state civic service commission for inde-
pendent investigation and approval. If that board rejects the
appointment then the mayor must appoint another whose selec-
tion in turn must be submitted to the civil service commission.
As City Affairs, the publication of the Boston Good Govern-
ment Association, declared, the civic service commission now
occupies the center of the stage. It has dared to differ with the
mayor on the qualities that go to make up an expert. The
mayor realizes that the clause of the charter dealing with this
subject is doing just what it was intended to do. It is keeping
out of office the old style of political heads of departments and
is treating the people to the spectacle of the new standards
actually put into practice.

In its work thus far the commission deserves the thanks of the com-

munity. It has perfomed an unpleasant duty conscientiously, carefully, and
(rare virtue?) silently.
There has been no appreciable diminution of interest in nomi-
nation reform, although there has been an increasing apprecia-
tion of the fact that primary reform is only a step towards the
restoration of popular government. Yet the best primary act,
as the Chicago Record-Herald has so wisely pointed out, is only
a tool. It is not a substitute for hard work and intelligence.
For a while there was danger that some of the more zealous
advocates of the new politics might regard nomination reform
as a panacea for all our political ills and as effective in itself.
Today nomination is to the fore-front in those states which
have not yet secured a law authorizing direct nomination. In
those states where the law has been established the aim is to per-
fect and extend it, not to destroy it.

The movement for the establishment of the initiative, referen-
dum, and recall is a part of the same movement as that mani-
festing itself in the demand for the direct nomination of candi-
dates. They are all part of the desire for a more responsive
electoral machinery. As for the past ten years, Oregon has
retained its leadership in this direction. There has been a feeling
on the part of many that the initiative and referendum have
been somewhat overworked in that state. It must be conceded,
however, that the results so far have not justified this fear, inas-
much as the Oregon voters have shown remarkable discrimina-
tion in their voting up or voting down propositions submitted
to them under the initiative and referendum laws. It is true
there have been efforts made to submit trivial questions but these
have not interfered with the intelligent expression of opinion on
questions submitted.

In Illinois a vigorous campaign for the adoption of the
initiative and referendum has been waged. The proposition
submitted to the voters at the November election was in the fol-
lowing form:

Shall the next general assembly submit to the voters of the State of
Illinois at the next following state election an amendment to the state con-
stitution providing for the control of legislation by the people by means of
the initiative and the referendum, said amendment to provide for the
initiation of legislation upon the petition of eight per cent of the voters,
and for the reference of legislation upon the petition of 5 per cent of the
voters, the action of a majority of electors voting to be final, thus restoring
to the people the power which they once held but which they delegated to
the general assembly by the Constitution.®
however, represents an improvement in that instead of submit-
ting the entire instrument covering all phases of government,
questions are submitted one by one in a form which admits of
a comparatively easy formulation of a sound judgment. Advo-
cates of the short ballot have been fearful lest the growth of
the initiative and the referendum movement would militate
against the movement. Experience with the short ballot and
the referendum and the initiative has not been sufficiently ex-
tended to justify one in making any dogmatic assertions one
way or the other. With the concentration of legislative and
administrative duties in the hands of a small number of elec-
tive officers, it would seem as if there should be adequate pro-
vision for the voters to declare themselves upon the questions of
policy, otherwise there would not be that separation of the policy
determining functions from the policy executing functions.

A steady progress of public opinion in favor of the short
ballot is to be noted. Involving as it does constitutional changes,
there is a very little to report in the way of concrete accom-
plishment, although the adoption of the commission form of
government represents one form of short ballot, and in this
direction there has been a very substantial advance during the
past year. Moreover the agitation of the short ballot idea has
brought about a more widespread consideration of the whole
question of our governmental machinery, with the result of
awakening the people to their duty and responsibility in the
premises.
