The Comparative Role of the Group Concept in Ward's Dynamic Sociology and
Contemporary American Sociology

Author(s): Walter B. Bodenhafer

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 26, No. 4 (Jan., 1921), pp. 425-474
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2764495

Accessed: 10-05-2016 17:14 UTC
THE COMPARATIVE ROLE OF THE GROUP CONCEPT
IN WARD’S DYNAMIC SOCIOLOGY AND CONTEM-
PORARY AMERICAN SOCIOLOGY

 

WALTER B. BODENHAFER
Washington University

 

Ill. THE GROUP CONCEPT AS USED BY SOME CONTEMPORARY
SOCIOLOGISTS

This chapter will endeavor to present the uses of the group
concept as they are displayed by some scholars who have become
distinguished as writers of sociology in America. The sociological
field is too wide for any pretense of giving attention to all to whom
reference might be made. The selection is purely arbitrary and
personal, but the reviews presented are fairly representative of
different standpoints. The rule has been adhered to of selecting
for extended discussion only those who have become known as
sociologists, and who have definitely been aligned with that division
of labor: This does violence, in particular, to one group of social
scientists which has been particularly prominent in developing the
view which is set forth throughout the paper. That group is the
social psychologists, such as Baldwin, Mead, and others whe have
performed an indispensable work in changing the whole bent of
thought in social science. In this case also the selection is arbitrary,
and has no justification except the limitations of space and the
recognition of a division of labor. No effort will be made to review
the whole system of sociology that might be found in all the writings
of a given author, but only those selections will be made which seem
to be appropriate for the purpose in hand. A steady effort will
be made to adopt a policy of liberal rather than strict construction
in all cases. The order in which the reviews come is partly chrono-
logical and partly that of the importance which is given to the
use of the group concept.

1 One exception is mentioned later.
As a point of departure for the consideration of Giddings’ use
of the group concept, it will be well to give his conception of his
task as a sociologist. He believes the purpose of sociology to be
that of conceiving society in its unity and attempting to explain
it in terms of cosmic cause and law.’ In order to accomplish its
purpose it seeks to work out a subjective explanation in terms of
some fact of consciousness or motive, and an objective interpreta-
tion in terms of a physical process. This does not mean a philo-
sophical dualism, but two ways of viewing reality? The central
fact of motive or consciousness is, of course, the consciousness of
kind. Around this the whole subjective explanation revolves:

Accordingly, the sociologist has three main quests. First, he must try
to discover the conditions that determine aggregation and concourse. Sec-
ondly, he must try to discover the law that governs social choices, the law that
is of the subjective process. Thirdly, he must try to discover also the law
that governs the natural selection and the survival of choices, the law that is
of the objective process.

With this brief summary of the general point of view and pur-
pose of sociology we may consider in further detail how far Giddings
makes use of the group in gaining the ends he has devined for his
subject. In setting out upon the descriptive analysis of society,
one must begin with the study of population, since the physical
population is the basis for all society. In such a study the first
fact to claim attention is the fact of aggregation or grouping. In
other words, the group is assumed as the starting point for any
study whatever. ‘Some degree of aggregation is the indispensable
condition to the evolution of society.” As will be shown later on in
the review, this position is carried through the whole sociological
discussion which occupies our attention. The importance of the
group factor, as the initial condition of the explanation of all origins,
will appear more clearly when we come to the study of the origin
and evolution of society. In support of his contention the author
cites examples of group life among animals and the fact that human

1 Principles of Sociology, p. 16.

2 Ibid. Giddings expressly disclaims any dualistic conception by his use of

these two interpretations, but passages throughout the book seem to indicate that he
does not escape a psychological dualism as will be suggested later on.

3 Ibid., p. 20.
beings are always found in groups. ‘The conception of nature as
‘red in tooth and claw’ is very dear to moralists and politicians,
but, unhappily, moralists and politicians do not know nature inti-
mately. A world of living creatures that fear and hate, shun and
attack one another without restraint, is not a fact of observation.
It is a pure a@ priori creation of the ‘pure’ reason.”

The term aggregation as used has a special meaning which is
intended to distinguish it from association. Aggregation is the
physical foundation of society. It is the mere physical concourse
of propinquity. Association, on the other hand, has reference to
the psychic process which begins in simple phases of feeling and
perception, and develops into activities that ultimately call forth
the highest powers of the mind. Aggregation is always supple-
mented by association if the assembled individuals are not too
unlike? While one might easily question whether any forms of
higher animals or the ancestors of man ever represent mere aggre-
gation as thus defined, yet the fact that is being emphasized by
Giddings is sound, namely, that the first assumption from which
a sociological study must start is the group, that is forms of life in
some sort of “togetherness.”’ Some of the discussion of the process
of aggregation seems to lay him open to the charge of having after
all to desert his social hypothesis and proceed to aggregate or gather
together his individuals, but a careful reading of the whole book
with this query in mind must acquit him of the charge. The
emphasis is on the fact of being in a group rather than on the active
stage of aggregation. The choice of terms is a bad one on account
of the active connotation to which the term “aggregation” so easily
lends itself. Giddings starts with an association or group, and does
not conceive of the individuals as coming together out of nothingness
with varying degrees of isolated evolution.

All human beings, from the lowest savages to civilized men, live
in family groups.3 These family groups range in size from the
simplest family unions up to the larger groups found among polyga-
mous peoples. Human societies are composed of families which are
combined to form larger aggregates. These aggregates are of two
types, the ethnical and the demotic. Ethnical societies are genetic

1 Ibid., p. 79. 2 Ibid., p. 100. 3 Ibid., p. 155.
aggregations in which the chief bond is blood-kinship. Demotic
societies, on the other hand, are those associations which are bound
together by habitual intercourse, mutual interests, and co-operation,
with little or no regard to origins or genetic relations.t The demotic
society is the later development, although the family group is found
in it as well as in the ethnic type. A more detailed consideration
of Giddings’ development of the nature and formation of these
two types of societies will bring out in a number of ways the part
which the group plays in his thinking.

Ethnic societies are divided into three great classes according
to the degree of development they have reached. The first class
is the horde which is composed of a few families, usually not more
than a hundred persons in all. These small groups are not found
permanently isolated from other similar groups, consequently there
results not only an internal group life, but also an intergroup com-
munication. They do not permanently combine, however, so as
to become a single group. The next larger group is the tribe,
which is an aggregate of several hordes or a differentiated horde
which has become very large. Such groups have one language,
occupy one territory, and are pretty thoroughly organized unities.
The third class of ethnic societies is the still larger group which is
a confederation of tribes into an ethnic nation or a folk. Such
groups have not yet developed along commercial, industrial, or
intellectual lines to a degree sufficient to make them into the modern
states.2 Whatever the class of ethnic society, it may be organized
on either the metronymic or patronymic basis. It will be seen
from the above summary of Giddings’ discussion of the primitive
forms of human life that some kind of group life is always in evi-
dence. Whatever the size or form of the life may be, there is the
constant factor of the group which makes possible a more or less
active social life.

As before indicated, the demotic societies are defined as being
those which have attained a civil basis; the blood bond has largely
disappeared. In this class are found all the more highly developed
states, including the present civilized nations. The latter represent
a higher type of social evolution. The family, however, remains

 

 

 

 

1 Principles of Sociology, p. 157. 2 Ibid., pp. 157-58.
the unitary group. Families are combined into neighborhoods,
hamlets, villages; the latter compose the town and so on up to the
highest unit, the state.t From the lowest to the highest type of
organization in groups, the central subjective factor is the
consciousness of kind.

The organization of the different members of society into vol-
untary groups for specified ends is what is called the constitution
of a society. These voluntary organizations are on the basis of
the consciousness of kind, that is, those that are in sympathetic
agreement as to the purposes of the organization. Those that are
not of ‘‘kind” are generally refused entrance to the special group.
These voluntary organizations are numerous, and increase with
the development of society. The most important of all voluntary
organizations are the political organizations. In addition to the
political are the religious organizations, secret societies, cultural
groups, labor organizations, in fact, all voluntary groupings which
are found to exist in contemporary society. Giddings does not
adequately explain the significance of these groups in the life of
the individual nor attempt to explain the processes by which the
relation of the individual to the group becomes so important. He
does not possess the means to do this, and relies on the principle of
the consciousness of kind for whatever explanation is given. In
other words, he has no social psychology to interpret the significance
of the situation he describes. In spite of these limitations, however,
it is of interest to this investigation to note the degree to which
emphasis is placed on the presence of numerous groups in the
actual life of society. The importance of the groups is implied,
but the details of the way in which the groups, particularly the
‘primary groups,” are so important in the creation of the individual,
are lacking. It remained for later sociological thought to bring
out this point more explicitly. The fact of the group, however,
as a central fact in human society is consistently kept in view
in the discussion with which we are dealing.

Thus far the discussion has largely concerned existing societies,
primitive and civilized. In order to show up more clearly the
extent to which the group concept plays a part in Giddings’ thought,

x [bid., pp. 168 ff.
it will be of value to consider that part of his sociology which has
to do with the evolution of society. The development of society is
traced through four stages of association: zodgenic, anthropogenic,
ethnogenic, and demogenic. We shall observe the same order in
seeking to find out to what extent he has used the group as a factor
in the evolutionary process which he attempts to follow.

The term “zodgenic association” suggests that the author con-
ceives association, or the group life, to have been a factor among ani-
mals and the precursors of man. We shall try to point out the wide
use which is made of this conception in the course of afew pages. The
principle upon which he proceeds is stated in this manner: “If
animal life in the primeval ages was not wholly different from the
animal life now, association had been quietly working its trans-
forming results for millions of years before mankind appeared upon
the earth.’ In other words, the group life began long before man
appeared, and not only that, it had also been a vital factor in pre-
paring for his advent. How this had been done will appear as we
proceed with the review. First of all, the group life or association
had certain direct effects on the mental life of the associated forms.”

These effects were, first, an original development of native
susceptibilities and powers, such as susceptibilities to suggestion,
capability of imitation, antipathies, sympathies, power of discrimi-
nation and co-ordination; secondly, a considerable accumulation
of knowledge; and thirdly, a further development of all powers
and susceptibilities. Association thus reacted on the whole organ-
ism. It gave the social animal an advantage in securing a more
adequate food supply, afforded a wider range of sexual selection
within the group, and gave the group a greater advantage in
struggles with hostile or unfavorable surrounding flora or fauna.

Giddings carries the group value still further and maintains
that the group has been a factor in the origin of species. The
extent to which the social factor is carried may be seen from the
following quotations: ‘Association was one of the great co-operating
causes of the origin of species’’;3 ‘‘It is not possible to doubt that

* Principles, p. 199; Elements of Sociology, p. 232.
2 Elements of Sociology, p. 237.
3 Principles, p. 202.
for thousands of years before man existed, natural selection was
everywhere supplemented by conscious choice, a direct product of
association’’; ‘‘ Association, in short, was a chief cause of variation
and of characterization. It created new varieties, and in them it
reproduced, in ever-increasing strength, the instinct to associate.”’*
In commenting upon the strictly biological approach to the evo-
lutionary problem he demands: ‘Is there not a fatal lack in the
biological philosophy that ignores the social factor and attempts
to account for variation through physiological processes only ?
Was not animal intelligence a selective agency that combined and
recombined the factors of evolution? And was not association a
factor in the development of intelligence?’ After citing many
examples from Kropotkin (Mutual Aid), he resumes, ‘On the whole,
we may accept M. Kropotkin’s conclusion that society has been a
more powerful aid than any other in the struggle for existence.
But it has been so, not because of any mysterious power in itself,
but because it has acted directly on the characters of the associated
individuals, transforming them gradually, and by degrees develop-
ing mental power.’’? With the defects in the analysis made, we
are not concerned. It is immaterial for our purpose whether, from
the side of biology, the details of the plan are sound or not. What
the passages do show is, that Giddings had in mind the group as a
very important factor in the actual life of the animal forms and of
the precursors of man, and that the group played a very important
part, not only in the development of the subsequent group life,
but also was a factor in the development of the individual forms.
The whole of Giddings’ view on this point is summarized in this way:

Thus throughout the ages before man, association was zoégenic. It was
causing variation and was determining survival. It was differentiating
animal life into kinds, and was bringing to a high state of perfection the kinds
that were best equipped with a social nature, with habits of mutual aid, and with
elementary forms of social organization. In achieving all this, association
was preparing the way for man and for human society... . . Thousands of
years, perhaps millions of years, before man was born, the foundations of his
empire were being laid in the zodgenic associations of the humblest forms of
conscious life.‘

t Ibid., p. 203. 3 Ibid., pp. 206-7.

2 [bid., p. 201. 4 Ibid., p. 207.
In other words, human society has its roots in the group life
of the distant past, and in order to analyze the evolutionary basis
of society and of man, one must have recourse to the fundamental
fact of the group.

Under the term anthropogenic association, Giddings discusses
the fact of association among prehistoric peoples and its relation
to the development of human beings. It is the next stage above
animal, or zodgenic, association described above. No existing
societies can be found which are in this stage, but there are enough
similarities revealed by the study of primitive tribes to suggest
some parallels. These are supplemented by the discoveries of
archaeologists which have revealed a good deal of the nature of
prehistoric life.

In this type of association, as in the former, the group plays a
central part. All evidence points to the conclusion that the pre-
historic peoples lived in groups, as did their animal ancestors, and
as do their descendants. There is no evidence of a hiatus of a
non-group life between the social animals and social man.

All the remains of primitive man show that they lived as savage men live,
in groups. The ape-like ancestor of man must have been a social animal. Is
there any reason to suppose that between the social anthropoid and the social
primitive man there was intercalated a pair living out of social relations and
so far differing mentally and physically from all the other creatures that any
society with them was impossible? If there is, it would be just as well to go
back to the hypothesis of special creation; for the mental and physical differ-
ences that mark me off from other creatures are those that are created by social
intercourse, and without society they could not have had a natural genesis.t

The group, then, is the sine qua non of the evolution of human
society and man. It is the group with its interrelations that has
produced those qualities which distinguish man from other forms
of animal life and has given him his pre-eminence. “If the
conclusions hitherto reached in this work are true, it is necessary
to believe that association, more extended, more intimate, more
varied in its phases, than the association practiced by inferior
species, was the chief cause of the mental and moral development,
and of the anatomical modifications that transformed a sub-human
species into man.’”

* Principles, p. 208. 2 Tbid., p. 221.
In his analysis of the nature, origin, and function of language,
Giddings displays, in a very clear fashion, the group factor as a
part of the social process in evolution. Of the importance of speech
in the development of society and of human beings he says: “Speech
is the specific attainment that separates man from the brute and is
the means to the development of his higher intellectual qualities.’
As will be shown later, this peculiar achievement is a social product,
and therefore is a result of group relations.

Language is defined broadly:

Language, the system of signs by which simple ideas, recepts, and concepts
are expressed, may consist of gestures, grimaces and tones, of inarticulate
utterances, of articulate sounds, or of articulate sounds, tones and gestures in
combination. The language of gesture and tone is the language of recepts;
It is well developed among animals and is the natural language of children,
mentally deficient adults and savages. Articulation is a secondary language
of recepts and the only language of concepts.?

Giddings adopts Romanes’ classifications of the signs that constitute
language, whether such signs are gestures, tones, or articulate
sounds, namely: (z) indicative; (2) denotative; (3) connotative;
(4) denominative; (5) predicative. These represent an advancing
gradation from the simplest expression of sensations up to the
expression of concepts. Animals cannot ascend above the third
class of signs, and only rarely as far as the third. The fourth and
fifth classes of signs are employed only by man. In other words,
animals below man have language, but not speech.3

The “crucial question in the problem of the origin of human
faculty” is, How was the transition made from the lower type of
language to the higher type? In trying to answer this crucial
question, Giddings follows Donovan in looking for the solution in
the intimate relation between speech, on the one hand, and ideation,

1 Ibid., p. 209. 2 Ibid., p. 223.

3 Giddings properly includes gesture as the beginning of language of the higher
type. His discussion reveals a psychology which is atomistic and individualistic
and does not fit in with his group hypothesis. His psychological dualism is open to
criticism from several points of view, but we are not concerned so much with this
defect as with the problem of finding out to what extent he makes use of the group
factor in evolving that most vital factor in human evolution, language. His psychol-

ogy is inadequate but he does attempt to follow out the social hypothesis. In other
words, he makes bad use of the group concept, but he makes the attempt.
with choral music, on the other. Under the stimulus of excitement
which occurs at festal occasions and celebrations, with their intense
emotion, social interest, and rhythm, “‘signs were first distinguished
in thought from the things signified, and so conventionalized as
names, movable types of speech.’* The inadequacy of this explana-
tion of the problem is quite apparent, but the important point
to be noted is not its inadequacy but that it brings in the essential
fact of the group, and the emotional tension arising in group life,
as the starting-point for all attempts to explain the problem of the
origin of language in its higher forms. It was the group which
gave the human being a language which enabled him to lift himself
above the other forms of life.

The effect of language upon the nature of the developing forms
was to develop what Giddings calls human nature.

From the moment that the hominine species began to practice speech,
however feebly, however awkwardly, it began to develop a human nature.
The term “human nature” has so long been associated with economic motives
and with individualism, that it has acquired a perverted meaning. Human
nature is not the unsocial egoistic nature. Self-interest is not the distinctively
human trait; it is a primordial animal trait, which man, an animal after all,
still possesses and must cultivate if he would continue to live. Human nature
is the pre-eminently social nature.?

The thought contained here has been developed by other sociolo-
gists and is sound. Human nature is a group product and is essen-
tially a human characteristic. The instincts have their roots in the
distant past of the physical organism, but the mind or self is created
by the group and is a social product; it is human nature.

Giddings criticizes the traditional view of the order of evolution
as being unsound in that it reverses the true order. He describes
the traditional view as follows: “In the conceptions of evolution
that became current after the publication of the Descent of Man,
the development of man was pictured as beginning in a physical
transformation, continuing in a mental and moral development,
and completing itself in an evolution of social relations.’* Such a
view, according to Giddings, reverses the true order of cause and

1 Principles, p. 225. 2 Ibid.

3Cooley, Social Organization; Park, Principles of Human Behavior; Todd,
Theories of Social Progress; et al.

4 Principles, p, 228.
effect. ‘Social life enlarged and stimulated the mental life until
it created speech and conceptual thought. With the aid of speech
and conceptual thought, association continued to develop the
mental activity at an ever-accelerating rate until it became the
supreme activity and dominant interest of man.” By reason of
the fact of association in group life there developed language
and the resulting power of thought. “To create the human mind
was the great work of anthropogenic association.”?

Enough has been given to show the central position which in Gid-
dings’ view the group occupies in human evolution. As has been
suggested, there is an absence of an adequate process to explain the
origin of speech and the human mind, but they areproperly considered
as results of a group mode of life extending back into the dim animal
past. Giddings’ psychological point of view is that of an intellectual-
istic dualist, which, from the standpoint of a behaviorist or function-
alist, is open to serious criticism, but, for the present, that is outside
the purpose of this review. That purpose is to indicate some of the
ways in which Giddings used the group as a fact in constructing
his sociology. It is hoped that the purpose has been accomplished.

Concerning the relation of the individual to the group in
present societies, Giddings says: “The individual, therefore, is
not prior to society, or society to the individual. Community is
not precedent to competition, or competition to community. From
the first, competition and community, society and the individual,
have been co-ordinate. Society and the individual have always
been acting and reacting upon each other.”3 This passage suggests
the thesis which Cooley followed,* and which expresses the starting-
point for modern social psychology, namely, the individual and
the group are but two phases of the larger whole. The final end
of the whole social process is not, however, the ultimate exaltation
of the group at the expense of the individual, as implied by Plato
and actually carried out in the German state, but rather the reverse:
“The function of society is to develop conscious life and to create
human personality.’’s

3 Ibid., p. 229. 2 Ibid., p. 255. 3 Ibid., p. 399.

4 Human Nature and the Social Order; Social Organization.

5 Principles, p. 420.
Professor Ross has made his particular contribution to American
sociology in the field of what he has defined as social psychology
and its subordinate branch, social control. This investigation will,
therefore, endeavor to find in his writings bearing on those subjects
to what extent he makes use of the group as a tool of thought in
the solution of the problems arising in those fields.* In doing so,
we shall seek out those phases of his discussion which seem to bear
upon certain points that may be of aid, rather than attempting
to give a résumé of his whole sociological contribution. In order
to derive a perspective for the summary it will be well to present
Ross’s conception of the whole sociological field and of the particu-
lar place of each branch in the whole scheme.

In his Foundations of Sociology Ross attempts to define the
scope and function of sociology and to give it its place among the
social sciences. The first task he sets himself is to define the
subject-matter of the science. The “social organism”’ will not do
because, look where we will, we find no “social body complete with
head, limbs, periphery, and viscera.”” The study of the relation
between groups, and between the group and the individual, is not
broad enough to constitute the subject-matter of the science,
because it must embrace the genesis of the groups and there are
many relations between individuals that do not involve the groups.
If we turn to the modes or forms of association into groups, after
Simmel’s notion, we have only one of the provinces of sociology,
namely social morphology. Human achievement, which was
Ward’s subject-matter for the science, is again but one volume of
a treatise on sociology. Much of the field of human interaction
is not embraced within the subject of achievement. Ross’s con-
ception of sociology as the science of association is extended
by Ross himself. Sociologists are eager to investigate the
“springs of human progress,’ to find the causes of social trans-
formations, to trace the influence of environment on humanity;
but these do not belong to the problem of association. “‘ Social
psychology, social morphology, social mechanics . . . . all of them

1 This summary is based on his three works, Social Control (1901), Foundations of
Sociology (1905), Social Psychology (1908). His subsequent writings do not indicate
a material departure from the views elaborated in the books named, and for the purpose
of this discussion may be ignored.
are, it seems to me, but convenient segments of a science, the subject-
matter of which is social phenomena. I say ‘phenomena’ in prefer-
ence to ‘activities,’ because it embraces beliefs and feelings as well
as action.”* In defining what are “social phenomena,” he says:
“All phenomena which we cannot explain without bringing in
the action of one human being on another.”

The science which has social phenomena for its subject-matter
is necessarily the master-science; it aspires to the suzerainty of
the special social sciences. The justification for such a claim is
found in the interrelatedness of society.

Although there are several facets to human nature, although each aspect
of social life has some sort of psychic basis of its own, still, the deeper we pene-
trate into the causes of human affairs, the more impressed are we with the
cross relations between social phenomena of different orders.4

. ... The fuller our knowledge, the more impressed we are with the rela-
tivity of each class of social phenomena to other classes. Society no longer
falls apart into neat segments like a peeled orange. State, law, religion, art,
morals, industry, instead of presenting so many parallel streams of development,
are studied rather as different aspects of one social evolutions

Although one might dissent from the claim for sociology inferred
from this statement, still the latter indicates a clear conception of
the fact that human life is a social process, a group, and that the
group conception must be held in mind in all attempts to study
this thing that we call society in any of its multifarious forms.

What is the unit of investigation with which sociology has to
deal? Is it the group? Is it the individual? Is it something else?
To these questions Ross returns very definite answers. There is
no use to look for a single elementary social fact: ‘‘When the assay
is completed, at the bottom of the crucible will probably be found
several ultimates.’ The individual must be rejected as the unit
because that is the unit of anthropology. Furthermore, only the
spiritual part of man is molded by association, and not everyone
is drawn in between the social rollers.?, The functional group will

* Foundations of Sociology, p. 6. 4 Ibid., p. 12.
3 Ibid. 5 Ibid., pp. 13-14.
3 Ibid., pp. 8-9. 6 Ibid., p. 85.

7Ibid. This statement is very significant in showing the individualistic pre-
conceptions underlying his analysis.
not do for the social unit; since many groups are antagonistic to
society, they have no part in the division of labor. Groups are
temporary and shifting, and while a study of groups and group rela-
tions is of very great value, it is not the unit of social investigation.
Nor can the institution be considered the social unit. It leaves
out of account those social relations and those groupings which
are temporary and do not become institutions. All these things
are products; they have arisen out of the actions and interactions
of men. To understand them, ‘we must ascend to that
primordial fact known as the social process.’* This is the basic
unit. It is not single, however, but manifold, social processes.

Leaving the larger sociological field, it is of value to place in
that field the particular subjects of study, social psychology and
social control. It is in these lines that Ross shows his thinking
most clearly, and they will, therefore, merit closer examination.
Social psychology, as Ross conceives it, “studies the psychic planes
and currents that come into existence among men in consequence
of their association.”? It has to do with psychic uniformities,
that is, with uniformities due to social causes. It is distinguished
from sociology proper in that the latter deals with groups and struc-
tures. It is distinguished from psychological sociology by the fact
that it omits the psychology of groups. The problem of social con-
trol is but one phase of social psychology, namely, conscious social
ascendancy.* These differentiations of definition are necessary
in order to preserve an honest criticism of Ross’s work, and enable
us to escape misinterpretation of varying terminologies. With
this introduction we pass on to a more concrete study of his use
of the group concept in his analysis. In doing so we shall take up
several illustrative problems that are especially fitted to display
the use to which he puts such a conception, and the failures to use
it, if such there be.

In order to see what use is made of the group concept, we may
examine the crucial question of the relation of the individual to
the group, as Ross sees it. With reference to the problem of order
in society, Ross says:

I began the work six years ago with the idea that nearly all the goodness

and conscientiousness by which a social group is enabled to hold together can
be traced to such influences [social influences]. It seemed to me then that
the individual contributed very little to social order, while society
contributed almost everything. Further investigation, however, appears
to show that the personality freely unfolding under conditions of
healthy fellowship may arrive at a goodness all its own, and that order is
explained partly by this streak in human nature and partly by the influence
of social surroundings.*
In attempting to state the reciprocal relation between the individual
and the group, Ross adopts uncritically the thought of Baldwin: “In
other words, the ego and the alter are only the same thought with
different connotations. I use the same notion of personality, now
in thinking of ego, now in thinking of alter. Hence, I must read
into the other person the same desires and interests I feel in myself.’
Upon this basis Ross builds his conception of the sense of justice
as one of the agencies of control. The use made of Baldwin’s
thought in a few such discrete passages indicates that Ross did
not grasp the significance of either the process or the implications
of the theory which Baldwin was trying to develop. The concep-
tion of the self and the alter as being twin phases of a total social
situation, which is the basis of all social psychology, was never
utilized by Ross. His references in such statements as the above
were merely perfunctory. They do show, however, a reaching
after the heart of the social process and a consciousness that it is
in the group-individual relation that a sound sociological unit must
be found. Though lacking in many particulars, the writer of
Social Control was getting at the heart of the sociological problem;
it was an attempt to interpret the process and significance of the
relation of the group to the individual, in so far as the social influences
mold and shape the individual into its own likeness. Of the essen-
tial part of the group in the formation of the various attitudes of
the individual, Ross was well conscious. Thus, for example:

The fact is, every group of men exhibits a morality corresponding to
its place in the hierarchy of groups... . . Many nepotists, sectaries, and

t Ibid., Preface. 2 Ibid., p. 3.
partisans are simply victims of one of these unscrupulous group moralities.
Adherents of sects—anarchists, Jesuits, Jacobins, émigrés—are induced by
the sectego to commit crimes they would not commit for themselves.

Again, the influence of smaller groups on the individuals in them
is powerful:

Every party, labor union, guild, lodge, surveying corps, or athletic team will,
in the course of time, develop for its special purposes appropriate types of
character or observance, which exert on its members an individual pressure
subordinating them to the welfare or aims of the association.?

These quotations indicate the place which Ross gives to the group
in the influencing of the actions of the members of those groups.
He does not, however, grasp fully the essentially social nature of
the origin of moral codes and moral attitudes. His individual is
largely given and, once given, the group has a powerful effect upon
him. He does not utilize adequately the place of the group in the
creation of moral attitudes arising out of group crises. In fact
the individual is the source of all ethical improvements.

Ross does not enter into a study of social origins to any length.
He takes society as it is and deals with the problems of association as
hefindsthem. Occasional references, however, disclose his hypothe-
sis as to some of the problems of social origins. He inclines to
adopt the view of Ward and Comte that the altruistic attitude
is relatively a late development in social evolution: ‘In the light
of the facts collected by many workers, it is no longer difficult
to trace the slender stem of altruism rising from the lower levels
of mammalian life side by side with the thicker and rougher trunk
of egoism.”’? To bridge the chasm he exploits the réle of sympathy.
In addition to sympathy there are certain gregarious instincts that
facilitate harmony in social relations, but
we do not yet know whether our simian ancestor was most akin to the solitary
ape, or to the sociable chimpanzee, but it is safe to say that man was never so
thoroughly sociable as the horse, the prairie dog, or the grass-eating animals
generally. With even the best of strains of man, the gregarious instincts do
not seem to have very long roots. His social union comes late and is not easy
to maintain. .... Those enthusiasts, then, who draw charming lessons from
the study of gregarious animals and of social insects not only fail to give us

1 Social Control, p. 71.
2 [bid., p. 232. 3 Ibid., p. 7.
Ross recognizes, however, that the studies of anthropologists
among the primitive communities that exist show a natural com-
munity life with a relatively peaceful nature. This is one of the
paradoxes of anthropology? How this paradox is to be reconciled
with his theory of the origin of altruism and social impulses is not
adequately explained. Since primitive times, he continues, the
present civilized peoples have gone through a process of evolution
which destroyed the primitive attitudes of sociability and replaced
them with individualistic ones. Still more recently there is a rever-
sion, through the selective process, to the more sociable type,
resulting from the disappearance of the frontier and the creation
of an industrial stable life. The older primitive association was
a natural one, while the latter is a more rational one following upon
the perception of the advantages of association.s Ross also finds
racial difference when it comes to the matter of sociability. The
superior dolichocephalic blond race of North Europe is “mediocre
in power of sympathy and weak in sociability” but it has a pre-
eminent sense of justice. It is the protestant race, the race which
achieves dominion over others and individual liberty.‘

In connection with the place of the group or social factor in
the explanation of the social process, it is of interest to note that
Ross recognizes the fact of the transition from an individualistic
type of psychology to a social psychology:

The older psychology was individualistic in its interpretations. The con-
tents of the mind were looked upon as elaborations out of personal experience.
It sought to show how from the primary sense-perceptions are built up ideas,
at first simple, then more and more complex—ideas of space, time, number,
cause, etc. The upper stories of personality, framed on beliefs, standards,
valuations and ideals, were comparatively neglected. The psychologists failed
to note that for these highly elaborated products we are more indebted to our
fellowmen than to our individual experience, that they are wrought out, as it

1 Ibid., p. 14. 2 [bid., p. 15. 3 Ibid., p. 17.

4 Ibid., pp. 32 ff., 439 ff.; Social Psychology, pp. 6 ff. One wonders what the effect
of the experiences of the war may be upon this naive conception. If there is one thing
that contemporary social psychology is a unit in, it is that such pseudo-racial deduc-
tions are of decreasing value.
were, collectively, and not by each for himself. The newer psychology, in
accounting for the contents of the mind, gives great prominence to the social
factor. It insists that without interaction with other minds the psychic devel-
opment of the child would be arrested at a stage not far from idiocy.

This criticism of the older psychology is certainly sound. It is
also true that there has been going on a swing to the social inter-
pretation of the origin of the mind both phylogenetically and onto-
genetically. The shift which Ross mentions here is the most
significant shift in the social sciences. It is essentially the shift
to the group as the center of thought and investigation.

In attempting to apply the newer psychology, which he expressly
adopts, Ross follows in the path of Tarde and Baldwin. To the
former particularly is he indebted for his thought. If one were
to find in his whole sociological system a central thought, it is the
explanation of social life in terms of the planes and currents of
uniformity which are achieved by means of suggestion and imita-
tion. The réle of the individual is that of the inventor. The
innovator’s products are made the possession of the group by the
process of imitation or suggestion. Aside from imitation Ross
has no clue to explain the social process. Its inadequacy is not
recognized, and the tendency is for it to be used uncritically without
any attempt to enter into its psychological limitations.

In dealing with that most interesting part of contemporary
social psychology, the nature and origin of the self, Ross does not
go much farther than to refer with approval occasionally to Baldwin,
as suggested above. Such references, however, do not penetrate
to the center of Ross’s thinking, and they are essentially foreign
to his general argument. For all practical purposes, he assumes
the self as given, the individual as already formed. His problem
is then the rather futile one of attempting to mold and shape this
complete individual into social conformity, to bend the individual
will into some sort of social order. Such is the central thesis one
Ellwood defines sociology as the science of the origin, develop-
ment, structure, and function of the reciprocal relations of indi-
viduals.? As will be found out in later discussion, he makes special
mention of the psychic interaction which, in his opinion, is the
essence of the social process. In other words, his definition of
the subject implies a group relation to start with. In so far as the
social origins are to be treated, they must be treated with
the primary assumption of a group of social beings in more
or less of psychic interaction. “In a psychological interpreta-
tion of society, therefore, we must begin with concerted or
co-ordinated activity, with the group acting together in some
particular way, for it is this which constitutes the group a
functional unity, and which is the first psychic manifesta-
tion of group life.” For Ellwood, this interacting relationship,
this psychic stimulus and response, is the central factor in sociologi-
calstudy. In looking for a concrete object which may be adopted
as the unit or object of investigation he finds it in the group. “So

Mead, “Social Psychology as Counterpart to Physical Psychology,” Psychological
Bulletin, December 15, 1909.

2 Sociology in Its Psychological Aspects, p. 15. 3 Ibid., pp. 146-47.
far as there is a concrete object of the sociologist’s attention, it is
the group of associated individuals.’* As soon as the investigator
shifts his attention from interactions to the individuals concerned
in the associational process or mental interaction, he becomes a
psychologist or biologist and loses the end of the sociologist’s quest.
We thus see that in Ellwood’s general introduction to the socio-
logical problem he has the group in the foreground as the sine qua
non of his search. Whether used adequately or not, it is the basic
assumption in all his thinking. How it is used in the various prob-
lems he meets will appear in later pages of this review.

To bring out more clearly the central place which the group
occupies in Ellwood’s thought it will be worth while to refer to his
discussion of the nature and origin of society. After reviewing
several conceptions of society which have been suggested by differ-
ent writers, he adopts as a tentative definition of society,“‘any group
of psychically interacting individuals.”? ‘The only criterion by
which we may decide whether any group constitutes a society or
not is its possession or non-possession of the essential mark of a
society, namely, the functional interdependence of its members on the
psychical side.”’ Applying this criterion to various groups such
as a family, a nation, a debating club, a civilization, he finds that
they are all within the given category. The term society as he
uses it is a very broad one, and would come within the meaning of
the term group where that term is used to cover social situations
in which the actions of one form of life answer to and stimulate
activities in another form. The definition given above indicates
the bent of Ellwood’s thinking along the psychological line of
approach to the sociological problem. He does not ignore the
biological approach, but feels that the psychological is the more
important as the basis for an adequate sociology. Some of the
possible criticisms of his stressing of the “psychical” interactions
will be mentioned later.

With this view of the nature and definition of society we may
proceed to the problem of the origin of society. To begin with,
Ellwood points out that the life-process is essentially social. It

1 Sociology in Its Psychological Aspects, p. 22.
2 [bid., p. 13. 3 Ibid., p. 14.
involves interaction from the start. This interaction goes through
an evolution from a physical to a psychical basis. He expressly
repudiates the individualistic approach to the problem of the origin
of society and adopts the group as his starting-point.

Life is not, and cannot be, an affair of individual organisms. The processes

of both nutrition and reproduction of all higher forms of life involve a necessary
interdependence among organisms of the same species, which, except under
unfavorable conditions, gives rise to group life and psychical interaction.
Society is no more the result of the coming together of individuals in isolation
than the multicellular organism is the result of the coming together of cells
so developed. Society, that is, the psychical interaction of individuals, is an
expression of the original and continuing unity of the life-process of the asso-
ciating organisms."
We have here then an avowed adoption of what has been called the
social hypothesis, or, in other words, the group concept, as the
fundamental starting-point in the discussion of the much-discussed
problem of the origin of society. The contrast with the position
of Ward and much of the earlier sociological thought is abrupt and
definite. Ellwood states that the “most serious errors in sociology
have been introduced through the assumption of primitive isolation
or separateness.”

In carrying out in more detail the development of society,
Ellwood shows how social life is a function of the food and repro-
ductive processes. Under ordinary conditions the food process is
essentially a social matter or group matter. It is of fundamental
importance both to the individual and to the group. The social
factor has selective value in the food process.

Now, control over the food process can be more easily established by groups
of co-operating individuals than by isolated individuals. Natural selection
operates, therefore, from the first in favor of such groups, and toward the elimi-
nation of individuals living relatively isolated. It must especially favor those
groups in which the interactions between individual units are quick and
sure—that is, those groups in which the power of psychic inter-stimulation and
reponse is fully established and in which intelligent co-operation and orderly
relations between individuals are highly developed. It is not an accident that
the most successful, and, in general, the higher animals live in groups with
well-ordered relations and highly developed means of inter-stimulation and
co-operation.3

1 [bid., p. 125. 2 [bid., p. 126. 3 [bid., p. 127.
However important the food process may be in the group life,
the reproductory process is still more important as a group factor
in the evolution of the higher types of association or society. The
presence of the young implies a social situation in which there are
at least two persons. The most important of the relations growing
out of the reproductive process is not the relation of the male to
the female, but of the parent to the child, particularly the relation
of the mother and the child. This becomes increasingly important
as the period of infancy is prolonged:

In the relationship of the mother to the child we have the beginnings of
that sympathetic social life of which the family has remained the highest type,
and which has become the conscious goal of civilized human society. Society

in the sympathetic sense then has had its beginnings in the family, that is,
in the relation of the child form to the mother form.

Human society is but an evolution of animal societies. In other
words, the group life was characteristic of the ancestors of man;
“animal society is the precursor of human society,” and human
society is “but a form of animal society.” The “whole difference
between the two... . is in the forms and definiteness of the
psychical interaction between individuals.’? The chief charac-
teristic distinguishing human from animal society is the possession,
by the former, of language and abstract reasoning. All other
differences can be reduced to these twos Whatever degree of
difference may exist between the two types of society, human
society is an inheritance from animal society and may be regarded
as a form of animal society. The origin of society has been affected
and modified by the intellectual factors that have developed, but
“human society is not in any sense an intellectual construction
due to the perceptions of the utilities of association.”* In other
words, the intellectual factors are a result of the group life, and their
presence assumes the priority of the group as a necessary precedent.
This is an exact reversal of the position taken by Ward. The
group is thus conceived, in Ellwood’s thinking, as the fundamental
concept in the explanation of the origin of contemporary social life.

x Sociology in Its Psychological Aspects, p. 129.
2 [bid., p. 131.
3 Ibid., p. 132. 4Ibid., pp. 137-38.
In order to show further the place of the group concept, it is
interesting to discover what answer Ellwood gives to the question
as to whether man was primitively a social animal. The foregoing
discussion implies the emphatic affirmative answer he gives to the
question:

There is not the slightest evidence that man was ever a solitary creature,
or even that he lived in solitary family groups. The evidence from the highest
animals, from prehistoric archaeology, from the lowest existing savages, from
human instincts, from language and other sources, points to the conclusion that
primitive man lived in hordes of several related families.

 

 

 

 

This, it will be remembered, is contrary to the argument of Ward.
The distinction between the two is that Ellwood maintains the group
concept in his theory of origins. With reference to the much-
elaborated “anti-social” characteristics, which led Ward and others
to predicate a non-social primitive ancestor of man, Ellwood points
out that these qualities are a later development, due to the changes
in the group life:

The answer is that while man was primitively social, his sociality was
narrow, confined largely to the family and to the kindred group, and that
consequently he is not as yet well adapted to wider social relations. It is
interesting to note, however, that these so-called anti-social traits of man are
not found most fully developed among the lowest savages. Rather they
characterize peoples that are somewhat advanced in culture, particularly those
in the stage of barbarism. .. . . The lowest peoples in point of culture even
at the present time we find again to be essentially peaceful. War with its feroci-
ties, cannibalism, and slavery are relatively late products, then, in social evolu-
tion, and incident to man’s adjustment to a wide and more complex social
environment. It is, therefore, quite within the truth to say that it is the struggle
and conflict that have been developed with the species in its more complex stages
of evolution that have called forth, sometimes in exaggerated forms, the preda-
tory and anti-social tendencies which we see more or less in human society
at present.?

In so far then as there is a problem of socialization, it is one of
making the individual a factor in the larger and more complex life
of the community so as to extend his habitual small group attitudes
to the larger groups also. Ellwood’s use of the group as the tool
for the interpretation of the origin of society and for the explanation
of the so-called anti-social characteristics, particularly the latter,

1 I[bid., pp. 137-38. 2 Ibid., pp. 138-39.
is a real advance over the position of Ward. It displays an adequate
grasp of the place of the group as the fundamental starting-point
for sociology and for all social sciences as well. The group concept
marks the most significant step in sociological thought since Ward’s
Dynamic Sociology.

Professor Ellwood emphasizes the importance of the “primary
groups” as they are conceived by Cooley. These face-to-face
groups constitute the most significant agencies by which social
unity is created and continued:

Now, these small primary groups, the family, the neighborhood community,
and other groups which involve face-to-face association, are manifestly the
natural environment for the development of the social traits of the individual.
They are, in other words, the natural medium for the development of our social
life; they preserve its unity in time, and hence we shall have to consider them
at length when we consider the problem of social continuity.t

These groups are the particular carriers of tradition. It is
through them more than through our schools, churches, etc., that
the social life, the social inheritance, is transmitted from generation
to generation. “So important is tradition in human society that
in practically all stages of civilization we find certain institutions
whose special work is to be carriers of tradition. In modern civili-
zation these institutions are especially schools, churches, libraries,
and the like. However, the real carriers of tradition are not these
specialized institutions, but the primary groups of which we have
already spoken, especially the family and the neighborhood groups.
If human society had to rely upon schools and libraries to conserve
its mental life, its continuity on the psychic side would be very
imperfectly developed.’”

The great importance attached to the family group is char-
acteristic of all of Ellwood’s writings.

The family is perhaps the chief institutional vehicle of tradition in human
society. It has been such in all stages of civilization, and as long as it continues
to be the chief environment of children of tender years, it will doubtless con-
tinue to be so. In the family the child learns his language, and in learning it

he gets with it the fundamental knowledge, beliefs, and standards contained
in the tradition of his civilization, or at least of his class. So much does the

1 Sociology in Its Psychological Aspects, p. 119.
2 Introduction to Social Psychology, p. 135.
child get his essential social traditions from his family life that many educators
claim that moral instruction can never be given adequately in our public schools,
but that the real foundation of the moral tradition must be gotten while the
child is yet of tender age from his family circle.

This small family group with its close association is the source of
the primary ideals. From this smaller group life these ideals are
carried into the larger groups.

It is from the family group that we get, in the main, our notions of love,
service and self-sacrifice; and we learn these ideals in the family the more
effectively, because the life of the normal family group usually illustrates the
practices which these ideals stand for. Taking these primary ideals from the
family life, we apply them to the social life generally, and even to humanity at
large. The family then, we may say, is the natural medium for the develop-
ment and transmission of the ideals and standards of the social life. It has
been the cradle of civilization in the past, and something like its organization
seems to be the normal goal which men set up for society at large to realize.
Two traditional ideals which are potent in our civilization, for example the
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man, are quite sufficient in themselves
to illustrate the importance of the family as a maker and conserver of social
ideals.

From the neighborhood groups certain ideals are gathered by
the child which are fundamental for its participation in any social
group.

In the same way, we have received from our neighborhood group the ideals
of freedom, fair play, justice and good citizenship. The very ideal of social
solidarity itself comes, as Professor Cooley shows, from the unity experiences
in these small primary groups. Inasmuch as these groups have certain traits
which are found in all stages of civilization, there is certainly much to be said
for Professor Cooley’s idea that what we ordinarily call “human nature” is
largely acquired there.3

The reason why those groups are so important and powerful
in engrafting the fundamental social traditions on the growing gen-
eration is that the meanings of these traditions are accompanied,
to a large extent, by actual behavior. They are thus a part of the
activity of the child rather than being merely precepts.

The meaning of essential traditions is clearer in these groups to the young

because they are accompanied, to a large extent, by actual behavoir correlated
with the tradition. In other words, these groups are also the carriers of custom,

t [bid., p. 135. 2 [bid., pp. 136-37. 3 Idid., p. 137.
in the sense of definite habits of social behavior. The child therefore can get
the meaning of a certain tradition regarding government, religion or morality,
for example, from the family life, better than he can from the printed page or
even the spoken word. He can get the meaning, too, better in the close and
intimate relations of the family group than he can in the more partial and uncer-
tain associations of the school or the neighborhood.*

Professor Ellwood might have carried this suggestion of his func-
tional psychology further. It is a logical explanation coming from
one whose express psychological point of view is that the act is the
proper unit of thought.

The use of the primary group in tracing so large a part of social
evolution thus constitutes one of the most important uses of the
group concept possible. In emphasizing these small groups,
Ellwood is recognizing in social theory one of the striking develop-
ments in contemporary practical life, namely, the growing con-
sciousness of the small local group as the center of so many phases
of social activity.?

One of the interesting and fruitful ways in which Ellwood
applies his psychology to group situations is shown in his discussion
of the problem of the origin and function of social consciousness.
Applying the analogy of the réle of consciousness in individual
life, he finds that social consciousness arises when a group
crisis arises, that is, when the old and hitherto useful habits
have broken down and are no longer able to meet the situation.
In such cases social consciousness enters, and like individual con-
sciousness, its réle is to create a new adjustment in a conflict
situation. He describes the process in this manner:

One can say, in a general way, perhaps, and be approximately near the
truth, that all social changes start in an unconscious way; that they are then
brought to consciousness, and later conscious efforts are made to guide and
control them. In other words, social changes start, as a rule, with some change
in the environment or in the inner make-up of the group, which makes old
social habits and institutions no longer well adjusted, or even altogether
unworkable. Thus, changes in the mere numbers of a group may make some
social custom, adapted to a smaller group, unworkable. In some cases where
the new adjustments to be made are slight, or take place very slowly, they may
not come vividly into the consciousness of the members of a group. But when

1 Introduction to Sociol Psychology, pp. 135-36.
? See introductory chapter.
the changes are great, rapid, or complex, they come into the consciousness of
the members of the group, and some attempt to control them usually takes
lace.t

7 Now it is evident that what is called social consciousness in human groups
has to do with the adaptation of the group as a whole to some situation, just as
individual consciousness has to do with adaptation. It is only by developing
such a state that the activities of the members of a group can be accurately
co-ordinated in the way required by a complex social life. The more complex
groups, therefore, show more social consciousness. The city group shows more
than the rural group, and the civilized group more than the uncivilized.?

Some light for our discussion may be gained in considering
Ellwood’s conception of the nature and function of the mind. This
is one of the crucial points in the problems of social origins and is
significant for our purposes, since it reveals pretty clearly just what
the point of view of a particular writer under discussion may be.
In any given case it displays whether the group conception is the
fundamental one, or whether the author has recourse to an indi-
vidualistic explanation for the difficult problem he faces. The
significance of this for social control and for social theory will be
pointed out later. The mind, according to Ellwood, is a part of
the life-process and a part of the general evolutionary stream.3
Its function is that of control over complex adaptive processes.*
Consciousness arises where new adjustments or adaptations to a
complex situation are made necessary by the failure or inadequacy
of pre-existing co-ordinations.s’ Mind thus comes to be a thing
having distinct survival value, and as such giving human beings
an enormous advantage. From the very first, since it is selective,
it assumes a teleological or purposeful réle.?’ This purposive activity
increases in scope and importance until at the present complex
stage of the higher civilizations, it may be said to be the dominant
type?

This résumé of Ellwood’s discussion is sufficient to show that
his effort is to follow the general lines of a functional psychology.
His footnote acknowledgments express his definite nominal adher-
ence to that point of view. His adherence to a consistent func-
tional psychology is apparent, rather than real. The mind, with

Ibid, p. 147. 4 Ibid. 1 Ibid.

2 Ibid., pp. 152-53. 5 Ibid. 8 Ibid., p. 33.

3 Ibid., pp. 30-33. 6 Ibid.
him, is still a thing in itself. Consciousness “comes in” to mediate
difficult conflict situations. Both mind and consciousness remain
entities which are unexplained, and, except when making an effort
to class himself as a functionalist, he is using a structural point of
view. His writing exhibits an interesting halfway station between
an earlier structural-metaphysical point of view and a later func-
tional point of view, with the former predominating.

As a supplementary fact to this criticism one may add the more
or less recurring dualism running through that part of Ellwood’s
discussion dealing with social psychology. This probably is a
natural result of his conception of mind or consciousness as an entity.
He carefully distinguishes between physical interaction and psychic
interaction.? “Each mind is, so far as we know, wholly unconnected
with other minds except through the intervention of physical
media.” This unconscious dualism pervades both of Ellwood’s
major works, and is never unified. Just why the glance of the eye,
the movement of the body of one form, and the reciprocal gestures
and cries cf another form, are not as much a part of the psychical
as any other part of the total activity circuit is hard to see.4 To
take the act and not an isolated segment called psychic as the
unit seems the only way out of the dualism. The act is social,
and in so far as it has significance for sociology it involves the group.
To segment the act is to make an inadequate use of the group con-
cept in approaching the very interesting and difficult problem of
the “mind.’’s
Before leaving this phase of the discussion it should be noted
that Ellwood recognizes and emphasizes the fact that the mind is
a social product:

We cannot doubt the social character of the individual mind. While
consciousness exists only in the individual, every aspect of consciousness has
been socially conditioned. This is true even of the racially inherited aspects
of consciousness, the instincts, emotions, and practically all native impulses.
The higher human instincts and emotions, especially, show very plainly their
reference to the social life, and function quite as much with reference to the
life of the group as they do with reference to the life of the individual. The
acquired traits of consciousness practically all come to us through our social
environment. From it we get not only our knowledge, our beliefs, our ideals,
but even our precepts and concepts, in the strict sense of these terms. It is
in the “give and take”’ of the social life that we learn and develop practically
all of the phases of the consciousness of adult life. In a word, mind has been
developed through interaction of mind with mind in the carrying on and con-
trolling of common life processes. Mental life belongs, therefore, quite as
much to the group as to the individual.

This point of view, which one might denominate the prevailing one
in contemporary sociology in America, is adhered to pretty con-
sistently throughout Ellwood’s writings. He does not, however,
furnish any sufficient process whereby the result arrived at in the
group relation, namely, the development of the mind, the self, or
consciousness, is explained. Just what the process is, in terms of
functional psychology, whereby language, meaning, and mind have
been created by the group is not set forth. Imitation is stressed,
but it cannot suffice? Until this gap is filled, it would seem there
can be no complete social psychology. It is the missing link in
the application of the group concept to the problems of sociology.

On the whole, Ellwood has made one of the distinguished con-
tributions to sociological thought in America. The group concept is

claims of objectivism, or “physiological sociology.” He feels that both the subjective
and the objective methods may be of value to the sociologist. In answer to Ellwood’s
article, see Bernard’s, “The Objective Viewpoint in Sociology,” American Journal of
Sociology, XXV, 298.

Introduction to Social Psychology, p. 73-

2 The lack of a process is shown clearly in Ellwood’s treatment of imitation in
both his larger works. It is outside our province to do more than call attention to
it here.
Cooley’s writings have given him rank as one of the real con-
tributors to sociological thought in America. The three books
under consideration may all be ranked as studies in social psychol-
ogy rather than in general sociology or social origins. The subject
which formed the problem of investigation for his first book, society
and the individual, may be looked upon as the subject of his writings
in general. The situation before him is always one involving a
group. This summary will not attempt to present a review of his
whole system, but will select out salient parts which seem to display
most clearly the use of the group concept in his analysis of the vari-
ous problems that he attempts to treat. Such problems, for
example, as the relation of society to the individual, the nature of
the mind in so far as it is both social and individual, the nature and
formation of the self, the nature and origin and importance of
primary groups, freedom, pecuniary valuation, will give a fairly
good insight into the use made of the group concept.

We may begin, as he does in his first book, with the long-debated
problem of the relation of the individual to the group, or society
and the individual. Of the fundamental nature of his conception
of this relation he does not leave one long in doubt, although the
whole book is but an elaboration of the principles laid down in the
first chapter.

A separate individual is an abstraction unknown to experience, and so
likewise is society when regarded as something apart from individuals. The
real thing is Human Life, which may be considered either in an individual aspect
or in a social, that is to say, a general, aspect; but is always, as a matter of
fact, both individual and general. In other words, “society” and “individuals”
do not denote separable phenomena, but are simply collective and distributive
aspects of the same thing, the relation between them being like that between
other expressions, one of which denotes a group as a whole, and the other the
members of the group, such as the army and the soldiers, the class and the
students, and so on."

The point of view suggested is so thoroughly a part of Cooley’s
general thought that it will be well to cite further statements
explaining and elucidating it. Each will serve of itself to show the
prominent place which the group occupies in the assumptions from
which he starts his discussions. Continuing the thought that the
individual and society are one, he says still more emphatically:

And just as there is no society or group that is not a collective view of
persons, so there is no individual who may not be regarded as a particular view
of social groups. He has no separate existence; through both the hereditary
and the social factors in his life a man is bound into the whole of which he is a
member; and to consider him apart from it is quite as artificial as to consider
society apart from individuals.?

Consequently any view which sets society over against the indi-
vidual, or vice versa, as its fundamental assumption is false to the
facts.

I think, then, that the antithesis, society versus the individual, is false and
hollow whenever used as a general or philosophical statement of human rela-
tions. Whatever ideas may be in the minds of those who set these words and
their derivatives over against each other, the notion conveyed is that of two
separable entities or forces; and certainly such a notion is untrue to fact.3

In order to clarify his conception of the indissoluble relationship
which he has described, Cooley expressly repudiates four traditional
conceptions that have prevailed or do prevail in current thought.
The first of these is what he calls “‘mere individualism,” in which the

* Human Nature and the Social Order, pp. 1-2.

2 Ibid., p. 3. 3 Ibid., p. 7.
collective aspect is as nearly as possible ignored: ‘‘Each person is
held to be a separate agent, and all social phenomena are thought
of as originating in the action of such agents. The individual is
the source, the independent, the only human source, of events.’
This view enters into the current thought of the day, being con-
genial to the “ordinary material view of things and corroborated
by theological and other traditions.” The second view which he
repudiates is the “double causation,” in which society and the
individual are thought of as separate causes with a division of
power between them. This is the view “ordinarily met with in
social and ethical discussion.” It is not advance, philosophically,
upon the one first mentioned:

There is the same premise of the individual as a separate unrelated agent;

but over against him is set a vaguely conceived general or collective interest
and force. It seems that people are so accustomed to thinking of themselves
as uncaused causes, special creators on a small scale, that when the existence
of general phenomena is forced upon their notice they are likely to regard these
as something additional, separate, and more or less antithetical.?
Another view which is inadequate, according to Cooley, is “the
social faculty view.” This view regards the social as including
a part only of the individual. “Human nature is thus divided
into individualistic or non-social tendencies or faculties, and those
that are social. Thus, certain emotions, such as love, are social;
others, as fear, or anger, are unsocial or individualistic.”’ In
contrast to this particular-faculty view, Cooley presents the thesis
that “man’s psychical outfit is not divisible into the social and the
non-social; but that he is all social in a large sense, is all a part
of the-common human life.’”4 A fourth view which must be dis-
carded is “primitive individualism”

This expression has been used to describe the view that sociality follows
individuality in time, is a later and additional product of development. This
view is a variety of the preceding and is, perhaps, formed by a mingling of
individualistic preconceptions with a somewhat crude evolutionary philosophy.

. Man was a mere individual, mankind a mere aggregation of such; but
he has gradually become socialized, he is progressively merging into a social
whole. Morally speaking, the individual is bad, the social the good, and we must
push on the work of putting down the former and bringing in the latter.

* Human Nature and the Social Order, p. 8.
2 Ibid., p. 9. 3 [bid., pp. 1-12. 4Ibid., p. 12. 5 Ibid., p. 10.
In contrast to this view of the priority of the individual in point
of time, Cooley asserts that

individuality is neither prior in time nor lower in moral rank than sociality;
but that the two have always existed side by side as complementary aspects of
the same thing, and that the line of progress is from a lower to a higher type
of both, not from the one to the other... . . If we go back to a time when the
state of our remote ancestors was such that we are not willing to call it social,
then it must have been equally undeserving to be described as individual or
personal.

If the person is thought of primarily as a separate material form, inhabited
by thoughts and feelings conceived by analogy to be equally separate, then the
only way of getting a society is by adding on a new principle of socialism,
social faculty, altruism, of the life. But if you start with the idea that the social
person is primarily a fact in the mind, and observe him there, you find at once
that he has no existence apart from a mental whole of which all personal ideas
are members, and which is a particular aspect of society.?

The foregoing statements are sufficient to show the nature of
Cooley’s point of view in his approach to the social problem. The
unit which he has in mind is always a group, of which one may
take either an individual aspect or a total or collective aspect.
The group and the individual are but two phases of the same or
total social situation. ‘To attempt to approach the study of society,
as Ward did for instance, from the standpoint of the individual,
and then attempt to create a social superstructure on the basis
of that individual approach is an abstraction that the facts do not
warrant. From the beginning, according to Cooley, there must
have been a group situation. It is the fundamental hypothesis
upon which he constructs his whole subsequent thought. The
further points of inquiry which we shall pursue are in reality but
amplifications of this fundamental one, but they will serve to illus-
trate and clarify it and will, to some extent, show the process which
is found to exist in them all. We may begin with the closely
related discussion of the individual and social aspects of the mind
and of the nature of the mind in general.

In defining the term mind in its social and individual aspects,
Cooley carries his synthetic view, elaborated above, into every part

1 [bid., p. 11.

2 Ibid., pp. 89-90. Cooley acknowledges his deep indebtedness to both James and
Baldwin for the view he holds.
of the discussion. To understand his discussion we must discover
his definition of the mind. This he gives in the following words:

Mind is an organic whole made up of co-ordinating individualities, in some-

what the same way that the music of an orchestra is made up of divergent but
related sounds. No one would think it necessary or reasonable to divide the
music into two kinds, that made by the whole and that of the particular
instruments; and no more are there two kinds of mind, the social mind and the
individual mind. When we study the social mind we merely fix our attention
on larger aspects and relations rather than on the narrower one of ordinary
psychology.
In other words, the conception of a separate and isolated individual
entity, which can be called the mind, is an abstraction which has
no real existence. The point will become clearer as we go on to
discuss Cooley’s treatment of the problem of consciousness and the
self. It will be noted that the group relation is kept consistently
in view throughout.

Consciousness, whether one is treating of social consciousness
or self-consciousness, is invariably a product of a group relation.
Neither can arise without the other.

Social consciousness or awareness of society is inseparable from self-
consciousness, because we can hardly think of ourselves excepting with
reference to a social group of some sort, or of the group except with
reference to ourselves. The two things go together, and what we are
really aware of is a more or less complex personal or social whole, of which now
the particular, now the general, aspect is emphasized. In general then most
of our reflective consciousness, of our wide-awake state of mind, is social con-
sciousness, because a sense of our relation to other persons, or of other persons
to one another, can hardly fail to be a part of it. Self and society are twin-born,
we know one as immediately as we know the other, and the notion of a separate
and independent ego is an illusion. This view, which seems to me quite simple
and in accord with common-sense, is not the one most commonly held, for
psychologists and even sociologists are still much infected with the idea that
self-consciousness is in some way primary, and antecedent to social conscious-
ness, which must be derived by some recondite process of combination or
elimination.?

The view here enunciated is so vitally a part of all Cooley’s thinking
that it will bear repetition in different forms. It would be difficult
to find a more complete statement of the growing view of social

I Social Organization, p. 3.
2 Tbid., p. 5.
psychology as to the essentially social nature of the individual and
of the self.

Cooley criticizes Descartes’ well-known maxim, Cogito, ergo sum,
upon the ground that it is an abstraction of the individual aspect
of a social situation and a positing of that as the primary fact, to
the neglect of the other pole of the dialectic. It is “one-sided or
‘individualistic’ in asserting the personal or ‘I’ aspect to the exclu-
sion of the social or ‘we’ aspect, which is equally original with it.’’*
Descartes’ error was a result of a too narrow introspection. A
broader introspection reveals the fact “that the ‘I’-consciousness
does not explicitly appear until the child is, say, about two years
old, and that when it does appear it comes in inseparable conjunc-
tion with the consciousness of other persons and of those relations
which make up a social group.’” In other words, Descartes lacked
an adequate conception of the group as a fact in mental develop-
ment. The consciousness of self implies the consciousness of others
and vice versa. ‘Self and society go together, as phases of a com-
mon whole. I am aware of the social groups in which I live as
immediately and authentically as I am aware of myself.”

Closely connected with the social nature of the self and of
consciousness, is the problem of thought as a social process.
Thought, according to Cooley’s explanation, is essentially an impli-
cation of the group process. In other words, thought is a social
process. ‘Our thoughts are always, in some sort, imaginary
conversations; and when vividly felt they are likely to become
quite distinctly so.” Thought has grown up out of the interrela-
tions of living forms. Whether we view it as it develops in the
case of the child, or in the most highly developed type of reflection,
thinking always implies the other forms of life. Thought is essen-
tially internal conversation, internal dialogue. That is, it is a
group product, and always implies a group both for its inception
and for its development. It is true of adults as it is of children that
“the mind lives in perpetual conversation.” “The fact is that
language, developed by the race through personal intercourse and
imparted to the individual in the same way, can never be dis-
sociated from personal intercourse in the mind; and since higher
thought involves language, it is always a kind of imaginary con-
versation. The word and the interlocutor are correlative ideas.’*
This implication of the fundamental relation of the group to both
language and thought, and the very close relation, one might say
identity, between language and thought, is one of the most impor-
tant implications of the group concept which modern social psychol-
ogy has developed. Cooley has performed a real service in pointing
out some suggestive ways in which the problem may be followed up.
The radical contrast that this view presents to that of Ward, in
which thought was assumed to antedate group or social life, is
quite apparent. It symbolizes one of the most important differ-
ences in the réle of the group concept and its implications. It
is true, of course, that Cooley does not discover any process whereby
self-consciousness arises and functions, nor does he show the process
by which the self is created or by which the social product, language,
becomes reflective thought. He does, however, by calling attention
to the essentially social nature of self, language, and thought,
establish the basis for his sociological approach to the problems
which he discusses. Some such presumption, it would seem, is
necessary for the founding of a real claim for sociology as a social
technique.

Two very significant applications of the group concept remain
to be pointed out. They constitute two very significant and impor-
tant contributions to social theory in general. They are Cooley’s
elaboration of the nature and importance of “primary groups” and
his group or social approach to the problem of pecuniary valuation.
The meaning and significance of the term “primary groups” as
developed by Cooley are so well recognized that it is hardly neces-
sary to do more than to call attention to the point. The impor-
tance of the family, the playground, the neighborhood was not
unknown before his treatment of them, but their real importance
could be pointed out only on the basis of an adequate social psy-
chology. So long as the self, the individual, was looked upon as a
datum rather than as a creation of social or group life, the intimate

* Human Nature and the. Social Order, p. 56.
face-to-face groups, while more or less important as secondary
factors, could not assume a primary réle. Once, however, the
newer social psychology has taken upon itself to regard the self,
thought, and the individual as products of a group relation, then
the intimate associational groups become primary in importance.
In other words, the significance of Cooley’s contribution in this
respect is not in calling attention to certain universal forms of
group life, but in reinterpreting that group life in terms of a social
psychology. The degree to which the local group life is coming
to have a recrudescence of emphasis in various fields of thought is,
to some extent at least, influenced by Cooley’s able use of the group
concept in this part of his thinking.

With reference to the other point mentioned, the discussion of
the problem of value, it is not within the province of this paper
to attempt to present a résumé of the argument presented. The
relevant point for us is that, in taking up the problem of pecuniary
valuation, Cooley approaches it from the social point of view
rather than from the individual point of view as is common in
economic theory. In other words, it is an effort to deal with the
problem of pecuniary valuation in particular from the group point
of view. In carrying out his purpose, Cooley makes use of the
fundamental social psychology which runs through all his work.
In doing this he is making a contribution to the, as yet, young
attempt to apply the group concept, the social point of view, to
the province of valuation in economic theory, which has for so long
been the preserve of the individualist. The usual treatment of
the problem in economic theory, according to Cooley,
starts with demand as a datum, assuming that each individual has made up
his mind what he wants and how much he wants it. There is seldom, I believe,
any serious attempt to go back of this, it being assumed, apparently, that these
wants spring from the inscrutable depths of the private mind. At any rate
it has not been customary to recognize that they are the expression of an
institutional development.

What Cooley attempts to do is to go back of these individual wants,
as found in the individual minds of economic theory, and show
that the minds themselves, as well as the wants or demands, are

Social Process, p. 297.
socially created; that the group has formed and made them as they
are. A treatment of value which ignores this fundamental part
of the valuation process as at best a half-truth. The market is an
institution and as such creates its values and demands, shapes the
types of wants and tends, like any institution, to preserve itself
and its wants from changes and modifications. The result of the
individualistic treatment of valuation which has been current is to
saddle the whole institution of the market on human nature:

The accepted economic treatment would seem to be equivalent to a renun-

ciation of any attempt to understand the relation of value to society at large;
or, in other words, of any attempt to understand value itself, since to understand
a thing is to perceive its more important relations.
The truth of the situation is that the problem is a social one,
valuation is a social process rather than an individual one. The
market itself is the main factor in creating values. This does not
mean merely

that pre-existing individual estimates are summed up and equilibrated in
accordance with the formulas of economic science; though this is one phase
of the matter, but also that the individual estimates themselves are moulded
by the market, at first in a general way and then, in the process of price making,
drawn toward mechanical uniformity. The individual and the system act
and react upon each other until, in most cases, they agree, somewhat as in
fashion, in religious belief and the like. The influence of the market is not
secondary either in time or importance to that of the person; it is a continuous
institution in which the individual lives and which is ever forming his ideas.”

From these quotations one may see that what Cooley is attempting
to do is to apply his psychology of the relation of the individual
and the group to the particular social problem of valuation. It is
merely, by way of summary, an application of the newer social
psychology to the province of economic theory in so far as it has
to do with valuation. We are not concerned with the further
details of the application. It is enough to point out that the
overwhelming number of writers in political economic theory are
individualistic in their thinking, but that, in his latest book,
Cooley is attempting to proceed logically from the prevailing point
of view in contemporary social psychology. In a word, it is an
effort to approach the heart of economic theory from the group

1 Social Process, p. 298. 2 Ibid., pp. 298-99.
Miss Follett’s book, The New State, is the most important
analysis of the group concept and its significance for social practice
that has recently appeared. Like some of the other books that
have been noted in the discussions of this chapter, the group concept
forms such a large part of the text that to attempt to show in any
adequate way the details of its treatment would involve a repetition
of almost the whole of the work. The effort will be confined, there-
fore, to an attempt to select out those parts of the discussion which
show most clearly the prominence of the group in the author’s,
mind, and the uses to which the concept is put. Such a plan
necessarily will do violence to a book which is so thoroughly per-
meated with the group idea that it merits bodily inclusion in this
essay. We shall have occasion to refer to it again in the next
chapter.3

In order properly to approach the point of view with which
Miss Follett sets about her task, it will be well to inquire into the
psychological point of view with which she begins. That is, we
must find out what is meant by the “new psychology” as contrasted
with the discarded “‘old psychology.” The key to the former is,
that it refuses to recognize the legitimacy of the separation of the
individual from the group:

We have long been trying to understand the relation of the individual to

society; we are only just beginning to see that there is no “individual,” and
that there is no “society.” It is not strange, therefore, that our efforts have
gone astray, that our thinking yields small returns for politics. The old
psychology was based on the isolated individual as the unit, on the assumption
that a man thinks, feels, and judges independently. Now that we know that
there is no such thing as a separate ego, that individuals are created by recip-
rocal interplay, our whole study of psychology is being transformed."
In other words, the new psychology is a social psychology which
recognizes the interacting socii in a total social situation as the
unit. Such a psychology must be more than an “application of
individual psychology to a number of people.’* The new psy-
chology, on the other hand, ‘‘must take people with their inher-
itance, their ‘tendencies,’ their environment, and then focus its
attention on their interrelatings.’”’ Again, we must distinguish
a proper social psychology from that so-called social psychology
which makes “socially minded” tendencies on the part of indi-
viduals the subject of its study. ‘‘Such tendencies still belong to
the field of individual psychology.’ “A social action is not an
individual initiative with a social application, neither is social
psychology the determination of how far social factors determine
individual consciousness. Social psychology must concern itself
primarily with the interaction of minds.”s In other words, it is
group psychology.

Still another distinction is to be made between the latter and
what has sometimes passed for group psychology, namely, crowd
psychology. ‘Social psychology may include both group psychol-
ogy and crowd psychology, but of these two group psychology is
much the more important.’® This distinction between the group
and the crowd is conceived to be fundamental. The crowd and
the group “represent entirely different modes of association.”
“Crowd action is the outcome of agreement based on concurrence
of emotion rather than of thought, or if on the latter, then on a

1 The New State, p. 19. 4 Ibid.

2 [bid., p. 20. SIbid.

3 [bid., p. 21. 6 Ibid.
concurrence of emotion produced by becoming aware of similarities,
not by a slow and gradual creating of unity.”* The process by
which this creation of unity is secured will be explained later.
The point to be noted here is that a crowd psychology, while it
has received more study, is to be distinguished from a group
psychology or social psychology as used by the author. The latter
is the more important, not only for present analysis of group life, but
for a constructive program ina democracy. In a word, the essence
of the theme of the book is that the group process must be
substituted for the “crowd fallacy.” With these preliminary
remarks on the general psychological point of view we may pass
to other matters which will serve to illustrate and amplify the
suggestions contained in the foregoing quotations.

In order to understand the further references to the group
as the fundamental concept with which the book deals, it is
necessary to sketch briefly what is meant by the term “the group
process” as itis used. The group process is the heart of the group
psychology, and is represented as the only solution of the problem
of democracy. In its essence it is a stimulus-and-response situation
in a group, whereby a real group mind is created out of integration
of the attitudes of the co-operating persons. This process is not
one of mere addition or subtraction of individual attitudes. The
attitudes are not fixed. The result of group discussion and activity
is a composite whole which is something new. It is not secured
by the acquiescence of the member of the group but by his contribu-
tion. It is not compromise or a striking of averages. It is not
suppression of one part by the other members. The group process
is found only when there is an integration of differences and agree-
ments into a new whole. “It is an acting and reacting, a single
and identical process which brings out differences and integrates
them into a unity. The complex reciprocal action, the intri-
cate interweavings of the members of the group, is the social
process.’

Ibid.

2 Ibid. The point of view set forth in this summary of the author’s analysis of
the group process suggests Cooley’s analysis of the formation of public opinion (Social

Organization, chap. xii), and Aristotle’s still earlier statement of the advantages of
giving supreme power in the state to the many rather than to the few (Politics iii. 11).
In contrast to the group process as thus sketched, two theories
of the group process are criticized, namely, “the imitation theory
and the like-response-to-like-stimuli theory.’”* Imitation is a part
of our social life but it is only a part, and a “part that has been
fatally over-emphasized.’”? It has been made the bridge to span
the gap ‘“‘between the individual and society, but we now see that
there is no gap, therefore no bridge is necessary.”3 The chief error
in making imitation the basis of a social psychology is that it
stresses likenesses to the neglect of the other very important factor,
difference:

The core of the social process is not likeness, but of harmonizing difference
through interpenetration. But to be more accurate, similarity and difference
cannot be opposed in this external way—they have a vital connection. Simi-
larities and differences make up the differentiated reactions of the group; that
is what constitutes importance, not their likeness or unlikeness as such. I react
toastimulus; that reaction may represent a likeness or an unlikeness. Society
is the unity of these differentiated reactions. .... Unity is brought about
by the reciprocal adaptings of the reactions of individuals, and this reciprocal
adapting is based on both agreement and difference.4

This does not mean that there is not uniformity. The distinction
to be made is between uniformity as given, and the unity which
we achieve. Uniformity means stagnation. Similarity is a doc-
trine of degeneration. “Unity, not uniformity, must be our aim.
We attain unity only through variety. Differences must be inte-
grated, not annihilated, nor absorbed.”s “The unifying of
difference is the eternal process of life—the creative synthesis, the
highest act of creation, the at-onement.’®

Closely connected with the unification of thought through what
has been described as the group process of integration is the unifica-
tion of feeling, or “collective” feeling as it is called. It is recognized
by Miss Follett that the unification of thought which she has
described is only part of the group process. Here again, it is
pointed out, the older individualistic psychology is inadequate to
give a true explanation of the origin and nature of sympathy:

Particularistic psychology, which gave us ego and alter, gave us sympathy
going across from one isolate being to another. Now we begin with the group.

*The New State, p. 23. 3Ibid. 5 Ibid., p. 39.

2Ibid., p. 34- 4Ibid., pp. 34-35. 6 Ibid., p. 40.
We see in the self-unifying of the group process, and all the myriad unfoldings
involved the central and all-germinating activity of life. The group creates.
In the group, we have seen, is formed the collective idea, “similarity” is there
achieved, sympathy also is born within the group—it springs forever from inter-
relation. The emotions I feel when apart belong to the phantom ego; only
from the group comes the genuine feeling with—the true sympathy, the vital
sympathy, the just and balanced sympathy.?

We have here an excellent statement of the relation of the group
to the feeling of sympathy, as well as a clear conception of the
central position of the group as opposed to the older separation
of one independent individual from another, with the consequent
necessity of getting them together through the invention of a bond
of feeling. The necessity of the assumption of the priority of the
group as the basis for the appearance of sympathy is clearly set
forth in the following passage:

It has been thought until recently by many writers that sympathy came

before the social process. Evidences were collected among animals of the
“desire to help” other members of the same species and the conclusion drawn
that sympathy exists and that the result is “mutual aid.” But sympathy
cannot antedate activity. We do not, however, now say that there is an
“instinct” to help and then sympathy is the result of the helping; the feeling
and the activity are involved one in the other.
The reason why we have had difficulties in trying to find out whether
self-interest or love for one’s fellows is the chief motor force in
society has been because “‘we have thought of egoistic or altruistic
feelings as pre-existing; we have studied action to see what prece-
dent characteristics it indicated. But when we begin to see that
men possess no characteristics apart from the unifying process,
then it is the process we shall study.”’ The recognition of the
group life as the center and starting-point for social analysis is
quite apparent from the older views criticized. This emphasis
which Miss Follett places upon activity as the key to the inter-
pretation of the group process, is one of the cardinal characteristics
of functional psychology. One of the significant suggestions, in a
practical application of the point of view that has been presented,
is contained in the following words:

This means that we must live the group life. This is the solution of our
problems, national and international. Employers and employed cannot be

3 Ibid., p. 44. 2 Ibid., p. 45. 3 Ibid.
exhorted to feel sympathy for one another; true sympathy will come only by
creating a community or group of employers and employed. Through the
group you find the details, the filling out of Kant’s universal law. Kant’s
categorical imperative is general, it is empty; it is only a blank check. But
through the life of the group we learn the content of universal law."

This recognition of the importance of the implications of the relation
of group activity to the formation of the feeling of sympathy and
all other moral qualities can hardly be exaggerated. The empty
attempts to form moral character by the repetition of moral pre-
cepts, which has been the common theory of educational and
religious leaders and institutions, find in the above statement a
much-needed corrective. The educational application of the theory
that the group activity is the center from which education must
proceed will be pointed out later. Attention is called to it here to
show the significance of the group concept as a basis for the analysis
of the feelings of sympathy as suggested by the passage last quoted
above.

Although the author’s point of view has been suggested, it will
be well to take up in some specific details her conception of the
relation of the individual to society. We shall have occasion to
point out that a distinction is made between the old individualism
and the new individualism; we shall take up the former first and
deal with it and the category “society” at the same time. The
key to Miss Follett’s position is given in these words: “A man is
a point in the social process rather than a unit in that process, a
point where forming forces meet straightway to disentangle them-
selves and stream forth again. In the language of the day, ‘man
is at the same time a social factor and a social product.’”’? Thesun-
dering of the individual from the larger whole is as “artificial and
late an act as the sundering of consciousness into subject and
object.” The same view of the group as the reality is set forth
more fully in the following statement of it:

The individual is the unification of a multiplied variety of reactions. But
the individual does not react to society. The interplay constitutes both society
on the one hand and individuality on the other; individuality and society
are evolving together from this constant and complex action and reaction.
Or, more accurately, the relation of the individual to society is not action and
reaction, but infinite interactions by which both individual and society are

1 The New State, p. 60. 2 Ibid., p. 60.
forever a-making; we cannot say, if we would be exact, that the individual
acts upon and is acted upon, because that way of expressing it implies that he
is a definite, given, finished entity, and would keep him apart merely as an
agent of the acting and being acted on. We cannot put the individual on one
side and society on the other, we must understand the complete interrelation
of the two. Each has no value, no existence without the other.

The above summary of the view of the relation of the individual
to the group and its condemnation of the older individualistic
viewpoint suggests the author’s conception of the “new individual-
ism,” or the proper and sound individualism. Individualism, in
this latter sense, is a late social product. It consists in the develop-
ment of the individual to the highest power in a collective or intense
group life. The development of a true social life is not antagonistic
to the development of an individual, but is a part of the same
process. In other words, the two develop together. The new
view of individualism does not destroy the individual, as has been
charged. Those who advocate the newer view are giving “the
fullest value to the individual that has ever been given, are preach-
ing individual value as the basis of democracy, individual affirma-
tion as its process, and individual responsibility as its motor force.’
This conception of individualism suggests a criticism of the older
conception of freedom or liberty. That conception was that the
“solitary man was the free man, that the man outside society
possessed freedom but that in society he had to sacrifice as much
of his liberty as interfered with the liberty of others.”3 Such a
conception of freedom involves the fallacies of the older psychology
with its assumption of the priority of the individual. The true
idea of freedom, the argument runs, is found only in that view
which conceives of the individual and the group developing together;
a man “‘gains his freedom through perfectly complete relationship
because thereby he achieves his whole nature.’ Freedom is found
in what has been described as the group process, in the integration
process whereby a social unity is created out of differences and
agreements. One becomes free as one enters into the intense social
life and becomes an actual part of it:

That we are free only through the social order, only as fast as we identify
ourselves with the whole, implies practically that to gain our freedom we must

 Ibid., p. 61. 2 Ibid., p. 74. 3 Ibid., p. 69. 4 Ibid.
take part in all the social life around us; join groups, enter into many social
relations, and begin to win freedom for ourselves. When we are the group in
feeling, thought and will we are free.

We see, then, that the group is the central concept in the working
out of the ideas of freedom and of individualism. Freedom and
individualism, in the proper sense of the term, are not opposed
to the group, but are implied in the group conception of life. It is
only in a group that individuality and freedom are possible. They
are corollaries of a group conception of the human process. Both
are achievements.

Before leaving the discussion of the relation of the individual
to the group or to society, it may be well to notice briefly Miss
Follett’s view of the concept “society,” and her criticism of the
social-organism theory. With reference to the first, she very
properly observes that there is no such thing as society en masse.
In that sense the term is a misnomer. The reality is a number
of groups to which one is more or less intimately attached:

Iam always in relation not to “society,” but to some concrete group. ....
Practically, “society” is for every one of us a number of groups. The recog-
nition of this constitutes a new step in sociology, analogous to the contribu-
tion William James made in regard to the individual... . . The vital relation
of the individual to the world is through his groups; they are the potent factors
in shaping our lives.?

In other words, the study of society becomes the study of groups.

With reference to the organic conception of society, Miss Follett
takes the position that it is inadequate, although containing one
essential truth. That truth is that it attempts to stress the funda-
mental unity of the thing it is describing. The term is valuable
as a metaphor but is lacking in psychological accuracy. The
criticisms made of the analogy set forth nothing that has not been
brought forth by other writers in attacking the theory. Most of
the defects have been acknowledged even by the sponsors for the
theory in American sociology. They need not be repeated here.

In order to bring out more clearly the position of the writer
we are now reviewing, it will be helpful to summarize the application
of her view to the theory of human progress. Two of the older
theories of progress are examined; first, that progress depends on
individual invention and crowd imitation; and second, that prog-
ress is the result of struggle and survival of the fittest. Taking
up the first of these theories, it is pointed out that the second half
of it has been disposed of above in connection with the criticism
of the theory of imitation as the process of social psychology. The
first half of the theory, individual invention, is briefly treated.
The individual does not invent or originate in the older sense of the
terms. The older view committed the error of ignoring the fact
that the individual is himself a group product. Conceding all that
may be true of inborn ability, still, according to Miss Follett, the
“individual” idea one brings to a given group “‘is not really an
‘individual’ idea; it is the result of the process of interpenetration,
but by bringing it to a new group and soaking it in that the inter-
penetration becomes more complex.’”* ‘There wells up in the
individual a fountain of power, but this fountain has risen under-
ground, and is richly fed by all the streams of the common life.’
The place of the group in invention, though not generally a part
of the common thought, has been so fully elaborated by other
writers that it is hardly necessary to suggest the soundness of
Miss Follett’s application of the group view to the invention theory.

The second theory of progress, struggle and survival, is subjected
to several criticisms. In the first place, it has been placed upon
an individualistic basis, pictured as a struggle between individuals.
The equally important fact of co-operation and group life was
ignored. Not only among men, but in the animal world as well,
“biologists tell us that ‘mutual aid’ has from the first been a strong
factor in evolution,’ giving to those animals which exhibit it an
advantage over the solitary type. Assuming correction of the
individualistic conception of struggle, does the conception of group
struggle suffice as an adequate process of progress? To this question
a negative answer is given because group struggle implies a subjec-
tion of one group by the other; it violates the principle that progress
is achieved by the integration of differences, by the extension of
membership in ever higher groups. Even if the struggle idea is
extended no further than the intellectual world it is invalid, because

1 Ibid., p. 94. 2 Ibid., p. 95. 3 Ibid.
the true way to progress is not through argument or struggle but
through the process of group integration of differences, that is,
through what has been called the ‘‘group process.” True discussion
is not struggle, but “‘an experiment in co-operation.”* ‘We must
learn co-operative thinking, intellectual team-work. There is a
secret here which is going to revolutionize the world.’”?

The failure to take into account the group process is the error
in both the older notions of progress which have just been criticized.
The true approach, according to Miss Follett, to an adequate theory
of progress is to be found in the group process: “Progress then
must be through the group process. Progress implies respect for
the creative process, not the created thing; the created thing is
forever and forever being left behind us.”’ Out of the group life
alone comes the creative power. ‘‘No individual can change the
disorder or the iniquity of this world. No chaotic mass of men and
women can do it. Conscious group creation is to be the social and
political force of the future. Our aim is to live consciously in more
and more group relations and to make each group a means of
creating. It is the group which will teach us that we are not pup-
pets of fate.”4 Progress, in other words, is to be secured by the
application of the group conception to our whole life. Thus will it
“revolutionize the world.”

Thus far in the summary, attention has been directed to the
problem of setting forth the fundamental notions of the writer
under discussion, of clarifying the meaning of the concept “group,”
and showing some of its implications. From now on it will be well
to point out some of the ways in which the group concept that has
been developed may be used in practical problems. Lack of space
necessitates doing violence to the constructive side of Miss Follett’s
discussion. It may be summarized in the following words: ‘We
have said, ‘The people must rule.’ We now ask, ‘How are they
to rule?’ It is the technique of democracy which we are seeking.
We shall find it in group organization.”’> That is, the ‘‘new state”

1 The New State, p. 95. 2 Ibid. 3 Ibid., p. 98.

4Ibid., p. 101. This statement gives the thesis of the book. The new state
is to arise out of the recognition of the group principle and its application, in place
of the older political theories based on the older psychologies.

SIbid., p. 155.
is to be secured by discarding the older conceptions and perfecting
the organization of groups as the only workable democratic method.
At the bottom of a sound democratic group method is placed the
neighborhood group. This small “primary” group, as Cooley calls
it, is the foundation stone upon which Miss Follett erects her edi-
fice. It is here that, for political purposes, the group process works
out. It is here that public opinion is formed and made effective.
It is here that the individual is discovered and conserved and en-
larged. Neighborhood organization is the destroyer of the boss and
the crowd, supplanting them with real leadership and a real group:

Neighborhood organization must then take the place of party organization.
.... The rigid formality of the party means stultification, annihilation.
But group politics, made of the very stuff of life, of the people of the groups,
will express the inner, intimate ardent desires of spontaneous human beings,
and will contain within its circumference the possibility of the fullest satisfac-
tion of those desires. Group organization gives a living, pulsing unity made
up of the minds and hearts and seasoned judgments of vital men and women.*

With the neighborhood organized, Miss Follett extends the prin-
ciple of group organization on up to the highest groupings known.
To carry the principle of group organization from “neighborhood
to nation’’ there must be
two changes in our state first, the state must be the actual integration of living,
local groups, thereby finding ways of dealing directly with its individual
members. Secondly, other groups than the neighborhood groups must be rep-
resented in the state; the ever-increasing multiple group life of today must be
recognized and given a responsible place in politics.

As suggested by this statement, Miss Follett accepts the theory
of the unified state as opposed to political pluralism which discredits
the state. Her discussion of the principles and inferences involved
in the different point of view is a very interesting elaboration of
the group-process theory, but we cannot go into it further than to
point out that she holds consistently to the view, which seems to
be sound, that the organization of larger and more inclusive groups
does not destroy the smaller groups, but, on the contrary, demands
them as essential to the larger group organization. Through the
process of integration, it is pointed out, it is possible to build

1 Ibid., pp. 242-43. 2 Tbid., p. 245.
up a group organization from neighborhood to nation, and even to
internation or world-organization. Through it all, however, the
group method is the only sound basis of modern political organiza-
tion. In reply to the contention of those who favor occupational
representation as the proper method of representation, it is pointed
out that no one group can be chosen to the exclusion of all other
groups. Important as the occupational group is, it does not take
in the whole of one’s interests. One is a member of many and
various groups which must be integrated into the true neighborhood
group as the fundamental group in political activity. “To sum up:
no one group can enfold me, because of my multiple nature. This
is the blow to the theory of occupational representation.’

The foregoing brief summary has not attempted to do more
than to present the point of view of the author with respect to the
group conception of society, and to suggest the application which
is made of the concept once it has been developed. The book
contains one of the most suggestive applications of the group
concept as a tool of analysis that has appeared. It represents
a point of view which sociology has had a large share in developing;
a view which is characteristic of contemporary sociological thought
in this country.
