American Democracy and the Modern Church

Author(s): Allan Hoben

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 21, No. 4 (Jan., 1916), pp. 458-473
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763904

Accessed: 10-05-2016 04:51 UTC
AMERICAN DEMOCRACY AND THE MODERN CHURCH

 

ALLAN HOBEN
University of Chicago

 

The political history of the United States records a consistent
democratization of government. In applying democracy to an
ever-widening area of activity, the American people have carried
the initial spirit of the nation quite beyond the range of primary
national interests as incorporated in the Declaration of Independ-
ence. Progress has been made from the formal affairs of state
toward the practical concerns of the people, from the birthday
issue with Old World politics toward domestic concern for the
common man.

In this modern development, as in the initial act creating the
nation, will be found the simple faith that the people are able to
govern themselves, and are more to be trusted than overlords,
however benevolent, in attaining and guarding common rights.
Upon fair presentation, the popular verdict tends ever toward a
more adequate justice. The early leaders, however, both in the
nation and in the constituent states as they multiplied, were insist-
ent that this happy outcome of democracy depended upon the
efficiency of educational and religious institutions. The one must
guarantee sufficient intellectual training and the other reliable
moral character. The reflective rather than the emotional will
of the people was deemed essential to the great experiment.

No doubt the political function of the church was more obvious
and simple in post-Colonial days than it is now when the vital
problems are not those imposed upon a whole people from without,
but rather those which arise from a stratified society within the
nation. It may be of interest, therefore, to chart the location
and significance of the church in contemporary democracy, and
to indicate what the churches, conceived collectively, are doing
toward the realization of a comprehensive and worthy form of self-
government.
Quite apart from the important matter of the form of govern-
ment under which a people may be organized, it will be generally
conceded that the morality of those holding public office vitally
affects common welfare. Moral failure in public trust not only
blights the popular mind with the frost of cynicism but allows
predatory interests to rob the whole people, who, for the time being,
have no advocate or defender other than the publicly elected official.
If, therefore, democracy is ever to discover and retain efficient
servants after the fashion of private concerns, she will need the
best judgment and the full moral support of church people. Of
even greater importance is the necessity of maintaining high moral
standards in the citizenship generally, so that almost any popular
choice may be politically safe, and that malfeasance may be
promptly and vigorously punished. To this end, the free debate
of public questions in the light of the highest ethics becomes impera-
tive.

Such being the case, it is in point to ask whether the church
supplies such leadership to the state, whether she leavens the mass
with such working ideals of integrity and service as will auto-
matically right governmental wrongs and guarantee progressive
righteousness, and whether she fosters the enlightened debate of
public questions. The minority standing of the whole church
group, however weakened by sectarianism, does not in itself absolve
the church from rendering great service to the state. For the group
supplying leadership always exerts an influence far above the ratio
of its numerical strength. Hence the question remains whether
the church fosters such a conception of civic duty as will impel
her adherents both to serve in public capacity and to do their
duty at the polls. Leaders in anti-saloon propaganda report 40 to
60 per cent of the church vote registered in the cities studied, so
that the actual church vote probably falls below half of her voting
strength.

It is probably true that both main divisions of the Christian
church are chiefly concerned with saving souls for heaven. The
conditions under which souls are achieved, and the fact that these
conditions are increasingly determined by government only faintly
affect the rescue policy. Possibly the arrest of the social sense
is due to an unscientific, metaphysical doctrine of ‘“‘sin,”’ as con-

trasted with sins which may be empirically observed as a social
and largely unnecessary product, to a formal conception of the
soul at variance with psychological knowledge, to a traditional
despair which beclouded the early persecuted church and so
fostered individualistic eschatology, and to a view of salvation as
being something other than normality. The fact that misgovern-
ment, whether deliberate or by neglect, blights innumerable souls
with greed, poverty, crime, vice, and disease does not come home
to the church in such a way as to make her vigorous for society’s
governmental or organic health. No doubt, also, the usual silence
of the church when confronted with the ills of our collective life—
which ills in turn spring largely from economic injustice—is due
to the ever-present danger, that in practically every local church
any positive espousal of social righteousness would surely disturb
the peace.

The vent for moral passion which might be found in a hearty
enlistment in democracy’s struggle has as substitute an intermittent
opening in high-pressure evangelism, which is a recrudescence of
individualistic traditionalism professionally and profitably engi-
neered, and also in a rather lower fissure whence issue condemnation
of public officials and the odor of dead opportunity proclaiming that
“politics is rotten.” Instead of urging her strong men to enter
the fray and to bear hardship for the common weal, instead of
training her youth and inspiring them for civic duty, she lets men
of inferior standards both make the rules and umpire the game
while with the other “‘respectables” she keeps out of trouble or at
most says some “nasty” things from the sideline.

The church’s service to the state depends in no sense upon
action as a political party, whether composed of the 14 per cent of
the population adhering to Roman Catholicism or of the 24 per
cent affiliated with Protestant denominations. The great majority
outside the church would tolerate no such method and would
suspect ulterior aims of power and privilege, however lofty the
ideals announced. It certainly is not for lack of organic political
effort that the church is to be censured, but rather for an under-
estimate of the state and for failure to inject into public service,
through strong, well-trained men, the greatest dynamic that democ-
racy can have—the principles of Jesus of Nazareth. The state
has needed timber, and the timber has not been provided; the
gospel has needed socio-governmental expression, and the most
virile of its professed adherents have been busy making private
fortunes under un-Christian rules.

From these and other considerations it has come about that now,
when democracy has educated the people to distrust philanthropy
as covering more ills than it cures, and to regard it as a belated
and unfair substitute for social justice, the church, having taken
no arduous part in the struggle of the common people to gain their
rights, stands embarrassed and bewildered before a seemingly
ungrateful people. With her, for the most part, the old ideal of
charity still prevails, whereas the democracy is not asking alms
but fair play. It is difficult for church leaders to sense the change
or rightly to estimate how sensitive is the soul of democracy to the
whole affront of patronizing good-will. Humaneness as a doctrine
of social relationship can be fully accepted only in a society where
democracy has not been born or is utterly dead.

Ugly suspicions also permeate the popular estimate of the
church. Can the minister as employee of the select group do his
full manly duty by his employers? Is it in human nature to take
issue with one’s bread and butter? Do the prominent supporters
of the church stand for the democratization of opportunity, the
square deal, the Golden Rule? Does the church represent brother-
hood or class-consciousness? Has it not in the very luxury of its
appointments, in its segregation of Negroes, immigrants, and work-
ing people, stood for class rather than for brotherhood? Whether
the common man thinks of the awesome building, the professional
choir, the sermon without debate or reply, or the constant presenta-
tion of dead issues, he always suspects the lack of democracy.

No one who has knowledge of that greater half of society without
the church can honestly doubt the existence of these suspicions,
and the stubborn fact remains that, whether well founded or not,
they constitute a barrier to the church’s service in the democracy.
For the outsider can now distinguish between Jesus and ecclesi-
asticism perhaps more clearly than is the case with the churchman.
It may be that the popular, unchurched mind is too suspicious,
and has learned in the school of hard knocks to look for the revenue
feature behind all movements as well as to resent superimposed
benefits; but certainly the present organization and standard
activities of the church do not impress the mass with any heroic
proof of her unselfishness. More recent forms of propaganda for
the Kingdom of God through the secular and organic life of the
state are eliciting a vast amount of unpaid service for the public
good; and until very recently the church has hardly recognized
these heroic struggles for righteousness outside her walls.

Contributors to most of these reform organizations ask no
return in comfortable pews, fine music, and aesthetic solace, but
only that the cause of human justice be promoted. The socialist
believes that his cause is greater than that of the church, the trade-
unionist that his is more urgent, and both are prepared to make
sacrifices which compare favorably with any similar exhibit in the
modern church. Similarly, most of the societies working for reform
and amelioration, even though they be often supplied with impulse
and ideal through church religion, regard their propaganda as
more urgent than ecclesiastical effort. The suspicion that sec-
tarian leaders and local ministers are animated by something other
than a passion for human welfare creeps into the public mind, and
the man of the street discounts the paid enthusiast who often
betrays the fact that he is working primarily for his church, and
not disinterestedly for the common good. The church by virtue of
her long history and substantial success in attracting the well-to-do
has become professionalized, while the younger movements of the
struggling classes possess more of the initial spirit of Christianity
when apostles and prophets did not work for hire; and member-
ship in these new organizations is usually more conscious and vital
than it is in the older body.

Thus the degree in which the church is separated from the
masses is not merely geographic as measured by its suburban trend,
but somewhat organic also as measured by the difference between
the volunteer unpaid apostle and the subsidized modern minister.
It may be that this wide gulf will not be bridged but by a genera-
tion of preachers who, like Amos, Jesus, and Paul, give their life
and message to the people, living as the people live, working as
they work, and refusing every monetary reward for this public
service. In such a situation the motive of the propagandist could
not be impugned or his message fettered. The supposition that
a clear grasp of the central message of Jesus and ability to convey
its dynamic to others necessitate extended professional training
and detachment from productive toil may need to be revised; while
the richer social implications of the gospel that might come to an
intelligent person in the normal process of the world’s work demand
fair consideration. In the mind of the democrat the whole question
of the inner and outer effects of making a livelihood out of religion
is up for frank review, and, whether one thinks of foreign mission
policies or of the needs at home, there must be a comparison of the
respective virtues of the two methods: that of Christianizing people
while working in the ranks with self-support and that of ministering
religion to people by a professional class supported by others.

Again, the internal organization of the local church, even when
ostensibly democratic, ever tends toward bureaucratic control.
So far as the preacher is concerned, this is due to the assumption
that he speaks ex cathedra and has some sort of authority other
than that of demonstrated truth as so perceived by his hearers.
But the common man who is working out his economic and social
salvation in other bodies and who has qualified as a democrat
abhors a muzzled meeting. For him the sanctity of the truth in
the case stands above consecrated buildings, personages, and dic-
tators. Furthermore, in many churches so little effort is made to
refer matters of policy, program, election, and expenditure to the
whole body for decision, that the people become supine in their
goodness and almost grateful to those who, with presumably the
best of intentions, nullify self-government.

With some notable exceptions the music of the church takes the
same upper-class, patronizing trend. Money which might have
been spent to educate the whole body in glorious and unifying
praise and in the training of large numbers of children and youth
to participate worthily in public worship is often spent on a few
imported singers, who give a high-class and critical stamp to the
service, but seldom draw out the congregation in the joyful abandon
of democratic praise. Again the psychology is that of a super-
imposed, although problematical, benefit, as contrasted with a
social achievement of the whole body.

It is perhaps iconoclastic to suggest that the church needs to
re-examine her meeting-house in the light of this crude and relent-
less spirit of democracy. Is it best to occupy a distinctive building
or to use quarters in which other popular assemblies of the people
gather and express themselves? Should the place in which religion
is advocated possess a solemn grandeur, an awesome and aesthetic
worth, acrystallized tradition of the might and sanctity of the historic
church? Should it bow the soul in mute acceptance of a ministry
which it and its officials mediate, and send men forth pardoned,
purified, and serene to meet the unceasing struggle of the outer
world? Perhaps so; but if this be all, democracy remains unsatis-
fied.

It is noteworthy that the forward movements of the church, in
which it has found the people, have been marked by unconven-
tionality and extramural effort. The open fields, marked places,
streets corners, town-halls, schoolhouses, and rough “‘tabernacles”’
have characterized the popularization of religion from the time of
Jesus to the present day. The address of man to man in forum
fashion as is the practice in politics is standard democratic form.
Aesthetic and sedative values reside in the ecclesiastical treatment,
but the implications of the separateness of religion from common
places and from common life, and its failure thus to come to grips
with the people, as well as its shyness of intellectual struggle in
the open without fear or favor, have made the religion of the sanc-
tuary the religion of the few.

Some maintain that America’s large European immigration
demands the reproduction here of the great symbols and bulwarks
of religion as set forth in the imposing cathedrals of the Old World.
But those who so argue do not reckon with democracy, lack faith
in the ability of America to work out a form consonant with her
spirit, and forget that the immigrant himself, seeking liberty and
larger life, is very tired of the old patriarchal system—which he
regards as largely an imposition—and is passing through skepticism
toward a religion that is popularly and intellectually based. The
church which seeks to serve him through the old architecture of
monarchical religion will probably have a harder task than the
group which seeks to meet him on the democratic level where he
may be paid the compliment of working out his own salvation with
as much honesty and independence as he exercises in his other
groups, social and national.

Another matter calling for a review of church method in the
light of democracy is the degree of social stratification which is
condoned and sometimes indorsed. The church often accentuates
the belief that an impassible gulf exists between the Negroes and
the whites. Whatever the inter-racial method may be in the
heavenly Jerusalem, the church is quite clear on the point that it
is not best that blacks and whites should work together here on a
basis of character values and a common aim. The social decrees
which so handicap the Negro in securing industrial and political
justice are confirmed by the church brotherhood which denies
him the education and hope to be found through association with
his white brethren in the membership and activities of the common
church organization. It may be contended that he prefers to be
separate, has a different psychology, would not be happy in the
white group, etc., but efforts to disabuse him of this opinion and
to mitigate his embittered race-consciousness by making him
welcome on a common membership basis are usually lacking.

A similar stratification exists through several generations of
immigrants and their children. Undoubtedly the church should
so specialize her method as to be able to minister to new comers
in their native tongues. But to erect and maintain separate
buildings for these people retards assimilation and stratifies the
democracy. In this way the church is often working at cross-
purposes with the public school, and long after the children have
been prepared to become part and parcel of the common American
life the church will be found accentuating by its separate buildings,
organizations, and language those clannish factors which impede
a hearty and reliable democracy.

Little need here be said of the gradual alignment of the church
and the well-to-do except that the congeniality of the two is
attested by their present partnership. Conversely there must
have been some lack of congeniality to account for the absence of
the struggling classes. For certainly both their social hunger and
their need of help were greater than would be found with the
“respectables,” while at the same time they were less competent
to command other outlets. Had the church been democratic and
socially concerned, rather than ecclesiastic and self-centered, there
is no reason to doubt that she would have succeeded more largely
with the mass than with the class, or at least equally with both.

Another difficult element enters into the problem by virtue of
the fact that the symbols and content of public worship are largely
the product of an undemocratic age. Only in small degree, as yet,
have the hopes of the masses risen into sacred song, great statements
of faith, and adequate common prayer. The historic agencies used
by the church are rich in ministries to the individual soul as con-
trasted with the same service for the collective life. Even in their
best form, they are the voice of the unworthy suppliant in the
presence of an absolute monarch. Without wholly denying the
validity of this aspect of religion, one feels that for the democ-
racy which has become conscious there remains an unsatisfied
demand, an Immanuel passion as contrasted with the absentee
potentate.

So also the theological conceptions of the church are not cast
in terms which are known to the common man. The preacher
may speak of sin as a great undifferentiated state, with explanations
as to how man came under sin and how the hearer may himself
be extricated from this state, but the public mind does not think
in these terms. The intelligent democrat has analyzed sin more
specifically than the appointed moral leader. To him definite
sins have become clearly outlined. He believes that their preven-
tion is more important than their forgiveness and that prevention
is, in a very large measure, possible. The point of view of the
churchman is theological, that of the democrat, social. The one
thinks of a state of sin, the other, of a condition of society that
defeats the real ends of life. The one seeks to change the spiritual
status on a basis of belief, the other, to change living conditions
by direct action. Both may be right, but they do not understand
each other.
The church says children are unregenerate and need to be born
anew, the democrat says many of them are victims of vicious living
conditions imposed by greed and the industrial exploitation of
human rights. The church would save them by the mystery of
baptism or of faith, the democrat thinks that they would save them-
selves in a fair society where the hopes and possibilities of the soul
might reach out through normal human experience to some sure
sense of an Infinite Love.

Similar contrasts exist all along the conscious boundary between
church and mass. Church membership is for those who believe
thus and so, and who submit to a certain ritual. These are the
measures of excellence. But in the democracy social conduct that
is fair and therefore beneficial to all is the sole consideration for
tating and good citizenship. The ecclesiastic will admit the unself-
ish person only on certain provisos of creed and ritual, and whoever
qualifies in these respects is usually immune from censorship or
dismissal, although his social conduct may be subversive of the
public good, extortionate, and unjust. But the standard of the
outside world has to do only with conduct, reckoning this or that
profession as neither here nor there.

All of this wide difference has come about in a fairly traceable
way. The church has undergone a progressive loss of public
function, as for example the control of education and relief, and
there has crept in a subtle error, to the effect that her responsibility
ceased, with the passing over of these concerns to the state. She
lacked the vision to see society whole, to work for the community
in its totality, to shepherd all the people. Denominationalism
favored irresponsibility. Philanthropy supplanted public spirit,
ambulance service got more attention than generalship. Arrest
was inevitable, and, by the law of compensation, she turned with
greater diligence to her traditions while the democracy marched
on to meet its trying problems.

The writer recalls a recent painful illustration of how the church
sometimes ignores this state-consciousness. Picture a great audi-
ence on memorial Sunday, a service organized by local officials and
rich in the best patriotic music, rumors that Germany’s reply to
President Wilson’s first note was being received at Washington,
and a noted preacher who announces to this expectant congrega-
tion that he will preach on the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. To
the perplexed democrat in this land which is striving to realize
the brotherhood of all the peoples there was the unhappy suggestion
that organized religion is wedded to tradition, lacks regard for the
departed servants of the Republic and concern for her moral guid-
ance in the grave issue of the hour. Fortunately this is no fair
view of the church’s response to the special days of celebration
in the democracy, but it is indicative of an aloofness to state inter-
ests which is all too general.

A review of the courses of study which the church offers her
children and youth also favors the inference that she is not an
eager and efficient handmaid of the state. Almost without excep-
tion the material is traditional and individualistic and without
inspiration or direction for civic duty. With all the social service
parlance so much in vogue, the direct avenue to justice in the
corporate life is seldom mentioned. The philanthropic mother
nurtures a philanthropic child, in the presence of crying needs.
This is the interpretation of the Christ spirit and is not without
promise if it should carry through to the why of misery and the
finer obligation of justice. The hope of connecting with democracy
through this avenue consists in the rather common experience wherein
the serious social worker gropes through the sorrows and super-
ficialities of philanthropy to the comprehensive realities of civics.

It may be that a dim sense of the church’s failure to meet
society’s collective need of moral leadership underlies the present
demand that she confine herself to the “‘gospel,” implying thereby
that the gospel is concerned solely with man’s relation to God.
And since the attempt to regulate social conduct is so fraught
with the danger of offending church people, it is thought that a
restriction of the church’s function as an agent of religion is desir-
able. But the internal advantage of such a course is bound to be
attended with further loss of influence in the democracy. The
ethics of society in general would then prove to be more aggressive,
vital, and urgent than that of the church group.

Recent developments of the democratic spirit will test church
organization in new ways. The progressive realization of woman’s
suffrage, growing logically out of general education and the feminist
movement, is rapidly centering the attention and effort of women
about civic affairs. A competitive bid is being made for the time
and energy which women have so generously given to the church.
During the past decade women have educated themselves, prin-
cipally in their clubs, to understand and attack governmental
evils which threaten their own and the public’s interests, especially
in the humanitarian field; and perhaps the bulk of humanitarian
legislation has been proposed and urged by them.

This means that the most intelligent women and those with
capacity for leadership are turning from relief to reform measures,
from philanthropy to civics; and unless the church provides scope
and expression for this redirected energy she will suffer the loss
of that active support which the women have so readily given.
A further implication of this trend is the necessity of giving women
a larger representation on the official boards of the church. Democ-
tacy demands that representation be substantially balanced or,
at least, placed upon a basis of merit and efficiency quite apart
from any consideration of sex.

As any given church becomes large and prosperous there develops
a tendency to remove its government from the rank and file. The
usurpation of the “ring” is not consciously banal, but springs
mainly from the bother of maintaining an active, and therefore
real democracy. In the election of officials and the adoption of
policies and budgets there is often a cut-and-dried method which
hardly preserves the form of democracy, much less its substance.
Instances are known where members in good standing have been
refused information as to the church’s expenditures on its standard
activities; which, of course, implies that the contributor—and
therefore, by implication, any or all of the members—might be
kept ignorant of what the rulers do. In so far as such practices
obtain, the spirit of democracy is violated, for self-government
permits no secrecy in the handling of the common funds. The
church must meet the standards of a public which is debating, and
in some instances trying, the initiative, referendum, and recall.

From the foregoing no conclusion should be drawn as to the
imminent decease of the church. For, while no one can reliably
forecast how the newer altruism of justice will clothe or incorporate
itself, only a poor historian would predict that the church will
pass away because of its present maladjustment to democracy.
The vitality of social institutions of long standing is almost un-
limited, and in the case of the church there is the added conviction
of being divinely ordained. Because of these two facts she can
continue far beyond the day of her social utility and can, no doubt,
last long enough to make or suffer the necessary adjustments.

It is often forgotten that the church is usually but a pacific
grouping of people who have numerous other vital associations
covering practically all the normal contacts in a community.
These persons are in the stream of contemporary life and cannot
in the long run, or in any given compartment, remain permanently
unaffected by the time spirit. Already a distinct party of dis-
content is to be found in many churches. It represents something
far more real than inherited denominational labels and probably
exists in all sects. This more radical and socially conscious element
does not make much disturbance as yet, but like every democ-
ratized minority it will finally speak and act.

If, however, conformity to the democratic demand proves to
be very slow, the experience will be no different from that of the
schools which have had more reason to respond because supported
by the whole citizenship. Yet the aristocratic policy of the schools
—dictated by the professional class through university standards—
is only now reluctantly yielding to the pressure of democracy which
demands a training suitable for the many as against a culture
limited to the few. Surely the higher schools, which have shaped
education, have excelled the church in avoiding live issues and in
maintaining a decorous post-mortem interest in the life of the people;
and yet the whole system from top to bottom is now changing and
becoming socially dynamic. So may it be with the church as she
faces the situation and becomes less occupied with tradition.

Another source of hope is to be found in the personnel of the
modern ministry. Almost without exception the candidate for
the ministry comes from the common people. Certainly he does
not at the outset represent wealth or privilege in any form. By
birth and early training he is from the economic middle class or
below. It is hardly to be supposed that in most cases he can be
manipulated into any other attitude than that of the people from
whom he springs. Of course there is a certain danger arising from
the frequent practice of subsidizing ministerial students, and so
compromising the manliness that inheres in self-support, and also
the frequent liability to bias, through the fact that young men of
promise are quickly detected and retained by the well-to-do class,
but an intimate acquaintance with divinity students for more than
a dozen years has convinced the writer that they are essentially
and intelligently democratic in sympathy and aim.

Furthermore, during recent years radical changes have been
made in ministerial training. Especially in divinity schools affili-
ated with universities the social sciences have come in for increas-
ing consideration, and sociological courses are required which
direct the attention of the prospective pastor to those very problems
which agitate the body politic. The graduate of today is able
not only to see a community whole but to survey its social needs
and resources. He understands not only philanthropy but social
politics. He is furnished with a community conception of the
pastoral office and with a knowledge of how to co-operate with other
churches and welfare agencies. The degree of co-operation for
the sole aim of the community’s good may be somewhat hindered
by denominational overseers, but the divinity-school graduate of
today is sufficiently catholic in his outlook and social in his method
to at least keep pace with the democratic trend in government,
education, and industry, and to help form public opinion if he has
the personal qualities of leadership. The minister who has received
such training will not be laughed out of court, for his method will
be that of an accurate and conservative presentation of facts which
he has learned where and how to secure. In place of hasty, emo-
tional conclusions delivered from the protection of the pulpit, there
will be the patient, restrained, and repeated revelation of conditions
as they are, until the Christian conscience is moved and action is
taken through the agencies already organized for specific ameliora-
tion and reform.

Into the forum movement which is now so rapidly develop-
ing within the church, many of these questions will come for
conscientious consideration, with the result that the facts as set forth
in Sunday evening and week-night sessions will certainly stir the
church to a more vigorous attitude on questions of social morality
and will therefore re-enlist the interest of the public. The abnormal
fear of creating any issue will give place to wholesome partisanship
with the right. Not to avoid issues, but to be on the right side of
issues and to clarify them for the popular mind, is the essential
of moral leadership, and in the forum tendency of the present
time the church is headed toward that goal.

It is at this point that the function of the church needs clear
definition. Her’s is a composite group which by its very nature
is incapable of class propaganda. The other social groups whose
component members are firmly knit together by a common economic
interest must constitute the fighting units for their respective
reforms. No one of these militant groups is altogether right or
irreproachable in the methods used, and hence the church cannot
be the agent of any one. Her great function consists in her im-
partial adherence to righteousness and in her provision of a com-
posite group animated by the ethics of Jesus into which these
contending efforts may come for frank and brotherly consideration.
The hope of an honorable conciliation which compromises no single
item of righteousness rests largely with the church if she can main-
tain this open and unfettered attitude—an eagerness for the truth,
plainly spoken and reverently considered, in an atmosphere of
brotherly love.

This being the case, it is probable that the advocates of radical
reform will continue to be dissatisfied with the church. She will
at best serve chiefly to conserve the gains made in social morality
and to sanction certain reforms which she cannot directly under-
take. The social creed of American Protestantism as formulated
by the Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America is an
index of this conserving and sanctioning function. Therein the
major humanitarian reforms of our time are commended and a
publicity bureau for the church conscience is created. Through
the Anti-Saloon League the church is vigorously in the field for
temperance reform. This must serve as good training and as
introduction to the treatment of other problems which result from
the same commercialism. For, although the abolition of the saloon
will undoubtedly diminish misery and vice, there will remain other
social causes which the church cannot long overlook. Already
special days are dedicated to the consideration of labor, child
welfare, prison reform, and the prevention of disease, the method
being identical with that of the temperance propaganda, viz.,
sanction within the church body, and function through other
agencies. Furthermore, the Sunday schools are rapidly organizing
classes in welfare courses, which must lead to civics, and which in
themselves provide some training in self-government.

No doubt much of the criticism of the church is just. Many
honestly question the wisdom of diverting so much social energy
into this channel when direct action seems to promise more imme-
diate benefit. Yet for society to despair of so great a dynamic as
the religious sanction in the hearts of those who would conserve
its welfare or cure its ills is deliberately to use less than the full
and normal dynamic for human betterment. Church people are
awakening slowly because they are comfortable. It takes some
time to grasp what religious living means in this twentieth century.
Their attention has long been diverted elsewhere. When they
behold the cause of human justice in the present order as something
more than the concern of mortals, as being, indeed, the cause of
God, they will respond with that peculiar totality of self which
inheres in religion.
