The Social Function of War Observations and Notes

Author(s): Robert E. Park

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Jan., 1941), pp. 551-570
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769923

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:14 UTC
ABSTRACT

The view is here advanced that war is a political institution in process—an institu-
tion whose function has not been defined, whose structure is not yet fixed. The attempt
to put war into a biological category errs not so much from a failure to distinguish be-
tween social and biological aspects of war as from failure to distinguish | between com-
petition and conflict as different aspects of the “struggle for existence.” Competition
may be regarded as an individuating or analytic process; conflict as an integrating proc-
ess. Wars have provided the necessity for an organization of society which, for the
purpose of collective action at least, has become immeasurably superior to the primi-
tive horde. The state not only had its origin in war, but its chief function continues to
be preparation for and execution of war. Where no common interests or “constitutional
understandings” exist to make compromise possible, wars seem inevitable. Ideological
wars turn out to be struggles for land because political control and sovereignty of
territory are necessary to maintain the different ways of life represented by the parties
to these conflicts. The function of war.has been (1) to extend the area of peace, (2)
to create within that area a political power capable of enforcing it, and (3) to establish
an ideology which rationalizes and a cult which idealizes the new political and social
order.

By making warfare more efficient and more terrible, modern tech-
nology has made war itself our No. 1 social problem. There is a vast
literature on war and peace; but, aside from what has been written
about the science and art of warfare, there is little or nothing in the
literature that throws light on the nature of war or its role and func-
tion in the life and natural history of society. Furthermore, what
we have learned about the effects of war, while it has made peace
more desirable, has not made war any less inevitable.

Most of what has been written in recent years in regard to the
problem of war and of peace may be fairly summed up in the vigor-
ous language of General Sherman’s apology for his “march to the
sea.”’ “War,” said he, “is hell’’—that is to say, it is cruel, bar-
barous, economically disastrous and politically atavistic, and gener-
ally unconscionable. This recognizes the problem but contributes
nothing to its solution. I might add that problems which can be
fairly described only in epithets are notoriously hard to deal with.
In so far as this is true in the case of war, it seems to be because

we have no adequate working conception of what war is.
551
The immediate consequences of war are obvious enough, but we
do not know the long-run effect of wars and the preparations for
wars upon society and human nature. It is inevitable that struggles
which involve the very existence of peoples have had and will con-
tinue to have, as long and as often as they are repeated, a profound
effect upon the nature of men, their attitudes and institutions.
“Peace,” it has been said, “has been the dream of wise men but war
has been the history of nations.”” When, however, we seek to make
war the subject of systematic and scientific investigation, we do
not seem to have language in which to describe these influences in
general terms. We need to ask ourselves: What is war?

We do not know whether to regard war as a natural phenomenon,
like an earthquake or a pestilence, or to classify it as a social phe-
nomenon, like a political contest or an elementary form of judicial
procedure, like the ancient trial by battle—an institution which may
be said to survive at present in Germany and elsewhere in Conti-
nental Europe in the form of the duello. In short, we do not know
whether war is to be conceived as a social institution or as a biologi-
cal and social process.

Trial by combat seems to have been a peculiar custom of certain
German tribes and was imported by them into western Europe in
the course of the Germanic invasions. It was, according to Gibbon,
first made a legal institution in Burgundy by an edict of King Gundo-
bald in A.D. Sor and was later ‘“‘propagated and established in all
the monarchies of Europe from Sicily to the Baltic.” The church
and the clergy were, for various reasons, opposed to the institution,
and it is recorded that the King, in defending his edict against the
objections and complaints of one of his bishops, disposed of the
matter finally with this appeal to common sense and the consensus
of mankind. “Is it not true,” he said, “that the event of national
wars and private combats is directed by the judgment of God; and
that his providence awards the victory to the juster cause?’’?

The conception of war as a procedure in which issues that cannot
otherwise be adjudicated are decided, if not by force of arms, at
least by physical combat, has persisted to the present day in several

1Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. III, chap.
XxXviii, p. 331.
interesting forms—the strike, for example? Taking account of the
changes in the modes of thought which have taken place since
Gundobald made his defense of trial by battle, it is interesting and,
in a sense, reassuring to note that the conception of war upon which
warfare is conducted today is not substantially different from what
it was fourteen hundred years ago. Treitschke in his lectures on poli-
tics, in which he set forth fully the Prussian conception of war, de-
fined its function in much the same language as King Gundobald.
He says: “Between civilized nations also war is the form of litiga-
tion by which states make their claims valid. The arguments
brought forward in these terrible law suits of the nations compel as
no arguments in civil suits ever can do.”

In illustrating and enforcing his conception of war as an instru-
ment of political policy and a method by which states may, if they
can, “make their claims valid,” Treitschke reminds his students, to
whom these lectures are addressed, that “often as we have tried
by theory to convince the small states that Prussia alone can be the
leader in Germany, we had to produce the final proof upon the
battlefields of Bohemia and the Main.”

Treitschke’s notion that war may be conceived as a form of litiga-
tion between states, whether wholly valid or not, helps to make war
intelligible in so far as he seems to identify the role of modern war
with that of the ancient custom of trial by battle. “It is impor-
tant,” Treitschke adds, “not to look upon war always as a judgment
from God. Its consequences are evanescent but the life of a nation
is reckoned in centuries, and the final verdict can be pronounced
only after a survey of the whole epoch,” a sentence which reminds
one of Schiller’s famous dictum, “‘Die Weligeschichte ist das Welt-
gericht.”

When and how far war may be conceived as a judicial procedure
remains a question. While the institution of trial by battle seems
to have been based, like war, on a purely nonrational procedure,
these contests did, nevertheless, have the character of a judicial pro-
cedure in so far as they were duly regulated by custom and sanc-
tioned by tradition.

2E. T. Hiller, The Strike: A Study in Collective Action (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1928).
The same may be said, with some qualifications, to be sure, of
war. Even in the little wars of primitive people intertribal etiquette
usually prescribed some formalities for the declaration of war and
the conclusion of peace. In the great wars of more civilized peoples
there have always been some accepted rules of warfare, though not
always rigidly enforced. The so-called “laws of war” were mainly
designed to lessen the cruelties and hardships of warfare, particu-
larly for the innocent bystanders, namely, the neutrals and civilian
populations.

One of the more important actions taken for the regulation of
warfare between European peoples was the Declaration of Paris,
adopted in 1856 at the close of the Crimean War. This was followed
by the Red Cross Convention of 1864, providing for certain im-
munities for doctors, nurses, and other persons engaged in caring for
the sick and wounded.

Not only civilians, however, but military experts and professional
soldiers acknowledging that there are “technical limits at which
war ought to yield to the requirements of humanity,” have from
time to time sought to regulate by international understanding the
consequences of unrestricted warfare. In 1868 the Russian czar
called an international conference, composed entirely of military
officers and experts, to secure an agreement to limit the use of a type
of bullet which inflicted needless suffering. The recommendations of
this conference were embodied in the Declaration of St. Petersburg,
binding the parties to renounce, among other things, the use of
“projectiles weighing less than 4oo grammes (about 14 ounces)
which are explosive or charged with fulminating or inflammable sub-
stance.” The Hague conferences of 1899 and 1907 followed, and, as
a result of these and other conferences, an elaborate code for the
conduct of war was drawn up and adopted. However, in view of the
uncertainties of the interpretation and enforcement of these “laws”
under actual conditions of warfare the code was happily supple-
mented by a proviso in the preamble which provided that, until a
more complete system of regulation should be agreed upon, “inhabi-
tants and belligerents should remain under the protection and the
rule of the principles of the law of nations, as they result from the

3 Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences (New York, 1935), XV, 359.
usages established among civilized peoples, from the laws of human-
ity and the dictates of the public conscience.’’4

Since that time warfare, with the rapid advance in the technol-
ogy of war, has assumed ever vaster proportions and achieved an
ever more terrible efficiency. International politics, meantime, has
become more realistic and more cynical. ‘‘Total warfare,” so called,
is limited neither to the heavens above nor to the waters under the
earth, and, with the advent of the new “strategy of treachery and
terror,” war has invaded the realm of the spirit—the last stronghold
of free souls. Under these circumstances a “peace offensive” may be
as effective a means of conquest as physical warfare.

Since propaganda has come to be recognized as one of the weapons
of warfare, it has, by means of the radio and other forms of com-
munication, not only broken down the last effective barrier dividing
nations but abolished the distinction that once existed between
peace and war. William James said thirty years ago in an article
that sounds as if it had been written yesterday:

“Peace” in military mouths today is a synonym for “war expected.” The
word has become a pure provocative, and no government wishing peace sin-
cerely should allow it ever to be printed in a newspaper. Every up-to-date dic-
tionary should say that “peace” and “war” mean the same thing, now in posse,
now in actu. It may even reasonably be said that the intensely sharp competi-
tive preparation for war by the nations is the real war, permanent, unceasing;
and that the battles are only a sort of public verification of the mastery gained
during the ‘“peace’’-internal.s

Under these conditions it is difficult to conceive of war as a form
of judicial procedure even as elementary as the ancient trial by
battle. It is even doubtful whether it can any longer be regarded,
as it once was, as an “institution recognized by international law.”’*
This is true in spite of the German War Book and other treatises in
which the rules of the game have been rigorously defined.’
War has, in a summary way, settled international disputes but
not always in accordance with any recognized principle of justice
or necessity inherent in the international situation. Otherwise, each
new war as it occurred would have provided a precedent not merely
for defining progressively the rules of warfare but for determining
the issues involved in these “terrible lawsuits.” As a matter of fact
the precedents do exist. They make up a large part of the subject
matter of our histories. But no principle seems to have emerged
from them that is likely to enable us to deal with the issues of new
wars as they arise. More often, so far from adjudicating interna-
tional disputes in accordance with some general understanding or
tradition, not to say principle, of international law, war has been
an innovating and revolutionary force tending to overturn the exist-
ing international order and to challenge the tradition and principles
upon which that order at any time has rested.

Thus World War II, which began with the assumption that its
purpose was to revise the treaties with which World War I was con-
cluded, is now proclaiming itself a world-revolution. It is no longer,
as was once announced, a war to enforce the claims of the Have-Nots
against the Haves. It is rather an ideological war—a war to estab-
lish a new order based upon a new political philosophy and a new
philosophy of life.

This, then, is the interesting but anomalous status which war
seems to occupy in the international social order. It is an institu-
tion—a political institution—in process; an institution whose func-
tion has not been defined, whose structure is not yet fixed in custom
and in tradition. Such usages governing the conduct of wars as have
grown up and been accepted in the past have, indeed, tended to
legitimatize wars and give them an institutional character. But le-
gitimacy is a characteristic that attaches to something regarding
which we know what to expect. We do not know what to expect of
war any more.

Considering the manner in which wars are now waged and the
definition of “total war” by General Ludendorff, the modern world,
whatever it may do in practice, has accepted, as an intellectual
proposition, Professor George Mead’s dictum that war “‘as a policy
for adjudicating national differences is utterly discredited.” It is
discredited because, as Professor Mead concludes, “if logically pur-
sued it leaves nothing to be adjudicated, not even the enemy nations
themselves.”

The obvious, if not insuperable, difficulties of bringing war within
the limitations of an institutional order where its function would
be defined and its excesses controlled has led some students of politi-
cal society to conceive war in biological rather than in sociological
terms and to define its function accordingly as biological rather than
social. Thus, Spencer Wilkinson, professor of military science at
Oxford University, in an article on war in the Encyclopaedia Britan-
nica, introduces the subject with a reference to an observation upon
which Malthus based his theory of population and Darwin his theory
of the origin of the species—namely, the observation that living
organisms multiply more rapidly than the food supply, and for that
reason there is “‘a perpetual competition among all living creatures,
including human beings, for the means of subsistence.’’ Among the
higher organisms, certainly in the case of man, competition often
assumes the form of conflict. As a matter of fact, animals “‘are usu-
ally equipped with organs of attack and of protection or evasion.
On the one hand teeth, tusks, paws, claws, electricity; on the other
hand shells, hides, scales and devices for camouflage.”

Because he is not only a gregarious animal like sheep but a social
and rational creature as well, man carries on the “struggle for exist-
ence,” as Darwin described it, not merely by individual competition
but by the conflict of organized groups or societies. Such a conflict
between organized groups is war, and the instrument by which wars
are carried on are armies.

The author pushes the biological interpretation still further. He
conceives the army as itself an organism, “a society within a so-

8 “Every individual in the nation is expected to give his entire strength either at
the front or at home, and this he can only do when he realizes that it is an immutable
and inviolable truth that war is being waged solely for the existence of the nation. A
totalitarian policy must put at the disposal of such a war the strength of the nation and
preserve it and only a conformity to the fundamental racial and spiritual laws will
succeed in welding nation, conduct of war, and politics into that powerful unity which
is the basis of national preservation” (General Erich Ludendorff, The Nation at War
[London, 1936], p. 54).

9 George H. Mead, “‘National-Mindedness and International-Mindedness,” Inter-
national Journal of Ethics, XXXIX, No. 4 (July, 1929), 400-404.
ciety.” The weapons with which an army fights are—like the claws,
paws, and tusks with which the lower animals are equipped—the
instruments with which nations and peoples carry on the struggle
for existence. So conceived, war becomes a form of natural selection,
its function being to determine the survival not so much of indi-
viduals as of peoples and of the institutions by means of which na-
tions and peoples carry on their collective life. The conception of
war in terms of Darwin’s theory of evolution, since it seems to ac-
cept war as fatally rooted in the very nature of human relations and
of society, has not been accepted by the advocates of international
peace. Militarists, on the other hand, even when they make no apol-
ogies for it, are likely to regard war as an inevitable incident of in-
ternational relations, just as conflict has invariably been an incident
and an instrument of political action wherever a political society
has existed.

Von Moltke, who led the Prussian army in the three wars which
brought about the establishment of the Second German Reich,
wrote in a letter that has become famous: “Perpetual peace is a
dream and not even a happy dream.” From other statements one
gathers that Moltke conceived of war, as others have before and
since, as one of the instruments of God’s mysterious providence de-
signed not to settle international disputes but (1) to purge society
of a political regime and a social order which were decadent and
doomed to destruction and (2) to supersede these with forms more
vigorous and fit to live.?°

The attempt to put war into a biological category goes astray,
it seems to me, not so much from a failure to distinguish between
the social and biological aspects of wars as from a failure to distin-
guish between competition and conflict as different aspects of the
“struggle for existence.” As a matter of fact, the existing species
have not survived merely because they were “superior” to those that
perished but rather because they were the “fitter,” i.e., they fitted
the “niches” in the natural economy in which they occur. Thus the

to See Dr. G. F. Nicolai, The Biology of War (New York, 1918), pp. 521-22. Written
during World War I and translated from the German by Constance A. Grande and
Julian Grande, this volume by a professor of physiology is perhaps the most thorough-
going criticism of the biological conception of war in the literature of the subject.
first effect of competition has not been to destroy but to distribute
the different organisms and species as they have successively ap-
peared in the evolutionary series. It is as if each individual and each
species had been condemned to be forever seeking the particular
spot in the biosphere where it could live, and to survive by repro-
ducing its kind. In turn, this distribution has been one of the in-
struments for the evolution of new species. The dispersion of the
species, their diversification and preservation in all their diversity,
as described by the older naturalists and their successors, the plant
and animal ecologists, is one of the most fascinating chapters in the
story of biological evolution.

Dispersion was facilitated by the fact that competition between
organisms of the same species, since they make similar demands on
the habitat, is more intense than the competition between organ-
isms of different species. Dispersion is an incident of the food quest.
A further consequence of this dispersion has been the formation of
associations, like that of the vine and the fig tree, of mutually inter-
dependent species. This interdependence, like that of the predacious
animal and its prey, does not necessarily result in the extirpation of
either species but rather in the preservation of both.

It is by competition in the first instance that the dispersion and
diversity of organisms is made possible; but it is by competition,
also, that what is called the “balance of life” is maintained and the
diversity of the species is preserved. This mutual interdependence
of organisms has been described as “the web of life.”

Within the limits of a geographical habitat the interdependence
of the species inhabiting it tends to become more intimate and more
vital. Such a region in which plants and animals maintain a kind
of biological economy is described by ecologists as a “community.”
This is, however, a community, nota bene, without institutions. Such
a community is, in fact, a kind of society, since it is composed of
individual organisms living together; but it is different from the
so-called animal societies, like those of the social insects, in this im-
portant respect—it is composed of species which, because they do
not interbreed, have no “family ties.’ They have no instincts, as

11 See Richard Hesse, Ecological Animal Geography, translated and edited by W. C.
Allee and Karl P. Schmidt (New York, 1937).
is the case of the social insects, which hold the individual units of
the family or of other genetic groups together during the periods of
reproduction and of the infancy of the progeny. Animal societies
are, after all, merely great families. Communities, as the term is
used by ecologists, are associations organized territorially in which
the nexus which holds individual organisms of the divergent species
together is purely economic. Societies, as the term applies to ani-
mals, are associations of individuals genetically related and organ-
ized on a familial pattern.

The two fundamental types of association which I have sought
to distinguish as they exist among the inferior species—namely, (1)
the territorial and ecological or economic and (2) the familial or so-
cial—are reproduced, with substantially the same differences, in the
interrelations of races and peoples. This is true even though the
different races, being of the same species, interbreed freely where
the opportunity offers, as organisms of different species do not.

Generally speaking, the type of association that I have called
“communal”—using the word in the sense in which that term is
employed in ecology—is identical with that widespread system of
relationships which commerce has spun among the peoples of the
world, a form of association which is likely to be more intimate and
personal among neighbors but more impersonal and less intimate
among those who are either wholly unaware of their biotic and eco-
nomic interdependence or know it only at second hand. This net
of economic relationships in which, individually and collectively,
races and peoples are ineluctably bound together corresponds in a
general way to the “web of life” in which all living creatures are
involved.?

1 We have studied the forms of life, and we have considered the adaptation of
these forms to the exigencies of this or that habitat. In every habitat we find that there
is a sort of community or society of organisms not only preying upon but depending
upon each other and that certain balance, though often a violently swaying balance, is
maintained between the various species so that the community keeps on. The par-
ticular name given to this subject of vital balances and interchanges is “Ecology.”
“Economics” is used only for human affairs; ecology is really an extension of economics
to the whole world of life. Man is always beginning his investigations too close to him-
self and finding later that he must extend his basis of inquiry. The science of economics
—at first it was called political economy—is a whole century older than ecology. It
tries to elucidate the relations of producer, dealer, and consumer in the human com-
On the other hand, within this wide-ranging economy, which at
the present time extends to the limits of the habitable world, kin-
ship ties and economic relationships are, in human society, further
complicated by the existence of institutions—familial, economic,
political, and religious—which do not exist in animal societies.

It is quite possible, as some anthropologists have contended, that
primitive man—the genuinely primitive man—being a gregarious
creature, may have lived for long periods of time wandering about
in the forests in flocks or herds, without formal organization or in-
stitutions of any sort. There are, at any rate, in remote corners of
the world peoples like the Semangs in the tropical forest of the
Malay Peninsula, the Veddas of Ceylon, or the blameless Punan of
Borneo whose mode of life is said to approach in its simplicity that
of the lower animals. In this age of innocence, where there were
no formal social order and no institutions, there were, we are told,
no wars." As soon, however, as men came together to carry on any
common enterprise, under circumstances where it was necessary to
preserve discipline and maintain tension over any considerable
length of time, some more efficient sort of organization was needed.
It was under these circumstances that institutions seem to have come
into existence.

Institutions, generally speaking, have had their origins in some
collective action—some common enterprise or social movement that
munity and show how the whole system carries on. Ecology broadens out this inquiry
into a general study of the give and take—the effort, accumulation, and consumption
in every province of life. Economics, therefore, is merely human ecology; it is the
narrow and special study of the ecology of the very extraordinary community in which
we live. It might have been a better and brighter science if it had begun biologically
(H. G. Wells, Julian S. Huxley, G. P. Wells, The Science of Life [New York, 1931],
II, 961).

33 The Punan of Borneo are among the most primitive people, culturally speaking,
in the world. For untold ages they have lived in the forests of Borneo, well out of the
way of the great movements that have swept through the archipelago, carrying culture
from India to the East. There is no reason to believe that they had been influenced
strongly by any food-producing people until the Kayan and kindred tribes came up
into the central watershed on their way toward Sarawak.

In the Punan we have a food-gathering people of good physique and bright intelli-
gence who have remained comparatively undisturbed and therefore present to us
typical conditions among really primitive peoples in general (see G. Elliot Smith,
Human History [New York, 1929], p. 199).
required concert and continuity of action over a considerable period
of time. The most elementary form which these movements take
is undoubtedly that of mass migration. The connection and correla-
tions between mass migration and war in the historical process have
been discussed in a recent volume by Frederick Teggart.%4 Other
social movements are those that seek to bring about some sort of
reform in the manners or in the economic and political organization
of existing society, like the feminist or the prohibition movement.
But there are also other movements that aim at more drastic
changes, for example the revolutionary and religious movements
initiated by political sects—fascism, communism, and socialism.

All these movements entail a more or less consistent collective
action over a considerable period of time; but, compared with the
changes which are ordinarily described as evolutionary, they are
relatively sudden and catastrophic. They are, however, different,
not merely in degree but in kind, from those more gradual and evo-
lutionary, sometimes insensible, changes which take place with the
slow accumulations of time—changes which are the results of the
minor innovations, accommodations, and adaptations of a multitude
of individuals who, like these little marine animals (Anthozao) which
build the coral islands, co-operate unconsciously to bring into exist-
ence a structure of whose character and dimensions they are hardly
conscious.

Such changes as social movements bring about might be char-
acterized as “mutations’”—mutations that are planned and pro-
moted. Social changes that are planned, particularly when they are
planned on a grand scale, almost always have consequences that can
never quite be foreseen. These consequences, therefore, are very
largely just what happens rather than what was planned. Society
is so far from being a closed system that one cannot deal with it
either as an artifact or as a system of mechanical forces."

14 Rome and China: A Study of Correlations in Historical Events (University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1939).

15 Where will you find in history a case of a great purpose rationally adopted by a
great society and carried through to the intended result and then followed by the ex-
pected consequences in the way of social advantage? You can find no such thing. Men

act from immediate and interested motives like these for which they have waged war,
and the consequences may be advantageous or disadvantageous to men. The story of
Of all the common enterprises and of all the collective actions that
men have undertaken, war is undoubtedly the most imposing in the
amount and quality of the effort men put forth; the most devastat-
ing and revolutionary in its consequences. Into war—a great war,
a total war—man puts all that he has: his wealth, his science, his
indomitable will, and eventually his very existence. It is certain,
therefore, that as far as man has sought to control his destiny by his
collective planning and collective action, these titanic contests—the
death struggles of superorganisms—have had the most tremendous
effects, not only upon society and its institutions, but upon man
himself, his spirit, his personality, and his terrestrial career. The
amount of effort that man puts forth in war, however, as well as the
passions and sentiments that these efforts arouse, are due not merely
to the fact that man is here competing with other men but that he is
conscious of those with whom he is in competition, not only of their
acts, but of their purposes and intentions. Under these circum-
stances competition becomes conflict; a competitor an enemy.

Cooley, who seems to have been the first to undertake to give
an account of competition in sociological terms, says its function is
“to assign each individual his place in the social system.’’ He adds
that “competition is not necessarily a hostile contention nor even
something of which the competing individual is always conscious,”
since “from our infancy onward throughout life judgments are daily
forming regarding us of which we are unaware, but go to determine
our careers.”

Cooley does not, however, distinguish the very different conse-
quences that ensue (x) when competition is not conscious and (2)
when it is, i.e., when it is conflict. Competition does indeed deter-
mine our place in the economic system since it assigns us to the job
and function we can perform rather than to the one we should choose
to perform. But status, whether it is occupational or social—in any
of the various senses of that term—gets its peculiar character be-
cause it is a result of conscious competition, i.e., emulation, personal
conflict, war; because, in short, it is the outcome of a struggle, not
these acts and consequences makes up human history (Essays of William Graham

Sumner, edited, with prefaces, by Albert Galloway Keller and Maurice R. Davie
[New Haven: Yale University Press, 1934], p. 148).
merely for a spot in the sun or for a job but for recognition and a
place in an existing social order.

Gaetano Mosca in his Elementi di scienza politica, recently trans-
lated under the title of The Ruling Class, referring to the attempts
to introduce Darwin’s doctrine of evolution of the species into the
social sciences, declared that its application to social relations is
based upon a fundamental confusion, since it identifies “the struggle
for existence” which is characteristic of the lower animals with “the
struggle for pre-eminence” which is characteristically human and “a
constant phenomenon that arises in all human societies, from the
most highly civilized down to such as have barely issued from sav-
agery.” Incidentally, Mosca points out that conflict, like competi-
tion, is not merely a means of biological selection. On the contrary,
like competition, it is the principle of organization. Its function is
not to destroy but ultimately to assimilate the vanquished. This
involves the imposition upon them of the status of a subject people
and, incidentally, the assignment to them of a function in the terri-
torial economy within which the victors are dominant. Mosca’s
statement is:

In a struggle between two human societies, the victorious society as a rule
fails to annihilate the vanquished society, but subjects it, assimilates it, im-
poses its own type of civilization upon it. In our day in Europe and America
war has no other result than political hegemony for the nation that proves
superior in a military sense, or perhaps the seizure of some bit of territory.7
Although the struggle for status or, as Mosca calls it, the struggle
for “pre-eminence” is an obvious characteristic of human society,
it has by no means diminished or taken the place of the unceasing,
if silent, struggle of races and peoples for survival. Comparative
studies of vital statistics of different peoples and population groups
show that.?? Rather has the struggle for pre-eminence, as Corrado
Gini’s demographic investigations indicate, had a profound effect
upon biotic competition, “the competition of life,” as Sumner calls
it. This is a consequence of the fact that every population group

6 Translated by Hannah D. Kahn and edited and revised with Introduction by
Arthur Livingston (New York and London, 1939], p. 29).

17 See S. J. Holmes, The Negro’s Struggle for Survival (University of California Press,

1937); also Romanzo Adams, Interracial Marriage in Hawaii: A Study of the Mutually
Conditioned Processes of Acculturation and Amalgamation (New York, 1937).
tends to die at the top. Pre-eminence as it is achieved by any group
or class is accompanied by a declining birth rate in the pre-eminent
class. “As a rule,” says Gini, “the upper classes are less fertile than
the middle, and these, as a rule, are less so than the lower classes.”**
The effect of this is “to provoke a current from the middle classes
to the upper, and from the lower to the middle” in order to fill the
gaps that have been created by the decline of fertility in the upper
classes or the decline in birth rate from whatever causes.

These and other considerations to which recent population stud-
ies have called attention indicate that the struggle for existence,
ie., the competition of life and for space—Lebensraum, to use the
German expression—whether it takes the form of biotic competition
or the more obvious form of struggle for pre-eminence, is a more
complicated matter than has been assumed by those who have
sought to explain war as an incident of natural selection and the
struggle for existence.

From this point of view competition, as distinguished from con-
flict, appears as an individuating, not to say analytic, process. It
tends to dissolve the traditional social order into its individual ele-
ments in order that it may bring about a greater specialization and
wider division of labor in an ever wider circle of those economically
interdependent individuals and groups which constitute the eco-
nomic community. The communal order, where it exists, is thus
an effect of competition. Conflict, on the other hand, tends to bring
about an integration and a superordination and subordination of the
conflict groups, whether they be familial and tribal in character, as
among the simpler peoples, or national, racial, and religious, as
among more sophisticated peoples.

These two terms—community and society—employed in this re-
stricted sense, designate two aspects—biological and cultural—of a
single entity which presents itself in one aspect as a biotic commu-
nity, ie., a population occupying a territory, settled in a habitat,
and in the other as an institutional and cultural unit, a society or-
ganized to act collectively and eventually politically.

However one may finally conceive the role which war has played

38 Corrado Gini, Shiroshi Nasu, Oliver E. Baker, and Robert Kuczynski, Population
(“Lectures on the Harris Foundation” [Chicago, 1929]).
in the long process of history, it is obvious that its function has not
been merely that of an adjudicator of intertribal or international dis-
putes. Rather, these disputes and the wars that grew out of them
have provided the occasion and the necessity for an organization of
society which, as it evolved, has become immeasurably superior, for
the purposes of collective action at least, to the gregariousness of
the primitive horde or the animal herd.

The effect of hostility upon the organization and solidarity of the
groups in conflict has been frequently noted, but no one has stated
it in more memorable terms than William Graham Sumner in his
Folkways, where, discussing the mechanisms of ‘“‘we-group” and the
“others-group” relationships, he says:

The relation of comradeship and peace in the we-group and that of hostility
and war towards others-groups are correlative to each other. The exigencies of
war with outsiders are what make peace inside, lest internal discord should
weaken the we-group for war. These exigencies also make government and
law in the in-group, in order to prevent quarrels and enforce discipline. Thus
war and peace have reacted on each other and developed each other, one within
the group, the other in the intergroup relation. The closer the neighbors, and
the stronger they are, the intenser is the warfare, and then the intenser is the
internal organization and discipline of each.

In insuring peace within as its consequence, war has created (1)
in the family and in societies organized on a familial pattern a moral
solidarity based on personal loyalties and piety and (2) in the state
a political institution which has made collective action possible on
a scale of which there is no promise in primitive society.”? The fact
that in the division of labor between the sexes man was not only
the hunter but the fighter, who now and then brought home a
strange woman, is responsible for putting him at the head of the
family. It is probably one reason why, in primitive society, the

19 (New York, 1906), p. 12; see also Sumner’s essay “War” in the Essays of William
Graham Sumner, II, 136-73.

20 When for the first time in the history of the world the group of people who hap-
pened to be living in Egypt abandoned the nomadic life and began to till the soil they
were accomplishing a vastly greater revolution in the affairs of mankind than the mere
invention of the crafts of the farmer and the irrigation engineer. They were commit-
ting themselves to the much more formidable task of erecting the complicated edifice
of civilization and formulating the fantastic doctrine of the state system which has
dominated the world ever since (Smith, of. cit., pp. 252-53).
matriarchate has, in most cases, been succeeded by the patriarchate
—a change which Sumner believes may have been the greatest and
most revolutionary in history."

It was, however, not merely war but the life-long intimacy and
dependency of every member of the family on every other, the
sense of security in the family circle and the terror of all that was
outside of it, which created the moral solidarity so characteristic
of familial society including the clan and the tribe. As soon as man
achieved a more or less settled existence and began to accumulate
property, wars were undertaken for less romantic purposes and for
less interesting and more manageable booty. In fact, war became
with pastoral peoples not merely an adventure but a vocation. Rob-
bery among many of the Bedouin tribes was considered as legitimate
a method of gaining a livelihood as agriculture. Lippert refers to it
as “Bedouin livelihood.”

It happens occasionally today in North Africa that desert tribes
come to terms with a settled population, whom they have long re-
garded as their legitimate prey, by accepting tribute in lieu of the
booty they were accustomed to carry off. In such case it is part of
the agreement that the erstwhile marauders become the protectors
of their erstwhile victims, holding off other tribesmen who would
otherwise plunder them. Sometimes, however, mobile and warlike
desert tribes have not been content merely to exact tribute from,
but have chosen to make a conquest of, their sedentary neighbors.
This, in fact, seems to have been the way in which the state has
normally come into existence, i.e., by the conquest of an agricultural
by a pastoral and nomadic people. Friedrich Ratzel says:

The war-like character of the nomads is a great factor in the creation of
states. It finds expression in the immense nations of Asia controlled by nomad
dynasties and nomad armies, such as Persia, ruled by the Turks; China, con-
quered and governed by the Mongols and Manchus; and in the Mongol and
Radjaputa states of India, as well as in the states on the border of the Soudan.”

In any case, sociologists and historians who have investigated the

21 See Sumner, Folkways, pp. 355-56; see also Maurice R. Davie, “War and Women,”
in his The Evolution of War: A Study of Its Role in Early Societies (Yale University
Press, 1929), pp. 96-102.

22 Quoted by Franz Oppenheimer, The State: Its History and Development Viewed
Sociologically (Indianapolis, 1914), p. 54-
subject seem to agree that the state not only had its origin in war
but that its chief business is still, as Dealey says, “to be ready for
war and to wage it whenever national safety or national interest de-
mand it.’’3

As states have come into existence by war, it has seemed to cer-
tain writers that they are forever condemned to continue their con-
quests in order to maintain their existence. Nothing is more de-
moralizing to an army or to a military state than peace, and nations
to survive must act. There must always be some great collective
enterprise on the national agenda in which all classes can actively
participate. “It is not yesterday, tradition, the past, which is the
decisive, the determining force in the nation..... Nations are made
and go on living by having a program for the future.””4

War has been and still is the greatest, the most strenuous, if no
longer the most glorious, enterprise in which nations can engage;
and there seems to be, as George Mead has insisted in his reply to
William James, no substitute for war. “The age of discussion” has
not yet, as Walter Bagehot believed it should and would, super-
seded the age of war.

What is probably taking place is that the issues in international
controversies are being steadily narrowed by the increase of political
knowledge, i-e., a more searching analysis of international situations
and a more realistic conception of the processes involved in the func-
tioning of political societies. Even discussions are more fruitful when
they are based on facts. But facts assume the existence of some
common assumptions, either implicitly or explicitly accepted by the
parties to the discussion. In political controveries they involve the
existence of a common body of tradition and of constitutional, that
is to say fundamental, understandings, by reference to which what
was a datum becomes a fact. In most wars what I have called ‘“con-
stitutional understandings” are involved, as they were, for example,
in our war between the states, as they are in the present World War.
In such cases neither discussion nor “appeasement” is likely to bring
a solution. Where no common interest appears that makes compro-
mise possible, wars seem inevitable. But men like Mead believe
there is, or should be, no such instance; no situation that would not
eventually yield to an intelligent analysis of the facts."

As states brought into existence a society that was organized on
the basis of territory rather than on common race and culture, it
was more or less inevitable that they should seek to expand their
territories. In carrying on their wars for that purpose, however,
they were always seeking a frontier which they could defend; always
seeking to find a boundary behind which the state could stabilize
society and live in peace. But always the frontiers receded as the
armies approached them. A land-hungry population was always
moving beyond the established frontiers, and new means of travel
and transportation were constantly extending the area over which
it was possible and necessary to exercise sovereignty in order to
maintain peace.

With the organization of the city-state there began, in contrast
with the dispersion of peoples characteristic of primitive life, a
movement for the coming-together and integration of races and
peoples—a tendency which is characteristic of cities and civilized
life. The city, as we must remember, has been not merely the mar-
ket place and focal center of a constantly expanding trade area or
market. It has been at the same time the seat and center of an ex-
panding dominion—a dominion and an authority which was invari-
ably dispersed or relaxed in times of peace but constantly tightened
and intensified when the beacons on the hilltops announced the
approach of war. For war and peace are, as Sumner suggests, so
intimately related that one may say that peace creates the problem
that war is required to solve.

While the struggle for possession of the land has provided the
occasion for most international wars, there have been other wars,
like the Crusades to gain possession by Christians of the Holy
Sepulcher or the Islamic wars to win the world for Allah and Ma-
homet. These so-called holy wars were actually ideological wars,

26 Mead, op. cit., pp. 355-407.
seeking primarily to propagandize a cult. But all wars, imperialistic
wars, that seek to expand the territory of the state always turn out,
as in the case of the present World War, to have an ideological core.
They are wars “to end war” or they are wars to defend the demo-
cratic way of life from the invasions of a collectivistic and totalitar-
ian imperialism.

On the other hand, ideological wars turn out, likewise, to be
struggles for land and living space. This is because, in order to
maintain the different ways of life represented by the parties to
these conflicts, political control and sovereignty of a territory in
which they can survive is indispensable.

What can one say, finally, in regard to the nature of war and its
function? Generally speaking, one may say that war is politics. It
is, generally speaking, politics in its original, noninstitutional, and
nonrational form—a form in which the belligerent states or parties
seek by force of arms (1) to extend the territorial limits of their
sovereignty and (2) to establish and impose upon the nations and
peoples with whom they are in conflict a political and economic order
which is in the interest of the dominant party, race, or nation. This
gives a new significance to Freeman’s statement that “history is
past politics” and “‘politics is present history.”

Historically, the function of war has been (1) to extend the area
over which it is possible to maintain peace, (2) to create and organize
within that area a political power capable of enforcing it, and, fi-
nally, at least in most cases, (3) to establish an ideology which ra-
tionalizes, and a cult which idealizes and so gains understanding and
acceptance for, the new political and social order which the victor
has imported or imposed upon the vanquished. This is the way that
war settles issues. It is in this sense that one may say with Schiller:
“The world’s history is the world’s judgment” on the acts of men
and of nations.

UNIVERSITY oF CHICAGO
