Preschool Personality Research

Author(s): Ruth R. Pearson

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 36, No. 4 (Jan., 1931), pp. 584-595
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2767 163

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:45 UTC
PRESCHOOL PERSONALITY RESEARCH

RUTH R. PEARSON
University of Chicago

ABSTRACT

Historically, changing conceptions of the child have reflected prevailing psycho-
logical viewpoints. The emphasis today is upon the child as a person, with plans, pur-
poses, social relationships, and status in one or more social groups, leading to a many-
sided personality, even in early life. Social technologists find this approach valuable
in securing adjustment of problem cases, but as research workers we have not devised
techniques suited to the adequate testing of the hypothesis. The experience of young
children differs widely in various environmental situations. Many who have pub-
lished studies in this field, however, generalize beyond their data, implying that re-
sults secured in one group (conditions seldom specified) apply to children of the same
age elsewhere. It is necessary to improve our methods and to study in detail varia-
tions among groups of the same age-span, and also differences in the behavior of in-
dividual children when studied by identical techniques in all the groups to which they
belong.

Fourier, we are told,* divided nurslings into three classes—the
benignant, the malignant, and little imps—attributing evil instincts
to all except those of the first category. The inductive or other basis
for his generalization is unfortunately not recorded. No one concep-
tion, however, has persisted. Historically, the child has been looked
upon in turn as a miniature adult, a passively reacting mosaic of
psychic powers; as a young animal, instinctively recapitulating the
life-experience of the race, and only in part amenable to education;
as a never-failing spring of creative activity; as a volcano of sup-
pressed passions, largely sexual in nature; as an irritable response
mechanism, continually conditioned, unconditioned, and recondi-
tioned by the environment; and as a person. Each of these views
reflects a current psychology of its time; while the last, so widely
influential just at present, bids fair to be epoch-making in more
ways than one.

Persons of any age, as we use the term today, are assumed to
have plans, purposes, hankerings, antipathies, relationships with
others, and status in one or more social groups. When the teeth and
tonsils have been examined, and the I.Q. temporarily established, it
is generally recognized, in the procedure of guidance clinics and

elsewhere, that the source of maladjustment may lie in a dream
* Cited by G. Compayré, Development of the Child in Later Infancy (1902), p. 211.
584
gone wrong, in merciless teasing by an older sister, or a confirmed
sense of failure to meet group expectations. Logic would seem to
demand that human behavior, “normal” or “abnormal,” be studied
in relation to its setting; and in everyday experience we find that
tools such as life-history documents yield results fruitful for the
understanding and control of social relationships. Social psycho-
logical theory has undoubtedly been influential in shaping this new
approach. We have heard and repeated many times over:

“The person has as many selves as there are groups to which he belongs.”?

“The etymology of the term? suggests that its meaning is to be found in the
réle of the individual in the social group.”*

“What we need to know is how different customs, established interacting ar-
rangements, form and nurture different minds.”®

As research workers, however, we have not yet learned how to cope
methodologically with the drastic implications of this viewpoint.
The practical achievements of the clinics, and of occasional homes
and schools, outstrip our ability to explain them.

Adult personality studies encounter many difficulties; but as the
age of the subjects diminishes, some at least of these obstacles dis-
appear. Children under five years of age belong to few groups.
Their previous experience, while of great significance, has been so
recent as to admit of approximate reconstruction through inter-
views with relatives and associates, plus recorded facts. Most im-
portant of all, the young child tends to ignore accessory adults—
those not essential to his needs or plans—thus enabling them to
pursue their note-taking activities undisturbed. Also, he inhibits
both acts and emotional expression far less than he will a few years
later, when the assimilation of group culture has been carried far-
ther. These advantages appear to the writer to outweigh whatever
handicaps are imposed by the youth of the subjects. Sociologists
dealing with adult personality studies continue to emphasize the
need for more extended knowledge of interaction in early life. Cer-

? Robert E. Park and E. W. Burgess, Introduction to the Science of Sociology

(1924), p. 609. Adapted from George E. Vincent, “The Rivalry of Social Groups,”
American Journal of Sociology, XVI (1910-11), 471-84.

* “Personality,” from the Latin persona, a mask used by actors.
* Park and Burgess, of. cit., p. 70.
° John Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct (1922), p. 63.
tainly preschool children in their everyday life routine present a
rich and promising field for human nature research.

The varying environments in which the small child finds himself,
in the course of this everyday routine, may be roughly classified
by such obvious differences as those of housing arrangements, mem-
bership of the group, and control methods. Five types of surround-
ings are outstanding: the home, neighborhood play group, day nur-
sery, nursery school, and kindergarten. It will be worth while to
consider the control forms which characterize each, since the trans-
fer of group culture in the process of personality development is so
largely a matter of social control.

During the first few months of infancy in the home, all relation-
ships between child and adult are in the true sense primary, i.e.,
characterized by immediate emotional response. A very elementary
sort of rapport is established, based on care and the satisfaction of
the child’s needs. We may assume that wishes, in the sense of de-
layed satisfactions, giving rise to imagery, are just beginning to
grow out of habits already acquired. Obviously, in this first period,
the adults concerned have real social control of the child’s behavior.
His small world may be molded at will. Control is attained through
some or all of the following methods: physical manipulation inci-
dental to care; letting alone at regular intervals; gesture and tone of
voice; and a planned environment. Consistent behavior on the part
of the adults leads to clearly defined habits in the infant. Incon-
sistent behavior, fairly common in emotionally unstable adults, con-
fuses the situation. Such inconsistency, however, is less apt to occur
now than later. The very small baby is almost universally admired,
approved, and cared for on schedule.

During the period from about the sixth month to the end of the
second year, primary contacts continue to characterize the family
relationship, though distinct types of primary group life can be dis-
tinguished. The child is still considered an infant, and is not expect-
ed to understand or conform to the entire behavior code prescribed
for older children. Meaning is constantly being attributed to acts
which the child sees and hears; and this, with the gradual develop-
ment of speech, makes possible new mechanisms of social control in
addition to those operative in the earlier period. Control by speech®
and by punishment now commonly appear, though the latter is by
no means universal. Words are at first used in connection with acts
and gestures, as in the preceding months; but as their meaning is
learned, act and gesture are dispensed with. Control through lan-
guage may take the form of suggestion, epithets of approval and
disapproval, promised satisfactions, commands, threats of reward
or punishment, etc. Clear-cut punishment, defined as the erection
of formal penalties for certain acts, imposed by those in authority
over the child, may or may not enter the situation at this stage. It
becomes more prominent in the next.

The child, during these first months of infancy, accomplishes only
the first few steps in his assimilation of the group culture. He learns
by experience, as other young animals learn. But it is only with the
acquisition of speech that the rich store of concepts making up the
mores and skills of the group can be transmitted. It is this process
of acculturation which interests the social psychologist, since only
as he acquires the means of communication can the child be consid-
ered a member of human society. The period immediately following
the second year is therefore by far the most significant for person-
ality study.

The preschool child in the home.—We come now to the period in
which the child is an “ex-baby,” a toddler, runabout, or, in the nar-
rower technical sense of the term, a preschool child. Experiences
differ widely in the several types of environment in which his time
is spent. In the home we may expect to find a more or less sudden
shift of relationships, especially if, as often happens, a brother or
sister has been born. The toddler, now that he has a fairly extensive
vocabulary, is expected to exercise self-control, and to adapt him-
self gracefully to the convenience of his adult relatives. If he is told:
“Go over there and sit down, and sit stil,” utterly without occupa-
tion, while his mother chats over the telephone, a failure to carry
out the order is often interpreted as wilful disobedience. It is hard
to realize that children must have time for unhurried practice of
those abilities which have long been, for the adult, automatic. The

*For a valuable study of the organization of early experiences about cue words,

see Ethel Bushnell Waring, Relation between Early Language Habits and Early Hab-
its of Conduct Control, “Teachers College Studies,” New York, 1927.
stage is more completely set for misunderstanding and friction than
at any other time of life, possibly excepting adolescence. Punish-
ment and threats are employed as means of control by the majority
of parents.’ Some rely altogether on these methods; others succeed
in bringing the child to want to do what they want him to do—the
secret of true social control, as distinct from compulsion—by main-
taining their prestige and leadership through varied means, such as
sharing the child’s interests and his activities. Thoughtful parents
realize the power of silent influences exerted by the environment,
and plan the details of the child’s surroundings with care. Family
customs and ceremonial play a large part in determining conduct,
even at this level. In addition, the public opinion of the family is
frequently invoked.

The preschool child in the neighborhood play group—With his
emergence from the home, the toddler as a rule finds himself among
boys and girls of mixed ages, and subject to the imperative controls
of informal gang life. More studies are needed of play as it goes on
in these unsupervised groupings, about street corners and in vacant
lots, as well as in the standardized playground. The power of public
opinion, the opinion of their peers, over even very young children, is
seen in an incident recorded by a student observer:

When Stevie was two and a half years old, he was sitting playing on the street.
His mother called to him to come in. He paid no attention. She called again in a
still louder, harsher voice. Then he turned and said, “If you have to holler on
me don’t do it in the street. Wait till we get in the house.”

Studies of the control mechanisms within the play group show that
the emphasis here is upon the use of epithet and the complex pres-
tige of leadership. The child’s acts and purposes, until now wholly

* William Stern, in The Psychology of Early Childhood (1924), treats punishment
as an essential part of the child’s life, assuming an unfolding from within of the moral
sense, as illustrated by the fact that his child Hilde, in the fourth year, frequently
anticipated her parents’ intentions and chastised herself (p. 538). Watson would sub-
stitute for the moral notion of punishment an immediate rap or other reaction, admin-
istered as objectively as possible, to condition the undesirable response. Professor
Ellsworth Faris stresses the fact that many preliterate peoples, with enviable family
control, do not punish their children. The apparent maturation of a moral sense is
explained by Cooley as follows: “What is called principle appears to be simply a habit
of conscience... .. One who studies the sense of oughtness in children will have no
difficulty in seeing that it springs largely from a reluctance to break habits—an indis-
position to get out of mental ruts” (Human Nature and the Social Order [New York],
Pp. 340). These viewpoints indicate the wide range of practice with which the research
worker must expect to deal.
within family control, begin to show the effect of outside influences.
With the attainment of full-fledged membership in such non-family
primary groups, social control conflicts inevitably occur. Through
this experience, of course, the child becomes aware that standards
exist, and is able eventually to weigh and consider possible courses
of action, testing the affective power of each and so making what we
call a “rational choice.”

The preschool child in the day nursery—Day nurseries have
been established to meet the pressing need of working parents for a
place where small children may be left during the entire day, and
where older children may come at noon and after school hours.
Physical care is provided, but mental and social development are
often left to chance, except for the general “mothering” of a busy
matron. There is a trend today toward standardization at a higher
level, but on the whole the day nursery still constitutes a semi-
organized environment. At the nursery there is at least regularity
of routine and relatively little punishment—exclusion from the
group, enforced inactivity, deprivation of special pleasures, or put-
ting to bed being most in use. If the child comes from a home where
corporal punishment is the rule, he finds that he must adjust to
these different situations. An observer, visiting a Polish day nur-
sery, reports:

Some of the older children seem to have solved their problem of adjustment
by assuming one attitude toward the matron or teachers in the nursery and an en-
tirely different one toward the parents and relatives in the home. Others, who
have not succeeded in making such a compromise of attitudes, when they are
reproved in the nursery assume a manner entirely explainable in the atmosphere
of thehome.....

The preschool child in the nursery school_—Nursery schools, for
children two to four years of age, in contrast to the day nursery,
present an ordered universe, where every detail of the program is
planned with the purpose of establishing habits and activities con-
sidered desirable by those in charge. It was found, however, at the
Third National Conference of Nursery School Workers, held last
year in Chicago, that general lack of agreement existed as to rela-
tive values, in the realm of social traits. Of a series of issues raised,
the question, “What kind of character are we trying to produce?”
was voted the most divisive. There is practical unanimity, neverthe-
less, on such matters as health-building, opportunity for a wide
range of sensory-motor experience and spontaneous play, growing
skill in self-help, etc. Experts in many fields are enlisted; extensive
records of development are kept; and in many cases research pro-
grams are under way.® The teaching staff are, as a rule, guided by
some consistent theory of education, and consciously adopt certain
verbal formulas in accustoming the children to the nursery code of
behavior. Control is largely through the planned environment, sup-
plemented by such matter-of-fact statements as, “It is time now for
orange juice,” or “We do so-and-so in our school”; and temporary
separation from the group in case of crisis. Close co-ordination with
the home thakes possible comparative study of the child’s life in
these two fundamental groups at the point where partial relaxation
of family control is just beginning. As one mother said, after ob-
serving her two-year-old among his mates, “There’s a great deal of
human nature in the nursery school.” Best of all, for the purposes
of the social psychologist, it is human nature in the making, not yet
crystallized, but subject to rapid change under the powerful influ-
ences of the group. Attitudes and habits are often completely,
though not permanently, reversed within three or four weeks. Here
systematic observation may be carried on, tests given as desired,
disguised as games, whole behavior cycles traced without embar-
rassment to the subject, and methods evolved for the taking and
analysis of interaction records and for testing the validity and re-
liability of results secured.

The preschool child in the kindergarten—As the kindergarten
program is generally familiar, it is necessary only to say that the
influence of nursery-school theory and procedure is already being
felt at this next level. Perhaps the outstanding effect has been to
reinforce the trend already evident toward the “free” kindergarten,
with greater informality of program. Also, as one kindergartner
said, “Our children come to us from the nursery school with so
much clearer an understanding of the world about them that we
have to introduce more social science in the kindergarten.” She re-

®See especially: Dorothy Swaine Thomas, Some New Techniques for Studying
Social Behavior, Child Development Monographs, No. 1, Child Development Insti-
tute, Teachers College, New York, 1929. Also, for extreme emphasis on growth and
biological development: Harriet M. Johnson, Children in the Nursery School (New

York), 1928. Best summary: Twenty-eighth Yearbook, Preschool and Parental Ed-
ucation (Bloomington: National Society for the Study of Education, 1929), Vol. XIV.
ferred to the children’s increased interest in transportation systems,
occupations, and other processes of community living, as observed
by them and reproduced in their play.

The problem of method.—It is clear from this brief survey of the
different “established interacting arrangements,” to quote Dewey,
within which the American child’s earliest social relationships are
formed, that wide and significant differences exist. These are not
being taken into account in any current research program. The
nursery-school régime is freer than that of the kindergarten and
more standardized than that of the home. Age of children and type
of control are less variable than in the day nursery and backyard
play group. All of these points favor the nursery-school or pre-
school laboratory as a central field for research in personality de-
velopment at the present stage of our technique. Emphasis on any
one of the groups to which a given child belongs, however, except
as a starting-point for study, is out of place in a rounded plan based
on the viewpoint with which we are here concerned. As social psy-
chologists, we are committed to the testing of an important hy-
pothesis: that personality is a function of group life, varying with
the réles which the individual adopts in each social situation. Our
problem is to evolve methods suited to this task. If personality is in
reality as many-sided as the number of social groups in which it
takes on form—if the child in each situation must, through trial and
chance success, learn the set of relations which enables him to “fit
in”—if he is in each a different child—this cannot be ignored in the
application of our research techniques. If the hypothesis does not
hold true, or demands statement in some modified form, this knowl-
edge in itself should prove invaluable. There is, we must assume,
no such thing as X-the-person, except as the term is understood
to include X-at-home, X-at-his-grandmother’s, X-at-the-nursery-
school, and later X-with-the-gang, X-the-captain-of-the-team, etc.
The toddlers themselves recognize this relativity of experience. “At
home I don’t like blue,” was recently overheard in a nursery play
group, and similar remarks are frequent.

Studies made in one group only are of course necessary and use-
ful, but scientific integrity requires that we shall not claim too much
for them. This difficulty weakens the value of the contribution
made by Piaget, working in Geneva, Switzerland, with a highly se-
lected group of children in a private school who, we must infer from
his conclusions, are held to typify children of the same age else-
where. He tells us:

It is only from the age of 7 or 8 that there can be any talk of genuine under-

standing among children.®
There is, as we have said, no real social life between children of less than 7

or 8 years.1°
This distinction between our two groups of children . . . . proves that the
effort to understand other people and to communicate one’s thought objectively
does not appear in children before the age of about 7 or 734.11
Such a picture contrasts strangely with everyday observations in
our preschool laboratories in this country. The reader wonders
what the experience of these youngsters had been previously, and
what it was, at home and elsewhere, at the time of the investigation
—to what extent they were expected or indeed permitted to enter
into co-operative activities. In contrast with these unjustified gen-
eralizations, one finds statements such as the following, which are
of unquestioned value, since they have a place and time reference:
Social life at the Maison des Petits passes, according to the observations of
Miles. Audemars and Lafendel, through three stages. Up till about the age of
five the child almost always works alone. From five to about seven and a half,
little groups of two are formed... .. These groups are transitory and irregu-
lar. Finally, between seven and eight, the desire manifests itself to work with
others.1#
Undoubtedly this is what happens, for unknown reasons, at the
Maison des Petits. The corresponding ages would be placed, per-
haps, at three, four, and five as a result of observations taken at
Cambridge, Massachusetts, Chicago, or Winnetka, Illinois. One
two-year-old known to the writer was unhappy in a small group and
kept insisting, “Want a whole bunch of babies!” Piaget refers to
the Geneva school as a “natural” environment, and seems to imply
that the environmental factors may therefore be ignored. Social
psychology today holds, however, that no particular set of environ-
mental conditions can be considered more natural than another, as
customary arrangements differ so widely in different cultures; and
that scientific procedure must include exact specification of the con-
ditions under which given results are secured. Any conclusions
drawn must then be limited to the cases studied, or, with less cer-
° The Language and Thought of the Child (New York and London, 1926), p. 125.
* Tbid., p. 40. * Tbid., p. 126. ® Ibid., p. 41.
tainty, to groups similarly composed, carrying on their activities in
situations highly similar.

A promising line of attack has been recently reported by Walter
C. Reckless—the observation of children in the playroom of a re-
ceiving home, in order to get as clear a picture as possible of the
“situational personality” as a guide for prospective foster-parents.
Information as to the subject’s life in other groups was secured from
interviews only. It is stated that “by far the most revealing infor-
mation . . . . came from the playroom observations.” Yet the
relativity of the results to the group in which they were secured has
been disregarded. Can it be said, in general, that Edward is “not a
complainer’’? Are traits as stable as this, under varying conditions?
How will the child behave in a totally different situation, that of the
foster-home? The only way known to the writer of answering these
questions is to extend the same techniques of observation and analy-
sis into other groups to which the child already belongs, or in which
he may be placed tentatively. Reckless says: “We might have rea-
son to expect him to carry over these traits of the ‘situational’ per-
sonality into a new family situation unless some very sudden imi-
tation occurred.”** Surely sociological theory, supported by an
increasing mass of objective data, tends to discourage such expec-
tation. Ethel Verry, however, in her brief report of a study carried
on in preschool play groups, advances conclusions marginal to the
foregoing, which constitute a stimulating hypothesis for further
study:

When a child entered the play group he first assumed the réle which he was
used to take at home. If this worked satisfactorily he continued to occupy it.
If circumstances made it too hard for him to continue in his usual réle, he as-
sumed another personality which, while new to him in practice, was a familiar
part of his social consciousness. (Some held to one réle; others shifted.) In
examining the experiences of these two types of children, the writer found that
the children of the first or more stable type had had much less varied social con-
tacts than those of the second type.!+

Another approach, valuable in elaborating our techniques before
undertaking the all-around study of the person, consists in the

* “Case Studies Built around Observations of Individual Foster-Children in the
Playroom of a Receiving Home,” Publication of the American Sociological Society,
XXIV, No. 2 (May, 1930), 172.

*“A Study of Personality in Preschool Play Groups,” Journal of Social Forces,
May, 1925, p. 645.
analysis of several groups made up of children of the same age-
span. If Piaget’s assumptions hold, that behavior traits correlate
with chronological age rather than with experience, we may expect
to find highly similar behavior. In such a comparative study of four
nursery schools, made by the writer, the results indicate, instead,
considerable divergence in the trait actions recorded. The schools,
though following the usual daily program, differed in certain re-
spects, particularly in home background and in the control meth-
ods used by the teaching staff. It seems probable, though the analy-
sis of results is not yet complete, that a direct relation exists be-
tween these differences and the observed irregularities of behavior.

Dorothy Thomas, in discussing the methodology of the highly ob-
jective studies under way at Teachers College, Columbia Univer-
sity, frankly questions the practicability of dealing with such fac-
tors. Her point of view, reflected in the work of several associates,
is concisely stated:

In the study of group behavior . . . . the present methodological problem
seems to center entirely around the control of the observer. We are skeptical of
the possibility even of recognizing—much less of controlling—most of the “in-
terfering” stimuli in behavior of the sort we wish to study. . . . - a
The emphasis in these studies is placed upon testing the reliability
of observation records taken simultaneously by two or more observ-
ers—a most important piece of pioneer work. The investigators are
interested in determining individual differences ‘among children in
the same group. It seems pertinent to consider in this connection
the finding of the Character Education Inquiry that classroom
groups showed differences of behavior not to be accounted for by
population selection. As Hugh Hartshorne points out, the report
suggests that the existence of something which may be termed
“classroom morale” is an inescapable hypothesis. He emphasizes

the point:

No matter what may be the source of classroom correlations, they do exist,
whereas corresponding individual correlations do not exist... . . The signifi-
cant fact seems not to be selection, but group experience . . . . (morale, codes,

habits, teacher, prestige, etc.).1¢

* Op. cit., p. 3. .
** “Sociological Implications of the Character Education Inquiry,” American Jour-
nal of Sociology, XXXVI (September, 1930), 259.
The ground would appear to be cleared for more minute studies
of the variations in group behavior among children of the same age,
and analysis of the processes back of these results. What are the
outstanding differences among groups of preschool children? How
early and under what circumstances can we say that group morale
appears? What are its first manifestations, under given conditions,
in the behavior of young children? What factors are significant in
building something so intangible, yet as necessary a hypothesis as
that of the electron? Must we not assume that control techniques in
use by the adult members of the child’s several groups have a power-
ful influence during the preschool years?*’ Questions such as these
lead us to the heart of the problem. To what extent does the indi-
vidual child modify his behavior and exhibit different personality
traits as he passes from one group to another within his small world?

To sum up: If we are to make the needed contribution to the
methodology of personality research, we must find detailed and
workable means of discovering what a given person does and (by
implication only) what he feels, in response to others, in all the
group situations which he habitually meets. It is the finer differ-
ences of culture pattern and social contact within these situations
which must be scrutinized for explanatory clues. We are interested
in knowing what will happen when the social codes and control tech-
niques in two or more of the child’s earliest groups are mutually
complementary, and whether or not different results occur when
they are conflicting. It will then be time to extend these data by an
investigation of the same young person’s relatively less mechanized
behavior when confronted with varied types of unfamiliar social
situations—crises in which attitudes must be modified and habits
changed. We may even look forward to successful experimentation
in this difficult field, under carefully simplified and controlled con-
ditions, after a period of systematic observation has revealed the
significant factors involved. It is the social relationships making up
a life which must be studied.

That these “interfering stimuli” can be not only recognized but recorded and
classified is shown by several studies of personality differences exhibited in the mental
testing situation, made under Miss Thomas’ direction. See especially, op. cit., chap.

vii, a study of varied techniques used by the mental tester in overcoming the child’s
resistance at certain points.
