Contributions to Social Philosophy. IV. Sociology and Anthropology
Author(s): Lester F. Ward

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Jan., 1896), pp. 426-433
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2761873

Accessed: 08-05-2016 22:51 UTC
Atmost any subject may be classified in more than one way.
Anthropology is the science of man, and taken in its broadest
sense it embraces everything that concerns the human race. It
first received prominence at the hands of Paul Broca, the emi-
nent student of man in his physical relations. Owing to his
influence it was long restricted to the study of the human body,
but so appropriate a term could not be thus bound down, and
today it has come to receive the broadest meaning of which it
admits. The Anthropological Society of Washington, which
was founded in 1879, introduced into its constitution the following
classification of the science: (1) Somatology, (2) Sociology,
(3) Philology, (4) Philosophy, (5) Psyschology, and (6)
Technology. These subdivisions were adopted after prolonged
and careful consideration by such men as Major J. W. Powell,
Director of the U. S. Bureau of Ethnology, Col. Garrick Mallery,
the eminent student of sign language and kindred subjects, and
Professor Otis T. Mason, Curator of Ethnology for the U.S.
National Museum. It has been found during sixteen years’
experience that every subject proper to be brought before the
society could be classed under some one of these heads.

Here, as will be seen, sociology is made a subdivision of
anthropology, and properly so. But this does not in any way
invalidate an entirely different classification in which sociology
is made the generic science, and anthropology is looked upon as
in some sense a part of sociology. It all depends upon the

In our last issue (p. 313) it was stated in a footnote that owing to previous
publication this paper would be omitted from the series; but as so much of it, as now
presented, is new, it has been decided to insert all that seems essential to the general
argument, omitting the somewhat extended discussion of alleged exclusively human
attributes, for which the reader is referred to the American Anthropologist for July, 1895.

426
point of view. As man is the being with whom sociology deals
that science of course belongs to the science of man. But if
we look upon sociology as embracing everything relating to
associated man, a large part of the facts and phenomena of
anthropology overlap upon its domain, and it becomes important
to consider the relations subsisting among these phenomena.
Moreover, the phenomena of association are not exclusively
confined to man. Sociologists are coming to pay more and
more attention to phenomena among animals analogous to those
displayed by men, and animal association is a well-known fact
which is exciting increased interest. So that sociology is not
wholly included in any view of anthropology.

But when we examine the two sciences closely we perceive
that they differ generically. Anthropology, in dealing with
man, 7. ¢., with a particular being, or species of animal, is pri-
marily a descriptive science. It is not concerned with laws or
principles, but with material facts. Sociology, on the contrary,
deals primarily with association and whatever conduces to it or
modifies it. But association is not a material thing; it is a con-
dition, and the science that deals with it is chiefly concerned
with the laws and principles that produce and affect that con-
dition. In short, while anthropology is essentially a concrete
science, sociology is essentially an abstract science. The dis-
tinction is very nearly the same as between biology and zodlogy,
except that anthropology is restricted to a single species of
animal. Thus viewed, it is clear that it becomes simply a branch
of zoélogy with classificatory rank below ornithology, ento-
mology, mammalogy, etc. There is no other single species, or
even genus, that has been made the subject of a distinct science,
as might obviously be done, e. g., hippology, the science of the
horse, or cynology, the science of the dog.

It comes, however, wholly within the province of social
philosophy to inquire into the nature of this being, man, whose
associative habits form the chief subject of sociology. First of
all, his position in the animal world needs to be understood.
No possible good can come from ignoring the true relation of
man to the humbler forms of life around him, while on the other
hand, if this relation is correctly understood it furnishes one of
the principal means by which man can learn to know himself.
Accepting, therefore, the conclusions of the masters in zodlogy,
among whom as to the main points, there are no longer any dif-
ferences of opinion, we must contemplate man simply as the
most favored of all the “ favored races” that have struggled up
from a remote and humble origin. His superiority is due almost
exclusively to his extraordinary brain development.

Very few have seriously reflected upon the natural conse-
quences of this one characteristic—a highly developed brain.
Without inquiring how it happened that the creature called
man was singled out to become the recipient of this extraordi-
nary endowment, we may safely make two fundamental proposi-
tions which tend to show that this question is not as important
as it seems. The first is that if the developed brain had been
awarded to any one of the other animals of nearly the same size
of man, that animal would have dominated the earth in much
the same way that man does. The other is that a large part of
what constitutes the physical superiority of man is directly due
to his brain development.

As to the first of these propositions, it is true that man
belongs systematically to the highest class of animals, the
placental Mammalia. It would have looked somewhat anoma-
lous to the zodlogist if he had discovered that the dominant race
to which he belonged must be classed below many of the
creatures over which he held sway, as would have been the case
if the organ of knowing had been conferred, for example, upon
some species of large bird or reptile. But in fact something a
little less anomalous, but of the same kind actually occurs. The
line along which man has descended is not regarded by zodlo-
gists as by any means the most highly developed line of the
Mammalian class. It is a very short line and leads directly
back through the apes and lemurs to the marsupials and mono-
tremes—animals of much lower systematic order, the last named
forming a partial transition to birds. Most of the other
developed mammals, such as the Carnivora and Ungulata, have
a much longer ancestry and have really attained a far higher
stage of development. Inthe matter of digits it is maintained
that true progress is characterized by a reduction in their num-
ber, and that the highest stage is not reached until they are
reduced to one, as in the horse. In this respect man is a slight
advance upon the apes in the first toe having lost the char-
acter of a thumb. No one can deny that the power of flight
would have been an immense advantage to man, yet few mam-
mals possess this power, and it is chiefly confined to creatures of
low organization.

It is difficult to conceive a being entirely different in form from
man taking the place that he has acquired, but if any one of the
structurally higher races possessed the same brain development
it would have had the same intelligence, and although its
achievements would doubtless have been very different from his,
they would have had the same rank and secured for that race
the same mastery over animate and inanimate nature. This will
become clearer when we consider the second of the above
propositions which we may now proceed to do.

To what extent has brain development reacted upon man’s
physical nature? I cannot, of course, go fully into this question
here, but nothing is better known to anatomists than that the
erect posture is not the natural or primary one. It has been
acquired by man within a comparatively recent time. It isa
legitimate inference that it is chiefly due to brain development,
physiologically as a means of supporting the enlarged and cor-
respondingly heavier head, which it would be difficult to carry in
the horizontal position, and psychologically as the natural result
of a growing intelligence and self-consciousness which seeks to
lift the head and raise it to a position from which it can com-
mand its surroundings. It is a common observation that those
persons who possess the greatest amount of self-esteem stand
straightest, and it is this same principle that has operated from
the beginning to bring the human body more and more nearly
into a vertical position.
Pari passu with this process has gone on the diminution of
the craniofacial angle. The same influences that tended to raise
the body from the horizontal to the vertical position tended also
to carry the brain and upper part of the face forward and the
jaws and mouth backward. It is not claimed that this reaction
of the developing intelligence upon the physical form is suf-
ficient alone to account for the development of the entire type
of physical beauty attained by the most advanced human races.
Esthetic considerations are needed to complete the process, and
especially the powerful aid of sexual selection; but even the
sense of beauty must be in great part ascribed to mental
development and refinement.

Nothing is more certain than that the faculty of speech is a
product of intelligence. Both by direct effort and by hereditary
selection the organs of speech received increment after incre-
ment of adaptation to this end. The means of intercommuni-
cation was the indispensable requirement, and this would be
secured by any intelligent creature no matter what the physical
organization might be. Oral speech is by no means the only
way in which such intercommunication is secured, and even if
no organs had existed by which sound could be produced, some
other means would have been adopted. But man possessed
sound-producing organs in common with nearly all animals.
There is no evidence that he was specially favored in this
respect. In developed man the larynx is more complicated
than in most mammals, but this may be comparatively recent.
In many animals it is greatly specialized. In birds it is far
more elaborate than in man, being double and sometimes, as in
the crane, enormously elongated and coiled into a trumpet.
Who can doubt that with such an organ all birds could talk if
they possessed ideas to communicate? The parrot and many
other birds actually do distinctly articulate the words of human
speech by imitation, but they lack the power to clothe them
with thought. It would be easy to add a great number of other
proofs of the all-sufficiency of the one leading characteristic of
the human species—superior brain development—to account for
all the important features that distinguish man from the lower
animals, but those already mentioned will suffice.

The last question to be discussed is whether there is any
generic distinction between human and animal association.
Many animals are gregarious and some lead a truly social
life. We all know how most domestic animals love to mingle
with their kind. The horse is an exceedingly social animal and
is always uneasy and apparently unhappy until in the presence
of other horses. Most ungulates, even in the wild state, go
in flocks and herds. It is noteworthy that herbivorous animals
are more gregarious than carnivorous ones. Animals of the cat
tribe are scarcely at all so. Wolves, it is true, go in packs, but
it may bea question whether this is not entirely due to the
advantage this gives them in attacking their prey, which is often
an animal of nearly their own size, as the sheep. Many birds
live in flocks, sometimes, as pigeons, of immense numbers.
Fishes, too, form “shoals,” and insects swarm.

The causes of all these forms of gregariousness are numer-
ous and complex. The necessities of reproduction are sufficient
to account for a large part of it, and all animals must associate
enough to secure this end. One of the most curious facts is
that those animals which zodlogists place nearest to man are not
among the most gregarious. The habits of apes and monkeys
in the wild state are not as well known as could be wished in
discussing this question, and although some of the anthropoid
apes are known to go in troops, though not very large ones, still
this class of animals can scarcely be regarded as gregarious.
Although it is admitted that none of the living forms could
have been the immediate ancestor of man, and therefore there
will always remain the possibility that his true simian ancestor
may have been a gregarious animal, still the probabilities are
against this view, and it seems likely that throughout his purely
animal career man possessed the associative habit only so far as
was necessary for the maintenance of the race.

Considering all these facts Iam inclined to the view that
man is not naturally a social being, that he has descended from
an animal that was not even gregarious by instinct, and that
human society, like so many other facts that I have been enu-
merating, is purely a product of his reason and arose by insensible
degrees, pari passu with the development of his brain. In other
words, I regard human association as the result of the perceived
advantage which it yields, and as coming into existence only in
proportion as that advantage was perceived by the only faculty
capable of perceiving it, the intellect. In Dynamic Sociology I
took strong ground against the Aristotelian idea that man is a
gregarious animal and the Comtean doctrine that he is by
nature a social being, and pointed out a large number of
what I called ‘anti-social’ qualities in his nature’, and I
also worked out what I conceived must have been the
several steps which the race has taken in its passage from the
purely animal state to the developed social state. I do not
adhere to that position now merely because I assumed it then,
but rather because, notwithstanding the little real evidence,
subsequent indications have tended to confirm it. I will here
emphasize only one point. Human government is an art
only possible in a rational being. No animal possesses a gov-
ernment in any such sense. The primary object of government
is to protect society from just these anti-social influences, and it
is generally admitted that without it society could not exist.
This means that even in the most enlightened peoples the anti-
social tendencies are still so strong that they would disrupt
society but for an artificial system of protection. To call man
of whom this can be said a social being by nature is obviously
absurd. No doubt strong social impulses exist among men, but
they are the product of ages of constraint. Man may be in
process of becoming a social being, but he will not have really
become such until it shall be possible to dispense entirely with
the protective function of government. Universal education
and further centuries of custom may ultimately transform human
character to this extent, until habit shall become at least a second

*See Vol. L., pp. 394, 452, 462, 474; Vol. IL, pp. 212, 221.
2Vol. I, p. 466.
nature and accomplish the same result that natural selection has
accomplished in making gregarious animals and social insects ;
but thus far society, which is the product of the collective rea-
son working for its own interests, is still dependent upon the
momentary exercise of that reason in preventing its own over-
throw.

It is for these reasons that Iam obliged to maintain that
human society is generically distinct from all animal societies.
It is essentially rational and artificial while animal association is
essentially instinctive and natural. The adaptation in the for-
mer is incomplete, while in the latter it is practically complete.
Hence the same principles do not apply to human and animal
sociology. The latter is essentially a biological study, and
while psychological considerations are potent in both, those that
belong to animal sociology relate exclusively to feeling while
those that belong to human sociology relate chiefly to the intel-
lect. The facts of animal association therefore—the remarkable
resemblances to man’s ways displayed by insects and the curious
imitations of human customs in various departments of the
animal world—prove to be only analogies and not true homolo-
gies, and as such have much less value to the sociologist than

they appear at first view to possess.
Teoemct © Waicr
