The Sociology of Secrecy and of Secret Societies

Author(s): Georg Simmel

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 11, No. 4 (Tan., 1906), pp. 441-498
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2762562

Accessed: 09-05-2016 04:32 UTC
THE SOCIOLOGY OF SECRECY AND OF SECRET
SOCIETIES?

PROFESSOR DR. GEORG SIMMEL
Berlin

All relationships of people to each other rest, as a matter of
course, upon the precondition that they know something about
each other. The’merchant knows that his correspondent wants
to buy at the lowest price and to sell at the highest price. The
teacher knows that he may credit to the pupil a certain quality and
quantity of information. Within each social stratum the indi-
vidual knows approximately what measure of culture he has to
presuppose in each other individual. In all relationships of a
personally differentiated sort there develop, as we may affirm with
obvious reservations, intensity and shading in the degree in which
each unit reveals himself to the other through word and deed.
How much error and sheer prejudice may lurk in all this know-
ing is immaterial. Just as our apprehension of external nature,
along with its elusions and its inaccuracies, still attains that
degree of truth which is essential for the life and progress of our
species, so each knows the other with whom he has to do, in a
rough and ready way, to the degree necessary in order that the
needed kinds of intercourse may proceed. That we shall know
with whom we have to do, is the first precondition of having
anything to do with another. The customary reciprocal presenta-

1Translated by Albion W. Small.
tion, in the case of any somewhat protracted conversation, or in
the case of contact upon the same social plane, although at first
sight an empty form, is an excellent symbol of that reciprocal
apprehension which is the presumption of every social relation-
ship. The fact is variously concealed from consciousness,
because, in the case of a very large number of relationships,
only the quite typical tendencies and qualities need to be
reciprocally recognized. Their necessity is usually observed only
when they happen to be wanted. It would be a profitable
scientific labor to investigate the sort and degree of reciprocal
apprehension which is needed for the various relationships
between human beings. It would be worth while to know
how the general psychological presumptions with which each
approaches each are interwoven with the special experiences
with reference to the individual who is in juxtaposition with us;
how in many ranges of association the reciprocal apprehension
does or does not need to be equal, or may or may not be permitted
to be equal; how conventional relationships are determined in
their development only through that reciprocal or unilateral
knowledge developing with reference to the other party. The
investigation should finally proceed in the opposite direction;
that is, it should inquire how our objectively psychological picture
of others is influenced by the real relationships of practice and of
sentiment between us. This latter problem by no means has
reference to falsification. On the contrary, in a quite legitimate
fashion, the theoretical conception of a given individual varies
with the standpoint from which it is formed, which standpoint is
given by the total relationship of the knower to the known.
Since one never can absolutely know another, as this would mean
knowledge of every particular thought and feeling; since we
must rather form a conception of a personal unity out of the
fragments of another person in which alone he is accessible to
us, the unity so formed necessarily depends upon that portion of
the other which our standpoint toward him permits us to see.
These differences, however, by no means spring merely from
differences in the quantity of the apprehension. No psycho-
logical knowledge is a mere mechanical echo of its object. It is
rather, like knowledge of external nature, dependent upon the
forms that the knowing mind brings to it, and in which it takes
up the data. When we are concerned with apprehension of indi-
vidual by individual, these forms are individually differentiated
in a very high degree. They do not arrive at the scientific
generality and supersubjective conclusiveness which are attain-
able in our knowledge of external nature, and of the typically
individual psychic processes. If A has a different conception of
M from that of B, this does not necessarily mean incompleteness
or deception. On the contrary, the personality of A and the
total circumstances of his relation to M being what they are, his
picture of M is for him true, while for B a picture differing some-
what in its content may likewise be true. It is by no means cor-
rect to say that, over and above these two pictures, there is the
objectively correct apprehension of M, by which the two are to
be corrected according to the measure of their agreement with it.
Rather is the ideal truth which, to be sure, the actual picture of M
in the conception of A approaches only asymptotically, that is as
ideal, something different from that of B. It contains, as inte-
grating organizing precondition, the psychical peculiarity of A
and the special relationship into which A and M are brought, by
virtue of their characteristics and their fortunes. Every relation-
ship between persons causes a picture of each to take form in the
mind of the other, and this picture evidently is in reciprocal rela-
tionship with that personal relationship. While this latter con-
stitutes the presupposition, on the basis of which the conceptions
each of the other take shape so and so, and with reference to
which these conceptions possess actual truth for the given case,
on the other hand the actual reciprocity of the individuals is based
upon the picture which they derive of each other. Here we have
one of the deep circuits of the intellectual life, inasmuch as one
element presupposes a second, but the second presupposes the
first. While this is a fallacy within narrow ranges, and thus
makes the whole involved intellectual process unreliable, in more
general and fundamental application it is the unavoidable expres-
sion of the unity in which these two elements coalesce, and which
cannot be expressed in our forms of thought except as a building
of the first upon the second, and at the same time of the second
upon the first. Accordingly, our situations develop themselves
upon the basis of a reciprocal knowledge of each other, and this
knowledge upon the basis of actual situations, both inextricably
interwoven, and, through their alternations within the reciprocal
sociological process, designating the latter as one of the points at
which reality and idea make their mysterious unity empirically
perceptible.

In the presence of the total reality upon which our conduct
is founded, our knowledge is characterized by peculiar limitations
and aberrations. We cannot say in principle that “error is life
and knowledge is death,” because a being involved in persistent
errors would continually act wide of the purpose, and would thus
inevitably perish. At the same time, in view of our accidental
and defective adaptations to our life-conditions, there is no doubt
that we cherish not only so much truth, but also so much
nescience, and attain to so much error as is useful for our prac-
tical purposes. We may call to mind in this connection the vast
sums of human knowledge that modify human life, which, how-
ever, are overlooked or disregarded if the total cultural situation
does not make these modifications possible and useful. At the
other extreme, we may refer to the Lebensliige of the individual,
so often in need of illusion as to his powers and even as to his
feelings, of superstition with reference to God as well as men, in
order to sustain himself in his being and in his potentialities. In
this psycho-biological respect error is co-ordinated with truth.
The utilities of the external, as of the subjective, life provide
that we get from the one as well as from the other precisely that
which constitutes the basis of the conduct which is essential for
us. Of course, this proposition holds only in the large, and with
a wide latitude for variations and defective adaptations.

But there is within the sphere of objective knowledge, where
there is room for truth and illusion, a definite segment in which
both truth and illusion may take on a character nowhere else
observed. The subjective, internal facts of the person with whom
we are in contact present this area of knowledge. Our fellow-
man either may voluntarily reveal to us the truth about himself,
or by dissimulation he may deceive us as to the truth. No other
object of knowledge can thus of its own initiative, either
enlighten us with reference to itself or conceal itself, as a human
being can. No other knowable object modifies its conduct from
consideration of its being understood or misunderstood. ‘This
modification does not, of course, take place throughout the whole
range of human relations. In many ways our fellow-man is also
in principle only like a fragment of nature, which our apprehen-
sion, so to speak, holds fast in its grasp. In many respects,
however, the situation is different, and our fellow-man of his
own motion gives forth truth or error with reference to himself.
Every lie, whatever its content, is in its essential nature a promo-
tion of error with reference to the mendacious subject; for the
lie consists in the fact that the liar conceals from the person to
whom the idea is conveyed the true conception which he pos-
sesses. The specific nature of the lie is not exhausted in the
fact that the person to whom the lie is told has a false concep-
tion of the fact. This is a detail in common with simple
error. The additional trait is that the person deceived is held
in misconception about the true intention of the person who
tells the lie. Veracity and mendacity are thus of the most far-
reaching significance for the relations of persons with each
other. Sociological structures are most characteristically dif-
ferentiated by the measure of mendacity that is operative in
them. To begin with, in very simple relationships a lie is
much more harmless for the persistence of the group than
in complex associations. Primitive man, living in communities
of restricted extent, providing for his needs by his own produc-
tion or by direct co-operation, limiting his spiritual interests to
personal experience or to simple tradition, surveys and controls
the material of his existence more easily and completely than the
man of higher culture. In the latter case life rests upon a thou-
sand presuppositions which the individual can never trace back
to their origins, and verify; but which he must accept upon faith
and belief. In a much wider degree than people are accustomed
to realize, modern civilized life—from the economic system
which is constantly becoming more and more a credit-economy,
to the pursuit of science, in which the majority of investigators
must use countless results obtained by others, and not directly
subject to verification— depends upon faith in the honor of
others. We rest our most serious decisions upon a complicated
system of conceptions, the majority of which presuppose con-
fidence that we have not been deceived. Hence prevarication in
modern circumstances becomes something much more devasta-
ting, something placing the foundations of life much more in
jeopardy, than was earlier the case. If lying appeared today
among us as a sin as permissible as among the Greek divinities,
the Hebrew patriarchs, or the South Sea Islanders; if the
extreme severity of the moral law did not veto it, the progressive
upbuilding of modern life would be simply impossible, since
modern life is, in a much wider than the economic sense, a
“credit-economy.” This relationship of the times recurs in the
case of differences of other dimensions. The farther third per-
sons are located from the center of our personality, the easier can
we adjust ourselves practically, but also subjectively, to their lack
of integrity. On the other hand, if the few persons in our imme-
diate environment lie to us, life becomes intolerable. This
banality must, nevertheless, be brought out to view, because it
shows that the ratios of truthfulness and mendacity, which are
reconcilable with the continuance of situations, form a scale that
registers the ratios of the intensity of these relationships.

In addition to this relative sociological permissibility of lying
in primitive conditions, we must observe a positive utility of the
same. In cases where the first organization, stratification, and
centralization of the group are in question, the process is accom-
plished by means of subjection of the weaker to the physically
and mentally superior. The lie that succeeds—that is, which
is not seen through—is without doubt a means of bringing
mental superiority to expression, and of enabling it to guide and
subordinate less crafty minds. It is a spiritual fist-law, equally
brutal, but occasionally quite as much in place, as the physical
species; for instance, as a selective agency for the breeding of
intelligence; as a means of enabling a certain few, for whom
others must labor, to secure leisure for production of the higher
cultural good; or in order to furnish a means of leadership for
the group forces. The more these purposes are accomplished by
means which have fewer disagreeable consequences, the less is
lying ncessary, and the more room is made for consciousness of
its ethical unworthiness. This process is by no means completed.
The small trader still thinks that he cannot dispense with a cer-
tain amount of mendacious recommendations of his wares, and
he acts accordingly without compunctions of conscience. Whole-
sale and retail trade on a large scale have passed this stadium,
and they are accordingly able to act in accordance with complete
integrity in marketing their goods. So soon as the methods of
doing business among small traders, and those of the middle class,
have reached a similar degree of perfection, the exaggerations
and actual falsifications, in advertising and recommending goods,
which are today in general not resented in those kinds of business,
will fall under the same ethical condemnation which is now passed
in the business circles just referred to. Commerce built upon
integrity will be in general the more advantageous within a group,
in the degree in which the welfare of the many rather than that of
the few sets the group standard. For those who are deceived —
that is, those placed at a disadvantage by the lie— will always be
in the majority as compared with the liar who gets his advantage
from the lie. Consequently that enlightenment which aims at
elimination of the element of deception from social life is always
of a democratic character.

Human intercourse rests normally upon the condition that
the mode of thought among the persons associated has certain
common characteristics; in other words, that objective spiritual
contents constitute the common material, which is developed in its
individual phases in the course of social contacts. The type and
the most essential vehicle of this community of spiritual content
is common language. If we look a little closer, however, the
common basis here referred to consists by no means exclusively
of that which all equally know, or, in a particular case, of that
which the one accepts as the spiritual content of the other; but
this factor is shot through by another, viz., knowledge which the
one associate possesses, while the other does not. If there were
such a thing as complete reciprocal transparency, the relation-
ships of human beings to each other would be modified in a quite
unimaginable fashion. The dualism of human nature, by reason
of which every manifestation of it has its sources in numerous
origins that may be far distant from each other, and every quan-
tity is estimated at the same time as great or small, according as
it is contemplated in connection with littleness or greatness,
makes it necessary to think of sociological relationships in general
dualistically; that is, concord, harmony, mutuality, which count
as the socializing forces proper, must be interrupted by distance,
competition, repulsion, in order to produce the actual configura-
tion of society. The strenuous organizing forms which appear to
be the real constructors of society, or to construct society as such,
must be continually disturbed, unbalanced, and detached by indi-
vidualistic and irregular forces, in order that their reaction and
development may gain vitality by alternate concession and resist-
ance. Relationships of an intimate character, the formal vehicle
of which is psycho-physical proximity, lose the charm, and even
the content, of their intimacy, unless the proximity includes, at
the same time and alternately, distance and intermission. Finally
—and this is the matter with which we are now concerned — the
reciprocal knowledge, which is the positive condition of social
relationships, is not the sole condition. On the contrary, such as
those relationships are, they actually presuppose also a certain
nescience, a ratio, that is immeasurably variable to be sure, of
reciprocal concealment. The lie is only a very rude form, in the
last analysis often quite self-contradictory, in which this necessity
comes to the surface. However frequently lying breaks up a
social situation, yet, so long as it existed, a lie may have been an
integrating element of its constitution. We must take care not to
be misled, by the ethically negative value of lying, into error about
the direct positive sociological significance of untruthfulness, as
it appears in shaping certain concrete situations. Moreover,
lying in connection with the elementary sociological fact here in
question — viz., the limitation of the knowledge of one associate
by another — is only one of the possible means, the positive and
aggressive technique, so to speak, the purpose of which in general
is obtained through sheer secrecy and concealment. The follow-
ing discussion has to do with these more general and negative
forms. Before we come to the question of secrecy as consciously
willed concealment, we should notice in what various degrees
different circumstances involve disregard of reciprocal knowledge
by the members of associations. Among those combinations
which involve some degree of direct reciprocity on the part of
their members, those which are organized for a special purpose
are first in eliminating this element of reciprocal knowledge.
Among these purposeful organizations, which in principle still
involve direct reciprocity, the extreme in the present particular is
represented by those in which utterly objective performances of
the members are in view. This situation is best typified
by the cases in which the contribution of so much cash represents
the participation of the individuals in the activities of the group.
In such instances reciprocity, coherence, and common pursuit of
the purpose by no means rest upon psychological knowledge of
the one member by the others. As member of the group the
individual is exclusively the agent of a definite performance; and
whatever individual motive may impel him to this activity, or
whatever may be the total characteristics of his conduct as a
whole, is in this connection a matter of complete indifference.
The organization for a special purpose (Zweckverband) is the
peculiarly discreet sociological formation; its members are in
psychological respects anonymous; and, in order to form the
combination, they need to know of each other only that they
form it. Modern culture is constantly growing more objective.
Its tissues grow more and more out of impersonal energies, and
absorb less and less the subjective entirety of the individual. In
this respect the hand laborer and the factory laborer furnish the
antithesis which illustrates the difference between past and pres-
ent social structure. This objective character impresses itself
also upon sociological structure, so that combinations into which
formerly the entire and individual person entered, and which
consequently demanded reciprocal knowledge beyond the imme-
diate content of the relationship, are now founded exclusively on
this content in its pure objectivity.
By virtue of the situation just noticed, that antecedent or
consequent form of knowledge with reference to an individual —
viz., confidence in him, evidently one of the most important syn-
thetic forces within society — gains a peculiar evolution. Confi-
dence, as the hypothesis of future conduct, which is sure enough
to become the basis of practical action, is, as hypothesis, a mediate
condition between knowing and not knowing another person.
The possession of full knowledge does away with the need of
trusting, while complete absence of knowledge makes trust evi-
dently impossible.1| Whatever quantities of knowing and not
knowing must commingle, in order to make possible the detailed
practical decision based upon confidence, will be determined by
the historic epoch, the ranges of interests, and the individuals.
The objectification of culture referred to above has sharply
differentiated the amounts of knowing and not knowing essential
as the condition of confidence. The modern merchant who enters
into a transaction with another, the scholar who undertakes an
investigation with another, the leader of a political party who
makes an agreement with the leader of another party with refer-
ence to an election, or the handling of a proposed bill —all these.

1 There is, tobe sure, still another type of confidence, which our present discus-
sion has nothing to do with, since it is a type that falls outside the bounds either
of knowing or not knowing. It is the type which we call faith of one person in
another. It belongs in the category of religious faith. Just as no one has ever
believed in the existence of God on grounds of proof, but these proofs are rather
subsequent justifications or intellectual reflections of a quite immediate attitude
of the affections; so we have faith in another person, although this faith nay not
be able to justify itself by proofs of the worthiness of the person, and it may
even exist in spite of proofs of his unworthiness. This confidence, this subjective
attitude of unreservedness toward a person, is not brought into existence by
experiences or by hypotheses, but it is a primary attitude of the soul with
respect to another. This condition of faith, in a perfectly pure form, detached
from every sort of empirical consideration, probably occurs only within the sphere
of religion. In order that it may be exercised toward men it probably always
needs a stimulus or a sanction from the knowledge or the inference above referred
to. On the other hand, it is probable that in those social forms of confidence,
however exact or intellectually sanctioned they may seem to be, an element of that
sentimental and even mystical “ faith ” of man toward man is hidden. Perhaps the
type of attitude here indicated is a fundamental category of human conduct, rest-
ing back upon the metaphysical meaning of our relationship, and realized only
empirically, accidentally, and partially through the special conscious grounds of
confidence.
with exceptions and modifications that need not be further indi-
cated, know, with reference to their associates, precisely what it
is necessary to know for the purposes of the relationship in ques-
tion. The traditions and institutions, the force of public opinion,
and the circumscription of the situation, which unavoidably
prejudice the individual, are so fixed and reliable that one only
needs to know certain externalities with reference to the other in
order to have the confidence necessary for the associated action.
The basis of personal qualities, from which in principle a modifi-
cation of attitude within the relationship could spring, is elimi-
nated from consideration. The motivation and the regulation of
this conduct has become so much a matter of an impersonal
program that it is no longer influenced by that basis, and con-
fidence no longer depends upon knowledge of that individual ele-
ment. In more primitive, less differentiated relationships, knowl-
edge of one’s associates was much more necessary in personal
respects, and much less in respect to their purely objective relia-
bility. Both factors belong together. In order that, in case of
lack in the latter respect, the necessary confidence may be pro-
duced, there is need of a much higher degree of knowledge of the
former sort.

That purely general objective knowledge of a person, beyond
which everything that is strictly individual in his personality may
remain a secret to his associates, must be considerably reinforced
in the knowledge of the latter, whenever the organization for a
specific purpose to which they belong possesses an essential signi-
ficance for the total existence of its members. The merchant who
sells grain or oil to another needs to know only whether the latter
is good for the price. The moment, however, that he associates
another with himself as a partner, he must not merely know his
standing as to financial assets, and certain quite general qualities
of his make-up, but he must see through him very thoroughly as
a personality; he must know his moral standards, his degree of
companionability, his daring or prudent temperament; and upon
reciprocal knowledge of that sort must depend not merely the
formation of the relationship, but its entire continuance, the daily
associated actions, the division of functions between the partners,
etc. The secret of personality is in such a case sociologically
more restricted. On account of the extent to which the common
interest is dependent upon the personal quality of the associates.
no extensive self-existence is in these circumstances permitted
to the personality of the individual.

Beyond the organizations for distinct purposes, but in like
manner beyond the relationships rooted in the total personality,
stands the relationship, highly significant sociologically, which is
called, in the higher strata of culture, “acquaintance.” That
persons are “acquainted” with each other signifies in this sense
by no means that they know each other reciprocally; that is, that
they have insight into that which is peculiarly personal in the
individuality. It means only that each has, so to speak, taken
notice of the existence of the other. As a rule, the notion of
acquaintanceship in this sense is associated only with mere men-
tioning of the name, the “presentation.” Knowledge of the
that, not of the what, of the personality distinguishes the
“acquaintanceship.”” In the very assertion that one is acquainted
with a given person, or even well acquainted with him, one indi-
cates very distinctly the absence of really intimate relationships.
In such case one knows of the other only his external character-
istics. These may be only those that are on exhibit in social
functions, or they may be merely those that the other chooses to
exhibit to us. The grade of acquaintanceship denoted by the
phrase “well acquainted with another” refers at the same time
not to the essential characteristics of the other, not to that which
is most important in his inmost nature, but only to that which is
characteristic in the aspect presented to the world. On that
account, acquaintanceship in this polite sense is the peculiar seat
of “discretion.” This attitude consists by no means merely in
respect for the secret of the other — that is, for his direct volition
to conceal from us this or that. It consists rather in restraining
ourselves from acquaintance with all of those facts in the con-
ditions of another which he does not positively reveal. In this
instance the particulars in question are not in principle distinctly
defined as forbidden territory. The reference is rather to that
quite general reserve due to the total personality of another, and
to a special form of the typical antithesis of the imperatives; viz.:
what is not forbidden is permitted, and, what is not permitted is
forbidden. Accordingly, the relationships of men are differen-
tiated by the question of knowledge with reference to each other:
what is not concealed may be known, and what is not revealed
may yet not be known. The last determination corresponds to the
otherwise effective consciousness that an ideal sphere surrounds
every human being, different in various directions and toward
different persons; a sphere varying in extent, into which one may
not venture to penetrate without disturbing the personal value of
the individual. Honor locates such an area. Language indi-
cates very nicely an invasion of this sort by such phrases as
“coming too near” (zu nahe treten). The radius of that sphere,
so to speak, marks the distance which a stranger may not cross
without infringing upon another’s honor. Another sphere of
like form corresponds to that which we designate as the “signifi-
cance” (Bedeutung) of another personality. Towards the
“significant” man there exists an inner compulsion to keep one’s
distance. Even in somewhat intimate relationships with him
this constraint does not disappear without some special occa-
sion; and it is absent only in the case of those who are unable
to appreciate the “significance.” Accordingly, that zone of
separation does not exist for the valet, because for him there
is no “hero.” This, however, is the fault, not of the hero,
but of the valet. Furthermore, all intrusiveness is bound
up with evident lack of sensitiveness for the scale of signifi-
cance among people. Whoever is intrusive toward a significant
personality does not, as it might superficially appear, rate
that person high or too high; but on the contrary, he gives
evidence of lacking capacity for appropriate respect. As the
painter often emphasizes the significance of one figure in a
picture that includes many persons, by grouping the rest at a con-
siderable distance from the important figure, so there is a socio-
logical parallel in the significance of distance, which holds another
outside of a definite sphere filled by the personality with its power,
its will, and its greatness. A similar circuit, although quite differ-
ent in value, surrounds the man in the setting of his affairs and
his qualities. To penetrate this circuit by curiosity is a violation
of his personality. As material property is at the same time an
extension of the ego— property is precisely that which obeys the
will of the possessor, as, in merely graduated difference, the body
is our first “property” (Besitz)— and as on that account every
invasion of this possession is resented as a violation of the per-
sonality; so there is a spiritual private property, to invade which
signifies violation of the ego at its center. Discretion is nothing
other than the sense of justice with respect to the sphere of the
intimate contents of life. Of course, this sense is various in its
extension in connection with different personalities, just as the
sense of honor and of personal property has a quite different
radius with reference to the persons in one’s immediate circle
from that which it has toward strangers and indifferent persons.
In the case of the above-mentioned social relationships in the
narrower sense, as most simply expressed in the term “acquaint-
anceship,” we have to do immediately with a quite typical bound-
ary, beyond which perhaps no guarded secrets lie; with reference
to which, however, the outside party, in the observance of con-
ventional discretion, does not obtrude by questions or otherwise.

The question where this boundary lies is, even in principle, by
no means easy to answer. It leads rather into the finest meshes
of social forms. The right of that spiritual private property just
referred to can no more be affirmed in the absolute sense than
that of material property. We know that in higher societies the
latter, with reference to the three essential sides, creation, secur-
ity, and productiveness, never rests merely upon the personal
agency of the individual. It depends also upon the conditions
and powers of the social environment; and consequently its
limitations, whether through the prohibitions that affect the mode
of acquiring property, or through taxation, are from the begin-
ning the right of the whole. This right, however, has a still
deeper basis than the principle of service and counter-service
between society and the individual. That basis is the much more
elementary one, that the part must subject itself to so much
limitation of its self-sufficiency as is demanded by the existence
and purposes of the whole. The same principle applies to the
subjective sphere of personality. In the interest of association,
and of social coherence, each must know certain things with
reference to the other; and this other has not the right to resist
this knowledge from the moral standpoint, and to demand the
discretion of the other; that is, the undisturbed possession of his
being and consciousness, in cases in which discretion would
prejudice social interests. The business man who enters into a
contractual obligation with another, covering a long future; the
master who engages a servant; and, on the other hand, this latter,
before he agrees to the servile relationship; the superintendent
who is responsible for the promotion of a subordinate; the head
of a household who admits a new personality into her social
circle—all these must have the right to trace out or to combine
everything with reference to the past or the present of the other
parties in question, with reference to their temperament, and their
moral make-up, that would have any relation to the conclusion or
the rejection of the proposed relationship. These are quite rough
cases in which the beauty of discretion—that is, of refraining
from knowledge of everything which the other party does not
voluntarily reveal to us— must yield to the demands of practical
necessity. But in finer and less simple form, in fragmentary
passages of association and in unuttered revelations, all commerce
of men with each other rests upon the condition that each knows
something more of the other than the latter voluntarily reveals
to him; and in many respects this is of a sort the knowledge of
which, if possible, would have been prevented by the party so
revealed. While this, judged as an individual affair, may count
as indiscretion, although in the social sense it is necessary as a
condition for the existing closeness and vitality of the inter-
change, yet the legal boundary of this invasion upon the spiritual
private property of another is extremely difficult to draw. In
general, men credit themselves with the right to know everything
which, without application of external illegal means, through
purely psychological observation and reflection, it is possible to
ascertain. In point of fact, however, indiscretion exercised in
this way may be quite as violent, and morally quite as unjusti-
fiable, as listening at keyholes and prying into the letters of
strangers. To anyone with fine psychological perceptions, men
betray themselves and their inmost thoughts and characteristics
in countless fashions, not only in spite of efforts not to do so, but
often for the very reason that they anxiously attempt to guard
themselves. The greedy spying upon every unguarded word;
the boring persistence of inquiry as to the meaning of every slight
action, or tone of voice; what may be inferred from such and
such expressions ; what the blush at the mention of a given name
may betray—all this does not overstep the boundary of external
discretion ; it is entirely the labor of one’s own mind, and there-
fore apparently within the unquestionable rights of the agent.
This is all the more the case, since such misuse of psychological
superiority often occurs as a purely involuntary procedure. Very
often it i8 impossible for us to restrain our interpretation of
another, our theory of his subjective characteristics and inten-
tions. However positively an honorable person may forbid him-
self to practice such cogitation with reference to the unrevealed
traits of another, and such exploiting of his lack of foresight and
defenselessness, a knowing process often goes on with reference
to another so automatically, its result often presents itself so
suddenly and unavoidably, that the best intention can do nothing
to prevent it. Where the unquestionably forbidden may thus be
so unavoidable, the division line between the permitted and the
non-permitted is the more indefinite. To what extent discretion
must restrain itself from mental handling “ of all that which is its
own,” to what extent the interests of intercourse, the reciprocal
interdependence of the members of the same group, limits this
duty of discretion—this is a question for the answer to which
neither moral tact, nor survey of the objective relationships and
their demands, can alone be sufficient, since both factors must
rather always work together. The nicety and complexity of this
question throw it back in a much higher degree upon the respon-
sibility of the individual for decision, without final recourse to
any authoritative general norm, than is the case in connection
with a question of private property in the material sense.

In contrast with this preliminary form, or this attachment of
secrecy, in which not the attitude of the person keeping the secret,
but that of a third party, is in question, in which, in view of the
mixture of reciprocal knowledge or lack of knowledge, the
emphasis is on the amount of the former rather than on that of
the latter—in contrast with this, we come to an entirely new
variation; that is, in those relationships which do not, like those
already referred to, center around definitely circumscribed inter-
ests; but in relationships which, at least in their essential idea,
rest upon the whole extension of the personalities concerned.
The principal types in this category are friendship and mar-
riage. The ideal of friendship that has come down from antique
tradition, and singularly enough has been developed directly
in the romantic sense, aims at absolute spiritual confidence,
with the attachment that material possession also shall be a
resource common to the friends. This entrance of the entire
undivided ego into the relationship may be the more plausible
in friendship than in love, for the reason that, in the case
of friendship, the one-sided concentration upon a single element
is lacking, which is present in the other case on account
of the sensuous factor in love. To be sure, through the
circumstance that in the totality of possible grounds of attach-
ment one assumes the headship, a certain organization of the
relationship occurs, as is the case in a group with recognized
leadership. <A single strong factor of coherence often blazes out
the path along which the others, otherwise likely to have remained
latent, follow; and undeniably in the case of most men, sexual
love opens the doors of the total personality widest; indeed, in
the case of not a few, sexuality is the sole form in which they can
give their whole ego; just as, in the case of the artist, the form of
his art, whatever it may be, furnishes the only possibility of pre-
senting his entire nature. This is to be observed with special
frequency among women—to be sure, the same thing is to be
asserted in the case of the quite different “Christian love’ —
namely, that they not only, because they love, devote their life and
fortune without reserve; but that this at the same time is
chemically dissolved in love, and only and entirely in its coloring,
form, and temperature flows over upon the other. On the other
hand, however, where the feeling of love is not expansive enough,
where the other contents of the soul are not flexible enough, it
may take place, as I indicated, that the predominance of the erotic
nexus may suppress not only the practically moral, but also the
spiritual, contacts that are outside of the erotic group. Conse-
quently friendship, in which this intensity, but also this
inequality of devotion, is lacking, may more easily attach the
whole person to the whole person, may more easily break up
the reserves of the soul, not indeed by so impulsive a process,
but throughout a wider area and during a longer succession.
This complete intimacy of confidence probably becomes, with
the changing differentiation of men, more and more difficult.
Perhaps the modern man has too much to conceal to make a
friendship in the ancient sense possible; perhaps personalities
also, except in very early years, are too peculiarly individualized
for the complete reciprocality of understanding, to which
always so much divination and productive phantasy are essen-
tial. It appears that, for this reason, the modern type of
feeling inclines more to differentiated friendships; that is, to
those which have their territory only upon one side of the person-
ality at a time, and in which the rest of the personality plays no
part. Thus a quite special type of friendship emerges. For our
problem, namely, the degree of intrusion or of reserve within the
friendly relationship, this type is of the highest significance.
These differentiated friendships, which bind us to one man from
the side of sympathy, to another from the side of intellectual com-
munity, to a third on account of religious impulses, to a fourth
because of common experiences, present, in connection with the
problem of discretion, or self-revelation and self-concealment, a
quite peculiar synthesis. They demand that the friends recip-
rocally refrain from obtruding themselves into the range of
interests and feelings not included in the special relationship in
each case. Failure to observe this condition would seriously dis-
turb reciprocal understanding. But the relationship thus bounded
and circumscribed by discretion nevertheless has its sources at
the center of the whole personality, in spite of the fact that it
expresses itself only in a single segment of its periphery. It
leads ideally toward the same depths of sentiment, and to the
same capacity to sacrifice, which undifferentiated epochs and per-
sons associate only with a community of the total circumference
of life, with no question about reserves and discretions.

Much more difficult is measurement of self-revelation and
reserve, with their correlates intrusiveness and discretion, in the
case of marriage. In this relationship these forms are among the
universal problems of the highest importance for the sociology of
intimate associations. We are confronted with the questions,
whether the maximum of reciprocality is attained in a relation-
ship in which the personalities entirely resign to each other their
separate existence, or quite the contrary, through a certain
reserve — whether they do not in a certain qualitative way belong
to each other more if they belong to each other less quantitatively.
These questions of ratio can of course, at the outset, be answered
only with the further question: How is the boundary to be
drawn, within the whole area of a person’s potential communi-
cability, at which ultimately the reserve and the respect of another
are to begin? The advantage of modern marriage — which, to
be sure, makes both questions answerable only one case at a time
—is that this boundary is not from the start determined, as was
the case in earlier civilizations. In these other civilizations mar-
riage is, in principle, as a rule, not an erotic phenomenon, but
merely a social-economic institution. The satisfaction of the
instincts of love is only accidentally connected with it. With
certain exceptions, the marriage is not on grounds of individual
attraction, but rather of family policy, labor relationships, or
desire for descendants. The Greeks, for example, carried this
institution to the most extreme differentiation. Thus Demos-
thenes said: “We have hetaerae for our pleasure, concubines
for our daily needs, but wives to give us lawful children and to
care for the interior of the house.”’ The same tendency to exclude
from the community of marriage, a priori, certain defined life-
contents, and by means of super-individual provisions, appears
in the variations in the forms of marriage to be found in one and
the same people, with possibility of choice in advance on the part
of those contracting marriages. These forms are differentiated
in various ways with reference to the economic, religious, legal,
and other interests connected with the family. We might cite
many nature-peoples, the Indians, the Romans, etc. No one will,
of course, fail to observe that, also within modern life, marriage
is, probably in the majority of cases, contracted from conventional
or material motives; nevertheless, entirely apart from the fre-
quency of its realization, the sociological idea of modern marriage
is the community of all life-contents, in so far as they immediately,
and through their effects, determine the value and the destiny of
the personalities. Moreover, the prejudice of this ideal demand
is by no means ineffective. It has often enough given place and
stimulus for developing an originally very incomplete reciproca-
tion into an increasingly comprehensive attachment. But, while
the very indeterminateness of this process is the vehicle of the
happiness and the essential vitality of the relationship, its reversal
usually brings severe disappointments. If, for example, absolute
unity is from the beginning anticipated, if demand and satisfac-
tion recognize no sort of reserve, not even that which for all fine
and deep natures must always remain in the hidden recesses of
the soul, although they may think they open themselves entirely
to each other—in such cases the reaction and disillusionment
must come sooner or later.

In marriage, as in free relationships of analogous types, the
temptation is very natural to open oneself to the other at the
outset without limit; to abandon the last reserve of the soul
equally with those of the body, and thus to lose oneself completely
in another. This, however, usually threatens the future of the
relationship. Only those people can without danger give them-
selves entirely to each other who cannot possibly give themselves
entirely, because the wealth of their soul rests in constant pro-
gressive development, which follows every devotion immediately
with the growth of new treasures. Complete devotion is safe
only in the case of those people who have an inexhaustible fund
of latent spiritual riches, and therefore can no more alienate them
in a single confidence than a tree can give up the fruits of next
year by letting go what it produces at the present moment. The
case is quite different, however, with those people who, so to
speak, draw from their capital all their betrayals of feeling and
the revelations of their inner life; in whose case there is no
further source from which to derive those elements which should
not be revealed, and which are not to be disjoined from the
essential ego. In such cases it is highly probable that the parties
to the confidence will one day face each other empty-handed; that
the Dionysian free-heartedness may leave behind a poverty which
—unjustly, but not on that account with less bitterness — may so
react as even to charge the enjoyed devotion with deception. We
are so constituted that we not merely, as was remarked, need a
certain proportion of truth and error as the basis of our life, but
also a similar mixture of definiteness and indefiniteness in the
picture of our life-elements. That which we can see through
plainly to its last ground shows us therewith the limit of its
attraction, and forbids our phantasy to do its utmost in adding to
the reality. For this loss no literal reality can compensate us,
because the action of the imagination of which we are deprived is
self-activity, which cannot permanently be displaced in value by
any receptivity and enjoyment. Our friend should not only give
us a cumulative gift, but also the possibility of conferring gifts
upon him, with hopes and idealizations, with concealed beauties
and charms unknown even to himself. The manner, however, in
which we- dispose of all this, produced by ourselves, but for his
sake, is the vague horizon of his personality, the intermediate
zone in which faith takes the place of knowledge. It must be
observed that we have here to do by no means with mere illu-
sions, or with optimistic or infatuated self-deception. The fact
is rather that, if the utmost attractiveness of another person is to
be preserved for us, it must be presented to us in part in the form
of vagueness or impenetrability. This is the only substitute
which the great majority of people can offer for that attractive
value which the small minority possess through the inexhausti-
bility of their inner life and growth. The mere fact of absolute
understanding, of having accomplished psychological exhaustion
of the contents of relationship with another, produces a feeling of
insipidity, even if there is no reaction from previous exaltation;
it cripples the vitality of the relationship, and gives to its con-
tinuance an appearance of utter futility. This is the danger of
that unbroken, and in a more than external sense shameless,
dedication to which the unrestricted possibilities of intimate rela-
tionships seduce, which indeed is easily regarded as a species of
obligation in those relationships. Because of this absence of
reciprocal discretion, on the side of receiving as well as of giving,
many marriages are failures. That is, they degenerate into
vulgar habit, utterly bereft of charm, into a matter-of-course
which retains no room for surprises. The fruitful depth of rela-
tionships which, behind every latest revelation, implies the still
unrevealed, which also stimulates anew every day to gain what is
already possessed, is merely the reward of that tenderness and
self-control which, even in the closest relationship, comprehending
the whole person, still respect the inner private property, which
hold the right of questioning to be limited by a right of secrecy.

All these combinations are characterized sociologically by the
fact that the secret of the one party is to a certain extent recog-
nized by the other, and the intentionally or unintentionally con-
cealed is intentionally or unintentionally respected. The
intention of the concealment assumes, however, a quite different
intensity so soon as it is confronted by a purpose of discovery.
Thereupon follows that purposeful concealment, that aggressive
defense, so to speak, against the other party, which we call
secrecy in the most real sense. Secrecy in this sense— i. e., which
is effective through negative or positive means of concealment —
is one of the greatest accomplishments of humanity. In contrast
with the juvenile condition in which every mental picture is at
once revealed, every undertaking is open to everyone’s view,
secrecy procures enormous extension of life, because with pub-
licity many sorts of purposes could never arrive at realization.
Secrecy secures, so to speak, the possibility of a second world
alongside of the obvious world, and the latter is most strenuously
affected by the former. Every relationship between two indi-
viduals or two groups will be characterized by the ratio of secrecy
that is involved in it. Even when one of the parties does not
notice the secret factor, yet the attitude of the concealer, and
consequently the whole relationship, will be modified by it. The
historical development of society is in many respects characterized
by the fact that what was formerly public passes under the pro-
tection of secrecy, and that, on the contrary, what was formerly
secret ceases to require such protection and proclaims itself. This
is analogous with that other evolution of mind in which move-
ments at first executed consciously become unconsciously me-
chanical, and, on the other hand, what was unconscious and
instinctive rises into the light of consciousness. How this
development is distributed over the various formations of private
and public life, how the evolution proceeds toward better-adapted
conditions, because, on the one hand, secrecy that is awkward
and undifferentiated is often far too widely extended, while, on
the other hand, in many respects the usefulness of secrecy is dis-
covered very late; how the quantum of secrecy has variously
modified consequences in accordance with the importance or
indifference of its content —all this, merely in its form as ques-
tions, throws a flow of light upon the significance of secrecy for
the structure of human reciprocities. In this connection we must
not allow ourselves to be deceived by the manifold ethical nega-
tiveness of secrecy. Secrecy is a universal sociological form,
which, as such, has nothing to do with the moral valuations of
its contents. On the one hand, secrecy may embrace the
highest values: the refined shame of the lofty spirit, which covers
up precisely its best, that it may not seem to seek its reward in
praise or wage; for after such payment one retains the reward,
but no longer the real value itself. On the other hand, secrecy is
not in immediate interdependence with evil, but evil with secrecy.
For obvious reasons, the immoral hides itself, even when its
content encounters no social penalty, as, for example, many
sexual faults. The essentially isolating effect of immorality as
such, entirely apart from all primary social repulsion, is actual
and important. Secrecy is, among other things, also the
sociological expression of moral badness, although the classi-
cal aphorism, “ No one is so bad that he also wants to seem bad,”
takes issue with the facts. Obstinacy and cynicism may often
enough stand in the way of disguising the badness. They may
even exploit it for magnifying the personality in the judgment of
others, to the degree that sometimes immoralities which do not
exist are seized upon as material for self-advertising.

The application of secrecy as a sociological technique, as a
form of commerce without which, in view of our social environ-
ment, certain purposes could not be attained, is evident without
further discussion. Not so evident are the charms and the values
which it possesses over and above its significance as a means, the
peculiar attraction of the relation which is mysterious in form,
regardless of its accidental content. In the first place, the strongly
accentuated exclusion of all not within the circle of secrecy results
in a correspondingly accentuated feeling of personal possession.
For many natures possession acquires its proper significance, not
from the mere fact of having, but besides that there must be the
consciousness that others must forego the possession. Evidently
this fact has its roots in our stimulability by contrast. Moreover,
since exclusion of others from a possession may occur especially
in the case of high values, the reverse is psychologically very
natural, viz., that what is withheld from the many appears to
have a special value. Accordingly, subjective possessions of the
most various sorts acquire a decisive accentuation of value through
the form of secrecy, in which the substantial significance of the
facts concealed often enough falls into a significance entirely sub-
ordinate to the fact that others are excluded from knowing them.
Among children a pride and self-glory often bases itself on the
fact that the one can say to the others: “I know something that
you don’t know.” This is carried to such a degree that it becomes
a formal means of swaggering on the one hand, and of de-classing
on the other. This occurs even when it is a pure fiction, and no
secret exists. From the narrowest to the widest relationships,
there are exhibitions of this jealousy about knowing something
that is concealed from others. The sittings of the English Parlia-
ment were long secret, and even in the reign of George III
reports of them in the press were liable to criminal penalties as
violations of parliamentary privilege. Secrecy gives the person
enshrouded by it an exceptional position; it works as a stimulus
of purely social derivation, which is in principle quite independent
of its casual content, but is naturally heightened in the degree in
which the exclusively possessed secret is significant and compre-
hensive. There is also in this connection an inverse phenomenon,
analogous with the one just mentioned. Every superior person-
ality, and every superior performance, has, for the average of
mankind, something mysterious. To be sure, all human being
and doing spring from inexplicable forces. Nevertheless, within
levels of similarity in quality and value, this fact does not make
the one person a problem to another, especially because in respect
to this equality a certain immediate understanding exists which
is not a special function of the intellect. If there is essential
inequality, this understanding cannot be reached, and in the form
of specific divergence the general mysteriousness will be effective
—somewhat as one who always lives in the same locality may
never encounter the problem of the influence of the environment,
which influence, however, may obtrude itself upon him so soon as
he changes his environment, and the contrast in the reaction of
feeling upon the life-conditions calls his attention to this causal
factor in the situation. Out of this secrecy, which throws a
shadow over all that is deep and significant, grows the logically
fallacious, but typical, error, that everything secret is something
essential and significant. The natural impulse to idealization, and
the natural timidity of men, operate to one and the same end in
the presence of secrecy; viz., to heighten it by phantasy, and to
distinguish it by a degree of attention that published reality could
not command.

Singularly enough, these attractions of secrecy enter into
combination with those of its logical opposite; viz., treason or
betrayal of secrets, which are evidently no less sociological in
their nature. Secrecy involves a tension which, at the moment of
revelation, finds its release. This constitutes the climax in the
development of the secret; in it the whole charm of secrecy con-
centrates and rises to its highest pitch — just as the moment of the
disappearance of an object brings out the feeling of its value in
the most intense degree. The sense of power connected with
possession of money is most completely and greedily concentrated
for the soul of the spendthrift at the moment at which this power
slips from his hands. Secrecy also is sustained by the conscious-
ness that it might be exploited, and therefore confers power to
modify fortunes, to produce surprises, joys, and calamities, even
if the latter be only misfortunes to ourselves. Hence the possi-
bility and the temptation of treachery plays around the secret, and
the external danger of being discovered is interwoven with the
internal danger of self-discovery, which has the fascination of the
brink of a precipice. Secrecy sets barriers between men, but at
the same time offers the seductive temptation to break through the
barriers by gossip or confession. This temptation accompanies
the psychical life of the secret like an overtone. Hence the socio-
logical significance of the secret, its practical measure, and the
mode of its workings must be found in the capacity or the inclina-
tion of the initiated to keep the secret to himself, or in his resist-
ance or weakness relative to the temptation to betrayal. From the
play of these two interests, in concealment and in revelation,
spring shadings and fortunes of human reciprocities throughout
their whole range. If, according to our previous analysis, every
human relationship has, as one of its traits, the degree of secrecy
within or around it, it follows that the further development of the
relationship in this respect depends on the combining proportions
of the retentive and the communicative energies—the former
sustained by the practical interest and the formal attractiveness
of secrecy as such, the latter by inability to endure longer the
tension of reticence, and by the superiority which is latent, so to
speak, in secrecy, but which is actualized for the feelings only at
the moment of revelation, and often also, on the other hand, by
the joy of confession, which may contain that sense of power in
negative and perverted form, as self-abasement and contrition.

All these factors, which determine the sociological réle of
secrecy, are of individualistic nature, but the ratio in which the
qualities and the complications of personalities form secrets.
depends at the same time upon the social structure upon which its
life rests. In this connection the decisive element is that the
secret is an individualizing factor of the first rank, and that in the
typical double rdle; i. e., social relationships characterized by a
large measure of personal differentiation permit and promote
secrecy in a high degree, while, conversely, secrecy serves and
intensifies such differentiation. In a small and restricted circuit,
construction and preservation of secrets are technically difficult
from the fact that each is too close to the circumstances of each,
and that the frequency and intimacy of contacts carry with them
too great temptation to disclose what might otherwise be hidden.
But in this case there is no need of secrecy in a high degree,
because this social formation usually tends to level its members,
and every peculiarity of being, acting, or possessing the persist-
ence of which requires secrecy is abhorrent to it. That all this
changes to its opposite in case of large widening of the circle is
a matter-of-course. In this connection, as in so many other par-
ticulars, the facts of monetary relationships reveal most distinctly
the specific traits of the large circle. Since transfers of economic
values have occurred principally by means of money, an otherwise
unattainable secrecy is possible in such transactions. Three pecu-
liarities of the money form of values are here important: first,
its compressibility, by virtue of which it is possible to make a man
rich by slipping into his hand a check without attracting attention ;
second, its abstractness and absence of qualitative character, in
consequence of which numberless sorts of acquisitions and trans-
fers of possessions may be covered up and guarded from publicity
in a fashion impossible so long as values could be possessed only
as extended, tangible objects; third, its long-distance effective.
ness, by virtue of which we may invest it in the most widely
removed and constantly changing values, and thus withdraw it
utterly from the view of our nearest neighbors. These facilities
of dissimulation which inhere in the degree of extension in the
use of money, and which disclose their dangers particularly in
dealings with foreign money, have called forth, as protective pro-
visions, publicity of the financial operations of corporations.
This points to a closer definition of the formula of evolution dis-
cussed above; viz., that throughout the form of secrecy there
occurs a permanent in- and out-flow of content, in which what is
originally open becomes secret, and what was originally concealed
throws off its mystery. Thus we might arrive at the paradoxical
idea that, under otherwise like circumstances, human associations
require a definite ratio of secrecy which merely changes its
objects; letting go of one, it seizes another, and in the course of
this exchange it keeps its quantum unvaried. We may even fill
out this general scheme somewhat more exactly. It appears that
with increasing telic characteristics of culture the affairs of
people at large become more and more public, those of individuals
more and more secret. In less developed conditions, as observed
above, the circumstances of individual persons cannot protect
themselves in the same degree from reciprocal prying and inter-
fering as within modern types of life, particularly those that have
developed in large cities, where we find a quite new degree of
reserve and discretion. On the other hand, the public function-
aries in undeveloped states envelop themselves in a mystical
authority, while in maturer and wider relations, through exten-
sion of the range of their prerogatives, through the objectivity of
their technique, through the distance that separates them from
most of the individuals, a security and a dignity accrue to them
which are compatible with publicity of their behavior. That
earlier secrecy of public functions, however, betrayed its essential
contradictoriness in begetting at once the counter-movements of
treachery, on the one hand, and of espionage, on the other. As
late as the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, governments
most anxiously covered up the amounts of public debts, the condi-
tions of taxation, and the size of their armies. In consequence of
this, ambassadors often had nothing better to do than to act as
informers, to get possession of the contents of letters, and to pre-
vail upon persons who were acquainted with valuable facts, even
down to servants, to tattle their secrets.2_ In the nineteenth cen-
tury, however, publicity takes possession of national affairs to
such an extent that the governments themselves publish the official
data without concealing, which no government would earlier

? This counter-movement occurs also in the reverse direction. It has been
observed, in connection with the history of the English court, that the actual
court cabals, the secret whisperings, the organized intrigues, do not spring up
under despotism, but only after the king has constitutional advisers, when the
government is to that extent a system open to view. After that time —and this
applies especially since Edward I] —the king begins to form an unofficial, and
at the same time subterranean, circle of advisers, in contrast with the ministers
somehow forced upon him. This body brings into existence, within itself, and
through endeavors to join it, a chain of concealments and conspiracies.
have thought possible. Accordingly, politics, administration,
justice, have lost their secrecy and inaccessibility in precisely the
degree in which the individual has gained possibility of more com-
plete privacy, since modern life has elaborated a technique for
isolation of the affairs of individuals, within the crowded condi-
tions of great cities, possible in former times only by means of
spatial separation.

To what extent this development is to be regarded as advan-
tageous depends upon social standards of value. Democracies are
bound to regard publicity as the condition desirable in itself.
This follows from the fundamental idea that each should be
informed about all the relationships and occurrences with which
he is concerned, since this is a condition of his doing his part with
reference to them, and every community of knowledge contains
also the psychological stimulation to community of action. It is
immaterial whether this conclusion is entirely binding. If an
objective controlling structure has been built up, beyond the
individual interests, but nevertheless to their advantage, such
a structure may very well, by virtue of its formal inde-
pendence, have a rightful claim to carry on a certain amount
of secret functioning without prejudice to its public char-
acter, so far as real consideration of the interests of all is con-
cerned. A logical connection, therefore, which would necessitate
the judgment of superior worth in favor of the condition of pub-
licity, does not exist. On the other hand, the universal scheme of
cultural differentiation puts in an appearance here: that which
pertains to the public becomes more public, that which belongs to
the individual becomes more private. Moreover, this historical
development brings out the deeper real significance: that which
in its nature is public, which in its content concerns all, becomes
also externally, in its sociological form, more and more public;
while that which in its inmost nature refers to the self alone —
that is, the centripetal affairs of the individual — must also gain
in sociological position a more and more private character, a
more decisive possibility of remaining secret.

While secrecy, therefore, is a sociological ordination which
characterizes the reciprocal relation of group elements, or rather
in connection with other forms of reaction constitutes this total
relation, it may further, with the formation of “secret societies,”
extend itself over the group as a whole. So long as the being,
doing, and having of an individual persist as a secret, his general
sociological significance is isolation, antithesis, egoistic indi-
vidualization. In this case the sociological meaning of the secrecy
is external; as relationship of him who has the secret to him who
does not have it. So soon, however, as a group as such seizes
upon secrecy as its form of existence, the sociological meaning
of the secrecy becomes internal. It now determines the reciprocal
relations of those who possess the secret in common. Since,
however, that relation of exclusion toward the uninitiated exists
here also with its special gradations, the sociology of secret
societies presents the complicated problem of ascertaining the
immanent forms of a group which are determined by attitudes of
secrecy on the part of the same toward other elements. I do not
preface this part of the discussion with a systematic classification
of secret societies, which would have only an external historical
interest. The essential categories will appear at once.

The first internal relation that is essential to a secret society is
the reciprocal confidence of its members. This element is needed
in a peculiar degree, because the purpose of maintaining the
secrecy is, first of all, protection. Most radical of all the pro-
tective provisions is certainly that of invisibility. At this point
the secret society is distinguished in principle from the individual
who seeks the protection of secrecy. This can be realized only
with respect to specific designs or conditions; as a whole, the
individual may hide himself temporarily, he may absent himself
from a given portion of space; but, disregarding wholly abstruse
combinations, his existence cannot be a secret. In the case of a
societary unity, on the contrary, this is entirely possible. Its ele-
ments may live in the most frequent commerce, but that they com-
pose a society —a conspiracy, or a band of criminals, a religious
conventicle, or an association for sexual extravagances— may
remain essentially and permanently a secret. This type, in which
not the individuals but their combination is concealed, is sharply
distinguished from the others, in which the social formation is
unequivocally known, but the membership, or the purpose, or the
special conditions of the combination are secrets; as, for instance,
many secret bodies among the nature peoples, or the Freemasons.
The form of secrecy obviously does not afford to the latter types
the same unlimited protection as to the former, since what is
known about them always affords a point of attack for further
intrusion. On the other hand, these relatively secret societies
always have the advantage of a certain variability. Because they
are from the start arranged on the basis of a certain degree of
publicity, it is easier for them to accommodate themselves to fur-
ther betrayals than for those that are as societies entirely
unavowed. The first discovery very often destroys the latter,
because their secret is apt to face the alternative, whole or not at
all. It is the weakness of secret societies that secrets do not
remain permanently guarded. Hence we say with truth: “A
secret that two know is no longer a secret.” Consequently, the
protection that such societies afford is in its nature, to be sure,
absolute, but it is only temporary, and, for contents of positive
social value, their commitment to the care of secret societies is in
fact a transitional condition, which they no longer need after they
have developed a certain degree of strength. Secrecy is finally
analogous only with the protection which one secures by evading
interruptions. It consequently serves only provisionally, until
strength may be developed to cope with interruptions. Under
these circumstances the secret society is the appropriate social
form for contents which are at an immature stage of develop-
ment, and thus in a condition peculiarly liable to injury from
opposing interests. Youthful knowledge, religion, morality,
party, is often weak and in need of defense. Hence each may
find a recourse in concealment. Hence also there is a predestina-
tion of secret societies for periods in which new life-contents come
into existence in spite of the opposition of the powers that be.
The eighteenth century affords abundant illustrations. For
instance, to cite only one example, the elements of the liberal party
were present in Germany at that time. Their emergence in a
permanent political structure was postponed by the power of the
civic conditions. Accordingly, the secret association was the
form in which the germs could be protected and cultivated, as in
the case of the orders of the I/lwminati. The same sort of protec-
tion which secrecy affords to ascending movements is also secured
from it during their decline. Refuge in secrecy is a ready resort
in the case of social endeavors and forces that are likely to be
displaced by innovation. Secrecy is thus, so to speak, a transition
stadium between being and not-being. As the suppression of the
German communal associations began to occur, at the close of the
Middle Ages, through the increasing power of the central gov-
ernments, a wide-reaching secret life developed within these
organizations. It was characterized by hidden assemblies and
conferences, by secret enforcement of law, and by violence —
somewhat as animals seek the protection of concealment when
near death. This double function of secrecy as a form of pro-
tection, to afford an intermediate station equally for progressing
and for decaying powers, is perhaps most obvious in the case of
religious movements. So long as the Christian communities were
persecuted by the state, they were often obliged to withdraw their
meetings, their worship, their whole existence, from public view.
So soon, however, as Christianity had become the state religion,
nothing was left for the adherents of persecuted, dying paganism
than the same hiding of its cultus which it had previously forced
upon the new faith. As a general proposition, the secret society
emerges everywhere as correlate of despotism and of police con-
trol. It acts as protection alike of defense and of offense against
the violent pressure of central powers. This is true, not alone in
political relations, but in the same way within the church, the
school, and the family.

Corresponding with this protective character of the secret
society, as an external quality, is, as already observed, the inner
quality of reciprocal confidence between the members. This is,
moreover, a quite specific type of confidence, viz., in the ability to
preserve silence. Social unities may rest, so far as their content
is concerned, upon many sorts of presumption about grounds of
confidence. They may trust, for example, to the motive of busi-
ness interest, or to religious conviction, to courage, or to love, to
the high moral tone, or — in the case of criminal combinations —
to the radical break with moral imperatives. When the society
becomes secret, however, there is added to the confidence deter-
mined by the peculiar purposes of the society the further formal
confidence in ability to keep still—evidently a faith in the per-
sonality, which has, sociologically, a more abstract character than
any other, because every possible common interest may be sub-
sumed under it. More than that, exceptions excluded, no kind of
confidence requires so unbroken subjective renewal; for when the
uncertainty in question is faith in attachment or energy, in moral-
ity or intelligence, in sense of honor or tact, facts are much more
likely to be observable which will objectively establish the degree
of confidence, since they will reduce the probability of deception
to a minimum. The probability of betrayal, however, is subject
to the imprudence of a moment, the weakness or the agitation of a
mood, the perhaps unconscious shading of an accentuation. The
keeping of the secret is something so unstable, the temptations
to betrayal are so manifold, in many cases such a continuous
path leads from secretiveness to indiscretion, that unlimited faith
in the former contains an incomparable preponderance of the sub-
jective factor. For this reason those secret societies whose rudi-
mentary forms begin with the secret shared by two, and whose
enormous extension through all times and places has not even yet
been appreciated, even quantitatively——such societies have
exerted a highly efficient disciplinary influence upon moral
accountability among men. For there resides in confidence of
men toward each other as high moral value as in the companion
fact that this confidence is justified. Perhaps the former phe-
nomenon is freer and more creditable, since a confidence reposed
in us amounts almost to a constraining prejudice, and to dis-
appoint it requires badness of a positive type. On the contrary,
we “give” our faith in another. It cannot be delivered on
demand, in the same degree in which it can be realized when
spontaneously offered.

Meanwhile the secret societies naturally seek means psycho-
logically to promote that secretiveness which cannot be directly
forced. The oath, and threats of penalties, are here in the fore-
ground and need no discussion. More interesting is the fre-
quently encountered technique for teaching novices the art of
silence. In view of the above-suggested difficulties of guarding
the tongue absolutely, in view especially of the tell-tale connection
which exists on primitive social planes between thought and
expression — among children and many nature peoples thinking
and speaking are almost one—there is need at the outset of
learning silence once for all, before silence about any particular
matter can be expected. Accordingly, we hear of a secret order
in the Molucca Islands in which not merely silence about his
experiences during initiation is enjoined upon the candidate, bu
for weeks he is not permitted to exchange a word on any subject
with anybody, even in his own family. In this case we certainly
have the operation not only of the educational factor of entire
silence, but it corresponds with the psychical undifferentiation o
this cultural level, to forbid speech in general in a period in
which some particular silence must be insured. This is somewhat
analogous with the fact that immature peoples easily employ the
death penalty, where later for partial sins a partial punishmen
would be inflicted, or with the fact that similar peoples are often
moved to offer a quite disproportionate fraction of their posses-
sions for something that momentarily strikes their fancy. It is
the specific “incapacity” (Ungeschicklichkeit) which advertises
itself in all this; for its essence consists in its incompetence to
undertake the particular sort of inhibition appropriate to
endeavors after a strictly defined end. The unskilled person
moves his whole arm where for his purpose it would be enough to
move only two fingers, the whole body when a precisely differ-
entiated movement of the arm would be indicated. In like man-
ner, in the particular types of cases which we are considering, the
preponderance of psychical commerce, which can be a matter of
logical and actual thought-exchange only upon a higher cul-
tural level, both enormously increases the danger of volubility,
and, on the other hand, leads far beyond prohibition of the
specific act which would embarrass its purposes, and puts a
ban on the whole function of which such act would be an
incident. When, on the other hand, the secret society of the
Pythagoreans prescribed silence for the novice during a number
of years, it is probable that the aim went beyond mere peda-
gogical discipline of the members in the art of silence, not, how-
ever, with special reference to the clumsiness just alluded to, but
rather with the aim of extending the differentiated purpose in its
own peculiar direction; that is, the aim was not only to secure
silence about specific things, but through this particular discipline
the adept should acquire power to control himself in general.
The society aimed at severe self-discipline and schematic purity
of life, and whoever succeeded in keeping silence for years was
supposed to be armed against seductions in other directions.
Another means of placing reticence upon an objective basis
was employed by the Gallic druids. The content of their secrets
was deposited chiefly in spiritual songs, which every druid had
to commit to memory. This was so arranged, however — espe-
cially by prohibition of putting the songs in writing—that an
inordinate period was necessary for the purpose, in some cases
twenty years. Through this long duration of pupilage, before
anything considerable could be acquired which could possibly be
betrayed, there grew up a gradual habit of reticence. The undis-
ciplined mind was not suddenly assailed by the temptation to
divulge what it knew. There was opportunity for gradual
adaptation to the duty of reticence. The other regulation, that
the songs should not be written down, had much more thorough-
going sociological structural relations. It was more than a pro-
tective provision against revelation of the secrets. The necessity
of depending upon tradition from person to person, and the fact
that the spring of knowledge flowed only from within the society,
not from an objective piece of literature — this attached the indi-
vidual member with unique intimacy to the community. It gave
him the feeling that if he were detached from this substance, he
would lose his own, and would never recover it elsewhere. We
have perhaps not yet sufficiently observed to what extent, in a
more advanced cultural stage, the objectifications of intellectual
labors affect the capacity of the individual to assert inde-
pendence. So long as direct tradition, individual instruction,
and more than all the setting up of norms by personal authori-
ties, still determine the spiritual life of the individual, he is
solidly merged in the environing, living group. This group
alone gives him the possibility of a fulfilled and spiritual exist-
ence. The direction of those connective tissues through which
the contents of his life come to him, run perceptibly at every
moment only between his social miliew and himself. So soon,
however, as the labor of the group has capitalized its out-
put in the form of literature, in visible works, and in permanent
examples, the former immediate flow of vital fluid between
the actual group and the individual member is interrupted.
The life-process of the latter no longer binds him continuously
and without competition to the former. Instead of that,
he can now sustain himself from objective sources, not depend-
ent upon the actual presence of former authoratative persons.
There is relatively little efficacy in the fact that this now
accumulated stock has come from the processes of the social mind.
In the first place, it is often the labor of far remote generations
quite unconnected with the individual’s feeling of present values,
which is crystallized in that supply. But, more than that, it is
before all else the form of the objectivity of this supply, its
detachment from the subjective personality, by virtue of which
there is opened to the individual a super-social natural source, and
his mental content becomes much more notably dependent, in
kind and degree, upon his powers of appropriation than upon the
conventionally furnished ideas. The peculiar intimacy of asso-
ciation within the secret society, of which more must ‘be said
later, and which gets its place among the categories of the feelings
from the traits of the specific “confidence” (Vertrawen) char-
acteristic of the order, in consequence of what has been said very
naturally avoids committing the contents of its mysteries to writ-
ing, when tradition of spiritual contents is the minor aim of the
association.

In connection with these questions about the technique of
secrecy, it is not to be forgotten that concealment is by no means
the only means under whose protection promotion of the material
interests of the community is attempted. The facts are in many
ways the reverse. The structure of the group is often with the
direct view to assurance of keeping certain subjects from general
knowledge. This is the case with those peculiar types of secret
society whose substance is an esoteric doctrine, a theoretical, mys-
tical, religious gnosis. In this case secrecy is the sociological end-
unto-itself. The issue turns upon a body of doctrine to be kept
from publicity. The initiated constitute a community for the pur-
pose of mutual guarantee of secrecy. If these initiates were
merely a total of personalities not interdependent, the secret would
soon be lost. Socialization affords to each of these individuals a
psychological recourse for strengthening him against temptations
to divulge the secret. While secrecy, as I have shown, works
toward isolation and individualization, socialization is a counter-
active factor. If this is in general the sociological significance of
the secret society, its most clear emergence is in the case of those
orders characterized above, in which secrecy is not a mere socio-
logical technique, but socialization is a technique for better pro-
tection of the secrecy, in the same way that the oath and total
silence, that threats and progressive initiation of the novices, serve
the same purpose. All species of socialization shuffle the indi-
vidualizing and the socializing needs back and forth within their
forms, and even within their contents, as though promotion of a
stable combining proportion were satisfied by introduction of
quantities always qualitatively changing. Thus the secret society
counterbalances the separatistic factor which is peculiar to every
secret by the very fact that it is society.

Secrecy and individualistic separateness are so decidedly corre-
latives that with reference to secrecy socialization may play two
quite antithetical réles. It can, in the first place, as just pointed
out, be directly sought, to the end that during the subsequent con-
tinuance of the secrecy its isolating tendency may be in part
counteracted, that within the secret order the impulse toward
community may be satisfied, while it is vetoed with reference to
the rest of the world. On the other hand, however, secrecy in
principle loses relative significance in cases where the particular-
ization is in principle rejected. Freemasonry, for example,
insists that it purposes to become the most universal society, “ the
union of unions,” the only one that repudiates every particularistic
character and aims to appropriate as its material exclusively that
which is common to all good men. Hand in hand with this
increasingly definite tendency there grows up indifference toward
the element of secrecy on the part of the lodges, its restriction to
the merely formal externalities. That secrecy is now promoted
by socialization, and now abolished by it, is thus by no means a
contradiction. These are merely diverse forms in which its con-
nection with individualization expresses itself — somewhat as the
interdependence of weakness and fear shows itself both in the fact
that the weak seek social attachments in order to protect them-
selves, and in the fact that they avoid social relations when they
encounter greater dangers within them than in isolation.

The above-mentioned gradual initiation of the members
belongs, moreover, to a very far-reaching and widely ramifying
division of sociological forms, within which secret societies are
marked in a special way. It is the principle of the hierarchy, of
graded articulation, of the elements of a society. The refinement
and the systematization with which secret societies particularly
work out their division of labor and the grading of their members,
go along with another trait to be discussed presently; that is, with
their energetic consciousness of their life. This life substitutes
for the organically more instinctive forces an incessantly regu-
lating will; for growth from within, constructive purposefulness.
This rationalistic factor in their upbuilding cannot express itself
more distinctly than in their carefully considered and clear-cut
architecture. I cite as example the structure of the Czechic secret
order, Omladina, which was organized on the model of a group
of the Carbonari, and became known in consequence of a judicial
process in 1893. The leaders of the Omladina are divided into
“thumbs” and “fingers.” In secret session a “thumb” is chosen
by the members. He selects four “fingers.” The latter then
choose another “ thumb,” and this second “thumb” presents him-
self to the first “thumb.” The second “thumb” proceeds to
choose four more “fingers”; these, another “thumb;” and so
the articulation continues. The first “thumb” knows all the
other “thumbs,” but the remaining “thumbs” do not know each
other. Of the “fingers” only those four know each other who
are subordinate to one and the same “thumb.” All transactions
of the Omladina are conducted by the first “thumb,” the “ dicta-
tor.” He informs the other “thumbs” of all proposed under-
takings. The “thumbs” then issue orders to their respective
subordinates, the “fingers.” The latter in turn instruct the mem-
bers of the Omladina assigned to each. The circumstance that
the secret society must be built up from its base by calculation and
conscious volition evidently affords free play for the peculiar
passion which is the natural accompaniment of such arbitrary
processes of construction, such foreordaining programs. All
schematology —of science, of conduct, of society—contains a
reserved power of compulsion. It subjects a material which is
outside of thought to a form which thought has cast. If this is
true of all attempts to organize groups according to a priori prin-
ciples, it is true in the highest degree of the secret society, which
does not grow, which is built by design, which has to reckon with
a smaller quantum of ready-made building material than any
despotic or socialistic scheme. Joined to the interest in making
plans, and the constructive impulse, which are in themselves com-
pelling forces, we have in the organization of a society in accord-
ance with a preconceived outline, with fixed positions and ranks,
the special stimulus of exercising a decisive influence over a
future and ideally submissive circle of human beings. This
impulse is decisively separated sometimes from every sort of
utility, and revels in utterly fantastic construction of hierarchies.
Thus, for example, in the “high degrees” of degenerate Free-
masonry. For purposes of illustration I call attention to merely
a few details from the “Order of the African Master-Builders.”
It came into existence in Germany and France after the middle of
the eighteenth century, and although it was constructed according
to the principles of the Masonic order, it aimed to destroy Free-
masonry. The government of the very small society was
administered by fifteen officials: summus register, summi locum
tenentes, prior, sub-prior, magister, etc. The degrees of the order
were seven: the Scottish Apprentices, the Scottish Brothers, the
Scottish Masters, the Scottish Knights, the Eques Regii, the
Eques de Secta Consueta, the Eques Silentii Regii; etc., etc.

Parallel with the development of the hierarchy, and with
similar limitations, we observe within secret societies the structure
of the ritual. Here also their peculiar emancipation from the
prejudices of historical organizations permits them to build upon
a self-laid basis extreme freedom and opulence of form. There
is perhaps no external tendency which so decisively and with such
characteristic differences divides the secret from the open society,
as the valuation of usages, formulas, rites, and the peculiar pre-
ponderance and antithetic relation of all these to the body of pur-
poses which the society represents. The latter are often guarded
with less care than the secret of the ritual. Progressive Free-
masonry emphasizes expressly that it is not a secret combination ;
that it has no occasion to conceal the roll of its members, its pur-
poses, or its acts; the oath of silence refers exclusively to the
forms of the Masonic rites. Thus the student order of the
Amicisten, at the end of the eighteenth century, has this charac-
teristic provision in sec. I of its statutes:

The most sacred duty of each member is to preserve the profoundest
silence with reference to such things as concern the well-being of the order.
Among these belong: symbols of the order and signs of recognition, names
of fraternity brothers, ceremonies, etc.

Later in the same statute the purpose and character of the
order are disclosed and precisely specified! In a book of quite
limited size which describes the constitution and character of the
Carbonari, the account of the ceremonial forms and usages, at the
reception of new members and at meetings, covers seventy-five
pages! Further examples are needless. The role of the ritual in
secret societies is sufficiently well known, from the religio-mystical
orders of antiquity, on the one hand, to the Rosenkreutzer of the
eighteenth century, and the most notorious criminal bands. The
sociological motivations of this connection are approximately the
following.

That which is striking about the treatment of the ritual in
secret societies is not merely the precision with which it is
observed, but first of all the anxiety with which it is guarded as a
secret —as though the unveiling of it were precisely as fatal as
betrayal of the purposes and actions of the society, or even the
existence of the society altogether. The utility of this is probably
in the fact that, through this absorption of a whole complex of
external forms into the secret, the whole range of action and
interest occupied by the secret society becomes a well-rounded
unity. The secret society must seek to create among the cate-
gories peculiar to itself, a species of life-totality. Around the
nucleus of purposes which the society strongly emphasizes, it
therefore builds a structure of formulas, like a body around a
soul, and places both alike under the protection of secrecy, because
only so can a harmonious whole come into being, in which one
part supports the other. That in this scheme secrecy of the
external is strongly accentuated, is necessary, because secrecy is
not so much a matter of course with reference to these super-
ficialities, and not so directly demanded as in the case of the real
interests of the society. This is not greatly different from the
situation in military organizations and religious communities.
The reason why, in both, schematism, the body of forms, the fixa-
tion of behavior, occupies so large space, is that, as a general pro-
position, both the military and the religious career demand the
whole man; that is, each of them projects the whole life upon a
special plane; each composes a variety of energies and interests,
from a particular point of view, into a correlated unity. The
secret society usually tries to do the same. One of its essential
characteristics is that, even when it takes hold of individuals only
by means of partial interests, when the society in its substance is
a purely utilitarian combination, yet it claims the whole man in a
higher degree, it combines the personalities more in their whole
compass with each other, and commits them more to reciprocal
obligations, than the same common purpose would within an open
society. Since the symbolism of the ritual stimulates a wide range
of vaguely bounded feelings, touching interests far in excess of
those that are definitely apprehended, the secret society weaves
these latter interests into an aggregate demand upon the indi-
vidual. Through the ritual form the specific purpose of the secret
society is expanded into a comprehensive unity and totality, both
sociological and subjective. Moreover, through such formalism,
just as through the hierarchical structure above discussed, the
secret society constitutes itself a sort of counterpart of the official
world with which it places itself in antithesis. Here we have a
case of the universally emerging sociological norm; viz., struc-
tures, which place themselves in opposition to and detachment
from larger structures in which they are actually contained,
nevertheless repeat in themselves the forms of the greater struc-
tures. Only a structure that in some way can count as a whole
is in a situation to hold its elements firmly together. It borrows
the sort of organic completeness, by virtue of which its members
are actually the channels of a unifying life-stream, from that
greater whole to which its individual members were already
adapted, and to which it can most easily offer a parallel by means
of this very imitation.

The same relation affords finally the following motive for the
sociology of the ritual in secret societies. Every such society
contains a measure of freedom, which is not really provided for
in the structure of the surrounding society. Whether the secret
society, like the Vehme, complements the inadequate judicature
of the political area; or whether, as in the case of conspiracies or
criminal bands, it is an uprising against the law of that area; or
whether, as in the case of the “mysteries,” they hold themselves
outside of the commands and prohibitions of the greater area —
in either case the apartness (Heraussonderung) which charac-
terizes the secret society has the tone of a freedom. In exercise
of this freedom a territory is occupied to which the norms of the
surrounding society do not apply. The nature of the secret
society as such is autonomy. It is, however, of a sort which
approaches anarchy. Withdrawal from the bonds of unity which
procure general coherence very easily has as consequences for the
secret society a condition of being without roots, an absence of
firm touch with life (Lebensgefiihl), and of restraining reserva-
tions. The fixedness and detail of the ritual serve in part to
counterbalance this deficit. Here also is manifest how much men
need a settled proportion between freedom and law; and, further-
more, in case the relative quantities of the two are not prescribed
for him from a single source, how he attempts to reinforce the
given quantum of the one by a quantum of the other derived from
any source whatsoever, until such settled proportion is reached.
With the ritual the secret society voluntarily imposes upon itself
a formal constraint, which is demanded as a complement by its
material detachment and self-sufficiency. It is characteristic that,
among the Freemasons, it is precisely the Americans — who enjoy
the largest political freedom—of whom the severest unity in
manner of work, the greatest uniformity of the ritual of all lodges,
are demanded; while in Germany — where the otherwise suffi-
cient quantum of bondage leaves little room for a counter-
demand in the direction of restrictions upon freedom—more
freedom is exercised in the manner in which each individual
lodge carries on its work. The often essentially meaningless,
schematic constraint of the ritual of the secret society is therefore
by no means a contradiction of its freedom bordering on anarchy,
its detachment from the norms of the circle which contains it.
Just as widespread existence of secret societies is, as a rule, a
proof of public unfreedom, of a policy of police regulation, of
police oppression; so, conversely, ritual regulation of these
societies from within proves a freedom and enfranchisement in
principle for which the equilibrium of human nature produces the
constraint as a counter-influence.

These last considerations have already led to the methodo-
logical principle with reference to which I shall analyze the still
outstanding traits of secret societies. The problem is, in a word,
to what extent these traits prove to be in essence quantitative
modifications of the typical traits of socialization in general. In
order to establish this manner of representing secret societies, we
must again review their status in the whole complex of socio-
logical forms.

The secret element in societies is a primary sociological fact,
a definite mode and shading of association, a formal relationship
of quality in immediate or mediate reciprocity with other factors
which determine the habit of the group-elements or of the group.
The secret society, on the other hand, is a secondary structure;
i.e, it arises always only within an already complete society.
Otherwise expressed, the secret society is itself characterized by
its secret, just as other societies, and even itself, are characterized
by their superiority and subordination, or by their offensive pur-
poses, or by their initiative character. That they can build them-
selves up with such characteristics is possible, however, only
under the presupposition of an already existing society. The
secret society sets itself as a special society in antithesis with the
wider association included within the greater society. This anti-
thesis, whatever its purpose, is at all events intended in the spirit
of exclusion. Even the secret society which proposes only to
render the whole community a definite service in a completely
unselfish spirit, and to dissolve itself after performing the service,
obviously regards its temporary detachment from that totality as
the unavoidable technique for its purpose. Accordingly, none of
the narrower groups which are circumscribed by larger groups
are compelled by their sociological constellation to insist so
strongly as the secret society upon their formal self-sufficiency.
Their secret encircles them like a boundary, beyond which there is
nothing but the materially, or at least formally, antithetic, which
therefore shuts up the society within itself as a complete unity.
In the groupings of every other sort, the content of the group-
life, the actions of the members in the sphere of rights and duties,
may so fill up their consciousness that within it the formal fact of
socialization under normal conditions plays scarcely any rdle.
The secret society, on the other hand, can on no account permit
the definite and emphatic consciousness of its members that they
constitute a society to escape from their minds. The always per-
ceptible and always to-be-guarded pathos of the secret lends to the
form of union which depends upon the secret, as contrasted with
the content, a predominant significance, as compared with other
unions.

In the secret society there is complete absence of organic
growth, of the character of instinct in accumulation, of all
unforced matter of course with respect to belonging together and
forming a unity. No matter how irrational, mystical, impres-
sionistic (gefiihlsméssig) their contents, the way in which they
are constructed is always conscious and intentional. Throughout
their derivation and life consciousness of being a society is per-
manently accentuated. The secret society is, on that account, the
antithesis of all genetic (triebhaft) societies, in which the unifica-
tion is more or less only the expression of the natural growing
together of elements whose life has common roots. Its socio-
psychological form is invariably that of the teleological combina-
tion (Zweckverband). This constellation makes it easy to under-
stand that the specifications of form in the construction of secret
societies attain to peculiar definiteness, and that their essential
sociological traits develop as mere quantitative heightenings of
quite general types of relationship.

One of these latter has already been indicated; viz., the
characterization and the coherence of the society through closure
toward the social environment. To this end the often complicated
signs of recognition contribute. Through these the individual
offers credentials of membership in the society. Indeed, in the
times previous to the general use of writing, such signs were
more imperative for this use than later. At present their other
sociological uses overtop that of mere identification. So long as
there was lack of documentary credentials, an order whose sub-
divisions were in different localities utterly lacked means of
excluding the unauthorized, of securing to rightful claimants
only the enjoyment of its benefits or knowledge of its affairs,
unless these signs were employed. These were disclosed only to
the worthy, who were pledged to keep them secret, and who could
use them for purposes of legitimation as members of the order
wherever it existed. This purpose of drawing lines of separation
very definitely characterizes the development manifested by cer-
tain secret orders among the nature peoples, especially in Africa
and among the Indians. These orders are composed of men
alone, and pursue essentially the purpose of magnifying their
separation from the women. The members appear in disguises,
when they come upon the stage of action as members, and it is
customary to forbid women, on pain of severe penalties, to
approach them. Still, women have occasionally succeeded in
penetrating their veil of secrecy sufficiently to discover that the
horrible figures are not ghosts, but their own husbands. When
this occurred, the orders have often lost their whole significance,
and have fallen to the level of a harmless masquerade. The
undifferentiated sensuous conceptions of nature people cannot
form a more complete notion of the separateness which orders of
this sort wish to emphasize, than in the concealment, by disguise
or otherwise, of those who have the desire and the right thus to
abstract themselves. That is the rudest and externally most radi-
cal mode of concealment; viz., covering up not merely the special
act of the person, but at once the whole person obscures himself;
the order does not do anything that is secret, but the totality of
persons comprising it makes itself into a secret. This form of the
secret society corresponds completely with the primitive intel-
lectual plane in which the whole agent throws himself entire into
each specific activity; that is, in which the activity is not yet
sufficiently objectified to give it a character which less than the
whole man can share. Hence it is equally explicable that so soon
as the disguise-secret is broken through, the whole separation
becomes ineffective, and the order, with its devices and its mani-
festations, loses at once its inner meaning.

In the case in question the separation has the force of an
expression of value. There is separation from others because
there is unwillingness to give oneself a character common with
that of others, because there is desire to signalize one’s own
superiority as compared with these others. Everywhere this
motive leads to the formation of groups which are obviously in
sharp contrast with those formed in pursuit of material (sachlich)
purposes. As a consequence of the fact that those who want to
distinguish themselves enter into combination, there results an
aristocracy which strengthens and, so to speak, expands the self-
consciousness of the individuals through the weight of their sum.
That exclusiveness and formation of groups are thus bound
together by the aristocracy-building motive gives to the former
in many cases from the outset the stamp of the “special” in the
sense of value. We may observe, even in school classes, how
small, closely attached groups of comrades, through the mere
formal fact that they form a special group, come to consider them-
selves an élite, compared with the rest who are unorganized:
while the latter, by their enmity and jealousy, involuntarily recog-
nize that higher value. In these cases secrecy and pretense of
secrecy (Geheimnistnerei) are means of building higher the wall
of separation, and therein a reinforcement of the aristocratic
nature of the group.

This significance of secret associations, as intensification of
sociological exclusiveness in general, appears in a very striking
way in political aristocracies. Among the requisites of aristo-
cratic control secrecy has always had a place. It makes use of
the psychological fact that the unknown as such appears terrible,
powerful, and threatening. In the first place, it employs this fact
in seeking to conceal the numerical insignificance of the govern-
ing class. In Sparta the number of warriors was kept so far as
possible a secret, and in Venice the same purpose was in view in
the ordinance prescribing simple black costumes for all the nobili.
Conspicuous costumes should not be permitted to make evident to
the people the petty number of the rulers. In that particular case
the policy was carried to complete concealment of the inner circle
of the highest rulers. The names of the three state inquisitors
were known only to the Council of Ten who chose them. In some
of the Swiss aristocracies one of the most important magistracies
was frankly called “ the secret officials” (die Heimlichen), and in
Freiburg the aristocratic families were known as die heimlichen
Geschlechter. On the other hand, the democratic principle is
bound up with the principle of publicity, and, to the same end, the
tendency toward general and fundamental laws. The latter relate
to an unlimited number of subjects, and are thus in their nature
public. Conversely, the employment of secrecy within the aristo-
cratic régime is only the extreme exaggeration of that social
exclusion and exemption for the sake of which aristocracies are
wont to oppose general, fundamentally sanctioned laws.

In case the notion of the aristocratic passes over from the
politics of a group to the disposition (Gesinnung) of an
individual, the relationship of separation and secrecy attains to a
plane that is, to outward appearance, completely changed. Per-
fect distinction (Vornehmheit) in both moral and mental respects.
despises all concealment, because its inner security makes it
indifferent to what others know or do not know about us, whether
their estimate of us is true or false, high or low. From the stand-
point of such superiority, secrecy is a concession to outsiders, a
dependence of behavior upon consideration of them. Hence the
“mask” which so many regard as sign and proof of their aristo-
cratic soul, of disregard of the crowd, is direct proof of the
significance that the crowd has for such people. The mask of
those whose distinction is real is that the many can at best not
understand them, that they do not see them, so to speak, even
when they show themselves without disguise.

The bar against all external to the circle, which, as universal
sociological form-fact, makes use of secrecy as a progressive
technique, gains a peculiar coloring through the multiplicity of
degrees, through which initiation into the last mysteries of secret
societies is wont to occur, and which threw light above upon
another sociological trait of secret societies. As a rule, a solemn
pledge is demanded of the novice that he will hold secret every-
thing which he is about to experience, before even the first stages
of acceptance into the society occur. Therewith is the absolute
and formal separation which secrecy can effect, put into force.
Yet, since under these conditions the essential content or purpose
of the order is only gradually accessible to the neophyte —
whether the purpose is the complete purification and salvation of
the soul through the consecration of the mysteries, or whether it
is the absolute abolition of all moral restraint, as with the
Assassins and other criminal societies—the separation in
material respects is otherwise ordered; i. e., it is made more con-
tinuous and more relative. When this method is employed, the
initiate is in a condition nearer to that of the outsider. He needs
to be tested and educated up to the point of grasping the whole or
the center of the association. Thereby, however, a protection is
obviously afforded to the latter, an isolation of it from the exter-
nal world, which goes beyond the protection gained from the
entrance oath. Care is taken—as was incidentally shown by
the example of the druids — that the still untried shall also have
very little to betray if he would, inasmuch as, within the secret
principle which surrounds the society as a whole, graduated
secrecy produces at the same time an elastic zone of defense for
that which is inmost and essential. The antithesis of the exotic
and the esoteric members, as we have it in the case of the
Pythagoreans, is the most striking form of this protective
arrangement. ‘The circle of the only partially initiated con-
stitutes to a certain extent a buffer area against the totally
uninitiated. As it is everywhere the double function of the
“mean” to bind and to separate—or, rather, as it plays only
one role, which we, however, according to our apperceptive
categories, and according to the angle of our vision, designate
as uniting and separating—so in this connection the unity
of activities which externally clash with each other appears
in the clearest light. Precisely because the lower grades of the
society constitute a mediating transition to the actual center of the
secret, they bring about the gradual compression of the sphere
of repulsion around the same, which affords more secure protec-
tion to it than the abruptness of a radical standing wholly with-
out or wholly within could secure.

Sociological self-sufficiency presents itself in practical effect
as group-egoism. The group pursues its purposes with the same
disregard of the purposes of the structure external to itself, which
in the case of the individual is called egoism. For the conscious-
ness of the individual this attitude very likely gets a moral justi-
fication from the fact that the group-purposes in and of them-
selves have a super-individual, objective character; that it is often
impossible to name any individual who would directly profit from
the operation of the group egoism; that conformity to this group
program often demands unselfishness and sacrifice from its pro-
moters. The point at issue here, however, is not the ethical valua-
tion, but the detachment of the group from its environments,
which the group egoism effects or indicates. In the case of a
small group, which wants to maintain and develop itself within
a larger circle, there will be certain limits to this policy, so long
as it has to be pursued before all eyes. No matter how bitterly
a public society may antagonize other societies of a larger
organization, or the whole constitution of the same, it must
always assert that realization of its ultimate purposes would
redound to the advantage of the whole, and the necessity of
this ostensible assertion will at all events place some restraint
upon the actual egoism of its action. In the case of secret
societies this necessity is absent, and at least the possibility
is given of a hostility toward other societies, or toward the whole
of society, which the open society cannot admit, and consequently
cannot exercise without restrictions. In no way is the detachment
of the secret society from its social environment so decisively
symbolized, and also promoted, as by the dropping of every
hypocrisy or actual condescension which is indispensable in
co-ordinating the open society with the teleology of the environ-
ing whole.

In spite of the actual quantitative delimitation of every real
society, there is still a considerable number the inner tendency of
which is: Whoever is not excluded is included. Within certain
political, religious, and class peripheries, everyone is reckoned as
of the association who satisfies certain conditions, mostly involun-
tary, and given along with his existence. Whoever, for example,
is born within the territory of a state, unless peculiar circum-
stances make him an exception, is a member of the highly complex
civic society. The member of a given social class is, as a matter
of course, included in the conventions and forms of attachment
pertaining to the same, if he does not voluntarily or involuntarily
make himself an outsider. The extreme is offered by the claim
of a church that it really comprehends the totality of the human
race, so that only historical accidents, sinful obduracy, or a special
divine purpose excludes any persons from the religious com-
munity which ideally anticipates even those not in fact within the
pale. Here is, accordingly, a parting of two ways, which evidently
signify a differentiation in principle of the sociological meaning
of societies in general, however they may be confused, and their
definiteness toned down in practice. In contrast with the funda-
mental principle: Whoso is not expressly excluded is included,
stands the other: Whoever is not expressly included is excluded.
The latter type is presented in the most decisive purity by the
secret societies. The unlimited character of their separation,
conscious at every step of their development, has, both as cause
and as effect, the rule that whoever is not expressly adopted is
thereby expressly excluded. The Masonic fraternity could not
better support its recently much emphasized assertion that it is
not properly a secret order, than through its simultaneously
published ideal of including all men, and thus of representing
humanity as a whole.

Corresponding with intensification of separateness from the
outer world, there is here, as elsewhere, a similar access of coher-
ence within, since these are only the two sides or forms of mani-
festation of one and the same sociological attitude. A purpose
which stimulates formation of a secret union among men as a
rule peremptorily excludes such a preponderating portion of the
general social environment from participation that the possible
and actual participants acquire a scarcity value. These must be
handled carefully, because, ceteris paribus, it is much more diffi-
cult to replace them than is the case in an ordinary society. More
than that, every quarrel within the secret society brings with it
the danger of betrayal, to avoid which in this case the motive of
self-preservation in the individual is likely to co-operate with the
motive of the self-preservation of the whole. Finally, with the
defection of the secret societies from the environing social syn-
theses, many occasions of conflict disappear. Among all the
limitations of the individual, those that come from association in
secret societies always occupy an exceptional status, in contrast
with which the open limitations, domestic and civic, religious
and economic, those of class and of friendship, however manifold
their content, still have a quite different measure and manner of
efficiency. It requires the comparison with secret societies to
make clear that the demands of open societies, lying so to speak
in one plane, run across each other. As they carry on at the same
time an open competitive struggle over the strength and the inter-
est of the individual, within a single one of these spheres, the
individuals come into sharp collision, because each of them is at
the same time solicited by the interests of other spheres. In secret
societies, in view of their sociological isolation, such collisions
are very much restricted. The purposes and programs of secret
societies require that competitive interests from that plane of the
open society should be left outside the door. Since the secret
society occupies a plane of its own— few individuals belonging
to more than one secret society — it exercises a kind of absolute
sovereignty over its members. This control prevents conflicts
among them which easily arise in the open type of co-ordination.
The “King’s peace” (Burgfriede) which should prevail within
every society is promoted in a formally unsurpassed manner
within secret societies through their peculiar and exceptional
limitations. It appears, indeed, that, entirely apart from this
more realistic ground, the mere form of secrecy as such holds the
associates safer than they would otherwise be from disturbing
influences, and thereby make concord more feasible. An Eng-
lish statesman has attempted to discover the source of the strength
of the English cabinet in the secrecy which surrounds it. Every-
one who has been active in public life knows that a small collec-
tion of people may be brought to agreement much more easily if
their transactions are secret.

Corresponding with the peculiar degree of cohesion within
secret societies is the definiteness of their centralization. They
furnish examples of an unlimited and blind obedience to leaders,
such as occurs elsewhere of course; but it is the more remarkable
here, in view of the frequent -anarchical and negative character
toward all other law. The more criminal the purposes of a secret
society, the more unlimited is likely to be the power of the leaders,
and the more cruel its exercise. The Assassins in Arabia; the
Chauffeurs, a predatory society with various branches that rav-
aged in France, particularly in the eighteenth century; the Gar-
dunas in Spain, a criminal society that, from the seventeenth to
the beginning of the nineteenth century, had relations with the
Inquisition —all these, the nature of which was lawlessness and
rebellion, were under one commander, whom they sometimes. set
over themselves, and whom they obeyed without criticism or
limitation. To this result not merely the correlation of demand
from freedom and for union contributes, as we have observed it
in case of the severity of the ritual, and in the present instance it
binds together the extremes of the two tendencies. The excess of
freedom, which such societies possessed with reference to all
otherwise valid norms, had to be offset, for the sake of the
equilibrium of interests, by a similar excess of submissiveness
and resigning of the individual will. More essential, however.
was probably the necessity of centralization, which is the con-
dition of existence for the secret society, and especially when,
like the criminal band, it lives off the surrounding society,
when it mingles with this society in many radiations and
actions, and when it is seriously threatened with treachery
and diversion of interests the moment the most invariable
attachment to one center ceases to prevail. It is conseqeuntly
typical that the secret society is exposed to peculiar dangers,
especially when, for any reasons whatever, it does not develop
a powerfully unifying authority. The Waldenses were in
nature not a secret society. They became a secret society in
the thirteenth century only, in consequence of the external pres-
sure, which made it necessary to keep themselves from view. It
became impossible, for that reason, to hold regular assemblages,
and this in turn caused loss of unity in doctrine. There arose a
number of branches, with isolated life and development, fre-
quently in a hostile attitude toward each other. They went into
decline because they lacked the necessary and reinforcing attri-
bute of the secret society, viz., constantly efficient centralization.
The fact that the dynamic significance of Freemasonry is obvi-
ously not quite in proportion with its extension and its resources
is probably to be accounted for by the extensive autonomy of
its parts, which have neither a unified organization nor a central
administration. Since their common life extends only to funda-
mental principles and signs of recognition, these come to be
virtually only norms of equality and of contact between man and
man, but not of that centralization which holds together the forces
of the elements, and is the correlate of the apartness of the secret
society.

It is nothing but an exaggeration of this formal motive when,
as is often the case, secret societies are led by unknown chiefs.
It is not desirable that the lower grades should know,whom they
are obeying. This occurs primarily, to be sure, for the sake of
guarding the secret, and with this in view the device is carried to
the point of constructing such a secret society as that of the
Welfic Knights in Italy. The order operated at the beginning
of the nineteenth century in the interest of Italian liberation and
unification. At each of its seats it had a supreme council of six
persons, who were not mutually acquainted, but dealt with each
other only through a mediator who was known as “The Visible.”
This, however, is by no means the only utility of the secret head-
ship. It means rather the most extreme and abstract sublimation
of centralized coherence. The tension between adherent and
leader reaches the highest degree when the latter withdraws from
the range of vision. There remains the naked, merciless fact, so
to speak, modified by no personal coloring, of obedience pure and
simple, from which the superordinated subject has disappeared.
If even obedience to an impersonal authority, to a mere magis-
tracy, to the representative of an objective law, has the character
of unbending severity, this obedience mounts still higher, to the
level of an uncanny absoluteness, so soon as the commanding
personality remains in principle hidden. For if, along with the
visibility of the ruler, and acquaintance with him, it must be
admitted that individual suggestion, the force of the personality,
also vanish from the commanding relationship; yet at the same
time there also disappear from the relationship the limitations,
i. e., the merely relative, the “human,” so to speak, which are
attributes of the single person who can be encountered in actual
experience. In this case obedience must be stimulated by the
feeling of being subject to an intangible power, not strictly
defined, so far as its boundaries are concerned; a power nowhere
to be seen, but for that reason everywhere to be expected. The
sociologically universal coherence of a group through the unity
of the commanding authority is, in the case of the secret society
with unknown headship, shifted into a focus imaginarius, and it
attains therewith its most distinct and intense form.

The sociological character of the individual elements of the
secret society, corresponding with this centralized subordination,
is their individualization. In case the society does not have pro-
motion of the interests of its individual members as its immediate
purpose, and, so to speak, does not go outside of itself, but rather
uses its members as means to externally located ends and activities
—jin such case the secret society in turn manifests a heightened
degree of self-abnegation, of leveling of individuality, which is
already an incident of the social state in general, and with which
the secret society outweighs the above-emphasized individualizing
and differentiating character of the secrecy. This begins with the
secret orders of the nature peoples, whose appearance and activi-
ties are almost always in connection with use of disguises, so that
an expert immediately infers that wherever we find the use of
disguises (Masken) among nature peoples, they at least indicate
a probability of the existence of secret orders. It is, to be sure, a
part of the essence of the secret order that its members conceal
themselves, as such. Yet, inasmuch as the given man stands forth
and conducts himself quite unequivocably as a member of the
secret order, and merely does not disclose which otherwise known
individuality is identical with this member, the disappearance of
the personality, as such, behind his rdle in the secret society is
most strongly emphasized. In the Irish conspiracy which was
organized in America in the seventies under the name Clan-na-
gael, the individual members were not designated by their names,
but only by numbers. This, of course, was with a view to the
practical purpose of secrecy. Nevertheless, it shows to what
extent secrecy suppresses individuality. Among persons who
figure only as numbers, who perhaps—as occurs at least in
analogous cases—are scarcely known to the other members by
their personal names, leadership will proceed with much less con-
sideration, with much more indifference to individual wishes and
capacities, than if the union includes each of its members as a
personal being. Not less effective in this respect are the extensive
role and the severity of the ritual. All of this always signifies
that the object mold has become master over the personal in
membership and in activity. The hierarchical order admits the
individual merely as agent of a definite rdle; it likewise holds in
readiness for each participant a conventional garb, in which his
personal contour disappears. It is merely another name for this
effacement of the differentiated personality, when secret societies
cultivate a high degree of relative equality among the members.
This is so far from being in contradiction of the despotic character
of their constitutions that in all sorts of other groupings despotism
finds its correlate in the leveling of the ruled. Within the secret
society there often exists between the members a fraternal equality
which is in sharp and purposeful contrast with their differences
in all the other situations of their lives. Typical cases in point
appear, on the one hand, in secret societies of a religio-ethical
character, which strongly accentuate the element of brotherhood;
on the other hand, in societies of an illegal nature. Bismarck
speaks in his memoirs of a widely ramified pederastic organization
in Berlin, which came under his observation as a young judicial
officer; and he emphasizes “the equalizing effect of co-operative
practice of the forbidden vice through all social strata.” This
depersonalizing, in which the secret society carries to an excessive
degree a typical relationship between individual and society,
appears finally as the characteristic irresponsibility. In this con-
nection, too, physical disguise (Maske) is the primitive phe-
nomenon. Most of the African secret orders are alike in repre-
senting themselves by a man disguised as a forest spirit. He
commits at will upon whomsoever he encounters any sort of vio-
lence, even to robbery and murder. No responsibility attaches to
him for his outrages, and evidently this is due solely to the dis-
guise. That is the somewhat unmanageable form under which
such societies cause the personality of their adherents to dis-
appear, and without which the latter would undoubtedly be over-
taken by revenge and punishment. Nevertheless, responsibility
is quite as immediately joined with the ego— philosophically, too,
the whole responsibility problem is merely a detail of the problem
of the ego—in the fact that removing the marks of identity of
the person has, for the naive understanding in question, the effect
of abolishing responsibility. Political finesse makes no less use of
this correlation. In the American House of Representatives the
real conclusions are reached in the standing committees, and they
are almost always ratified by the House. The transactions of
these committies, however, are secret, and the most important
portion of legislative activity is thus concealed from public view.
This being the case, the political responsibility of the repre-
sentatives seems to be largely wiped out, since no one can be
made responsible for proceedings that cannot be observed. Since
the shares of the individual persons in the transactions remain
hidden, the acts of committees and of the House seem to be those
of a super-individual authority. The irresponsibility is here also
the consequence or the symbol of the same intensified sociological
de-individualization which goes with the secrecy of group-action.
In all directorates, faculties, committees, boards of trustees, etc.,
whose transactions are secret, the same thing holds. The indi-
vidual disappears as a person in the anonymous member of the
ring, so to speak, and with him the responsibility, which has no
hold upon him in his intangible special character.

Finally, this one-sided intensification of universal sociological
traits is corroborated by the danger with which the great sur-
rounding circle rightly or wrongly believes itself to be threatened
from the secret society. Wherever there is an attempt to realize
strong centralization, especially of a political type, special organi-
zations of the elements are abhorred, purely as such, entirely apart
from their content and purposes. As mere unities, so to speak,
they engage in competition with the central principle. The central
power wants to reserve to itself the prerogative of binding the
elements together in a form of common unity. The jealous zeal
of the central power against every special society (Sonderbund)
runs through all political history. A characteristic type is pre-
sented by the Swiss convention of 1481, according to which no
separate alliances were to be formed between any of the ten con-
federated states. Another is presented by the persecution of the
associations of apprentices by the despotism of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. A third appears in the tendency to dis-
franchise local political bodies, so often manifested by the modern
state. This danger from the special organization for the sur-
rounding whole appears at a high potency in the case of the secret
society. Men seldom have a calm and rational attitude toward
strangers or persons only partially known. The folly which treats
the unknown as the non-existent, and the anxious imaginative-
ness which inflates the unknown at once into gigantic dangers and
horrors, are wont to take turns in guiding human actions.
Accordingly, the secret society seems to be dangerous simply
because it is secret. Since it cannot be surely known that any
special organization whatever may not some day turn its legally
accumulated powers to some undesired end, and since on that
account there is suspicion in principle on the part of central
powers toward organizations of subjects, it follows that, in the
case of organizations which are secret in principle, the suspicion
that their secrecy conceals dangers is all the more natural. The
societies of Orangemen, which were organized at the beginning
of the nineteenth century in England for the suppression of
Catholicism, avoided all public discussion, and operated only in
secret, through personal bonds and correspondence. But this
very secrecy gave them the appearance of a public danger. The
suspicion arose “that men who shrank from appealing to public
opinion meditated a resort to force.” Thus the secret society,
purely on the ground of its secrecy, appears dangerously related
to conspiracy against existing powers. To what extent this is a
heightening of the universal political seriousness of special organi-
zations, appears very plainly in such an occurrence as the follow-
ing: The oldest Germanic guilds afforded to their members an
effective legal protection, and thus to that extent were substitutes
for the state. On the one hand, the Danish kings regarded
them as supports of public order, and they consequently favored
them. On the contrary, however, they appeared, for the same
reason, to be direct competitors with the state. For that reason
the Frankish capitularies condemned them, and the condemnation
even took the form of branding them as conspiracies. The secret
association is in such bad repute as enemy of central powers that.
conversely, every politically disapproved association must be
accused of such hostility!
