Business Men and Social Theorists

Author(s): C. R. Henderson

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Jan., 1896), pp. 385-397
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2761870

Accessed: 08-05-2016 22:26 UTC
REPRESENTATIVES of two very respectable classes of the com-
munity are apt to find themselves in hostile attitudes in the dis-
cussion of contemporary social questions —the scientific student
of social phenomena and the ‘‘captain of industry.” Has the
student of sociology a right to discuss the central theme of his
field of research? This is the matter in dispute. Professor
Laughlin (Mill, Political Economy, p. 523) says: ‘The laborer,
if he would become something more than a receiver of wages,
in the ordinary sense, must move himself up in the scale of
laborers until he reaches the skill and power also to command
manager’s wages. . . . . It leads directly to the means by which
the lower classes may raise themselves to a higher position—
the actual details of which, of course, are difficult, but, as they
are not included in political economy, they must be left to
sociology —and forms the essential basis of hope for any proper
extension of productive codperation.” This definition of the
limits of economics and of the duty of sociology, made by a
master, we accept; but find ourselves resolutely opposed at the
very point where our discussion begins to have a real living
human interest. What is urged against our discipline and our
method?

It would be strange if the “captain of industry” did not
sometimes manifest a militant spirit, for he has risen from the
ranks largely because he was a better fighter than most of us.

385
Competitive commercial life is not a flowery bed of ease, but
a battle field where the ‘struggle for existence” is defining the
industrially “fittest to survive.”

In this country the great prizes are not found in Congress, in
literature, in law, in medicine, but in industry. The successful
man is praised and honored for his success. The social reward
of business prosperity, in power praise and luxury, are so great
as to entice men of the highest intellectual faculties. Men of
splendid abilities find in the career of a manufacturer or mer-
chant an opportunity for the most intense energy. The very
perils of the situation have a fascination for adventurous and
inventive spirits. In this fierce though voiceless contest a pecu-
liar type of manhood is developed, characterized by vitality,
energy, concentration, skill in combining numerous forces for an
end, and great foresight into the consequences of social events.
If the character is further analyzed we discover, along with some
apparent heedlessness of pain and many compromises with con-
science, an integrity about contracts which makes it possible to
build the business of the world on credit. Those who live in
retirement and simplicity are apt to find the swift, brusque,
imperious and impatient manners of the successful man some-
what severe and offensively dictatorial. But the ceremonial
tediousness of the parlor would be out of place in the office of
one who must think rapidly enough to keep thousands of tele-
graph operators, stenographers, clerks and other employés in
occupation. Dainty speech and elaborate politeness under the
conditions of life in a great commercial house would have all the
effects of crime.

By extending this study of the psychical processes of typical
business men we might be enabled to regard some social phe-
nomena in a new and stronger light. Great business men, like
some distinguished generals, let their deeds speak for them.
They say, with some touch of contemptuous sarcasm and cyni-
cism, they can hire talkers and buy books. So that to interpret
their inner life we must seize the rare occasions when they ven-
ture upon speech. As the number of college men among mer-
chants increases, the points of contact with academic men are
likely to increase.

A few typical quotations may be taken as indicating the
internal mental movements of representative business men.

A very common conviction of employers is expressed clearly
and bluntly in the words of an able and upright manufacturer,
recently deceased. ‘The relation between capital and labor is
one of the many questions in the comprehensive science of
political economy, and as such is a purely business matter. Phil-
anthropy has nothing to do with it, nor has religion or sentiment,
any more than they have to do with astronomy or with the law
of gravitation. .... The essays of the humanitarian and the
sermons of the preacher, however soundly based on the morali-
ties and the ought-to-be, generally only confuse and obscure the
real issues. However it may be in some ideal heaven, it is the
fact that in this world it is not from motives of generosity or
philanthropy that the master hires labor, and the laborer seeks
service. And the sooner the whole matter is taken out of the
realm of sentimental philosophy and placed on the bed rock of
simple, practical business common sense the better.” He then
proceeds to give an exposition of the determining factors in the
settlement of the rate of wages ; attacks all schemes of coépera-
tion and profit-sharing as ‘moonshine;” asserts that strikes
cannot raise the real wages of labor; that increase comes from
improvements in machinery and business methods; that laborers
can secure higher income only by becoming more useful; that
the only function of the state is to prevent violence. “All that
legislators and editors and preachers and philanthropists can do
is to educate the people that they may be able finally . .. . to
pass out of these turbulent obscuring mists of ignorant and sel-
fish struggle into the clear light of universal law and justice.”

In this concluding sentence the cultivated, generous, success-
ful Christian business man opens a wider door than his opening
sentences promised ; and it is a pleasure to add that his life was
better than his inherited economic creed.

In aspeech at St. Louis before the assembled representatives
of the great commercial clubs of the country Mr. William Whit-
man, of Boston, voiced a certain feeling of his peers. Mr. C. D.
Wright had suggested that in the future employers would be
held responsible before the law and at the bar of public opinion
for strikes; and that it would be held to be the duty of
employers during prosperous times to set aside a fund for the
payment of wages in times of adversity. Mr. Whitman declared
both propositions to be monstrous, and asked of the gentlemen
present: ‘What do you think of them? Will they increase or
diminish your burdens? Can you successfully prosecute your
business under them? Do you think that this new philanthropo-
ethico-economic management will attract the investment of
capital ?”

The particular propositions of Mr. Wright may be dropped
out of this discussion. They are of interest here only because
they drew the fire and showed the attitude of a typical business
man toward theoretical students of society. Indeed the speaker
himself turns from propositions to personalities. ‘Who are the
men engaged in promulgating these so-called reforms, ostensibly
for the benefit of workingmen? Are they not for the most part
theorists with unbalanced minds, who have adopted unsound
principles and are pushing them to the extreme? Are they
not men without the knowledge and experience necessary to
deal successfully with men or affairs? Why should men of
affairs permit them, undisputed, unanswered, unchallenged, to
arrogate to themselves the right to teach the world how we shall
conduct our business ?”

This speaker gives his reason for thinking that business
men carry in their own bosoms and interests the guarantees of
social welfare: “The purposes of business, the sense of respon-
sibility to others, the danger of personal loss and possible fail-
ure, and the hope of reward are the surest guarantees for the
conduct of affairs in the mutual interests of employer and
employed.”

It must be admitted that this rigorous protest against
impertinent and ignorant intrusion of dilettanti upon the pre-
serves of capitalist managers is not without justification. Social
theorists need to be meek men, and should stand with head
uncovered before the special gifts and services of the men of
genius who are working the latter-day miracles of industry and
commerce. Confessions of trespass on forbidden ground are in
order, but these must be personal and auricular before any
authority prepared to shrive.

It has been said that the laws of economics should be stated
in the indicative and not in the imperative mode, and this is
true of all purely scientific theory. The only person who can
possibly decide in practical affairs is the responsible manager of
the affairs concerned. When sincere fanatics vent their ravings
under the titles of ‘sociological science,’’ it is not to be wondered
at that suspicion should extend to those who are really trying
to “mount to the summit round by round.” Orators with more
heat than light are apt to be confounded with patient students
of practicable reform.

And yet we are not ready to confess that the student of
society is absolutely without a function, a mere useless parasite,
or at best a phonographic reporter of the dead past. Mr.
Lyman J. Gage, intimate friend of the seer, Professor Swing,
said: “To cherish false ideas concerning the motives of men
who are sailing with us in the same ship of national destiny is to
be raw and provincial. We are of the same blood, indissolubly
united in our diversified interests. .... By a clearer under-
standing of our mutual duties will we clamor less for what we con-
sider our respective rights.” Mr. Gage would not browbeat into
silence men who are intently studying the same phenomena
which occupy business men, only from a different point of view.

It is the duty of the scholar to place and keep before the
public the supreme criterion of social conduct, the common wel-
fare. In a boiler factory, where the din and noise drown all
sounds, the cry of a child cannot be heard. So men of affairs
are apt to be deafened, by the uproar of those very affairs, to the
neglected and forgotten members of our common humanity. A
table of statistics, interpreted and illustrated by literary skill,
may induce business men to enlarge the scope of their life
plans. The scholar’s duty is to aid in forming a judicial public
opinion, as distinguished from the public opinion of a class and
its special pleaders.

It is the duty of the scholar, if he is a living member of con-
temporary society and something beside an archeologist, to
secure a public recognition of all the elements of welfare. Such
a scholar will give due place to what Carlyle calls the “prelimi-
nary item,” bread, but he will help his fellows to see and realize
that “man cannot live by bread alone.” For this purpose is the
scholar supported by society, in order that he may be its mentor
and seer. It is true the idealist does not see intuitively how far or
by what means these higher factors of good may be secured, but
he can remind men by his own life and works that wealth is only
a preliminary item, a means but not an end of life. And if a
business man deserves the title of captain or king he will appre-
ciate the social service which reminds him of the real dignity of
his office.

It is the function and the duty of the social theorist to keep
attractively before “practical men” all the known and tried
methods of obtaining the elements of human well-being. In
performing this social duty the literary worker is not shut up to
the meager resources of his own invention. If his suggestions
of method are laughed out of court as the visionary schemes of
a cloistered fanatic, his defense lies in a prosaic description of
facts. When his plan of amelioration is pronounced impossible,
he can bring to bear the resources of his knowledge of social
experimentation. If inhuman greed, or routine habit, or vested
interests oppose his suggestions on the ground that they are
chimerical and millennial, he can set ingenious philanthropy over
against obstructive avarice. And it is his social function as a
scholar to make the great world act upon the mean world. It is
only in such service that he can earn his salt.

It is not the function of the scholar to bury the dead past, nor
to paint the future in pessimistic charcoal or optimistic vermil-
ion, for the entertainment of the public. He is called to select
the facts which will help generous and genial industrial leaders
to promote the common welfare, and especially the welfare of
those who are employed by them, and over whom their com-
manding position as leaders has given great power.

It is perfectly legitimate for the scholar to collect and use
the testimony of great captains of industry to correct the unsup-
ported assertions of other captains of industry. For example, in
respect to the usefulness of trades unions, Mr. Dyer quotes the
language of an employer: ‘As an employer in one of the great
staple trades, I have always held that we owe much of our pros-
perity in the manufacturing industries to trade combinations.”
This citation of an individual judgment is followed by a clear
summary of the actual achievements of the unions: the friendly
and material help in hard times ; the care of the sick ; the agencies
of education; the regulation of prices and production, “The
cupidity and selfishness of some would have made it difficult even
for just and generous employers to do right.’’*

In arranging the programme for the “Congress of Industrial
Conciliation and Arbitration” it was difficult to secure the par-
ticipation of employers. The responses to the Civic Federation
indicated a profound skepticism in the United States as to the
value of such methods. And yet men of affairs and experience
were found who were willing to look for better methods of decid-
ing disputes. Here again Mr. Lyman J. Gage, surely no visionary,
said: ‘In the business world of today, questions involving thou-
sands, nay, millions, are thus quietly and peacefully composed.
Cannot methods so benign in their character, so healthful in their
influences, find a place in the industrial relationships which now
so intimately enter into the warp and woof of our modern life.”

In the same Congress Mr. William H. Sayward spoke for the
National Association of Builders, and claimed that he represented
an industry which “comprehends an interest as large in amount
as that of any other single industry.” He denied that his asso-
ciation was working for philanthrophic ends, and yet contended
that they were serving the public. So far from trusting merely

* The Evolution of Industry, pp. 110-111.
competitive forces and the will of employers alone he reasoned
that special organization of laborers and managers is necessary.
“Tt is essential to have organizations of employers, who ‘together
shall control and direct the general principles and policies govern-
ing the common interest, so that there may be no overreaching
by selfish and reckless individuals on either side.” He accounts
for the fact that many employers have refused to accept the
plan by saying: ‘The proverbial slowness of employers to know
a good thing when they see it and their proneness to let matters
drift until they get almost hopelessly entangled, in preference to
taking a little trouble in advance,” is a sufficient explanation.

There are always business men who are not only sagacious
managers, with a gift for amassing riches, but who are broad
enough to go to the margin of ability in making experiments.
The names of Robert Owen, Godin of Guise, Leclaire of Paris,
Peabody of London and America, belong in this brilliant com-
pany. Every city furnishes examples of the same class and in
increasing numbers.

Mr. O. D. Ashley in “ Railways and their Employés”’ is one of
those who recognize the responsibility of employers to the
public. “If there is social unrest in the civilized world, a fact
which will be hardly disputed, we are bound, not only as Christians
but as parts of the human brotherhood, to give careful examination
to all plans which contemplate man’s improvement and elevation.”

We may discover in the very arguments by which the gentle-
men of affairs warn ethical theorists out of the manufactory a
need of theorists. It is assumed by both gentlemen quoted in
the beginning, that the class motives of employers and the laws
of nature are the sufficient guaranty of social welfare. From this
assumption of premises it follows that all discussion or intrusion
from other members of society must be impertinent and vicious.
But the state of mind disclosed in the quotations is itself a social
defect. It is symptomatic of the unsocial temper. These quo-
tations prove that many essential elements are ignored by very
able and upright men. They imply that there is at least one
class of the community who have no interest in the issue of social
strifes, and no right to be heard on their own behalf. They imply
that economic forces are automatic, natural and not human and
ethical. The influences which fix the rate of wages are treated
as if they belonged to the same category as the law of gravita-
tion. Human intelligence, will and aspiration are excluded from
consideration by such logic. Economics is put on the same level
as biology, or even chemistry.

The corrective of this attitude of some practical men is not
abuse but facts, just such facts as the studies of social history
supply in abundance. It is the duty and function of the theorist
to confront this automatic and fatalistic class theory of business
with the history of factory legislation. There are few facts so
pathetic as the opposition of John Bright, the pious manufacturer,
to the movement by which ethical sentiment redeemed the labor-
ing population of England from utter degradation.

It is the duty of the ethical theorist to show that the self-
interest of the manufacturer and landlord do not secure the pub-
lic welfare in any city of this country, and that it is precisely this
self-interest, narrowly conceived, which prevents rational legis-
lation against child-labor and sweat shops in Illinois. To show
these phenomena, their causes and wide results is precisely the
duty of the social scholar. ‘Philanthropy has nothing to do
with it . .. any more than with astronomy or with the law of
gravitation.” ‘The purposes of business, the sense of respon-
sibility to others, the danger of personal loss and possible failure,
and the hope of reward are the surest guarantees for the conduct
of affairs in the mutual interests of employé and employed.”
Compare with these assertions the evidence presented before the
Poor Law Commissioners of England in 1834 and succeeding
years; the black list of adulterations of food so familiar as to
hardly excite comment; the pictures of degradation of laborers,
the crippling of children, the demoralization of women due to
unregulated “free” competition, which are adduced by Professor
Walker in his work on “Wages,” and by Professor H.C. Adams
in his essay on ‘Relation of the State to Industrial Action.”
Con the “Hull House” Maps for Chicago facts; and then say
whether there is no need of “philanthrophy”’ in the regulation of
industry. It would be interesting to know what a factory would
be worth in a community where “sentiment” had died of asphyxia,
and where the interest of one class was left to determine the
terms on which industry should be conducted.

It is not denied that the sense of fairness and justice is strong
in business men; but we do claim that without strong ethical
feeling organized for common action, the meanest employer sets
the pace for all those who really desire to be honorable and fair.

Take an example from the phenomena of women’s wages.
Here sentiment is a powerful factor in reducing wages. While
the working girl is despised for kitchen labor; while the occupa-
tions open to women are overcrowded because the prejudices of
both men and women close others; so long will women suffer
from removable causes. So Professor Walker says : ‘What is the
remedy? Agitation and the diffusion of correct ideas, Let gifted
women continue to appeal for public respect and sympathy for
their sisters in work; let the schools teach that public opinion
may powerfully affect wages, and that nothing which depends on
human volition is inexorable! ... Efforts like these will not
fail to strengthen and support woman in her resort to market.”
There is one field of practice in which a social scholar as a citizen
must enter,—the field of local government. His activity may
be limited, but here he fights for his altar and hearth. It is true
that here again he meets the hostility or merry contempt of a
certain class of “practical” men. Now it is the turn of the
scholar to find himself in company with the merchant, and both
of them classed by politicians as “laymen.” The local leaders
of intrigue give both to understand that they are out of place
and that they may as well let the machine alone,—it is too com-
plicated and mysterious for gentlemen to manage.

But it cannot really be impertinent for a scholar to deal with
those practical affairs which touch every interest of his life as a
citizen, a father, a patriot and an idealist. It may not be pleas-
ant work to fight petty robbers in defense of his little property,
the school of his children, the supply of light and protection, and
the essential conditions of health. Nothing but intellectual
impotence can excuse any citizen, least of all the social scholar,
from a degree of direct effort on behalf of good local govern-
ment. He is liable to make mistakes, but these will not be so
fatal as the acts of men who sell or buy franchises under which
the community is made to serve the clique. If anything can
turn a quiet student into the noisy street, it is the conviction
that the public thoroughfare is being taken from him without
adequate recompense.

When the scholar enters the sphere of practice, he must pre-
pare himself for the treatment given a man with a silk hat in the
bull-and-bear pit on a board of trade holiday; he becomes the
target for the wildest boys. If he says anything which by any
chance tends to affect prices or nominations, he should not look
for reverence. That is an obsolete virtue in American practical
life. Nothing thinner than rhinoceros hide will do for an over-
coat where conflicting interests are at stake, and arrows are fly-
ing in all directions.

And yet the scientific method is needed along with the prac-
tical method. The general interest can be served only by the
union of science and art. The bronzed captain on the bridge can
direct the ship in a storm or fog better than the author of
“Synthetic Philosophy” or “ Dynamic Sociology.” Rude sailors
told the officious nobles to go below because they did “assist
the storm.” The best service of college professors when the
wind blows worst is to stay in bed and set an example of quiet-
ness and confidence. And yet the educated captain knows that
the mathematicians, astronomers, chemists, physicists and biolo-
gists have all contributed to his art. The more thoroughly he
knows the history of navigation the more he respects the schol-
ars who have made his craft possible.

The more college graduates we have in the counting rooms
the more cordial and fruitful will be the relations between prac-
tical men and scholars. As “scholarship” comes to mean social
service, and is freed from medizvalism and dialectics, it will be
recognized and respected by the men who are driving the
machinery of production. New and improved stocks come from
cross-fertilization. ‘‘ Breeding in-and-in” causes deterioration.
Study and counting room will be more. vigorous, sane and serv-
iceable for an alliance.

Science is itself conservative and judicial. The rich trustees
of a university may well feel secure in keeping their hands off
academic freedom. The professors of a science do not belong
to a mutual admiration society. They are more nearly a swarm
of critics, makers of honey but armed with stings. No criticism
from the business world could be so persistent, pitiless and
remorseless as that with which real scholars pursue the pretender
and amateur. But aside from this codperative chastisement the
very discipline of modern scientific method begets caution. No
man ever stated the difficulties in Darwinism more clearly than
Darwin himself, There is no class of men who so fully realize
the meaning of the oath to state “the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth.” The methods of science have much in
common with the methods of business. Both are intolerant of
gaps in the chain of causation. Both demand absolute continuity
between end and means. Both are impatient of fog and specu-
lation.

In this sense science is eminently “practical,” because it
measures by the most exact methods and instruments of inves-
tigation the available forces for attaining an end which seems
desirable. The scientific ideal is an exact balance between the
debits and credits, the causes and results of human action.
There is an undetermined remainder, bad debts and losses, as in
financial settlements, but the ideal is accuracy.

The social position of the “social theorist” is an advantage.
The nature of his studies compels him to come into touch with
persons of all classes and interests. He hears and reads on all
sides. His associations are with the refined, and his ideals of
life are formed in the best company. But his professional pur-
suits compel him to weigh the claims of the entire community.
The recent introduction of the “laboratory method” in sociol-
ogy is a guaranty that no department of human life will be
neglected. Apart from the bitterness of competitive strife,
interested in public welfare as others are but not directly inter-
ested in rich or poor alone, the student of social phenomena
may be reasonably expected to bring to light and present for
consideration elements of social well-being which hot contest-
ants for immediate and class advantage are sure to overlook.

It is of the essence of democracy that the interests of all
should not be at the mercy of a few, but should be the care of
representatives of the entire community. Kings by “divine
right,” and feudal lords by grace of birth, have assumed that
they knew how to legislate for the “lower classes” better than
the chosen spokesmen of these classes. Nothing but rude
blows of revolution and noisy chartist petitions shook the ruling
classes of Britain out of this delusion. Monopolies of social
wisdom and virtue do not exist. The frank recognition of divi-
sion of intellectual labor and of common social concern is all
that is asked by the social theorist, and in an age when the pen
is mightier than sword or hammer, his claim is not likely to be
permanently ignored.

C PR Wreenroennw
