A Year's Municipal Development

Author(s): Clinton Rogers Woodruff

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 6, No. 4 (Jan., 1901), pp. 532-549
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2762290

Accessed: 09-05-2016 04:06 UTC
A YEAR’S MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT.

Tue Proceedings of the First Conference for Good City Govern-
ment, published in 1894, contained a bibliography of the litera-
ture of municipal government and its betterment. Thirty-nine
pages sufficed for this purpose. The first number of Municipal
Affairs, published in March, 1897, contained a similar bibliog-
raphy, which required 224 pages. A new edition is in process
of preparation, and its editor advises me that upward of five
hundred pages will be required to accommodate the references.

The Philadelphia Proceedings also contained a brief account
of the then existing municipal reform organizations in the country.
Forty-five were described. This year the National Municipal
League has 119 organizations on its roll of affiliated members,
and its records show a grand total of 465 devoting all or a part
of their time to the study of the municipal problem.

These figures tell their own story. They tell more directly
and forcibly than a hundred pages of manuscript of the phe-
nomenal growth of interest in municipal affairs within the past
decade.

When we review the shortcomings of a year, we feel as if the
situation were indeed grave; and so in truth it is. The official
recognition and protection of vice and immorality in many of
our large cities ; the utilization of public power and office to serve
private ends ; the prevalence of official blackmail ; the prostitution
of public offices, and contracts to serve mean and selfish party
and factional ends; the sinister influence of corrupt corporations,
present a picture at once dark and forbidding, and constitute a
problem of serious import and difficulty.

The situation, however, is by no means hopeless. For every
year brings a keener appreciation of its gravity. Every year
brings new forces into the field to combat the forces of evil.
Every year witnesses a development of public sentiment in the
direction of higher municipal standards, and advances along
definite lines. Widespread corruption and political degeneracy

532
cannot long prevail in the face of widespread investigation and
discussion and efforts at improvement. If organizations like the
National Municipal League serve no other function, they at least
show that, serious as the present municipal problem is, the out-
look is full of hope and promise.

One great difficulty with municipal reformers in the past as
well as in the present has been a too great desire to get ahead
and to introduce the political millennium without adequate politi-
cal preparation. In other words, they have failed to appreciate
and realize, even if they may recognize it, that political instincts
and institutions are of necessarily slow growth. People do not
change their political habits in a day. When we appreciate how
difficult it is to secure agreement among a few, is it any wonder
that we experience difficulty in influencing the minds and actions
of tens and hundreds of thousands? And yet this is what we
must do if we are to secure permanent municipal reform.

The recent experience of New Orleans illustrates the point
in question. In 1896 the burden of the “ring” had become
intolerable. The voters, under the leadership of a public-spirited
Citizens’ League, founded on those principles for which the
National Municipal League stands, won an overwhelming vic-
tory. They drove the rascals from power, sent a number of
them to jail, and elected honorable, honest, and capable men to
succeed them. Forthwith reforms far in advance of the public
sentiment were inaugurated, and the usual results followed. The
voters grew tired of maintaining so exalted a standard, and a
reaction set in. They had not been trained to persistent effort.
The experience, however, has, on the whole, been beneficial
rather than the reverse, and the people of New Orleans, having
had one taste of decency, will not rest content under machine
rule. Gradually a permanent sentiment for better government
will be formed in the face of adverse conditions, which will last
longer than if formed in the heat of a single campaign.

The persistency of the organized effort for municipal better-
ment is an equally encouraging factor. Many of the organiza-
tions that were at work in 1894 at the time of the Philadelphia
conference, or were formed shortly thereafter, are still at work,
with no sign of abandoning their efforts. The City Club of New
York, the Municipal Leagues of Philadelphia and Milwaukee, the
Civic Federation of Chicago, the Merchants’ Association of San
Francisco, the Reform League of Baltimore, the various civil-ser-
vice-reform bodies, have done more than maintained an existence.
They have increased in power, efficiency, and influence. Spas-
modic efforts at reform have given way to regular and systematic
endeavors. Of course, greater difficulty is of necessity encoun-
tered in the maintenance of such organizations, because they can
only appeal to the unselfish civic patriotism of the citizen ; while
the “machines” and “rings” can and do appeal to the weaker
side of ambitious, selfish, and designing men. That reform bodies
can and do maintain their existence and extend their influence
from year to year shows conclusively that civic spirit is growing
in extent and wisdom.

In three states charter reform has occupied a prominent and
conspicuous place during the past two years. California, Min-
nesota, and Wisconsin easily occupy the first place in this matter.
San Francisco’s new charter went into effect January 1, 1900,
under the auspices of an administration that had been largely
responsible for its adoption and was friendly to its proper
enforcement. The results thus far have been satisfactory to the
friends of municipal reform, including the Merchants’ Associa-
tion of the city, which, with Mayor Phelan, shares the responsi-
bility and credit for its adoption and inauguration. Of course,
there have not been wanting those who feel disappointed because
the millennium is yet in the future and because there have been
some mistakes made. These mistakes have been lessons for the
wise administrator, and should not be permitted to obscure the
predominating excellent features of the charter and of its admin-
istration.

The experience of San Francisco has been such as to encour-
age other California cities to take steps to secure newer and more
modern charters. Under the constitution and the laws of the
state a board of freeholders, fifteen in number, can be appointed
charged with the duty of drafting a charter, submitting it first to
the voters and then to the legislature. This system constitutes
an imperfect system of home rule. The people can protect
themselves against the enactment of an inadequate or pernicious
charter, but they cannot make sure of having their affirmative
desires carried out.

The San Francisco charter, while perhaps not entitled to be
classed as a model, is an advanced piece of work, and represents
careful thought and study of the situation and an intelligent
comprehension of the problems confronting modern cities. Its
influence has been for good, and the movement for improved
charters in Californiahas been materially helped and strengthened
by its example.

In Minnesota a recently adopted constitutional amendment
permits the framing of home-rule charters.

Under this and the enabling acts passed by the legislature,
the local courts are authorized to appoint upon petition a com-
mission to draft and submit a charter at a special election. A
four-sevenths vote is necessary for adoption. Minneapolis has
twice availed itself of this opportunity, and twice failed. The sec-
ond proposed charter, which was regarded as a much better instru-
ment, was submitted to the voters in November and was defeated.
St. Paul has adopted a new charter, which, while it represents an
improvement, is signally defective in that it contains no civil-
service provisions. The reform bodies of the city supported it,
however, with great vigor because of the other substantial and
important changes which it did contain. Duluth has also adopted
a new charter, and numerous other cities in the state are consid-
ing the question.

The whole movement has been a healthy and a hopeful one,
and augurs well for the future. An analysis of the new instru-
ments is out of the question in this connection. It can be said,
however, that they represent advances along many lines, and
that a larger measure of good government is now possible than
formerly. That they represent an improvement and a certain
amount of antagonism to corrupt methods is clearly demonstrated
by the vigorous opposition of vested political interests to which
they were subjected.

In Wisconsin the League of Municipalities and the Milwaukee
Municipal Association have continued an intelligent interest in
the whole subject of municipal improvement. I know of no state
where the prospect is more hopeful. Chosen officials of the
cities show an intelligent and generous disposition to codperate
with public-spirited citizens, and there exists, I believe, a condi-
tion of affairs fruitful of great good to the community.

In Iowa the late legislature authorized the appointment of a
municipal-code commission. In Wilmington, Del., the board of
trade has continued without abatement its efforts for a new
charter. The city solicitors of the Pennsylvania third-class cities
have prepared a newact to improve the present system in vogue
among them. In Spokane, Wash., a movement for a new charter
is contemplated. Mobile, Ala., has succeeded in securing a new
one. Portland, Me., will shortly pass upon a charter prepared
by an aldermanic commission.

The past year has witnessed the practical application of a
new charter in Baltimore. This has been attended by a con-
siderable reduction in the rate of taxation (from $2 to $1.67 per
$100 of assessed value) and by the reorganization of nearly all
branches of the city government. In the fire department, the
police force, and the public schools the merit system has been, to
a greater or less extent, introduced. Nonpartisan boards have
been placed in charge of the schools, charities, and some other
branches of the municipal administration, and a very commend-
able spirit of economy has been shown by the city council and
board of estimates. It is not yet quite clear to outsiders what
should be thought of Mayor Hayes. Some of his appointments —
indeed, we may fairly say the bulk of them —have apparently been
satisfactory to the local friends of good government, but a few
have been severely censured, and he seems to have behaved
occasionally in an erratic and arbitrary manner. There seems
to be some ground for these complaints, but the general opinion
among those best qualified to judge is that Mayor Hayes has
done much more than was done by any previous mayor to place
the municipal administration on a nonpartisan, business basis,
and has fully justified the support accorded him by independent
voters at the first election under the new charter. The charter
has shown itself a valuable safeguard against extravagance and
corruption. The experience of the past year in Baltimore has
been, on the whole, decidedly encouraging to reformers.

In Greater New York a charter commission, appointed by
Governor Roosevelt, is at work devising ways and means to
correct the defects and evils of the charter of 1897. That instru-
ment was necessarily somewhat of an experiment along certain
lines, and only a very few years have been needed to develop its
weak points.

There has been no serious setback during the past year for
the cause of municipal civil-service reform except in New Orleans.
There the excellent law of 1896 has been subjected to a process
of emasculation by the machine and the system reduced to that
of Philadelphia, That is to say, certain of the elective officials
who are also appointing officers have been constituted the civil-
service board, with power to make rules and regulations. The
result will be what it has been in Philadelphia—a travesty on civil-
service reform. In the latter city during the present administra-
tion the mayor’s choices, selected and announced, in some cases,
months beforehand, have been passed with averages of 100. All
that can be said of the Philadelphia and New Orleans system is
that it keeps out the very worst applicants. It does not represent
any substantial barrier to an unscrupulous official or machine.
The constitutionality of the New Orleans changes has, however,
been questioned and is now pending in the courts.

In Chicago the politicians have been foiled in their attempts
to throttle and eliminate the merit system. The Democratic
party a year ago specifically declared against it and lost the
election. Within six months it changed its attitude, and the
enforcement of the law has been placed in the hands of a
friendly commission. The constitutionality and popularity of
the system established, it begins to look as if it had become
a fixture.

In New York the Roosevelt act is justly regarded as a long
step in advance and by far the most satisfactory piece of legis-
lation on the subject thus far enacted. In New York city as in
Chicago it looks as if civil-service reform had come to stay.
Future contests are much more likely to be waged for its exten-
sion rather than for its safety.

The civil-service provisions of the San Francisco charter are
said by Dr. Albert Shaw to be “the most advanced of any
modern municipal instrument.” Mayor Phelan has shown his
friendship for the merit system by appointing a friendly com-
mission, with J. Richard Freud, of the Merchants’ Association,
as chairman. Three suits instituted to test the constitutionality
of the civil-service article have been decided in its favor.

While not wholly agreeing with those who maintain that
civil-service reform is the “only cure for our much-lamented
municipal ills,” I do believe that there can be no complete trans-
formation of our municipal politics until the offices are removed
from the reach of spoilsmen. The establishment of the merit
system in our cities is essential to the betterment of our city
governments, and all efforts directed toward the establishment
of a sound public opinion on this subject are to be encouraged.
Our numerous civil-service reform associations scattered through
the country are therefore to be encouraged, as are also the
women’s auxiliaries; but we must be careful to guard against
the view that there is but one panacea for our ills. I think we
shall find that we shall have a municipal problem on our hands
even after the merit system has been generally inaugurated.

For instance, are not just, equitable election laws fundamen-
tally essential ?

Can any community long retain a democratic form of gov-
ernment, even though the most approved and most stringent
civil-service regulations may be in force, if the election laws
connive at and protect frauds, and are so arranged as to enable
corrupt men to maintain their creatures in office? Ballot and
electoral reforms form paramount issues in certain states at this
time. In Pennsylvania a Union Committee, representing the
Ballot Reform Association, the Civil Service Reform Associa-
tion, and the Municipal League, has been formed to promote
the cause of electoral reform in the state. The politics of Penn-
sylvania have achieved and retained their unpleasant and unfor-
tunate notoriety largely through the existence of a set of laws
that make frauds at election easy of accomplishment and diffi-
cult of detection; which facilitate the election of machine men
and discriminate against the honest independent. Until Penn-
sylvania has fair and adequate election laws it is almost useless
to talk of other reforms. The present prospect favors the enact-
ment of a law that will place all voters and all candidates on a
parity, and the adoption of a constitutional amendment and laws
which will make personal registration possible and will introduce
other much-needed regulations and safeguards.

The Municipal League of Philadelphia for years has been
laboring to bring about these reforms, and the present bright
outlook is undoubtedly in very considerable part due to its per-
sistence. In 1897 the constitutional amendment was prepared
by one of its committee and presented to the legislature by its
counsel. It failed of passage at that session, but in 1899 was
again introduced, and this time passed, only to meet with the
governor’s veto. The league questioned his right to take this
action and instituted a suit to determine the scope of his author-
ity. The lower court decided against the league’s contention;
but the supreme court sustained every one of its points and denied
the right of a governor to prevent the people from passing on
proposals to amend the constitution which have had the sanction
of the legislature. The amendment must pass another legisla-
ture before it can be finally submitted to a vote of the people.

The league’s victory has been considered by the leading
papers of the state, not identified with the machine, as one of
the most notable reform victories achieved in the state.

The plight of Kentucky under its present election law is well
known. The reform forces of that state have laid aside every
other consideration and measure, and concentrated their energies
to secure “a fair election law.” A nonpartisan committee has
been formed, which has been conducting a vigorous campaign
for the repeal of the infamous Goebel law and the enactment of
a statute which will safeguard the liberties of the state.

The existence of a law which makes it possible to throw out
the entire vote of a large and influential city like Louisville is a
menace to free government. Until it is repealed, public activities
are of necessity paralyzed and every privilege for which our
forefathers struggled placed in jeopardy. The civic spirit of the
state is very much alive, and is working as best it can against such
tremendous odds to defeat a machine which has stood sponsor
for so iniquitous a measure.

In Missouri another partisan statute stands in the way of
healthy political activity. It was conceived in partisan spite
and to promote partisan advantage, and those who have been
intrusted with its enforcement have followed in the spirit of its
conception. The prostitution of the offices to partisan ends is
bad, is reprehensible; but it is as nothing compared with the
prostitution of the instruments which freemen use to express
their opinions and wishes on public affairs.

In Wisconsin the movement for electoral reform has taken
a somewhat different form. Governor-elect La Follette, through
a splendid effort covering a period of at least four years, has
awakened the voters of the state to the urgent necessity of a
reform in the methods of nominations. In essence he advocates
the nomination of all candidates by the Australian ballot at what
would, to all intents and purposes, be a preliminary election.
Mr. La Follette’s suggestions are worthy of the closest study.
His suggestions are in the right direction and indicate a tem-
porary relief; but eventually we must make the means of placing
a candidate’s name on the official ballot absolutely free, equal,
and open. Nomination by petition, in short, is the most effective
way to prevent the evils in nominations which have been so
effectively portrayed and condemned by Mr. La Follette and
the Republican party of the state which has embraced his views
on the subject.

The machine has had a few more valuable privileges than
that of controlling nominations and a straight column on the
ballot. It will yield this advantage reluctantly and only after a
prolonged struggle; but freedom and equality of nomination and
balloting must be secured if the full measure of democratic
municipal government is to be attained.

One of the great obstacles standing in the way of that sepa-
ration of the consideration of the municipal affairs from state
and national politics for which this league preéminently stands
has been the existence on the statute books of laws which place a
premium on straight party voting and discriminate against the
independent voter and candidate. A citizen fully determined to
vote his convictions in this direction finds, after entering the
polling booth, that the tickets and the distribution of the offices
have been so arranged that it is a matter of great difficulty for
him to carry out his intentions. What with the complex duties
imposed upon members of the legislature, who select the United
States senators, pass state laws, and determine the form and con-
ditions of municipal governments; and the absence of municipal
home rule in letter or spirit, and the existence of a partisan
ballot, the reformer interested in divorcing municipal questions
from state and national ones has a hard task before him. Our
present form of government almost inextricably mixes our
national, state, and municipal politics, and partisanship has
devised a further means of perpetuating itself through establish-
ing a straight party column and a monopoly in the matter of
nominations. The election of United States senators by a direct
vote of the people would eliminate national politics from our
state legislatures. The establishment of municipal home rule
would eliminate municipal questions from them.

The inauguration of free and equal nominations and the
abolition of party columns would complete the work of separa-
tion, and the citizens of our municipalities would have, what is
now denied them, an adequate opportunity to determine municipal
issues from a municipal standpoint.

Municipal home rule must be established if we are to obtain
local self-government. The evils of depending upon a source
of authority outside of itself have rapidly multiplied. New
York city furnishes a striking lesson of the dangers of such
dependence. The people of that city are constantly resorting to
the legislature at Albany for relief from local conditions, over-
looking their ability to apply their own remedy at home. Should
Senator Platt succeed in establishing a state constabulary law
for New York city, it will constitute a most serious blow to the
cause of municipal home rule. Consequently a feeling of
dependence has been engendered, and the voters feel that if they
should make a mistake in the choice of local officials, they can
be saved from the results of their folly by an appeal to the
legislature.

There has been no abatement of public interest in the subject
of the municipal ownership of municipal monopolies. Indeed,
there seems to be a general acquiescence in the contention that
each city should own all its franchises; although there is still a
great diversity of opinion as to whether the city should control
or operate them. There are few indeed, who are willing to
maintain that a city should give away or sell for all time the
right to run street railways, to furnish heat, light, water, or other
municipal necessities. To advocate such a policy would be to
sanction the utilization of city property for the benefit of the few
at the expense of the many. There are not many who are willing
to do this, so that the discussion has practically narrowed itself
down to the determination whether the city shall merely control
the franchise in a general way, reserving a fair rental, or whether
it shall actually operate the plants directly. In considering this
phase we find that the consensus of opinion seems to be in favor
of the operation of water plants and the control of street-rail-
way operations, with opinion about equally divided on the sub-
ject of lighting. One thing is perfectly sure, and that is, as a
result of all this discussion concerning municipal ownership,
control, and operation, there has been a material improvement in
the condition which the city has been able to impose; and,
secondly, the people have been more than ever interested in
questions of local government. Matters pertaining to water,
heat, light, and transportation come home directly to the average
citizen, and any policy affecting them appeals to him as no
others do.

A strike like that which recently convulsed St. Louis also
serves to awaken the people to the dangers incident to the
private control and operation of important municipal functions.
For suffer as we may from municipal corruption and inefficiency,
they seldom, if ever, reach a point where violence and bloodshed
follow. Furthermore, voters are coming to realize that the
existence of rich corporations in a community dependent upon or
seeking municipal favors and discharging municipal functions
constitutes a serious menace. Who does not recognize the serious
import of the Ramapo Water Co.’s alliance with a nefarious
political combination? The united efforts of a courageous gov-
ernor and a fearless comptroller and public-spirited organizations
like the Merchants’ Association have been needed to check its
aggressive efforts.

When was the good name of Philadelphia more seriously
endangered than during the successful attempts to pass the gas
ordinance and the Keystone telephone ordinance, and the unsuc-
cessful attempt to pass the notorious Schuylkill Valley water
ordinance? Out of the Keystone telephone ordinance has
grown one of the gravest scandals of recent years. So flagrantly
unfair were the terms of the ordinance and so patent the inten-
tions of its backers that the press of the city, with but few
exceptions, united in condemning its nefarious provisions and its
equally nefarious surroundings. So keen and direct was the
criticism that the local administration, through its director of
public safety, in charge of the police of the city, resorted to
blackmail. Mr. John Wanamaker, whose son owns the Worth
American, one of the most vigorous of critics, was visited by the
official in question and threatened that if he did not cause that
paper to stop its comments he would publish certain affidavits
of a derogatory character which he had been gathering for six
months.

That an influential official should use the enormous powers
reposed in him by the laws of the state to seek out and destroy
those who had the courage to point out and criticise the short-
comings of the administration filled the community with horror.
A great mass meeting was held in the Academy of Music under
the auspices of the Philadelphia Municipal League to protest
against official blackmail and the gross abuse of official power.
Not for many years has so great a mass meeting been held in
the city. Never have the people been so outraged. While
there does not appear at this time as if any legal action can be
taken to punish the offenders, it looks as if the people would
apply the best and most drastic of remedies —the defeat of the
administration’s candidates when they offer themselves for the
suffrages of the people.

The cry for municipal ownership in the abstract has often
been made the cloak to hide some corrupt and selfish ends. By
this I mean that very often a city administration has advocated the
policy of public ownership while following out ulterior purposes
of public plunder. This may be taken as an illustration of the
popularity of the policy or of the difficulty of establishing more
than a very few reforms at a time.

It is simply out of the question to mention the places where
municipal ownership, control, and operation have been discussed
or partly inaugurated. The list includes nearly every state and
practically every city of importance. In many localities the
successful operation of the water and gas supply by the munici-
pality ‘can well be designated as the most notable municipal
event of the year.’”’ For instance, Duluth, Minn., feels a just
pride in the success of its water and gas plants, which were
acquired a few years ago after a long struggle, and then placed
in the hands of a competent engineer who was to be subject to
no political clique or influence. ‘Not the faintest inclination
has been shown to use the department or myself,” writes the
manager, ‘for political purposes. And therein lies the secret
of our success.” Rates have been reduced, the service has been
made pleasant and agreeable to consumers, special privileges
have been abolished, interest on the investment has been paid,
and a surplus accumulated. If this can be done in Duluth, if
honesty, economy, and intelligence can be introduced there,
why is it not equally feasible to do the same elsewhere? It is,
and if a story of honest business conduct of everyday affairs
could secure readers, a long one could be made out; but people
much prefer to hear a tale of shortcoming, and consequently we
hear of more of the failures of municipal control and operation
than we do of the successes. Naturally we conclude that the
former are the rule; the latter the exceptions. We might as well
conclude that vice and immorality are the rule because the
average newspaper devotes more space to them than it does to
virtue and honesty. Yet we know from our own experience that
the reverse is true.

The blind and selfish partisanship which gave to New York
four years of Tammany rule and defeated Seth Low gave to New
York city in its comptroller one of the most vigorous and prom-
ising figures in municipal life today, and likewise made possible
the election of a governor a year later who has through his
initiative and splendid leadership placed many wholesome laws
upon the statute book. Pittsburg reformers, after several years
of futile effort and discouraging-defeats, have taken fresh courage
and a new view of the situation. Their codperation in the bal-
lot-reform movement bids fair to open up new avenues of use-
fulness. We must not forget that a desire for municipal
right-doing is of slow growth. A hastily expressed wish is as
quickly suppressed.

Cincinnati a year ago rebuked its ring by defeating its can-
didates, but the instruments used proved inadequate to the task
imposed upon them. There was abrief resentment felt, but not
a deep-seated desire for reform; consequently there was little, if
any, discrimination in the selection of candidates, and the usual
results followed. What an old, old story! Disgust at long-con-
tinued debauchery; a sudden determination to change matters ;
support of the first set of men who will promise relief; their
election; the subsidence of public interest and a reversion to
former practices by officials and to civic indifference by the
citizens. Too often the people content themselves with a mere
exhibition of their power, not caring to direct that power to
definite ends. Such exhibitions amount to but little in the long run.

The principal work of the Milwaukee League, now known as
the Municipal Association, during the past year has been its
opposition to the street-railway company in its efforts to secure
undue advantages from the city for a grossly inadequate consid-
eration. In this it also opposed a city government originally
elected expressly to protect the city against the road’s encroach-
ment. An ordinance was introduced in the interest of the road
granting a ten-years’ extension of franchises, otherwise terminat-
ing in 1924, and twelve new franchises extending to 1924 and of
great aggregate value. For this it promised to give the people
a fare, including one transfer, that shall not exceed 5 cents, with
six tickets for 25 cents, or twenty-five for $1, good between
5:30 to 8 a.m. and 5 to 7 P.M. until January 1, 1905, when the
same fare was to be extended over the entire day.

In view of these conditions the league held the first public
meeting of indignation and protest when such a course required
a good deal of courage. It condemned the ordinance with
unsparing vigor, but scrupulously avoided personalities. As a
result a large and representative committee was appointed to
oppose the ordinance before the common council, and this was
the beginning of a long and bitter contest between the people of
all classes and the street railway and city government. Indig-
nation meetings were held in all parts of the city, two of them
called by the league, and the upheaval will not soon be forgotten.
Unfortunately the meetings were not always conducted as
exclusively upon the merits of the case as the initial meeting had
been, and it is believed in some quarters that this may have been
conducive to an unfavorable result —the passage of the ordinance
in the face of injunction proceedings and general adverse popular
opinion. Litigation growing out of the controversy is still pend-
ing in the Wisconsin supreme court. The position of the league
was that the ordinance was a serious infringement of the interests
of the city, and the duty of the city government was to continue
the existing conditions until such time as the road should make
a more equitable condition.

Chicago has taken a sensible course in regard to its railway
franchises; its board of aldermen having appointed a Street
Railway Commission, with a competent secretary, to consider
the subject in a thorough and systematic manner against the
time when the extension ordinances must come up for considera-
tion. The feature of the situation in Chicago which deserves
emphasis is the breakdown of the nonpartisan organization of
the council, as the result of partisan activity. There has been a
wonderful improvement in the Chicago city council within the
last few years—due very largely to the work along independent
lines of the Muncipal Voters’ League and similar bodies. The
voters were educated up to the point where they would vote for
the best men for city offices regardless of national party affilia-
tion. This work was consummated by requiring from the alder-
men running with the league’s indorsement a pledge to organize
this council on nonpartisan lines. A year ago the council was
so organized. Last spring the pledge as to nonpartisanship was
made stronger than ever. Before the election there was some
talk of organizing on partisan lines; but the league and the
independent newspapers at once challenged this talk, with the
result that the idea of partisan organization apparently was
abandoned, and the league’s pledge was signed by all the alder-
manic candidates who had the league’s indorsement. After the
election the majority met in caucus as partisans and finally put
through the committee slate approved by the caucus. The
‘personnel of the council is good, and of the committees fairly
good. The fact, however, that the council was organized by a
party caucus, in violation of the pledges made by a majority of
the caucus to organize on nonpartisan lines, gave rise to much
criticism and is regarded as discouraging. It is taken to mean
the reintroduction of partisanship into aldermanic elections, and
next spring voters no doubt will be urged to adhere to party
lines on the ground that the men elected are likely to act as
Republicans or Democrats, as the case may be, when in office.
The Municipal Voters’ League, in a report dealing with the
subject, has called attention to the difficulty of securing and
holding a good council under the partisan system of nomination
and election. It points out that the candidates offered by the
party organization are frequently weak or colorless where they
are not openly bad. In short, the partisan system does not
operate to bring to the front the strongest men. Under the
partisan system of nomination and the partisan ballot there is a
limit to the betterment of conditions. Improvement can go
only so far and it must halt. It is the opinion of leading officers
of the Municipal Voters’ League that the best results in city
affairs can only be attained when the nonpartisan ballot shall
have been substituted for the partisan ballot. Probably the next
legislature of Illinois will be asked to provide for such a ballot
in city elections. Chicago’s experience amply reinforces the
contention of advocates for a nonpartisan ballot, as outlined in
the ‘Municipal Program.” Partisanship must be eliminated from
our laws, even if we cannot altogether eliminate it from our
political considerations.

So much has been said concerning the hopeful tendencies and
the various setbacks of the past year that but little space is left
for a recital of the victories of the year. Some have already
been incidentally referred to in other connections ; of the remain-
der a few will be touched upon simply by way of illustration and
to encourage those who are striving to bring about a better con-
dition of affairs.

In June last Portland, Ore., held a most interesting election.
Oregon cast a large Republican vote. Indeed, the sentiment in
this direction was reported to be greater than ever before. Yet,
in face of this, Portland elected nearly its entire citizens’ ticket,
on the platform “ Hands off city affairs.” All the independent
state senators and at least ten of the twelve representatives were
chosen, notwithstanding the strength of the Republican organi-
zation and the running of the political tide in its favor. So
vigorously has the sentiment grown that the county and city
offices are matter of business and not of politics, and should be
freed from constant legislative trickery, that the people have
served notice that there must be an end to machine interference.
The significance of the victory lies in that the candidates who
were not interested in local affairs received a tremendous Repub-
lican majority, while politicians whom the people knew were
interested adversely to them, or who had worked for the political
control of city departments, were soundly beaten.

The election of Washington Gladden as an alderman in Colum-
bus, O., is an event of national significance. That so competent
and so well-informed a man could be elected speaks much for
the district he represents and for his influence in it. That one
so busy should accept the onerous burdens attached to alder-
manic duties is an example the force of which should not be
lost upon those men who advocate good government, but refuse
to make sacrifices for it. As a leading paper in commenting on
his acceptance said: ‘If Dr. Gladden can find time to go into the
council, there is no excuse that will suffice to release any man.”

The election of Professor Samuel E. Sparling, of the Univer-
sity of Wisconsin, to the Madison board of aldermen, and that of
Rev. Norman Fox, D.D., to be mayor of Morristown, N. J., teach
the same lessons. When voters will elect such men to office, and
when such men will accept office, the solution of the municipal
problem is not a hopeless one.

The Philadelphia Municipal League won a notable victory in
February by electing four of its magisterial candidates over those
chosen by the machine. In Rochester the Good Government
Club has secured and held a position as a balance of power, to
the manifest advantage of the city’s best interest. Troy, N. Y.,
has witnessed the overthrow of the ring’s candidates in face of
twenty-five years’ control. Comptroller Coler has increased his
hold upon the confidence of his constituents, and has proved a
thorn in the side of those whose interests were inimical to the
city’s. Boston defeated by a decisive vote an attempt of the
street-railway company to reimpose surface tracks on Tremont
street, after the expenditure of millions in the construction of
the subway. The good-government organizations of Detroit and
Cleveland have successfully continued their much-needed work
of discrimination between candidates.

There are many other points which of right should be touched
upon in this report, but the year’s development has been so
extended and varied, the movement has grown so vigorously,and
the agencies for betterment multiplied so rapidly, that it is simply
out of the question to touch more than a few phases, and those
but generally. This, however, we must all agree, affords ground
for encouragement and reasonable hope, and amply justifies the
continuation and extension of the work for which organizations
like the National Municipal League stand.

Ciinton Rocers Wooprurr.
