The Biological Foundations of Sociology

Author(s): G. Archdall Reid

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 11, No. 4 (Tan., 1906), pp. 532-554
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2762564

Accessed: 09-05-2016 04:43 UTC
THE BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIOLOGY?

G. ARCHDALL REID, M.B., F.R.S.E.
London

Probably no facts can be named of such importance as those
of heredity. They lie at the basis of every science and every pur-
suit that deals with living beings. Hardly a social, moral, or
intellectual question can be thought of but we find that in its
deeper aspects it is a problem of heredity. Heredity concerns not
only the philosopher and the man of science, but also the parent,
the teacher, the doctor, and even the statesman, the social
reformer, and the historian. Properly handled, it is not a very
abstruse subject. We are able to reach tolerably certain conclu-
sions without traveling much beyond the range of knowledge
common to most educated men. Nevertheless, though in all ages
heredity has greatly interested all men, it has as yet few real stu-
dents. The very interest it has excited has burdened it with
superstitions, which in the past have been accepted as matters of
common knowledge by men of science, who have added to the
obscurity by elaborately seeking to explain the existence of the
non-existent, the possibility of the impossible. Only very recently
have some of these cobwebs been swept away.

The basis of all life is the cell. A cell is a minute mass of
living protoplasm. Cells multiply by absorbing nutriment and
dividing into two or more daughter-cells. In the lowest organ-
isms the daughter-cells separate. Each individual, therefore,
consists of a single cell. Higher organisms consist of many, it
may be billions, adherent cells which work together for the com-
mon benefit. Among the cells of multicellular individuals are the
germ-cells, to which is delegated the function of producing future
individuals, future cell-communities. A germ-cell from one indi-

Read before the Sociological Society, at the School of Economics and
Political Science (University of London), Clare Market, W. C., October 24, 1905.
Sir John A. Cockburn in the chair.
vidual unites with a germ-cell from another. The compound cell
thus formed, the fertilized ovum, multiplies by dividing and
redividing many times the one cell into two cells, till a new
individual, a new cell-colony—-a man, for instance— arises.
During multiplication, differentiation in form and function occurs
among the cells, so that ultimately the individual is compounded
of many different kinds of cells — muscle-cells, skin-cells, gland-
cells, nerve-cells, and so forth. In the fertilized ovum is a dot, the
nucleus. In the nucleus are ultra-microscopical dots and threads
of a substance which, when multiplication occurs, displays remark-
able movements and is divided, seemingly with great precision,
among the daughter-cells. In this way it passes, apparently with
little change, from the germ-cells of the parent to those of the
offspring. This substance has been identified, with a high degree
of probability, as the germ-plasm, the bearer of heredity. We
need not pin our faith to any theories as to the composition of the
germ-plasm; but some such substance there must be—some
substance which is the bearer of heredity. If this theory of the
transmission of the germ-plasm from germ-cell to germ-cell be
correct—and all the evidence indicates that it is correct —the
child resembles his parent, not because his several parts are
derived from similar parts of his parent—his head from his
parent’s head, his hand from his parent’s hand, and so on — but
because his germ-plasm is derived by direct descent from the
parental germ-plasm, and therefore is very similar. The nature
of the germ-plasm, therefore, determines the nature of the indi-
vidual that arises from the germ-cells. Thus from one variety
of germ-plasm proceeds a man, and from another a rabbit. When
a species undergoes evolution, the germ-plasm undergoes gradual
change. When we improve our domestic plants and animals, the
alteration is always in essence a germinal change. It is the germ-
plasm that is the main fact to be grasped in a study of heredity.

All the characters, all the physical and mental parts, of a
living being are either “inborn” or “acquired.” An inborn
character is one which comes to the individual “by nature,” as
part of his natural inheritance. An acquired character, on the
other hand, is a modification of an inborn character caused, as a
rule, by use, disuse, or injury. For example, a man’s hand is
inborn. It comes to him by nature; it arises because the germ-
plasm in the germ-cell whence he sprang was so constituted that
it caused that germ-cell, under fit conditions of shelter and nutri-
tion, to multiply into a being having a man’s hand. In brief, a
man’s hand is a germinal character; but the thickening of the
skin in the palm of the hand which results from use, or a scar
which results from injury, is not an inborn character, but an
acquirement.

The principal mass of both inborn and acquired characters are
ancient possessions of the race. Thus the hand and the thickened
skin of the palm have been possessed by innumerable generations
of men. But in some characters offspring differ from their
parents. When these new characters are inborn, they are tech-
nically termed variations. Thus, if the child of normal parents
were “blind” “by nature,” his peculiarity would be a variation;
but if he became blind by injury, it would be an acquirement.
The great importance of distinguishing between inborn and
acquired characters lies in the fact that the former, including
variations, tend to be inherited by offspring, whereas most stu-
dents of heredity deny that the latter are ever inherited. It should
be noted that some acquirements are of great magnitude. Thus,
in the human being, the limbs develop beyond the infantile stand-
ard mainly under the influence of use, a paralyzed infant limb
growing little, if at all. Almost all growth, therefore, that
occurs in the limbs after birth is an acquirement.

Offspring tend to reproduce the main mass of the parental
inborn characters, but always with variations— with innumer-
able inborn differences— which, as a rule, are minute as com-
pared with the likenesses. Thus the child of a human being is
always another human being, but “by nature” he is invariably
somewhat different from his parent—a little taller or shorter,
stronger or weaker, fairer or darker, and so forth. The chief
problem of heredity, both theoretical and practical, is the question
as to what causes offspring to differ from their parents in this
inborn way. The importance of the problem at once becomes
evident when we remember that all racial change, all evolution,
depends on the variations of the individual members of the
species; that is, on changes in the germ-plasm. A race evolves
when it piles variations on variations during successive genera-
tions. It is in this way that species undergo change during a state
of nature. It is in this way that we improve our domesticated
plants and animals.

Several theories have been formulated to account for the
occurrence of variation, but they may all be placed in one of two
categories. On the one hand, it is supposed that the variations
of offspring are caused by changes in the environments of the
germ-cells whence the offspring arise; on the other hand, it is
supposed that they are not so caused, but arise “ spontaneously.”
The first theory is very popular with medical men. Thus it is
believed by them that, if a man leads a healthy, active life, his
children will be innately stronger and more vigorous than they
would otherwise have been; whereas, if he falls into ill-health
through want, hardship. disease, dissipation, or some such cause,
his germ-cells will be injured, and his offspring will tend to be
innately inferior. A natural corollary to this hypothesis is a
belief that a race will grow strong and vigorous if placed under
conditions that benefit its individuals; whereas it will degenerate
if placed under opposite conditions. This belief, of course, is
fundamentally opposed to the doctrine of natural selection, which
supposes that races evolve only when placed under influences
which, because injurious to the individual, weed out the weak
and the unfit, and leave the race to the strong and fit.

We can easily test these opposing doctrines by noting what
has happened to various races of men. Negroes on the west
coast of Africa, for example, have been exposed for hundreds,
perhaps thousands, of generations to severe malaria. This disease
is caused by a microbe which invades the body in great numbers
and floods it with a virulent poison, in which, therefore, the germ-
cells are literally soaked. Practically speaking, every negro
suffers for a prolonged period from malaria, and many perish
of it. If ever the environment of the germ-cell causes variations
in offspring, it should do so in this instance. But what do we
find? Neither the negroes nor any other races exposed to malaria
have grown degenerate. The negroes, for example, are a tall and
robust race. On the contrary, every race that has been exposed
to the disease is resistant to it precisely in proportion to the dura-
tion and severity of its past sufferings; and this, apparently, is
the sole effect that malaria has had on any race. The same is true
of every other disease and every other adverse condition to which
any race is subjected. Thus Englishmen, who have suffered
much from consumption, are more resistant to it than negroes,
who have suffered less, and much more resistant than Polynesians,
who have had no previous experience of the disease and are exter-
minated when it is introduced to their islands. Extreme cold has
not rendered degenerate the Eskimos, nor extreme heat the
Arabs; they have merely been rendered, by the survival of the fit,
resistant to heat or cold respectively. Many races have been
afflicted by alcohol for thousands of years. Some men are natur-
ally more susceptible to the charm of alcohol than others. These,
because they are more tempted, drink, on the whole, to greater
excess, and thus are weeded out to a greater extent. As a conse-
quence, every race is temperate precisely in proportion to its past
experience of alcohol. Thus west-African savages, who have
long possessed unlimited supplies of palm toddy, the Jews, and
the inhabitants of the vine countries of the south of Europe are
more temperate than north-Europeans, and infinitely more tem-
perate than most savages. What is true of alcohol is true also of
opium. Thus the natives of India, who have long used the drug,
are very temperate; the Chinese, who have used it for two
centuries, are less temperate; whereas Burmans, Australians,
and Polynesians, who have only lately made its acquaintance, are
extremely intemperate. City life, particularly slum life, is injuri-
ous to the individual. Each succeeding generation of slum-
dwellers presents a very debilitated and puny appearance, and
the mortality is immense. But races that have been most sub-
jected to the influences of city life—the Chinese, for example —
are in no way degenerate. The Chinese are a particularly fine
race of people.

On the other hand, as is well known, if a race is placed under
conditions highly beneficial to its individuals, so that the elimina-
tion of the unfit is reduced to a minimum, it tends to degenerate.
Thus we cannot improve or even preserve our breed of race-
horses merely by supplying good food and the other conditions
necessary for a healthy existence. We must weed out the unfit,
and so breed the race with care.

Were the prevailing medical doctrine, that variations are nor-
mally caused by the direct action of the environment on the germ-
plasm, true, all life would be impossible on earth; for all living
species are subjected to deteriorating influences, such as cold,
want, and disease. Unless the germ-plasm were resistant to the
environment, every species would drift steadily and helplessly to
destruction. Natural selection could not preserve it. There could
be no selection when all variations were unfavorable. There could
be no improvement in a race when in each generation all its indi-
viduals were inferior to their predecessors. Medical men found
their belief chiefly on certain statistics, compiled mainly by gentle-
men in charge of lunatic asylums, which demonstrate that a large
number of feeble-minded people have parents or grandparents dis-
eased or intemperate. But these statistics fail to take into account
the proportion of cases which have inherited parental defects, or
which have varied spontaneously from the parents. They fail also
to demonstrate that asylum patients have parents diseased or
intemperate in a greater proportion of cases than people of the
same social stratum outside the walls. I hope it will be under-
stood that, in controverting the prevailing medical doctrine, I do
not mean to imply that variations in offspring are never caused
by parental disease or intemperance. I mean to imply merely
that instances of variations so caused must be very rare. Other-
wise the race would become extinct. We know that the offspring
of diseased and intemperate people are often perfectly normal and
robust. That implies that their germ-plasm was insusceptible to
the action of toxins and alcohol. This insusceptible type survives.
The susceptible types are weeded out. A high degree of insus-
ceptibility is thus established as a necessary condition of individual
and racial survival, and in the process of ages becomes almost
absolute. Doubtless the germ-plasm of every species is most
insusceptible to the influences to which it is normally exposed.
Under exceptional circumstances, as when exposed to novel and
powerful influences, the whole race is sometimes rendered really
degenerate, as is proved by the deterioration of European dogs in
India and horses in the Falkland Islands. But the mere fact of
deterioration under novel conditions proves clearly how necessary
for the preservation of the race is a high degree of insusceptibility
to the influences to which the race is normally exposed. In view
of the indisputable fact that races undergo evolution, not degenera-
tion, when exposed to disease and alcohol, the medical doctrine of
heredity amounts in effect to this, that if only a race goes down
hill long enough, it will ultimately arrive at the top. It is literally
inconceivable that evolution can have resulted from continuous
degeneration.

We must conclude, therefore, that variations are very rarely
due to the direct action of the environment on the germ-plasm.
This conclusion is confirmed by another set of facts, which serve
also to indicate the true source of variations—the true reason
why offspring differ innately from their parents. The members
of a litter of dogs, cats, or pigs always vary, not only from their
parents, but among themselves, and may vary very greatly. Thus
one puppy may be large, strong, vigorous, dark, and rough-haired ;
while others may exhibit different qualities in all sorts of com-
binations. One puppy may resemble the father, another the
mother, and a third some distant ancestor. Obviously, their
extreme variations cannot be due to the action of environment;
for all the germ-cells and all the puppies before birth were placed
under conditions that were practically identical. We have no
choice, therefore, but to believe that the variations of the litter are
spontaneous; in other words, that their source lies in the nature
of the germ-plasm, not in the action of the environment. We
know that a germ-cell, on being fertilized, spontaneously produces
many different kinds of body-cells, such as skin- and muscle-cells.
In just the same way it produces spontaneously germ-cells which
differ among themselves. These variations are absolutely neces-
sary to the persistence of the species. Otherwise natural selection
would have no material to work on. Children would be exact
copies of the parent, and the race could not adapt itself to changes
in the environment. Thus it is only because children vary spon-
taneously from their parents in all directions, like bullet marks
round a bull’s-eye, that natural selection has been able to render
the races of mankind resistant to all the diseases by which they are
assailed.

We reach thus two fundamental biological laws. The first
law is that the germ-plasm is very highly indifferent to the action
of the environment, and therefore that children are seldom
affected by the influences to which their parents are exposed. The
second law is that germ-cells, and therefore the individuals that
arise from them, vary spontaneously among themselves, just as
the body-cells vary, and for the same reason. It follows! that we
cannot improve races of plants and animals by improving the con-
ditions under which they exist. Such a course benefits the indi-
vidual, but results in racial degeneration. The race can be
improved only by restricting parentage to the finest individuals.
All the practice, if not the theory, of breeders confirms us in this
belief.

It will be well worth our while to devote a little space to a
consideration of some of the effects resulting from man’s evolu-
tion against disease. Probably this evolution is the only form of
evolution which civilized races are now undergoing. Such is our
care for the weak in body and mind that there is nothing to indi-
cate, for example, that big and strong and active men, or clever
men, have, on the average, more children than smaller or duller
men. Nearly all our deaths are due to disease or old age. The
few that are otherwise caused are not selective in the sense that
they eliminate particular types of individual. Thus death by
drowning does not select particular types. It falls on the fit and
unfit in a fashion that is quite haphazard.

Zymotic diseases—that is, diseases due to living microbes —
appear to have originated among the ancient and crowded popu-
lations of the Old World. Our oldest histories, even our oldest
myths, tell of plague and pestilence. But we have no indication,
with the exception of malaria, that any such diseases existed in the
Western Hemisphere before the arrival of Europeans. On the
contrary, while we never hear of European adventurers in the
Western Hemisphere falling ill of any new disease except malaria,
we have quite definite accounts of the first introduction of this or
that Old World malady to this and that region of the western
world. The microbes of certain diseases, such as malaria and the
sleeping-sickness, are transferred from one human being to
another by winged insects, and may therefore prevail in regions
where the population is scanty. But most other zymotic diseases
pass directly from man to man, and therefore prevail most where
the population is densest. Thus the mortality from consumption,
and therefore the stringency of selection by consumption, is much
greater in the slums of great cities than in the open country. Dur-
ing uncounted centuries, therefore, with the advance of civiliza-
tion and the increase of population, man in the Old World under-
went evolution against many forms of disease. By means of this
evolution he achieved the power of dwelling in towns and cities,
of living a civilized existence in spite of the prevalence of disease.
Then, when the germs of disease were rife in every home and
thick on the garments of every man, Columbus discovered
America. At once the vastest tragedy in human existence began.
The New World was swept from end to end by recurrent pesti-
lences of air- and water-borne diseases, such as small-pox, measles,
and cholera. Whole tribes and nations were destroyed or deci-
mated. But an equal part was played by consumption. This
disease particularly affects such dark and ill-ventilated houses as
are built by men of European race in cold climates. The natives
of all the temperate parts of the New World melted away before
it. They could not at once achieve, under the worst conditions,
an evolution which the natives of the Old World achieved during
the course of many centuries, at the cost of hundreds of millions
of lives, under conditions that became worse only very slowly.
Nowhere in all the temperate parts of the New World has a settle-
ment of white men a native quarter such as every white settle-
ment has in Asia and Africa. The destruction wrought among
the inhabitants of the tropical forests was less. Malaria, to which
they had become resistant, protected them from the inrush of
Europeans, while the abundance of heat and light, and the absence
of towns and cities, checked the prevalence of consumption.
While, therefore, the native races of all temperate America, as
well as of all Australasia and Polynesia, seem irrevocably doomed
to extinction, it is possible that the aborigines of tropical America,
strengthened as they have been by a large infusion of European
blood, may persist. In the more temperate regions even half-
castes perish of consumption; hence the absence of a mixed race.
The political effects of the invasion of the New World by the
disease of the Eastern Hemisphere have been very remarkable.
Spain and Portugal, powerful nations in the fifteenth and six-
teenth centuries, had the first start in the race for empire, and
chose the seemingly richer tropics. But there malaria checked
colonization, and consumption did not cause the elimination of
the natives. The weaker British were shouldered into the
inhospitable north, where the vast void cleared by disease gave
their race almost limitless room for expansion. Subsequently they
secured all Australasia, in which the conditions are similar. In
the New World, then, the Anglo-Saxons have founded permanent
empires. Under no probable conjunction of circumstances are
they likely to be uprooted. But the fate of their Old World
dependencies will be different. Here the natives outnumber, and
will always outnumber, them. In the course of time they are sure
to be expelled or absorbed. Their fate will be like that of the
Romans and the Normans in England, not like that of the Saxons
who nearly exterminated the Britons. Disease has spread over
the whole world, and no other race will ever again have the oppor-
tunities so unconsciously used by the Anglo-Saxons. So vast and
fertile are their territories that it seems probable that their world-
predominance in the future has been secured by disease.
Roughly speaking, the stimuli under which a human being
develops are three in number: nutrition, use, and injury. All
individuals develop at first under what may be regarded as the sole
stimulus of nutrition. Thus up to the time of birth the human
being develops under the influence of this stimulus alone. Subse-
quently some of his structures continue to develop under it; for
example, his ears, his hair, and his teeth. He never uses his hair
nor his external ears in any active sense; obviously, therefore,
they grow simply because they absorb food. He uses his teeth,
but we have no reason to suppose that they would not grow
equally well if he did not use them. But after birth other of his
structures develop little, if at all, except under the added influence
of use; for example, his limbs, his heart, and his brain. If no
strain were placed on these structures, they would grow little, if at
all. Food alone is not sufficient for their continued growth.
Lastly, if the individual be injured at any time, as by a cut, the
stimulus of injury causes growth to take place during the process
of healing. In man the development which results from injury is
of infinitely less importance than that which results from nutri-
tion, and from nutrition plus use.

Now, since no parts can be used or injured unless they first
exist, and so are capable of being used and injured, nutrition must
always play the first, and generally the principal, part in the
development of living beings. And, moreover, when living beings
first came into existence, it must have played the sole part in their
development, until subsequently there was evolved the power of
growing under the stimulus of use and injury.

The power of growing and developing under the influence of
use is apparently quite a late product of evolution. It seems quite
absent except in the higher animals, and is present to the greatest
extent only in the highest. Thus an adult man owes the greater
part of his bulk to growth made under the influence of use; but
there is not the least evidence that most insects, for example, owe
any part of their growth to its influence. They grow, as the
infant grows before birth, under the sole influence of nutrition.
Indeed, the most of their structural changes occur when they are
quiescent undergoing metamorphosis; that is, when they are not
using the growing part of their structures. But it is not body
but mind that supplies the clearest evidence that the capacity of
developing under the influence of use is a late and a high product
of evolution. This is easily seen when we contrast the mental
development of a typical insect with that of man.

A certain beetle (Sitaris) lays its eggs at the entrance of the galleries
excavated by a kind of bee (Anthophora), each gallery leading to a cell. The
young larve are hatched as active little insects, with six legs, two long antenne,
and four eyes, very different from the larve of other beetles. They emerge
from the egg in the autumn, and remain in a sluggish condition till the spring.
At that time (in April) the drones of the bee emerge from the pupz, and as
they pass out through the gallery the Sitaris larve fasten upon them. There
they remain till the nuptial flight of the Anthophora, when the larva passes
from the male to the female bee. Then again they wait their chance. The
moment the bee lays an egg, the Sitaris larva springs upon it. Even while the
poor mother is carefully fastening up her cell, her mortal enemy is beginning
to devour her offspring; for the egg of the Anthophora serves not only as a
raft, but as a repast. The honey, which is enough for either, would be too
little for both; and the Sitaris, therefore, at its first meal, relieves itself from
its only rival. After eight days the egg is consumed, and on the empty shell
the Sitaris undergoes its first transformation, and makes its appearance in a
very different form..... It changes into a white, fleshy grub, so organized
as to float on the surface of the honey, with the mouth beneath and the
spiracles above the surface... . . In this state it remains until the honey is
consumed; and, after some further metamorphoses, develops into a perfect
beetle in August?

Now, the notable thing about Sitaris is that he appears to have
no memory. He seems to learn nothing; for instance, he does
not learn how to do anything. Many of his actions he does only
once, and all of them he does as well the first time of doing as the
last time. Memory, therefore, would be of no use to him. He
arrives in the world perfectly equipped for the battle of his life,
and is quite independent of all experience. He absorbs food, and,
as he grows, his mind, such as it is, develops. Nothing besides
the food is necessary for its development. He uses his mind, but
the use of it does not add anything to it. His mental characters,
therefore, are all inborn. They are instincts. An instinct is an
emotional impulse which develops under the mere influence of
nutrition, and which prompts to a corresponding action, the
instinctive action. A man is very different. He is born very help-
less, with few instincts, most of which are very imperfect. He has
the instincts of sexual and parental love, but he earns to love this
or that particular person. He has the instinct to sport, and so to
develop his body by using it. He has the instincts of curiosity and
imitativeness which cause him to use his mind, and so to develop
it. He has, besides, the instinct to eat when hungry, and to rest
when tired, and one or two other instincts. But, on the whole, his

2 Lloyd Morgan, Animal Intelligence, pp. 438, 439.
equipment of instinct is reduced to a minimum, which is the rea-
son he is so helpless at birth. But he has a most enormous
memory, a most prodigious power of growing mentally as he uses
his mind. From birth forward he continually stores experiences,
by which he guides his future conduct, and thus becomes the most
helpful of animals. Only a very little part of his mind, therefore,
is inborn and instinctive; immensely the greater part is acquired,
in the sense that it develops under the influence of use, of experi-
ence.

Now, because the beetle’s mind is inborn, owing nothing to
experience, therefore one beetle is mentally almost exactly like
every other beetle of the same species. If different beetles have
different experiences, that makes no difference to their minds,
since they are incapable of profiting by it. But, because a man’s
mind develops almost wholly under the influence of experience,
the minds of no two men are alike. Think how different are the
minds of the various people in this room — how different the con-
tents of their memories, how different their hopes and hates, their
ideals, and ambitions, and temptations. If, were it possible, we
exchanged minds one with another, and were conscious of the
change, we should feel almost that we had entered a new and
extraordinary world. But if one Sitaris exchanged mind with
another, he would not know the difference. In brief, our minds
differ because we are able to store in memory our experiences,
which are never alike in any two men. The minds of beetles, on
the other hand, are alike, because they are not affected by experi-
ence. According to the experience he has, an average baby may
become a fool or a wise man, a yokel or a statesman, a savage or a
civilized man, a saint or a thief. He may be trained to love or
abhor a particular religion, or code of morals, or country. Sitaris
can be trained to nothing, because he is able to learn to remember
nothing. It is possible to trace the evolution of memory, of the
power of learning by experience. In the fish and frog this power
is extremely limited. These animals have almost purely instinct-
ive minds. Their bodies also appear to develop almost solely
under the influence of nutrition, for frogs imprisoned in cavities
from the tadpole stage have emerged with the body and mind fully
developed. The cat, on the other hand, learns much. By its play
it develops both body and mind. A dog is still more capable of
learning. This capacity of learning and utilizing experience is
what we term “intelligence.” All our domestic animals have
some intelligence, which is why we are able to tame them. Man,
the latest product of evolution, is pre-eminent above all other
animals in his capacity for storing and utilizing experience. It is
this that makes him human. It is this alone that makes him
rational. All thinking depends on memory. Such an animal as
Sitaris cannot think; it can only feel. Man is inferior to Sitaris
in instinct, but in intellect, which is the product of stored experi-
ence, he is immeasurably superior.

To sum up, man is distinguished from all other animals, first,
by his enormous power of storing mental experiences, a power
which we term “memory” ; and, second, by his equally splendid
power of utilizing the contents of his memory, a power which we
term “reason.” These powers are possessed by all races of man-
kind and by all sane individuals; though it may be that this or
that race or individual has greater powers than another. Simi-
larly, all races and sane individuals have the same instincts; for
these, like memory and reason, are not sudden developments, but
products of prolonged evolution. It is possible, of course, that
one race or one individual has more or less of this or that instinct
than another, but the difference can seldom be great. No word
is more abused in popular, and even in scientific, literature than
“instinct.” Thus we often hear of the “instinct” of the savage
for tracking game. But no savage baby is born with a knowledge
of the appearance and habits of wild animals, nor does the know]-
edge arise in him during later life, in the absence of experience,
any more than a knowledge arises thus in a civilized baby. Pre-
sumably, an English child, under fit tuition, would acquire the
knowledge just as quickly and easily. So also we hear of a blow
being dodged “instinctively ;”’ but no human being dodges blows
until he has learned the nature of blows and how to avoid them.
In the house-fly, on the contrary, the knowledge, if we may so
term it, of dodging blows is really instinctive. We hear of the
human “instinct” of fear; but a baby fears nothing till he has
learned what to fear. We hear of the “instinct” to scratch an
itching spot; but, unlike the bird or the rabbit, no baby ever
scratches until he has learned how and when and where to scratch.
Man is almost the one mammal who is unable to swim instinct-
ively. It is, indeed, very plain that instincts have greatly dwindled
in man. It is fortunate for him that they have dwindled. The
loss of them has rendered him all the more adaptable. Reason
is a greatly superior substitute, provided his parents tend and pro-
tect him till he has acquired it.

We know that different individuals and races of man differ
greatly in body and mind. Thus the Englishman has one set of
physical and mental characters, the Chinaman another, and the
west-African black a third. We know that, to a large extent, the
physical differences between races are inborn, and we are apt to
assume that the mental differences are also innate. But when we
remember how little is instinctive in the mind of man, and how
much acquired, a strong suspicion is raised that we are mistaken
in supposing that inborn mental differences between races and
individuals are so great as are commonly supposed, or, at any rate,
are of the kind that most people think they are. In practice, we
assume that mental training is everything, and for that reason we
carefully educate our children, seeking to endow them with a fund
of useful knowledge, with energy and ability, and with high
ideals. But if we meet a man who is clever or stupid, or energetic
or slothful, or morose or amiable, and so forth, we almost invari-
ably assume he has been made what he is by nature, not by the
experiences through which he has passed. We cannot settle the
question as to whether nature or nurture plays the more important
part in molding character by observing individuals, for, after
training a man under one system, we cannot make him young
again so as to train him under another. But what we cannot
observe in the case of individuals we can observe in the case of
races, which, after all, are only aggregates of individuals. Races
are perpetually young, for each generation starts afresh. The
so-called old races are only races whose history is known for a
great length of time.

Many races quite suddenly changed their mental environment.
That is to say, the new generations have been differently trained,
have developed under different sets of mental experiences, as com-
pared to their ancestors. If, under these circumstances, the race
has changed its mental characters, we may be sure that the
alteration is an acquired, not a germinal, one; for the latter can
occur only under a very slow process of evolution or degeneration
extending over many generations. The Greeks are a case in
point. At first they were rude barbarians, apparently in no way
distinguished from the surrounding tribes. Then quite suddenly,
in quite a few generations, they became the most splendid race of
which history holds record. Subsequently, with equal sudden-
ness, they became an exceedingly wretched and degraded people.
Obviously, these great mental differences were due in the Greeks
to mere training, not to a process of evolution. A remarkable
thing about Greece, in its period of greatness, was the vast num-
ber of able men that it produced. Among a population hardly
equal to that of an average English county more really great men
arose in a couple of hundred years than all Europe produced in
fifteen centuries. Ancient Rome is another case in point. It also
produced numbers of able men in quite a short time. Much the
same thing happened in western Europe during the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries. Flocks of great men arose in all countries that
the Renaissance touched; that is, in all countries in which Greek
learning and Greek methods of thought were revived. The doc-
trine of averages and the theory of evolution forbid the belief that
these crowds of great men were due to sudden innate, that is
germinal, changes in the races that produced them. On the con-
trary, we are forced to the conclusion that they occurred in
greater numbers in some generations than in others, because in
those particular generations the youth were better trained men-
tally than in preceding and succeeding generations. And this
belief forces on us the corrollary that the mental status of any
individual or of any race is not necessarily in accord with the
innate mental powers. It may be due, and generally is due,
largely or wholly to mere training, to mere education.

The truth is vividly illustrated by a study of the mental effects
produced on their followers by various religions. Every religion
influences its followers, not only by its distinct doctrines, but even
more by the method by which the doctrines are taught. Some
methods of religious training permit much greater intellectual
freedom than others, even when the doctrines are much the same.
Thus the Protestant section of the Christian religion imposes
fewer restrictions than the Greek church. A little thought makes
it evident that every race is enlightened and progressive, and pro-
duces men of distinguished achievement, precisely in proportion to
the intellectual freedom permitted by the religion it follows.
Mahomedans, Buddhists, and Hindus produce few great men.
Medieval Europe produced few. Modern Christianity is divided
into three great sections. For the last century and a half almost
every man who has achieved world-wide fame has arisen from
among members of only one of those sections, or has been a rebel
against the doctrines and restrictions of the other two. This sec-
tion of Christianity has not a monopoly of innate genius, but it
has a large monopoly of effective genius.

All this evidence renders it abundantly plain that mental
power is not a mere matter of innate capacity, but is very largely
a matter of intellectual training. No doubt, men differ as much
in their inborn mental capacity as they do in bodily powers; but
the former is much more difficult to detect. You can train a man
of great innate capacity to have every appearance of.a fool. You
can so train a man of comparatively mean capacity that among
worse-trained men he has every appearance of ability. When,
therefore, we meet a distinguished man, it is unsafe to jump to the
conclusion that he is necessarily of great mental capacity. And
when we see a distinguished son follow a distinguished father, it
is not entirely safe to conclude that great innate capacity has been
inherited. We must remember the child’s imitative instincts and
the environment in which he has been reared —an environment in
which his father, with his own intellectual methods and his
energy, bulked large. Statistics of distinguished families illus-
trate the power of training quite as much as they do the power of
heredity.

Since, with rare exceptions, variations of offspring from par-
ents are spontaneous, it is obvious that we can improve a race
only, as breeders do, by restricting the output of offspring to indi-
viduals who have varied favorably. But we have seen how vast
are the acquirements of man. Therefore we can often greatly
improve the individual by improving the conditions under which
he develops. We have our choice then. Shall we improve the
innate qualities of our race by eugenic breeding; or shall we
improve the acquirements of the individuals of the race by
improving their surroundings; or shall we do both? I think all
people with any sense of duty to their fellow-creatures will declare
that, if practicable, we ought to do both. We should bear in mind,
however, that, were eugenic breeding possible, we could improve
the race to an unlimited extent; whereas our power of improving
the individual by placing him under better conditions is strictly
limited. We should remember, moreover, that an improved
environment tends ultimately to degrade the race by causing an
increased survival of the unfit. Our power to benefit the indi-
vidual physically by improving his acquirements is less than our
power to benefit him mentally. Most civilized people develop
under fairly good physical surroundings. Only in the slums of
great cities, as a rule, is bodily growth much stunted and the indi-
vidual enfeebled by insufficient nourishment and by bad hygienic
conditions. There is every hope, besides, that, with the spread of
knowledge and the awakening of the public conscience, the worst
features of slums will disappear in the near future. If, then, we
wish to improve the nation physically, it must be mainly by
selective breeding. Since we are a strong and robust race, most
people will agree that this is unnecessary as regards stature,
strength, and stamina. But, as we have seen, certain types of men
are unfit for existence under civilized conditions of life; for
example, people susceptible to consumption or to the charm of
alcohol. The experience of very many centuries has proved that
it is impossible to abolish the abuse of alcohol. Among civilized
peoples especially, repressive measures—at any rate, severely
repressive measures—actually increase the total amount of
drunkenness. It will, I think, prove equally impossible to banish
the tubercle bacillus. It is spread by the mere act of coughing.
Improved hygiene will result in such a revival of people suscept-
ible to consumption that the mortality will always tend to keep
pace with the improvements. In the Pacific islands a very sus-
ceptible race dwelling under ideal hygienic conditions undergoes
extinction when consumption is introduced. Probably, therefore,
our only hope of permanently reducing the mortality and misery
caused by intemperance and consumption lies in selective breeding.

As regards mind also, we have our choice between selective
breeding and an improved environment; that it to say, improved
mental training, improved education. No one who contrasts the
ancient Greek type of mind with the modern Thibetan type, and
realizes that the difference resulted mainly from mere education ;
who knows that the cannibal Maoris in a single generation have
acquired all the characteristics of a civilized race except the power
to resist disease; who is aware that during one year a school of
aborigines produced better results than any school of white chil-
dren in Australia; who thinks of what Japan has done within
thirty years; and who perceives how vile is the present system of
education in this country, especially the education of the upper
classes, will doubt that it is in our power to affect an immense and
immediate improvement in mind. There is no reason why we
should not rival, and even surpass, the Greeks. We have their
example, a knowledge of their methods. We could stand on their
shoulders, and possess a vastly larger fund of positive knowledge.
The subject of education is far ‘too large to enter on here, but we
may note that, when we compare Greek and modern methods
of instruction, one fundamental difference becomes manifest.
The Greeks taught their youths how to think; we teach them
what to think. The Greeks devoted their main attention to
developing the understanding; we devote ours to loading the
memory. Whatever the Greek boy learned linked up with the
interests of adult life, and was therefore remembered. Much
that the English boy learns has no bearing on the interests
of adult life, and therefore is forgotten. In brief, the Greek
youths were educated in a real sense; the English youths, in a
sense, are merely crammed. Dogmatic education is, of course,
the merest cram, with the added element that care is designedly
taken to stiffle independent thought. Classical education in which
the language, but not the methods of thought of the ancients, are
inculcated is also cram. But perhaps the least excusable form of
cramming, since it is perpetrated by men who should know better,
is that utter neglect of the reasoning faculty, combined with an
enormous overloading of the memory, by means of which the
thinking powers of scientific students are destroyed.

So vast might be the benefit to mind which would quickly
follow a mere improvement of education that, until we have done
all that it is possible in this direction, any attempt to exalt the
innate mental qualities of the race by the slower process of
selective breeding would be lost time. As we have seen, such an
attempt, owing to our present lack of means to distinguish in
practice between inborn capacity and acquired ability, would
present peculiar difficulties. In one particular, however, the
selective breding of mind is imperative. The number of the
insane is very rapidly increasing in all civilized countries. Vari-
ous explanations have been offered. It is said that the stress of
modern life is the cause of the increase. But there is no evidence
that the stress is greater than formerly, except perhaps among that
small class which is wealthy enough to devote itself to pleasure.
The falling death-rate would seem to indicate the contrary.
Moreover, the rise of insanity is as great in remote country dis-
tricts, where conditions have changed little — for example, in the
west of Ireland—as in towns. Again, it is said that the rise is
due to parental intemperance and consumption. But consump-
tion and, probably, chronic alcoholism are much less than for-
merly. Moreover, this theory is opposed to the doctrine of natural
selection. Were it true, life would be impossible on earth. Yet
again, it is thought that improved medical treatment has caused
insane people to live longer, and so to accumulate, and that the
registration of the insane is more efficient than formerly. No
doubt this theory contains a large element of truth. But the rise
of insanity is so great and continuous that it is manifestly insuffi-
cient to explain the whole facts. We must seek for an additional
factor. Formerly the insane were treated with the greatest bar-
barity.
While many were burned as witches, those who were recognized as insane

were compelled to endure all the horrors of the harshest imprisonment.
Blows, bleeding, and chains were their usual treatment, and horrible accounts
are given of madmen who had spent decades bound in dark cells... . not
until the eighteenth century was the condition of this unhappy class seriously
improved.
We may judge of the former treatment of the insane from Shake-
speare’s words: “Love is merely a madness I tell you, deserves
as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do.”* Until very
recently, then, in the vast majority of cases, the unfortunate
lunatic was placed under conditions which insured death or per-
manent insanity. From the moment his mental unsoundness
declared itself he ceased to have offspring. The natural selection
of the sane, therefore, was very stringent. For some generations
past, however, lunatics have been treated with great humanity
and skill. Beyond all classes of the community, they are now
watched over by the state. Men of sound mind, but suffering
from bodily illness, may perish in the slums for want of proper
nourishment and care; but the insane are removed to special
sanatoria, where, without expense to themselves, they receive food
and lodging, and are placed under the care of trained nurses and
medical specialists, over whom in turn the Commissioners in
Lunacy exercise a jealous supervision. As a consequence, the
lunatic frequently recovers, and is restored to his family and to
the right to have as many children as other people. Here is a case
in point. A lady writes:

For years I have been struggling to prevent idiots and lunatics being sent
from our county asylum to marry and breed idiots — just as if the thing were
desirable. I gave it up in hopeless despair about four years ago, owing to the
following case: A woman who is more than half idiotic came to live with
two sisters — one a total, the other a partial, idiot. She married a very dull,
partially idiotic man, and had almost immediately to be taken to the asylum.

There she gave birth to a complete idiot, and was sent home a few weeks
afterward, with the result that the same thing has been repeated nine times.’

The severity of natural selection with regard to the insane has
been greatly reduced; and, as in all similar cases, characters

®Lecky, History of European Morals, Vol. II, pp. 86, 87.
*As You Like It. Act III, scene 2.
® Quoted by Dr. Rentoul.
which selection formerly eliminated are tending to become more
common. The huge brain of man is a very complex and delicate
machine. A defect (an unfavorable variation) in any of its parts
is apt to throw the whole out of gear; and, like other variations,
such a defect, such a predisposition to insanity, tends to be
inherited. Unless, therefore, we find means to check the output
of children by the mentally unsound, the insane will multiply
until the state is no longer able to bear the weight of their main-
tenance. Selective breeding in this case is a dire necessity, and,
therefore, a certainty in the near future.

As I understand him, Mr. Galton proposes to exalt our race
by encouraging the finest types to have large families. I venture
to suggest, instead, that, for the present at least, we shall limit
our efforts to discouraging the multiplication of the most unfor-
tunate types. The latter proceeding would be more practicable,
since, as regards mind at least, the feeble types are more easily
detected than the best, and since it is always more easy to stop a
horse drinking than to make him drink. But, as a fact, both
Mr. Galton’s suggestion and my own are utterly impracticable in
the present state of public opinion, and even, if I may say, of
public intelligence. Before the one proposal or the other can be
thought of as anything more than a mere subject for academic
discussion, we must have a more enlightened public, a wider
diffusion of the knowledge of the laws of heredity. Of sheer
necessity, that diffusion of knowledge will come ere long. I think
I know the path it will follow. The medical profession com-
prises the largest and, if united, the most powerful body of scien-
tific men in the world. At present no systematic instruction in
heredity is. given to its members. Presently that will be changed.
The doctor will realize that other things and more things are
known about heredity than he supposes. He will recognize that
the science is not summed up by the hypothesis that, if a man con-
tracts a disease or is drunken, his offspring will tend to be sickly
or insane. He will perceive that the facts of heredity are just as
essentially and naturally a part of his medical equipment as the
facts of physiology and anatomy. At present he is in no way
distinguished intellectually above his contemporaries of the same
social stratum. Man of science though he be, he and his fellows
contribute less to the thought of the nation, and guide public
opinion less, than any other of the great professions. But when
he studies heredity, he will understand the development of mind
in the individual; he will separate the acquired from the inborn,
and will know why certain systems of education have depressed
some nations, whereas other nations have been exalted by differ-
ent systems; and then he will reform his own education and come
into his kingdom. Indeed, the mere study of heredity will con-
stitute the necessary reform; for, though the additional facts with
which he will have to load his memory will be few, yet the close,
accurate, and prolonged course of thinking that he will have to
undergo will develop his intellectual powers, and, lifting him
above the often petty minutize of his daily life, will bring him in
contact with many great subjects. A trained expert now in all
that is connected with the development of the body, he will
become a trained expert in all that is connected with the develop-
ment of mind. His will be the most commanding voice in that
most vital of all questions, the education of the young. Under his
influence, mental training will become scientific, in the sense that
it will be conducted with a full knowledge of means and ends.
In that day he will perceive also that selective breeding, the only
possible remedy against dangers that loom great and terrible in
the future, is really a question of public health; and then men like
Mr. Galton, who have devoted their lives to a noble purpose, will
not speak to a small and impotent circle, but to the intellectual
flower of the nation.
