The Scope and Method of Folk-Psychology

Author(s): W. I. Thomas

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Jan., 1896), pp. 434-445
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2761874

Accessed: 08-05-2016 22:59 UTC
ScIENcE, with all its wonders, has presented no more remarka-
ble spectacle than the order of its own development in time, to
which Comte first drew attention, namely, the emergence of the
special sciences in the order of their remoteness from man. Man
constructed a science of numbers, of the stars, of molar and
molecular masses, of plants, of stones, and of creeping things,
before he realized that he was himself an object capable of
receiving scientific attention. This anomaly is doubtless due
to the fact that always and everywhere man has been at the head
of the series of nature, and his superiority to the lower orders
of life has been so obvious as to generate in him the conceit
that he had nothing in common with them. Every savage tribe,
until disturbed by civilization, imagines that it occupies the very
center of the earth, and that it is the most perfect specimen of
the human race. Its river is the ‘Father of Waters,” its moun-
tain the “ Navel of the Earth.” The Chinese call their country
the “Flower of the Center,” and themselves the “Sons of
heaven,” and the nations bordering on the ‘Celestial Empire”
they know as “dogs,” “swine,” “demons,” and “savages.”

The earliest disturbance of this anthropocentric view came in
illusions concerning his relation to the supernatural to which man
was subjected through the possession of an elaborate nervous
organization; but these also accentuated his tendency to separate
himself in thought from the objects surrounding him. And
scientific interest in man has, even in these latter days, been so
far overshadowed and impeded by an interest in his relation to a
spirit world that a denomination of men as “good and bad,” like
the farmer’s classification of animals as “stock and vermin,” has
been too readily accepted as practically covering the case.

1 ELiske Recius, The Earth and Its Inhabitants: Europe, Vol. 1, p. 3.
434
The widening of the middle age orbis terrarum through
voyages of discovery led to the science of ethnology, and the
works of Linnzus, Buffon, Lamarck, and Darwin hastened the
formulation of somatic anthropology. In the course of time
prehistoric archeology, folk-lore and folk-psychology have been
added to these, and the term anthropology, like biology, is now
used in a large way to designate a congeries of separate
sciences— if, indeed, we permit ourselves to call any body of
knowledge whatsoever a separate science. In each of these
aspects the science of man has been making splendid headway,
but it has been so absorbed in the preliminary task of col-
lecting and classifying its materials that it has been able to do
no more than approach its main task, the determination of the
developmental relation of individual to race consciousness, and
the relation of both to accompanying institutions and usages.
In the division of labor incidental to the handling of a vast body
of material, this special task has been assumed by folk-psy-
chology; and further advance in certain lines of individual
psychology and social philosophy are dependent on reliable
generalizations from this field." In the preface to his recent
work on “Mental Development in the Child and the Race”
(in which he is able to say embarrassingly little of the race),
Professor Baldwin says very frankly that the attempt to
work out a theory of mental development in the child resulted
in “the conviction that no consistent view of mental devel-
opment in the individual could possibly be reached without
a doctrine of the race development of consciousness, 7, ¢., the
great problem of the evolution of mind;” and Professor

*The Germans have called this phase of anthropolygy by several names: folk-
psychology (Vélkerpsychologie), psychical anthropology, ethnological psychology.
By whatever name we call it, we must recognize that it is not strictly codrdinate with
the other branches of anthropology. It studies the conditions and changes in life-
direction displayed by the more elementary social aggregates, and in this respect its
materials are coincident with those of ethnology, somatic anthropology, prehistoric
archzology, and folk-lore; but it uses also, in a minor way, data furnished by philology,
history, individual psychology, demography and sociology. In the same way, indi-

vidual psychology is related to and dependent on zodlogy, anatomy, and physiology,
but is conveniently and properly treated as a separate discipline.
Wundt has declared with equal frankness that the problem is
beyond the reach of the experiment of the psycho-physicist :
“Our psycho-physical experiments have to do with the con-
sciousness of the evoluted man; . . . we learn little of psychic
development through them. Their application to psychic dis-
turbances will be presumably a limited one; it sheds light upon
the nature of the more profound disturbances less by direct
investigation than by giving information about the changes which
are associated with the condition and rise of these disturb-
ances. But preéminently the psycho-physical experiment is
concerned with the analysis of relatively elementary processes,
with simple acts of perception, will, and memory; only in a
limited way can it follow out the association of these simpler
processes. The development of the real thought process and of
the higher forms of feeling and impulse is closed to it; at the
most some insufficient observations can be made also on the
external, temporal succession of these processes.”’*

The natural approach to this question is through anthro-
pology; but the prominent methods of anthropology have
been weighing, measuring, and classifying, and like those of
psycho-physics, able to contribute to the developmental
history of mind only in a meager and indirect way. If
we examine, for example, two of these methods, determination
of brain-weight, and craniometry, we shall see that they have
had at best only a classificatory value, and no direct bearing on
the laws of mind.

The human brain doubtless contains the whole story of its
own development, if only the story could be read out; but mor-
phologically it represents capacity of response to stimuli
received from variables in the external world, beginning with
the protozoan period, and its development cannot be studied prof-
itably except in connection with these variables, Functionally,
also, the importance of the brain has been unduly emphasized by
certain anthropologists. There is far less direct connection
between intelligence and brain mass and form than was at one time

*W. Wunnt, Essays, p. 145.
presumed. It is true that the cerebral lobes are the seat of con-
sciousness; but the brain is no more essential to intelligence than
is the circulation, or digestion, or the liver. Intelligence is the
mediation of action, and all organs and tissues which coéperate in
forming an association, are equally important with the brain.
The five heaviest brains recorded by Topinard are those of
Tourgenieff (2020 gr.), a day-laborer (1925 gr.), a brickmason
(1900 gr.), an epileptic (1830 gr.), and the illustrious Cuvier
(1830 gr.) French anthropologists have reckoned the average
brain-weight as 1360 grammes, and the inferior limit of brain-
weight compatible with reason as 1000 grammes. But when
their idol Gambetta lately willed them his brain and died,
they were mortified to find that it weighed only 1100 grammes
—just 100 grammes above the point of imbecility. These facts
merely show that preconceptions were wrong, and that anthro-
pology has made itself more scientific in this regard. Gross
anatomy of the brain, especially in the hands of surgeons, and
fine anatomy, in the hands of neurologists, have established
important laws of growth and of mental pathology, but no
anthropologist can venture to say of a series of brains which are
male and which female, which Chinese and which German.
The whole matter of the relation of intelligence to brain-weight,
and of the nature and quantity of energy which is a function of
this organ, is, indeed, fundamentally a question of physiological
chemistry. The assumption that capacity for muscular work is
in direct proportion to the mass is approximately correct; but
the assumption that capacity for mental work is in proportion to
the mass of nerve substance is a gross error, as anthropologists
now very well know. Physiologists are, indeed, compelled to
assume a different principle of metabolism in the nerves from
that of the muscles, though the nerves have thus far eluded
inquiry in this direction.

Examination of the brain capsule and calculation of its
capacity (craniometry), and superficial measurements upon the
head of the living (cephalometry), have, in the nature of the
case, still more attenuated connections with the development of
race consciousness. They have been of some service in the
attempt to classify races and to distinguish the elements of
population in a given region, but every attempt to establish a
regular connection between form and function has been dis-
astrous. The best example of the absurdities into which crani-
ometry has led its devotees is Lombroso’s criminal type.
Lombroso found a number of cranial characters prevailing in
criminals, and concluded that an individual in which these char-
acters prevailed was a born criminal. But he measured only
criminals, while Bar* recently found that precisely the same
cranial characters prevailed among normal individuals as among
Lombroso’s criminals. It thus turns out that the characters
which Lombroso found prevailing in criminals are simply those
which occur most regularly in the human species, or at any rate
in the lower strata of the societies in question. A comparison
of the painfully elaborated methods of craniometry fills one with
a lively sense of the vanity of all of them; and there is at pres-
ent a tendency among anthropologists to make their cranial
measurements very few and simple.

Craniometry and the determination of brain weight have
been pursued in part as aids to the classification of races. But
the classification of races has itself thus far proven an igais
fatuus. The question is no nearer solution than when Blumen-
bach one hundred and twenty years ago made the classic division
of five which still stands in school books, Meantime the num-
ber has ranged from three to sixty-three; and the latest classi-
fication by de Quatrefages into white, black, yellow, and mixed,
has no merit except simplicity; for, as no one has insisted
more strongly than de Quatrefages himself, no pure race has
existed on the earth within historic times. Wherever man has been
met, his blood has already been mixed through crossing, migra-
tion, and conquest. How this mixture came about, and when,
is a question which, if not futile, is of much importance, but
there is no occasion at present to modify the impatient expres-
sion of Sir Henry Maine, that race theories “appear to have

* A. Baer, Der Verbrecher in Anthropologischer Beziehung, Leipsic, 1893.
little merit except the facility which they give for building on
them inferences tremendously out of proportion to the mental
labor which they cost the builder.7” But the formation of
artificial or historic races, through the influence of milieu and
the diffusion of a common fund of beliefs, sentiments, ideas,
and interests among a heterogeneous population brought by
hap and chance into the same geographical zone, is taking
place before our eyes at the present moment, and is a matter of
history ; and we are safe in assuming that in this the process of
the formation of true races is repeating itself.

It was inevitable that anthropology, like biology, should first
collect and classify its material. Every scrap of knowledge it
has brought to light is precious, and its classification of its
materials, though like all classifications more or less arbitrary,
is useful, if not used for more than it is worth. But anthro-
pology has undergone a change well illustrated by the difference
between the biological botany of today, and the “herbarium ”
botany of the past; its primary interest is in the laws of growth.
Among those who led in this change of direction—in theory, at
least—are Bastian, Lazarus, Steinthal, Waitz, Weinhold, Post,
Andree, Ratzel and Achelis—some of them philologists rather
than anthropologists.2>, They have insisted that our customs, our
laws, our arts, our religion, our speech, our minds, are the
product of society in common, and that through a comparative
examination of the languages, ceremonies, usages, and institu-
tions of primitive peoples, we have means of entering the region
which Wundt despaired of penetrating with the psycho-physical
experiment, and of tracing the laws of the progressive unfolding
of the psychical activities of man. ‘“ Only in and through soci-
ety is a man a psychical being and raises himself above the type
of a zoélogical species of the animal organisms to an individual
personality.’

* Early History of Institutions, Lecture III.

2 Among others, Tylor, Spencer, de Greef, Tarde, Le Bon, and Fouillée, who
presumably have not come under the influence of German theories, have contributed
to this movement.

3STEINTHAL, Zeitschrift des Vereins fiir Volkskunde, Vol. I, p. 12.
German folk-psychologists (including many who call them-
selves ethnologists) have insisted that man has heretofore
been only partially viewed; individual psychology has relied
on the statistics of education, introspection, and data from
insane asylums, and history has heretofore been the relation of
the development of castes, whereas the development of spirit,
which is ossified in dogmas and systems, can be seen only in the
great masses of humanity, who draw their sap direct from
mother earth. They have insisted on the identity of human
spirit in all zones—an identity underlying all external differ-
ences and local coloring. The races of men, like the palm of
the south and the fir of the north, are identical in the prin-
ciple of their growth; and ignoring the local, the incidental and
eccentric, we should find similar and universal laws of growth
among all peoples.’

The discovery of a great principle, that of parallelism in
development, has resulted from this view. Every community, as
far as it rises toward a culture condition, seems to take the same
steps as every other community rising to the same level of cul-
ture; whether these steps are taken invariably in the same
order, folk-psychologists are not yet able to say. But the fact of
similarity or identity of custom, art, superstition, ceremony, tra-
dition, or technology, is no longer to be regarded as a proof of
ethnic relationship, but a manifestation of the practical identity
of the human spirit in its operations in all times and places.
Another great principle already established, is that every cul-
ture community contains in itself survivals of the earlier stages
through which it has passed, just as the animal organism of the
higher type contains survivals from and reversions to the lower
stages of its evolution. Folk-lore has been so active in amass-
ing survivals that we may say of superstition, for instance, that
it is as dense today in central Germany as in central Africa.

The general criticism may be made of German folk-psy-
chologists that in their insistence on the reality of a collective

Cf. A, Bastian, Der Mensch, Vol.1, p. 11; Der Volkergedanke, pp. v, 172, et
passim.
human consciousness they have seemed to make the individual
at every point the creation of social conditions, losing sight of
the rhythm between the individual consciousness and social
consciousness whereby each is enabled to live more fully. They
have proceeded, too, in the main, on the assumption that in the
savage society we have the culture society at a lower historical
point, and that the laws of social growth can be understood only
in their most crude manifestations. In this they resemble those
biologists who assume that the laws of growth can be ade-
quately determined from a study of micro-organisms. But in
determining the chemistry of digestion, for example, the physi-
ologist must work with masses larger and more highly organized
than the amceba; and the social structure of savage communities,
while very suggestive, is likewise often too incomplete, when
taken alone, for the purpose of the folk-psychologist. A
knowledge of the present must be combined with the knowledge
of the past for an adequate understanding of any part of the
past. The nature-peoples are not communities in process
of becoming culture-peoples; they are as old as we, and in
the very fact that they have not become like us we may hope to
find the laws of social physics which raised us above them.
Herbart, who must be regarded as the pioneer in folk-
psychology, declared that “ideas move in our minds with as
much regularity as the stars move in the heavens.” The dis-
covery of the law of parallelism in the customs and culture of
different tribes and races is a confirmation of this view, and
suggests the necessity of a method more fundamental than any
based on race differences; and in order to secure a fundamental
basis of procedure we shall be wise if we avail ourselves of the
knowledge recently brought to light by physiologists in connec-
tion with the phenomena of irritability in general. Irritability is
the distinctive property of living matter. It is that quality of
plants and animals in virtue of which stored up energy is set
free by an external stimulus; it is therefore the basis of all
somatic and psychic life. We are familiar with the fact that
animals having special organs of sense receive through them
stimuli calling forth activity, but physiologists can also orient
at will the lower forms of life, both plants and animals, by means
of light, heat, electricity, acids, gravity, hard surfaces, etc. This
capacity of response is called in its various manifestations, helio-
tropism, galvanotropism, chemotropism, geotropism, and stereo-
tropism. Different plants and animals respond in various
ways to these mechanical stimuli, the same stimulus in some
cases attracting one form and repelling another, and the same
organism responding in different ways to different degrees of
intensity of the same stimulus, but there is no doubt that the
control of the sentient life of the lower stadia of living matter
falls directly under the fixed laws of physics and chemistry. All
instincts of animals, their habits, sagacity, migrations, and repro-
ductive life, find their explanation largely in these ‘‘tropisms.”
The views of certain recent writers, including Mr. Romanes, on
the nature of animal intelligence were really obsolete when they
left the press.

In the more lowly organized forms all stimuli are mandatory.
Hunger, for example, calls out motion through changes pro-
duced by katabolism in the organism, whereby it is attracted
chemotropically to food. In the higher forms higher nervous
centers and the power of inhibition and choice are developed,
along with special organs of sense and locomotion. What is
important for our purpose is that, given the property of irritabil-
ity, due to chemical constitution, which responds by movement
to certain stimuli and exhibits through dissociation of atoms an
energy which from being purely mechanical becomes more and
more purposive, we have a starting point for the interpretation
of the psychical energies of man. Differences in temperament
in individuals and in races must be regarded as due to the same
causes as positive and negative heliotropism or chemotropism
in plants and animals, namely, chemical constitution. The tem-
perament, character, or genius of a people predetermines within
certain limits the spirit of its institutions; it is the direct
exponent of the quality of racial irritability, and apparently
more fundamental, persistent and inimitable than intellectual
traits. We are all aware how apt the Orientals who attend our
universities are to acquire our intellectual habits, and how super-
ficial an impression our pedagogical systems leave on their
character. ‘Scratch a Russian and you will find a Tartar.” Very
little is yet known of the relation of national temperament to
conditions of food, climate, ancestry, etc., but striking differ-
ences exist, and it is important to recognize that the form and
spirit of the art, literature, ethics and politics of different races
are to be regarded as an expression of the temperament even
more than of the intelligence of the people. There is, too, an
interesting parallelism between lower forms of social organiza-
tion, lower organic forms of life, and the child, in the fact that
they are all controlled largely by mandatory stimuli. Great
popular movements and national upheavals, like the French
Revolution and the Protestant Reformation, are always tempera-
mental rather than intellectual expressions, and we are correct
in calling these movements instinctive. The substitution of
action based on knowledge for action based on feeling is made
possible in the individual and in society by the development of
higher centers of control and the power of choice through inhi-
bition and legislation. The fact that such a substitution is one
of the professed aims both of pedagogy and of sociology gives
peculiar interest to the examination of the forms of control
which have dominated different types of society, and the deter-
mination of the conditions and forces leading from one form of
control to another.

The animal in the protozoan period is played on solely by
the forces of external nature. In societies, especially in human
society, another set of stimuli is introduced, and the nature of
reaction on stimuli in general is modified. Language and
memory give every member of the group opportunity to play
upon the nature of every other member of the group. The
individual is no longer a harp played upon by natural forces,
but in a far greater degree by social forces: words, ideas and
sentiments are substituted for light, gravity and acid. In this
way we first get the great problem of association clearly before
us, and are on the way to work out the laws of human emotion
and intelligence. Irritability, or as we call it in human society,
sensibility, is the quality in virtue of which we get any reac-
tion; intelligence is the mediation of the direction of the action,
and education (association, tradition of ideas, discipline,
precept, coercion), represents all possible stimuli which may
reach the individual from society, modifying old impulses
and life-directions, and calling out new ones. Morality is a
term whose content varies immensely among different peoples,
but it is, in its widest meaning, a feeling in favor of the forms
of practice which have proven of life-saving advantage to
a people, and which by heredity, tradition and authority have
become relatively fixed.

“Empirically all changes manifest themselves as the result
of the universal reciprocal action between the simplest part and
the sum of all the parts of nature,—an action which expresses
itself physically as gravity, heat, light, chemical affinity ; sociol-
ogically, as nervous energy, speech, association, etc.”* For
working purposes we take the individual as “the simplest part
of nature,” or rather as the unit on which “the sum of all the
parts of nature” act, and which are acted on in turn by him, and
it will be convenient to set over against him the variables which
condition this action. The order in which these variables are
considered is not all-important, since they coéxist in varying
proportions at every stage. A convenient working schedule is
the following:

1. Habitat. Food-conditions. Anthropo-geography. (Con-
ditioning temperament and aptitude.)

2. Somatic anthropology: laws of growth and variation;
effects of crossing and interbreeding; heredity, atavism,
etc.

3. Reproductive life; love and marriage; the psychology of
sex; sex as a social stimulus.

4. Technology: the useful arts; science.

5. Atsthetic.

1 A, SCHAEFFLE, Bau und Leben des socialen Kérpers, Vol. Il., p. 20.
6. Animism (Religion, Myth, Superstition).
7. Jurisprudence, Politics (Formal control).

Morality, like intelligence, is a function of each of the fore-
going captions. It represents predominantly the affective, as
intelligence represents the intellectual, phase of consciousness.
Language, reflecting the content of consciousness, and patho-
logical conditions, marking the failure of normal corollations
and instincts (unfitness, immorality), are valuable aids at every
point.

Food and sex, like the foci of an ellipse, are the points
about which the whole process turns. These were the great orig-
inal stimuli to action and culture, and “making war, making love,
and making things” have been very aptly called by Miss Sim-
cox man’s chief occupation. War has been primarily with refer-
ence to territory on which to find food ; and in connection with this,
and with that other form of war which we call ‘the struggle for
existence,” systems of law, politics, morals and religion have
indirectly arisen. Technology, in its relation both to war and to
industry, has been connected with food. Art reflects the affec-
tive side of the life process, and it has shown in its whole course
a predilection for love and war. No very considerable body of
art except architecture would remain, indeed, if we omitted these
motives.

A statement of life in terms of food and sex is as crass, when
applied to culture conditions, as the chemical definition of man
as “forty pounds of carbon and nitrogen scattered through five
pailfuls of water.” But it is important to recognize that food
and sex are the irreducible factors of social life; and beginning
with these, we may hope to understand the meaning of the differ-
ent variables of society: ideas, institutions, beliefs, sentiments,
language, arts, literature—and to trace the “red thread” of

consciousness through them.
NT YT TWernaran
