The Social Types of War

Author(s): Hans Speier

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Tan., 1941), pp. 445-454
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769917

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:05 UTC
War is a social conflict. In the sociological analysis of war it is
necessary to ascertain the concrete meaning of this conflict, lest the
problem be obscured by false generalizations. Instead of differenti-
ating kinds of war according to causes it is here suggested that types
of war be distinguished according to the social definition of the
enemy.

The three pure types of war may be called absolute war, instru-
mental war, and agonistic fighting. Absolute war is unrestricted and
unregulated war, agonistic fighting is regulated according to norms,
and instrumental war may or may not be restricted, according to
considerations of expediency.

Absolute war may be characterized, negatively, by the absence
of any restrictions and regulations imposed upon violence, treachery,
and frightfulness. In absolute war the enemy is not an obstacle to
the attainment of values which he controls. Absolute war is not
waged in order to effect a change of the enemy’s mode of life; nor is
it waged in order to conclude peace with the vanquished foe. Peace
terminating an absolute war is established without the enemy. The
opponent is an existential enemy. Absolute war is waged in order
to annihilate him.

The absolute enemy is not a subject of predatory interests but
rather a symbol of strangeness, evil, and danger to the community
as a whole. His existence disturbs the order of life in the sense in
which order is understood and experienced in the in-group. His cus-
toms are scandalous, his rites sacrilegious. His laws are incompre-
hensible, so that he appears to be lawless. His gods are false idols.

445
Strange dress and manners, unfamiliar weapons, and possibly even
his physical appearance symbolize the utter danger to which the
in-group is exposed by an attack from the out-group or the provoca-
tion to attack which the out-group constitutes. The reproach of
perfidious assault and atrocious conduct in war are easily incurred
under these circumstances, and the answer is given in kind. Owing
to the absence of any cultural bonds, of social homogeneity, or of
common interests uniting the belligerents, despite their conflict, war
is waged without a sense of mutual obligation. Instead, all available
means of violence, treachery, and terror are applied without scruples.
Absolute war is war without rules, war in which the enemies do not
belong to one mankind but represent different kinds of men, as it
were, or regard each other indeed as animals. For, in the extreme
case, fighting is ferocious not merely because of moral indignation or
religious fanaticism but because of the elementary feelings of dis-
gust and horror."

The historical types of war in which restrictions tend to disappear
from warfare are, above all, wars against “barbarians,” “savages,”
and “infidels.” In the wars of the Greeks against barbarians rules
recognized in intra-Hellenic wars did not apply. Similarly, in the
Middle Ages, the use of weapons prohibited in wars among Chris-
tians was allowed in fighting the Mohammedans. “The Christian
knight is made to forget all honor and justice in the presence of his
pagan enemies. He takes an unfair advantage in battle; he kills the
wounded and helpless; he spares only those who, as they surrender,
cry, ‘Baptism! Baptism!’ He needlessly tortures and maims spies.
His ideal hero takes no prisoner, he exalts Christianity by pitilessly
exterminating all opponents.”

Nor is the distinction between absolute and limited war according
to the social definition of the enemy a peculiar trait of Western
civilization. It exists in many cultures,3 even among primitive
tribes. “Among the Australians unrestricted war is waged only
against totally foreign tribes which live far off and of which one
hears very seldom. The words used to denote these tribes must be
rendered in our language as ‘savages’ and ‘barbarians.’ ’’4

The wars in modern times that can be compared to those waged
against infidels have been called “ideological” wars.’ They are
fought in the name of political beliefs so dear to the belligerents that
they arouse a crusading spirit. When political passion reaches the
intensity of religious zeal, the foe becomes an “absolute enemy.”

Ideological wars between nations can be called international civil
wars when the ideologies are oriented toward class goals. It is well
known that in societies in which social stratification is very rigid,
ie., in which social immobility is enforced by legal and religious
sanctions, the value of life and death varies according to social
status. If a member of the highest class kills a person of very low
standing, this may fail to constitute what is ordinarily called mur-
der. Likewise the death of an honorable man caused by a knave
may entail so essential a diminution of honor to the kin of the mur-
dered person that restitution is impossible. In war the same differen-
tial evaluation of life according to social status asserts itself in the
differential treatment of enemies according to their social worth.
The medieval knight often spared the life of a disarmed foe if the
latter too was a knight but mercilessly slew him when he was of
low rank. The particular ferocity of civil wars is due partly to the
same cause, partly to the intense hate characteristic of civil war.
This hate has various reasons. Both the threat to the status privi-
leges of the higher class and the feelings of injustice animating the
revolting class are immediate and personal. Also, civil war means
treason, and treason of insiders constitutes a greater provocation

3 Cf, e.g., W. A. P. Martin, “Traces of International Law in Ancient China,” Inter-
national Review, XIV (1883), 69.

4A. Knabenhans, “Der Krieg bei den Naturviélkern,” Geographisch-ethnographische
Gesellschaft, Ziirich, XVI: Jahresbericht pro 1915-16 (Ziirich, 1917), p. 56. Cf. also
Maurice R. Davie, The Evolution of War: A Study of Its Role in Early Societies (New
Haven, 1929).

5 The term seems to have been used first by De Jomini.
than aggression from outsiders.‘ The rebellious class, by denying
the existence of common bonds with the suppressing class, defines
the civil foe as an absolute enemy.

Apart from wars against barbarians and savages, religious, civil,
and ideological wars, partisan wars also tend to approach the type
of absolute war, especially when inferiority in man power, equip-
ment, and organization are combined with an intense desire for
liberation from the militarily superior conqueror. Instead of accom-
modating themselves to defeat, the whole population may engage
in fighting and substitute ferocity for organized military strength.’

Finally, colonial campaigns often assume the character of ab-
solute war because the “savage” is defined as an absolute enemy.
Ferocities committed, justified, and advocated as retaliatory meas-
ures against savage tribes*® are ultimately due to the fact that civi-
lized weapons such as poison gas, aerial bombs, etc., are not avail-
able to the savages. Striking differences in equipment and methods
of warfare enter into the social definition of the enemy. In addition,
the history of colonization abounds with instances in which not the
strange warfare of the savages but their valuable land or possessions
precipitated ferocities under the pretext of antibarbarism.°

Instrumental war is waged in order to gain access to values which
the enemy controls. Thus it is defeat of the enemy—not necessarily
his annihilation—which is desired in instrumental war. The coveted
values may be political (strategical frontiers, alliance with the van-
quished foe, etc.), economic (spoliation, enslavement, exploitation,
markets, etc.), or religious (conversion), etc. The extent to which
instrumental war approaches the ruthlessness of absolute war de-
pends on the importance attached to the coveted values by the de-
fendant and on the character of these values. Instrumental war will
be less ruthless if the victor’s control over the coveted values pre-
supposes that the vanquished remain alive. Restrictions of instru-
mental war are not rooted in respect for God, laws, or one’s own
honor; they are merely expedient in character. The term instru-
mental war is chosen for two reasons. War is an instrument for the
attainment of values which the enemy controls. The enemy, too,
is an instrument that obstructs by defense in war and under certain
conditions must facilitate in some way after defeat the attainment
of these values.

These conditions can be stated more specifically. The most im-
portant kind of instrumental war is war waged in order to attain
economic values. When land occupied by the enemy, rather than
his purchasing power, his labor resources, or his value as a tributary,
is the objective, warfare tends to be particularly ferocious, since
the objective is more fully attained by extermination than by sub-
jugation. Under these conditions ferocity cannot be said to be eco-
nomically wasteful from the point of view of the victor.?° If mobile
wealth is the objective no restrictions are necessary, and only the
observation of norms may limit such wars. War assumes the form
of robbery in which the death of the victim may constitute murder
but does not mean waste.™

Thus, instrumental war may, under certain conditions, reach the
ferocity of absolute war. In absolute war, however, extermination
of the enemy is the supreme objective of war; it may even happen
that the economic values of the absolute enemy are destroyed be-
cause they are contaminated by the enemy who used them. Exter-
mination of the enemy in instrumental war is a rational means of
removing the political obstacle to the use of economic values.

In the simplest cases violence in war is restricted for expedient
reasons because the defeated and captured enemy himself becomes

10 A British military writer says about the English ravages in Transvaal: “.... By
thus exterminating whole families we hoped to leave untenanted lands on which our
colonists might establish themselves later” (A. C. Bell, Sea Power and the Next War
[London, 1938], p. 48). On the influence of climate on the economic objective and thus
on ferocity in European colonization overseas cf. Ruth Benedict, Race (New York,
1940), p. 168.

™ A perfect case of large-scale, organized robbery by military bands waging unre-
stricted war were the grandes compagnies in the Hundred Years’ War. Cf. P. Henri
Denifle, La Désolation des églises, monastéres et hépitaux en France pendant la Guerre de
Cent Ans, II (Paris, 1899), esp. 378 ff.
an immediate source of gain. The victor exploits the labor power of
the vanquished by enslaving him or by releasing him for ransom.
Evidently the economic organization prevailing among the victors
decides whether or not these restrictions will apply. The Iliad con-
tains several passages which make it clear that this economic atti-
tude toward the vanquished foe implies an element of mercy or,
to be more cautious, control of rage. It is up to the victor to prefer
the economic advantage, consisting in ransom, to the immediate
satisfaction of killing the vanquished foe. There is no clearer proof
for the contention that economic exchange of goods, even in its
basic form as an exchange of goods for life, contains an element of
peace and is contingent upon restraint of violence through reason.

When single combat ceases to be the predominant mode of war-
fare, restrictions of violence for reasons of economic expediency are
no longer dependent upon the calculations of the individual fighters
but rather upon both the foresight of the commander and the disci-
pline he is capable of imposing upon his soldiery. The ends of war
are no longer immediately intelligible to the soldier in his fight.
Prior to the appearance of disciplined armies, military victory used
to be wrought with the danger of demoralization for the victorious
mercenary armies. The strategical exploitation of victory was lim-
ited by the danger that the general might lose control over his sol-
diers as easy plunder and pillage threatened to transform his men
into a predatory crowd.

Economic foresight may also suggest that the enemies in war be
treated during the war itself as future tributaries whose means of
production should be spared in order not to diminish the chances
of later exploitation.”

In short, whether or not economic considerations make for a re-
striction of war depends on the social field in which war is waged,
especially on the form of gain as defined by the economic organiza-
tion of the victorious society."*

1 Tllustrations abound. For an especially neat one cf. Ram6n Menéndez Pidal, The
Cid and His Spain, trans. Harold Sutherland (London, 1934), p. 194.

33 Ferocity, devastation, and waste depend also on the organization of the military
supply systems. Even a brief consideration of this important factor, which would lead
to the distinction between wanton destruction and purposive, instrumental destruction
for strategical reasons, is omitted here for reasons of space.
The extreme opposite of absolute war is the fight waged under
conditions of studied equality and under strict observance of rules.
Measured in terms of destruction such a fight is highly inefficient
and ludicrously ceremonious. However, the agonistic fight, as we
know it from ancient Greece and also from other cultures," is not
oriented toward the destruction of the enemy, although his death
may, of course, ensue. Nor is it directed toward the acquisition of
wealth or other useful ends. It is fought for a prize, i.e., for a sym-
bolic value attached to victory (glory).

Each agonistic fight is a contest between opponents who delight
in measuring their strength according to certain rules of the “game.”
The opponents participate in a common culture or respect common
cultural values even if they are representatives of different power
structures. It is these common bonds which make the contest pos-
sible. The regulations reside in respect for values which none of the
opponents can be said to control. The values (customs, laws, codes
of honor, etc.) transcend the conflict.

The agonistic fight has the qualities of a play,’ with its freedom,
its rules, and its dissociation from useful action. But it is not only,
or at least need not be only, a “good” fight—a playful, vital con-
test. Certain plays are, as symbolic performances, closely related
to religious rites. The agonistic fight, too, may be a sacred play—
a ritual in which use is made of controlled force in order to determine
justice, which ordinarily cannot be determined by force. Victory
then is a fateful, symbolic revelation of justice, provided that the
sacred rules according to which justice has to be sought were meticu-
lously respected. The regulations in agonistic fighting are not rooted
in expediency as are the restrictions possibly imposed upon instru-
mental war. Rather they have the quality of norms.
For purposes of this discussion it does not matter whether these
rules have their origin in constellations of interests or considerations
of expediency; their validity resides in beliefs. Of course their in-
fraction is more likely when interests and beliefs cannot be recon-
ciled.7°

To sum up, the three types of war are oriented, respectively,
toward (x) annihilation, (2) advantage (especially enrichment), and
(3) glory and justice. The regulations of war may apply (x) to spe-
cific places that are exempted from warfare (temples, open cities)
or mutually agreed upon as battlegrounds (‘“pitched” battle); (2)
to certain “mes in which hostilities are suspended (negotiated truce,
customary cessation of hostilities at night, on special days, in winter,
etc.); (3) to certain forms which have to be observed in order to be-
gin and end hostilities or in order to avail one’s self properly of
victory (victor remaining on the battlefield for a fixed time, etc.);
(4) to the means of violence legitimately used in war by (a) legitimiz-
ing only the use of certain weapons and (8) only a specific use of
legitimate weapons; (5) to the method of warfare (rules prohibiting
the pursuit of defeated enemy, certain forms of symbol warfare,
etc.); (6) to the persons on the enemy side by (a) exempting from
violence or specific types of violence certain classes (women, chil-
dren, the old, noncombatants, heralds, etc.) and (6) prescribing
specific treatment of vanquished fighters (wounded, prisoners, the
dead); and, finally, (7) to the values controlled by the enemy espe-
cially by limiting spoiliation and devastation (a) in scope and (6) in
method; for example, through legitimizing only authorized devasta-
tion and spoliation but prohibiting lewd individual action.

Only in regulated wars can the distinction between “good war”
and “bad war’ be made,"’ the latter consisting in actions which
violate the rules of warfare. In absolute wars the distinction does
not hold. History abounds with cases, however, in which differences
in the conduct of war, owing to cultural differences between the
belligerents, were taken as manifestations of evil. From a partisan
point of view the infraction of a familiar rule is not easily distin-
guished from the observance of an unfamiliar rule. Thus the intro-
duction of a new weapon or method of warfare by one side regularly
causes moral indignation on the other side, until there too the new
device is adopted.

No actual war ever coincides with one of the pure types. The
Babylonians had an elaborately bureaucratic system of registering
booty by scribes while the heads of the enemies were for religious
reasons piled up in a pyramid “in order to augment their death”*—
a striking illustration of how traits of instrumental war may be
combined with traits of absolute war. When man fights for an idea
he mostly fights for an advantage at the same time. The typology
serves to render specific, concrete data,.viz., actual wars, intelligible
in general terms. What matters most in the comparative analysis
is the extent to which restrictions and regulations apply and of what
kind they are.

The same belligerent may wage absolute war against one enemy
and regulated war against another at different times or even at the
same time."® This important phenomenon can be understood only
with reference to the social definition of the enemy; it escapes at-
tention when the analysis of war is confined to the otherwise most
important problem of how the structure of a society influences war-
fare.

There are cases in which a belligerent of higher culture limits his
warfare more than his opponent does. Instances of such nonrecipro-
cal definition of the enemy can be found in the Crusades, the French
revolutionary wars, and in the present war in Europe. If a war lasts
long enough and if the available techniques on either side are fairly
similar reciprocity tends to develop.

Finally, any definition of the enemy is, to a varying degree, the
result of, and subject to, manipulation.

38 Quoted by Bruno Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, I (Heidelberg, 1920), 112.

19 Cf. also my paper, “Treachery in War,” Social Research, VII (1940), 258-79.
The typology holds regardless of the technical and organizational
conditions which prevail in war. For example, it would be erroneous
to assume that agonistic fighting is possible only in face-to-face com-
bat. Agonistic fighting does not necessarily disappear from war
when long-range weapons come to play a predominant role in
battle. Nor does such fighting presuppose that the commander par-
ticipates directly in it; when operations are directed, bureaucrati-
cally, from an “office” behind the front, war may still retain agonis-
tic traits, provided that the political and military élites of the belig-
erent societies hold certain rules of war in common respect. With
the introduction of long-range weapons the causes of violent death
become “‘invisible,” as Adam Smith put it. The bureaucratization
of the armed forces makes for a de-personalization of war: the sol-
diers become “unknown,” as it were. These changes affect the con-
tent of the norms in war, but agonistic fighting vanishes only when
the technological and organizational changes are accompanied by
other changes, in particular when the élites come to regard as their
highest standard that of efficiency in annihilation.

New Scwoot For SoctaL RESEARCH
New York City
