War and Technology

Author(s): Waldemar Kaempffert

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Jan., 1941), pp. 431-444
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769916

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:04 UTC
ABSTRACT

The course of military technology follows closely the course of industrial technology.
There is the same “cultural lag,” the same dependence on “outside” inventors (civil-
ians in this case) for revolutionary techniques. Sombart has expounded the thesis that
capitalism developed under the impetus of war. In this article the technological rela-
tion of military progress to industry, science, and invention is traced. It is shown that
both science and technology owe much to military necessity and that war has been a
powerful social force in the evolution of the physical sciences. Last, it is brought out
that military organization and military life have made their impression on industry,
with the result that workers are subjected to a discipline much like that of an army
and that the military line and staff have been copied by industry. Though military
needs have been the inspiration of physical scientists it is not to be concluded that
without war there would be no science. Though backward, the biological sciences have
developed apparently without any direct or indirect military encouragement.

For Richard the Lionhearted coal held not the slightest economic
or military interest. Today nations cannot wage war without it.
This culture of ours is based on coal and iron—on energy and ma-
chines made of steel. Since the “great man” theory of culture has
been abandoned—a theory which attributes all progress to heroes of
art, invention, politics, arms, religion, and statesmanship—it be-
comes necessary to discover exactly how science and technology
rose. We think at once of eighteenth-century liberalism, the develop-
ment of free trade, the Industrial Revolution. But the social pres-
sure that forced the technologist to make the most of coal and iron
ores and the physicist and chemist to examine the nature of matter

and formulate the laws that underlie mechanics began to be exerted

431
long before the French Revolution. Science is itself an aspect of
social change, a response to social compulsion. Like art, justice, and
religion it pursues a course which has little relation to its own in-
ternal logic. What, then, was the social pressure that shaped the
course of science?

There never was a time in the last five hundred thousand years
when there was not some science, some technology in the world.
Even the Peking man, who still had much of the ape in him, knew
the use of fire—the beginning of technology. And even primitive
savages invented such ingenious machines as bows and arrows and
firedrills. Yet it was not until explosives were introduced in war that
the real mechanization of armies began in our sense of the word.
It was the discovery and the military use of gunpowder that gave
science and technology their impetus—a discovery which did quite
as much as the invention of movable types and the steam engine
to change the structure of society, to give it new purpose and direc-
tion, and to lay the foundations of engineering and mass production.

If an explosive is to hurl a projectile, there is clearly need of a
suitable weapon. The need was met by the musket and the cannon.
At once we are confronted with a formidable metallurgical task.
The first metal cannons were made of bronze, an alloy much too
expensive for use on a large military scale, yet the only metal that
could be used in the beginning for lack of the proper technical skill.
Iron is cheaper, more abundant than copper, and, properly worked,
even more efficient. But to cast iron ingots of cannon size and in
sufficient quantity was beyond the capabilities of armorers and
smiths. Exactly where and when the change from bronze to cast-
iron cannon was made is not known. It occurred somewhere in west-
ern Germany, eastern France, or Belgium about 1410. But the first
Continental cannons were mortars, large in diameter, short in length.
The long-range fieldpiece, with its relatively small bore and great
length, originated in Sussex. From the very beginning the iron-
founding industry of Sussex produced war material, shot and guns,
and continued to do so throughout its whole course.

t Rhys Jenkins, “Iron Founding in England, 1490-1603.” Paper read before the
Iron and Steel Institute, London, November 9, 1938, and printed in the Transactions of
the Newcomen Society, XIX (1938-39), 35-49-
As might be expected the early Sussex iron-founders were not
industrialists in the modern sense, but craftsmen and artisans. Their
furnaces were small and were fired with charcoal and blown by
bellows worked by water wheels. Such was the demand for charcoal
and such the Continental demand for the long English cast-iron
gun that in the reign of Henry VIII, whose first act was to provide
for munitions, armor, and guns, England’s forests were threatened.
By Queen Elizabeth’s time it had become necessary to consider coal
as a foundry fuel. But mines, mere open pits, were soon flooded,
and there were only inefficient horse pumps to drain them. Out of
the need came two great inventions—the high blast furnace and
the Newcomen pump. With this early start in ferrous metallurgy
it followed naturally that by the middle of the seventeenth century
English arms factories were the best in Europe and that England
led the world in the casting of cannon.

To this day the influence of military needs on metallurgy persists.
Bessemer was confessedly inspired by the inefficiency of cannon in
the Crimean War and the need of steel to invent the converter that
bears his name. The first tough, strong, steel alloys were developed
for the protection of battleships, with the result that the first sound
automobiles were those with shafts and gears of nickel steel. Many
of the great advances in metallurgy were made under military pres-
sure. Our production of steels in electric furnaces was nothing to
boast of before the war of 1914-18. By the time the treaty of peace
was signed we had made good our deficiencies. It is also worth noting
that the best crucible steels were long produced in quantity by
Krupp by hand pouring and that Krupp was also the most powerful
industrial developer of electric steels. With the advent of the mili-
tary airplane and the airship, the need for aluminum alloys was ur-
gent, with the result that a wholly new branch of metallurgy was
opened for exploration.

Like swords, pikes, and coats of mail the earliest muskets were
made by individual craftsmen. But not for long. By the sixteenth
century the demand was such that specialization became necessary.
Even then women were engaged in making some parts of muskets,
though interchangeability had not yet been invented. By the end
of the sixteenth century, according to Sombart, the musket-makers
of Augsburg offered to the Duke of Milan nine hundred “hand
tubes,” all designed to fire a ball of one size. By 1540 Hartmann of
Nuremberg had standardized calibers—i.e., the relation of bore to
length—and by 1773 all firearms fired standard projectiles? In
others words, it was discovered four centuries ago that mass pro-
duction of munitions without standardization is impossible. Armies
were increasing in size, and their consumption of material was colos-
sal, considering the available resources. It is no accident, then, that
works in which firearms and powder were made were the first to
assume a modern character, that arsenals had to be built to store
weapons, that governments undertook the production of explosives,
munitions, and uniforms themselves.

Mass production by machines as we know it is inconceivable with-
out interchangeability of parts. And interchangeability is the off-
spring of military necessity. The first step in this direction seems
to have been taken in England. Pulley blocks constituted one of the
most important supplies of the English navy in the eighteenth cen-
tury. A single full-rigged frigate needed about fifteen hundred, and
the Admiralty was purchasing about one hundred thousand annu-
ally after the middle of the century. On the recommendation of
Samuel Bentham, brother of the famous Jeremy, Brunel’s wood-
working machinery, much improved by Maudslay, was introduced.
Each tool performed its own part in a definite series of operations,
with the result that pulley blocks were standardized and made so
as to be interchangeable. The principle was independently con-
ceived and applied to gun making by Leblanc in France (1785).
Much impressed, Jefferson did his unsuccessful best “to get the
U.S. to bring him over which he was ready for on moderate terms.”
Yet it remained for Eli Whitney to reinvent and reintroduce on a
larger and more dramatic scale the most important of all principles
in manufacturing. In 1798 he applied for a contract to make ten
thousand muskets on the interchangeable principle, so that it was
possible to assemble a complete weapon from a heterogeneous mass
of parts. It is significant that the impetus came from army needs.

2 Werner Sombart, Krieg und Kapitalismus (Miinchen, 1913).

3 Joseph W. Roe, English and American Machine-Tool-Builders (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1916).
As the result of his work the United States was so far in advance of
Europe in gun making that for years even the British imported
American machine tools for their government munitions factories
and arsenals. Though the machine tool assumes today many special
forms, it is the child of the musket and the cannon.

The demand for machine-made, standardized muskets and cannon
called for a new type of skill. To bore the cylinders for his first
engines Watt had to turn to John Wilkinson, and John Wilkinson
was a cannon-borer who had invented the one machine in all Eng-
land that could gnaw through a block of cast iron with accuracy.
Without Wilkinson’s machine tools the steam engine and hence the
factory system, despite the use of water wheels in the textile indus-
try, is scarcely conceivable as we know it. And so it was with the
standardization of screw threads and machine operations. All were
the direct and indirect consequence of the demand for firearms and
cannon which had to be produced on a quantity basis. Even the
Blanchard eccentric lathe was invented to accelerate the production
of gunstocks.

The standardization of weapons was naturally accompanied by
the standardization of clothing. It was not the desirability of dis-
tinguishing one army or brigade from another that led military
leaders to adopt uniforms but the necessity of converting an armed
force into a living machine. The beginnings, to be sure, are to be
found in the “house colors” or liveries of feudal lords, house colors
still preserved in the garb of our jockeys. The psychological effect
of the uniform in fostering loyalty and esprit de corps was recognized
when firearms were displacing pikes and bows and arrows.

Apart from the psychological advantage that accrued from uni-
forming troops, clothing, buttons, boots, saddles, hats, and other
wearing apparel were bound to be standardized. When even small
principalities and duchies framed specifications for cloth which was
to be of one quality and color, buttons of a given size and of a given
metal, hats of one design and material, the old hit-and-miss system
of clothing regiments had to give way. An order for ten thousand
uniforms or shoes was gigantic. For any army of one hundred thou-
sand more than six hundred thousand ells of cloth were required, and
the entire annual output of West Riding, center of the English cloth
industry in the eighteenth century, was only twenty-five thousand.*
During the Seven Years’ War the demand for military cloth was
almost more than the weavers could meet. So it was with wagons,
boots, harness, hats, and belts. Russia proceeded to fill some of her
needs in state factories. In the more democratic countries the army
dealt with large merchants who could control the quality and color
of cloth and avoid conspicuous variations. In the first quarter of
the nineteenth century we first hear of the sewing machine. It was
Thimmonier’s, and it was first used in making army uniforms (1829).

It would take us too far afield to show the ancillary effects of the
demand for uniforms. We must content ourselves with pointing out
that the textile industries needed large quantities of dyes, soap,
detergents, and bleaching agents. When prices soared in 1775 the
French Academy of Science offered a prize of 2,400 livres for a process
whereby soda could be made cheaply. Nicolas Leblanc, a pupil of
Lavoisier’s, won it, and thus started the heavy chemical industry.
In fact, his discovery was as important for industrial chemistry as
Watt’s invention for mechanical engineering. If France failed to
reap full industrial advantage of the soda process, it was because of
the French Revolution. The heavy chemical industry passed to Eng-
land, which was supplying cloth for most of the armies of the Con-
tinent, despite “Prussian interlopers,” as the English weavers called
them.

It is not enough to supply an army with weapons and uniforms.
Soldiers must have ammunition and food. Military demands were
always made on road builders. Though Europe allowed Roman
roads to collapse it did make military use of the locomotive when it
appeared. On the Continent railways were laid out from the very
beginning with an eye to military necessity. Moreover, they have
long been state controlled. Until the locomotive was devised prob-
ably the largest army ever assembled was that with which Napoleon
invaded Russia—a force of 500,000 which marched not as a solid
mass, but in separate groups. Delbriick has shown that the hordes
of Xerxes which invaded Greece are largely mythical.’ He declines
to accept the tales of the dense masses of Gauls that Caesar dwells

4 Sombart, of. cit.
3 Hans Delbriick, Numbers in History (London: University of London Press, 1913).
upon or of Attila’s 700,000 men. Moltke needed nine railways to
deploy an army of 400,000 and to control a reserve of 100,000, and
even with this aid his rapid maneuvers—far more rapid than were
Napoleon’s—would have been impossible without the telegraph.
Alexander set out with an army of 32,000 men on foot and 5,100
cavalry—about double the force Xerxes probably had in Delbriick’s
opinion. The total number of men engaged in the Battle of Hastings
could not have been more than 12,000 despite the categorical state-
ment of Roman de Rou that Harold had 400,000 under his command.
No general of ancient or medieval times could possibly have re-
cruited forces that ran into the hundreds of thousands, because of
the paucity of population, the lack of good roads and means of com-
munication, and the problem of finding enough food.

The vast technological change that occurred in equipping and
transporting armies after the introduction of gunpowder and factory
machinery is inconceivable without scientific advance. Back of the
introduction of gunpowder and the progress in metallurgy that led
to the improvement of firearms and artillery stood the scientist.
Like the engineer he received his inspiration from war, as Robert
K. Merton has shown.° Concern with the expansion of gases, com-
bustibility of powder, and the consequent pressure of the products
of combustion and the durability and resistance of materials aroused
interest in “derivative problems,” which seemed to be of purely
scientific interest and which were attacked, in consequence, without
apparent social pressure, so that the experimenters, utterly unaware
of the original impetus, imagined that they were pursuing research
solely for the sake of adding to the sum total of human knowledge—
an illusion still cherished in our university laboratories. The scien-
tists and engineers of the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth cen-
turies, however, were more aware of their relation to the soldier.
When Leonardo offered his services to the Duke of Milan he enumer-
ated ten of his virtues. Only one dealt with his gifts as an artist
(this most casually), and the rest with fortifications, guns, transpor-
tation of infantry, powders, and inflammables. Galileo was a pro-
fessor of military science at Pavia whose telescope was purchased
by the signory of Venice solely because of its value in naval warfare.

6 “Science and Military Technique,” Scientific Monthly, XLI (December, 1935), 542.
Tartaglia reluctantly laid the foundation of ballistics, realizing that
“it was a thing blameworthy, shameful and barbarous, worthy of
severe punishment before God and man”’ but consoling himself with
the thought that his work (incidentally quite useless in artillery
practice but highly useful in the development of mechanics) might
aid in overpowering the infidel Turks. Toricelli studied in much de-
tail the trajectory and range of projectiles. Leibniz worked in what
he called “military mechanics” and on a “new air-pressure gun.”
So did Denis Papin and Otto von Guericke.? The French artillery
schools of the eighteenth century were the only places where science
was systematically taught, and it was in them that Napoleon was
educated. Lavoisier, the founder of modern chemistry, was head
of the Régie des poudres. Rumford’s classic experiment to deter-
mine the mechanical equivalent of heat was carried out with the aid
of cannon-boring equipment—an experiment that furnished the basis
of thermodynamics. The theory of gravitation as it was evolved
by Galileo, Newton, and others emerged out of ballistics as much as
it did out of the swinging of pendulums and the falling of bodies.®

The dependence of war on science increased with military mecha-
nization. Today science and technology are mobilized to serve the
army, sometimes in peace, as in Germany under Hitler, and always
when hostilities break out. The result is a rapid and vast expansion
of industrial research to achieve military and, hence, industrial ends
as war assumes a totalitarian character. In this country there were
well-conducted industrial laboratories even before the war of 1914-
18. After 1918 research blossomed as never before. American indus-
trial chemistry, for example, received an impetus that revealed itself
in the production of optical glass (for which we had been dependent
on Germany), dyes, nitrates, electric steels, alloys, hydroelectric
machinery, silklike fibers, plastics, synthetic rubbers. In Great Brit-
ain, where industrial research stood at a low level, the story was re-
peated. If arms gained by the mobilization of science, so did indus-
try—even German industry.
As war gradually involved whole industries economic self-suffi-
ciency became a necessity. And self-sufficiency assumed different
aspects as military techniques developed. Henry VIII stimulated
the mining of iron, lead, and copper by inviting German capital to
invest in English mines and encouraged the immigration of foreign
artisans in metal. In every European country industry was devel-
oped with the aid of imported skill. Napoleon was, therefore, merely
carrying on an old tradition when he infused new life into the chemi-
cal industry and saw to it that sugar beets and potatoes were grown
of a quality that was unprecedented.

It was not until synthetic chemistry burgeoned that the first
scientific efforts could be made to overcome a home deficiency in
raw materials. Here, as might be expected, Germany took the lead.
Her first large-scale attempts were made in preparation for the war
of 1914-18. A score of chemists busied themselves with the conver-
sion of wood (cellulose) into sugar and then into cattle fodder. A
process for making an unsatisfactory kind of synthetic rubber was
devised by 1910 and highly improved after 1918. Haber was encour-
aged to develop his process of synthesizing ammonia, which won
him the Nobel prize. Bergius, another Nobel prize winner, Fischer,
and Tropsch conducted a series of researches which culminated in
methods of making gasoline and alcohol out of coal. Within a year
after the war of 1914 broke out sewage was treated for the recovery
of fats and other values, new processes for making glycerine were
devised, chemists were engaged in attempts—which have not yet
fully succeeded—to make out of petroleum an edible fat to take the
place of butter and margarine. Goering’s Four Year Plan, conceived
and largely carried out before the recent invasion of Czechoslovakia,
enlisted the technological resources of all Germany in a supreme
effort to thwart the inevitable British blockade, with the result that
fish and milk were converted into cloth, the tops of vegetables, ordi-
narily thrown away, were husbanded for conversion into fibers, and
the garbage pail became a source of raw material for industrial
chemistry. The economic repercussions are so well known that it
is unnecessary to dwell on them. The nitrate deposits of the western
South American coast, one of Chile’s chief sources of wealth, have
ceased to be of prime economic importance not only for Germany
but for other countries which proceeded to erect their own modified
Haber plants. It is true that high tariffs played their part in this
striving for self-sufficiency, but there is no doubt that, in Europe
at least, every great military power had British control of the seas
in mind.

Because war has little to do with morals or expenditures, because
the business of the soldier is to maim, kill, and destroy, it might be
supposed that all this military technological change was rapid. What
Ogburn calls “cultural lag” is found in armies as well as in society at
large. Standardization did not come about overnight. Rather was
it a process of centuries. Even so late as the time of Frederick the
Great remnants of feudal laxity persisted. That monarch could voice
nothing but disapproval of the Great Elector’s troops because of
their slipshod appearance and equipment and their lack of disci-
pline.’ War lords were slow in learning from the church, which had
uniformed its monks and nuns for centuries, standardized their ec-
clesiastical equipment and evolved a discipline as severe as that of
any modern army. Centuries had to elapse before gunpowder at last
completely displaced pikes and bows and arrows. Godfrey de Bouil-
lon, sans peur et sans reproche, hacked off the right hands of captive
musketeers but treated captive archers, swordsmen, and pikemen
as honored guests. Whitworth’s improved cannon and rifles were re-
jected at first. So were Armstrong’s rifles and built-up cannons, a tre-
mendous improvement over muzzle-loaders. Ericsson had to build
the “Monitor” at his own expense. Probably the deadliest weapon
ever used in war is the Maxim machine gun; yet Maxim had to hawk
his model all over Europe and succeeded in selling it only after he
allied himself with Zaharoff, a high-pressure salesman of munitions.
The German general staff was bitterly opposed to Count von Zep-
pelin’s rigid airship and in the end was overruled by popular opin-
ion and Emperor William II. Though gas might have been used in
battle at any time after the French Revolution it remained for Fritz
Haber to suggest that chlorine be wafted at Ypres and Neuve Cha-
pelle. It was only later that mustard gas, known for sixty years,
was fired in shells. The Wright airplane was at first rejected by the
United States, Great Britain, and France. Before 1904 the Krupps
were the leaders in military and industrial metallurgy, yet so diffi-
cult did they find it to sell their wares that the artillery experts of
the world were invited to see for themselves how the new steels
were made and to witness tests of new guns at the proving ground
of Meppen. It was not until 1901, when H.M.S. “Captain,” “Euryd-
ice,” “Atlanta,” and ‘Condor’ foundered in heavy weather, that
the British navy finally abandoned sails and spars, except for school-
ships.

Not only does military history reveal the same cultural lag as
industrial history but all the revolutionary means of killing on a
wholesale scale came from “outsiders,” that is from technologists
who were not professional soldiers. Whitworth, Armstrong, and
Krupp were commercial iron-founders like their predecessors under
the Tudors and Hohenstaufens. Ericsson was not a naval officer but
an engineer in private practice. Gatling was a physician and Maxim
a Maine farmer. Haber was a corporation chemist, director of an
industrial research laboratory. Leonardo and Fulton, both of whom
busied themselves with submarines, were artists. Bushnell, Bauer,
Holland, and Lake, four of the more important inventors who
brought the submarine to perfection, were all civilians. Lillienthal,
an engineer, Langley, an astronomer, and the Wrights, two bicycle
vendors and repairmen, were the more conspicuous among a score
of inventors who gave us the airplane. Professional soldiers improve;
they do not originate as a rule.

The explanation of technological lag in war and industry is the
same. Expense accounts for some of it, tradition and inertia for
much, and standardization for most. An army and a manufacturing
enterprise are both highly standardized. Artillery comes in standard
sizes, so that it may fire standard projectiles. So with rifles, gre-
nades, tractors, tanks, all the modern paraphernalia of war. With
billions invested in a standardized railway system it is financially
hopeless in a capitalistic society to change gauges, signals, tunnel
clearances, rolling stock, and brakes in order to introduce one-hun-
dred-and-fifty-mile-an-hour monorailways which can cross an abyss
ona steel cable. Though it has been possible for forty years to record
sound on a steel wire miles in length and to reproduce it electro-
magnetically in accordance with telephonic principles, we still cling
to the standard disk with all the disadvantages of changing it when
a long symphony is to be played and of the hissing and scratching
that accompany the friction of a needle in its groove. Military his-
tory merely parallels industrial history. Both in industry and in
war men are regimented. Everywhere there is system—system in
reconnoitering from the air, firing shells from a battery, building an
airplane, preparing and packaging a breakfast food. Innovations can
be introduced in the midst of war only on a small and experimental
scale, as in the case of gas, the tank, and armored vessels.

Every prediction that more effective means of killing would lead
to the end of war has been belied. Only a few years before 1914
H. G. Wells expressed the opinion in When the Sleeper Wakes that
not only would whole communities be wiped out by bombs dropped
from the air but that men would never be equal to the peril of
fighting in the air. When Kitchener first used the machine gun in
war and mowed down the massed hordes of the Mad Mullah in the
Sudan, the House of Commons was horrified and debated the ad-
visability of prohibiting the use of the weapon. Sorokin has ana-
lyzed go2 wars and 1,615 internal disturbances of the last 2,500
years only to find that the bloodiest period in all history was the
first quarter of the present century—an analysis made before 1939.
The average man of the thirteenth century had 6,500 more chances
of dying peacefully in bed than his descendant of the twentieth.
There is no support for the popular belief in the disappearance of
war as civilization progresses. War may conceivably destroy civili-
zation, but the greatest social, cultural, political, industrial, tech-
nological, and economic blossoming has occurred when belligerency
was high.

An army is an ideal consumer. It produces nothing and stands
psychologically apart from any other human organization. In in-
dustry workers have always viewed technological advance with
dread, so that when an invention like the spinning mule or the sewing
machine is introduced there is sabotage. The musket, the cannon,
the machine gun are labor-saving devices in precisely the same sense
that a steam shovel is a labor-saving device. But there is no sabotage
among soldiers, because there is no technological unemployment. A
machine gun can kill a thousand times more effectively than an in-
fantryman’s repeating rifle, but regiments of infantry are more
numerous than they ever were. Fighting ships did not decrease in
size when cannons were mounted on their decks, nor did crews di-
minish as the range and striking power of guns increased. Techno-
logical progress and military competition have led to fighting on a
broader scale, until at last whole populations are involved.

Industry seems to march so serenely on its course that we are
scarcely aware of the influence that war has had upon it. We are
apt to think of a factory merely as something that supplies goods.
Even though the goods are rifles and bullets, tanks and searchlights,
airplanes and explosives, it has an air of specious independence as
if it had grown from a seed without apparent external aid. Yet in-
dustry learned everything, except invention, from war—organiza-
tion, discipline, standardization, the co-ordination of transport and
supply, the separation of line and staff, the division of labor (cavalry,
infantry, artillery). Workers dress more or less alike. Such is the
influence of military example that “soda-jerkers,” nurses, trainmen,
waiters, elevator boys, theater ushers, and street sweepers are uni-
formed, and the doormen of hotels and motion-picture theaters re-
semble admirals and generals in resplendent full dress. Even the
changing of the guard has its counterpart in the changing of eight-
hour shifts. It may be, as Sombart maintains, that industry would
have evolved its organization and discipline without military in-
spiration, but the tempo of its progress would certainly have been
slower.

An indictment of war as an abuse of science and technology can
easily be converted into a brief on the debt of research and inven-
tion to arms. However persuasive such a brief might be, it could not
maintain the proposition that without war, without capitalism, with-
out profit-making there would have been no science, no technology.
Biology, for example, evolved with no other stimulus than curiosity
and the spirit of free investigation. On the other hand, there is no
doubt that the progress of the physical sciences has been accelerated
by war—the very sciences that are most likely to aid the soldier
and the most likely to make profits. With the exception of medicine,
the biological sciences, which have never appealed very strongly to
capitalists, to philanthropists or the state, have lagged behind the
physical sciences, and even medicine is backward compared with
engineering. Because biology has advanced, though it is a laggard
biology, we have every reason to believe that war is not a necessity
in the pursuit of science.

Even more reprehensible than the bias imposed in favor of the
physical sciences and engineering is the effect of war on the tempo
of research. When the treaty of peace was signed at Versailles, in-
dustry and agriculture in Europe and America had been expanded
far beyond normal requirements. Not only this but the machines
and processes that had been hastily invented and introduced sud-
denly and enormously complicated the problem of technological un-
employment. We cannot hope to solve that problem so long as war
imperiously demands of society the patriotic duty to forget its
struggles and hopes for a free, decent life in a hurried effort to meet
the appalling ravages of armies and to keep pace with the outrageous
destruction of material and human values. Nor is it to the credit of
war that legislation conceived to protect workers from the rapacity
of their exploiters is ignored or modified when the call to arms is
heard. To make the most of scientific and technologic change, which
implies the orderly application of discoveries and inventions, we
need prediction of the kind first attempted in Technological Trends
and National Policy, published in 1937 by the National Resources
Committee. But the most trustworthy forecast of technologic and
hence of social change can be of little value in framing a constructive
policy of the kind we need to make the most of science and develop
it uniformly and rationally on all frontiers to achieve the highest
social good.

New Yorx Times
