The Province of Sociology

Author(s): George E. Vincent

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Jan., 1896), pp. 473-491
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2761877

Accessed: 08-05-2016 23:18 UTC
I. Toe Nature anp Funcrion oF Metuop.

1, Method is mental machinery devised by men to deal with
phenomena.

2. The scientific method is applicable in greater or less
degree to all kinds of phenomena.

3. There are three modes of scientific investigation: observa-
tion, comparison, and experiment.

4. Method is an absolute necessity. for systematizing and
extending a knowledge of reality.

5. Method is a natural development from the instinctive
impulse of the mind to organize its impressions into a consistent
unity.

6. The preliminary discrimination of method is the distribu-
tion of all phenomena among certain grand divisions.

7. It is of vital importance to discriminate between a division
of phenomena for purposes of study, and a separation of the
phenomena themselves.

8. Since the sciences deal with different aspects of the same
objective world, it follows that they must codperate to give a
complete account of reality.

9. Scientific method has been developed historically first in
application to inorganic phenomena, then to organic life, more
recently to psychical and social phenomena.

10. Is there room for a further elaboration of method? Is
there need of another department of investigation ?

473
II. Historica Outiine oF SociaL PHILosopuy.

DeGreef: L’Evolution des Croyances et des Doctrines Politiques, Paris,

1895, Pp. 19-72.
Gumplowicz: Grundriss der Sociologie, Vienna, 1885, pp. 3-50.

Schwegler: History of Philosophy.

Bacon: Novum Organum, Bohn’s Library Ed. Bk. I, p 383, sg.

Comte: Philosophie Positive. Martineau’s Tr., Vol. II, Chaps. i. and ii.

Flint: Vico, London, 1884.

Small and Vincent: Am Introduction to the Study of Society. Bk. 1., Chs.
i, and ii.

1, The scientific method as applicable or applied to social
phenomena has been transmitted and developed from Aristotle,
through

a) The theologians of the Church with many speculative
modifications ;

6) Roger Bacon (1214-1292) ‘‘the first encyclopaedic savant
to emerge from the Middle Ages”;

c) St. Thomas Aquinas (1227-1274) who prepared for the
separation of theology and metaphysical philosophy ;

d) Machiavelli (1469-1527) who observed social forces and
based rules of action upon the actual nature of men;

e) Francis Bacon (1561-1626) the founder of the modern
scientific method ;

f) Hobbes (1588-1670) who based the sovereignty of the
prince on social need instead of “divine right” ;

g) Descartes (1596-1650) who by his attempt to sweep
away all preconceptions cleared the path for the scientific
methods ;

h) Spinoza (1632-1678) who announced the theory of the
“sovereignity of the people.”

2. These ideas thus developed began to be applied to social
phenomena systematically by

a) Vico (1668-1744) who announced the conception of a
continuous and ordered development in history; a cyclical
movement through three stages: divine, heoric, human. No
theological or speculative hypothesis was admitted. The
theory was based on observation, insufficient and unwarrant-
ably generalized though it was.

6) Montesquieu (1689-1755) ‘Laws are the necessary rela-
tions which are derived from the nature of things.”

c) Turgot (1727-1781) advanced a theory of irdefinite and
continuous progress.

@) Rousseau (1712-1778) in his Discours sur Origin de
Vinégalité parmi les hommes attempted to solve the economic
question which he clearly recognized as fundamental.

e) Adam Smith (1723-1790) was the enunciator of social
laws governing the phenomena connected with wealth.

Ff) Bentham (1749-1832) recognized the interrelation of
economic and ethical social factors.

g) John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) carried further the ideal of
reasoned intervention. “With him .... ends the meta-
physical period of political economy and the social sciences.”

h) Auguste Comte (1798-1857) the so-called “father of
Sociology.”

IJ. Tue System or Avucuste ComrTe.

Comte: Philosophie Positive. Martineau’s Tr., Vol.II, Chaps. vii-xi.
J. S. Mill: Zhe Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte, Boston, 1871.
Spencer: Of the Classification of the Sciences. Recent Discussions.
Ward: Dynamic Sociology. New York, 1883, Vol. I., Chap. i.
The Place of Sociology among the Sciences. American Journal of
Sociology, July, 1895.
Fiske; Outtines of Cosmic Philosophy. Boston, 1875, Vol. I., Chap. xii.

1. The doctrine of the three stages.
All bodies of human thought pass through three stages:

a) The theological or fictitious (personal or volitional ;
Mill.)

6) The metaphysical or abstract (abstractional or ontologi-
cal; Mill.)

c) The scientific or positive (phenomenal or experimental;
Mill.)
2. The hierarchy of the sciences.

An arrangement of decreasing generality or increasing com-
plexity, each science immediately dependent upon the next
below: (a) mathematics, (4) astronomy, (c) physics, (¢) chem-
istry, (e) biology (including ‘transcendental biology,” a sort of
psychology), (/) social physics or sociology.

Of this hierachy it is also asserted that the sciences pass
through the three stages in the sequence indicated, and should
be studied in this order.

3. The progress of society from the military to the industrial
régime.

2) Intellectual progress is the determining factor of social
evolution.

6) Intellectual progress passes through three stages to which
there correspond three grades of social evolution: military,
transitional or legal, industrial.

c) These three propositions (1, 2, and 3 above) together
constitute Comte’s theory of social evolution.

4. Criticisms.

a) As to the three stages, it is pointed out by Spencer
(Recent Discussions, p. 124) and Fiske (Cosmic Philosophy, Vol. l.,
p- 185) that the movement of human thought is a continual
progress, that the three stages are not different im hind, that
the advancement is simply from the more anthropomorphic to
the less.

6) The hierarchy of the sciences is by the same authorities
declared to be weakened by a confusion of “abstract” with
“general;” the historical proof of order of development
is denied; the evolution is not démear but the sciences have
advanced together in mutual interdependence (cf Classifica-
tion of the Sciences, Fiske’s Cosmic Philosophy, Vol. 1., p. 219).

c) As to thetransition from militancy to industrialism the
causal connection between intellectual progress and the three
types of society is not even remotely shown except perhaps in
the case of the third.
5. Estimate of Comte’s contributions to social science.

a) He should be judged by his general aims rather than by
his specific accomplishments.

6) Comte asserted with definiteness the sequence and causal
continuity of social phenomena, and attempted to formulate
laws of evolution.

c) He grasped the idea of the unity of nature and tried to
organize all human knowledge in harmony with that theory.

d) He is the Copernicus rather than the Kepler or Newton
of modern philosophy (Fiske).

IV. Tue DevELopMENT oF BIoLocy AND THE IDEA oF Evo-

LUTION,

The progress of the biological sciences, and the formulation of
theories of organic development have influenced all contempo-
rary thought, while the study of psychical phenomena has been
greatly advanced. Both movements have had the highest sig-
nificance to students of society.

a) The term evolution was first employed in biology in the
first half of the 17th century, to describe the growth of
embryos.

6) Harvey, Bonnet, Buffon and Wolff made contributions to
embryology which under Von Baer, early in this century,
reached a thoroughly scientific basis.

c) The idea of evolution may be applied either to an indi-
vidual or to a sum of individuals. In the latter case the
conception of development or evolution, approached by Des-
cartes and Leibnitz, gradually increased in definiteness.

@) Treviranus and Lamarck early in the century published
treatises which laid the foundations for the present theory.

e) In 1858 Charles Darwin published the Theory of Natural
Selection which was followed in 1859 by his famous work on
The Origin of Species. Thus the idea of adjustment to the
environment as a determining factor in biological variation
was announced.
J) The nature of heredity is at present a vexed question in
biology. Weismann, the biological specialist, denies that
acquired characters can be transmitted, while Spencer con-
tends that they are. (Vide articles in Contemporary Review,
September 1893-October 1894 and September 1895 also
Romanes, An Examination of Weismannism, Open Court Co.)

V. THE APPLICATION OF THE EVOLUTIONARY THEORY TO SOCIAL
PHENOMENA.

Spencer: First Principles, Secs. 111-145.

Fiske: Cosmic Philosophy, Vol. I1., Chaps. xviii. and xix.

Le Conte: Evolution and Its Relation to Religious Thought, pp. 3-7.

The Theory of Evolution and Social Progress. The Monist,
July, 1895.

Ward: Dynamic Sociology, Vol. 1., Chap. ii.

1. Herbert Spencer (1820——) has extended. the theory of
evolution to include all phenomena, 7. ¢., to interpret the whole
cosmic order. He expresses his indebtedness to Wolff, Goethe
and Von Baer. Spencer’s formula contains the following prop-
ositions :

a) Evolution is a change from a less coherent to a more
coherent form, consequent on the dissipation of motion and
integration of matter.

6) From a homogeneous to a heterogeneous state.

c) From an indefinite to a definite form.

d) During this process the retained motion undergoes a
parallel transformation.

2. John Fiske, in general a follower of Spencer, yet a thinker
of independence and originality, has specifically applied the
evolutionary conception to society as follows:

a) Social progress is a continuous establishment of inner

(4. é., within the society) relations in conformity to outer rela-

tions.

6) In the course of this adaptation, the community con-
tinually increases in definite heterogeneity, through successive
differentiations and integrations.
c) The increase in internal heterogeneity is determined by
the continuous increase of heterogeneity in the environment
(physical and psychical).

d) The increase of heterogeneity in the environment is
determined by the successive integration of communities into
more and more complex and coherent aggregates.

3. Conclusion. The results of the evolutionary conception of
society since Comte are in general :

a) Greater definiteness; a clearer conviction as to the
mutual reaction of physical and psychical forces.

6) A fuller appreciation of the universality of law, even
among the most complex phenomena.

c) A working hypothesis which may be made the basis of
practical attempts either to bring social efforts into harmony
with immutable forces, or by conscious plan to recombine and
modify natural tendencies.

VI. THE OrcGanic THEORY OF SOCIETY.

Spencer: Principles of Sociology, Vol. 1., Secs. 212 to 255.
The Social Organism, Westminister Review, January, 1860.

Mackenzie: Jntroduction to Social Philosophy, Chap. iii.

Schaffle: Bau und Leben des Socialen Korpers, Vol.1. pp. 41-49, 824-846.

Small and Vincent: Az Introduction to the Study of Society, Book I.,
Chap. v.

Ward: Sociology and Biology, American Journal of Sociology, November,
1895.

Giddings; The Theory of Sociology (Supplement to the American Acad-
emy, June 1894).

Patten: Zhe Failure of Biologic Sociology, American Academy, May, 1894.

The Organic Concept of Society, American Academy, Nov., 1894.
Small: Zhe Organic Concept of Soctety, American Academy, March, 1895.
Tarde: La Logigue Sociale, Paris, 1895, pp. 127-33.

The analogies between society and an individual organism
have been pointed out by many philosophers from Plato and
Thucydides to Hobbes, Hegel and Comte. The rapid develop-
ment of biology during the present century has unquestionably
stimulated thought about this conception. Spencer has made
the most detailed statements of the organic theory. He speaks
of society as a super-organism. Ward, DeGreef, Giddings, and
Schaffle also use the terms super-organic and super-psychical.
1, Summary of Spencer’s position. Society is said to be Ake
an individual organism in the following points:
a) Growth is attended by augmentation of mass,
6) Increasing complexity of structure, and
c) Increasing interdependence of parts.
d) The life and development of society is independent of
and far more prolonged than the life and development of any
of its component units.

Societies are declared to difr from individual organisms in
the following respects :

@) Societies have no specific external forms.

6) Elements of societies do not form a continuous mass.
(Analogy with certain forms of organisms, however, very
striking.)

c) Units of societies are not stationary and fixed in their
positions. (Difference not so great as at first appears.)

d) Capacity for pleasurable feeling is diffused in society
not confined to a special tissue as in an organism.

2. Mackenzie in his Jutroduction to Social Philosophy attempts
to abstract the idea organism and so to generalize it as to include
all vital combinations of units from the lowest plant to society
itself. This abstracted conception includes:

a) An intrinsic relation between the parts and the whole.

6) Development from within.

c) With reference to an end which is involved in its own
nature.

3. Fundamental distinction between the positions represented
by Spencer and Mackenzie. It is most important to note that
Spencer asserts analogies, Mackenzie, homologies. In the one
case societies are said to be Ake individual organisms, in the
other actually ¢o de organisms. Failure to grasp and keep con-
stantly in mind this distinction is a source of endless confusion
and misunderstanding because :

a) Analogies are useful tools of thought in attempting to
understand complex relations. “.... for those things which
are in themselves new can yet be only understood from some
analogy to what is old;” (Bacon, Novwm Organum, Bohn’s
Library Ed., p. 388.)

6) But analogies may mislead in interpretation, and are
very dangerous in constructive thought.

c) The mistake, therefore, of accepting the abstract idea of
organism, and then shifting one’s position to make concrete
applications to any particular type of organism, is to be care-
fully guarded against.

4. The arguments for and against the organic theory.
In defense of this conception it is claimed:

a) That in its generalized form it is in essential harmony
with reality.

6) That as an analogy it is a necessary mode of thought,
throwing light on most complex relations, and affording a
criterion for comparison.

c) That at least until a new nomenclature is decided upon
and given a precise meaning, biological terms such as struc-
ture, function, differentiation, etc., are the best available.

On the other hand it is asserted of the organic theory :

a) That, sufficiently abstracted, it becomes empty and
formal.

6) That analogies are likely to mislead or confuse rather
than give direction and promote clearness of thought.

c) That biological language connotes too much and should
be abandoned as quickly as possible for a new technical
vocabulary.

5. Conclusion. It is difficult to combine into definite state-

ments the results of these differences of view. The following
propositions seem justified :
a) There is substantial agreement that the nature of society
may be described as organic in a very general sense.

5) The careful use of analogies is at present a source of
aid to most minds but, it is conceivable, may gradually become
of less importance as new conceptions are formed.

c) In short, the theory is to be judged solely by its service
in extending a knowledge of actual relations in society. In
so far as it may be made useful it is to be defended; in so far
as it is true it will persist.

VII. Tue Nature oF SociaL PHENOMENA.

DeGreef: Jntroduction & la Sociologie, Vol. I, Chap. xiii.

Tarde: La Logique Sociale, Preface.

Mayo-Smith: Statistics and Sociology, New York, 1895, p. 2.

Small and Vincent: Ax Introduction to the Study of Society, pp. 60-61.

The attempt to define social phenomena, or at least to dis-
criminate them from the phenomena of biology and psychology
has resulted in the following theories:

1. Codperation or mutual service is held by some thinkers to
be the criterion by which social phenomena may be set off from
others.

2. Imitation is declared by Tarde to be the true touchstone for
testing social phenomena. Tarde extends the meaning of this
term to include recombination of models of ideas or things which
in turn become the models for others.

3. Contract, the originally conscious or subsequently uncon-
scious agreement between individuals themselves and between
individuals and society, is regarded by DeGreef as the essential
characteristic of social phenomena.

4. Contact, which includes all relations between individuals in
associated life, is advanced by Professor Small as the best gen-
erally descriptive term to be employed. This conception includes
all the essential elements of the above definitions, the first of
which is too narrow, the second too vague, the third only par-
tially true. In the nature of things an exact and specific defini-
tion is most difficult to frame, so that this general statement may
be accepted as a practical working conception.
VIII. CLAssIFICATION AND SCIENTIFIC DISTRIBUTION OF SOCIAL
PHENOMENA.
DeGreef: Jntroduction a la Soctologie, Vol. 1, p. 214.
Small and Vincent: Jnxtroduction to the Study of Society, p. 54.
The next logical procedure in method consists in classifying
phenomena which are deemed social, and then distributing them
among the special departments of social science.

1. DeGreef, a positivist of Comte’s school, asserts that the
same hierarchic arrangement which is applied to the various
sciences as wholes, must also be adopted in classifying the phe-
nomena of the sciences themselves. In accordance with this
theory he has proposed the following arrangement of social
phenomena in an order of dependence from below upward:

g) Phénoménes politiques.

f) Phénoménes juridiques.

e) Phénoménes moraux.

ad) Phénoménes relatifs aux croyances.
c) Phénoménes artistiques.

6) Phénoménes génésiques.

a) Phénoménes économiques,

Base: Facteurs élémentaires, inorganiques et organiques:
territoire et population.

2, Of this arrangement it is asserted:

a) That conscious attention is directed by society to social
phenomena in this chronological order, zof that the phenomena
themselves may not often coexist.

6) That only after conscious social effort has effected a
measure of organization of one class of phenomena, can atten-
tion be directed to the next higher class, 7. ¢., there is an order
of dependence.

c) That not only are the higher phenomena dependent
upon the lower, but the former react upon and constantly
modify the latter.

ad) That the difficulty of modifying social phenomena
increases as progress is made from the higher toward the
lower; ¢. g., it is far easier to alter political forms than to
effect changes in economic systems.

3. These phenomena and other phenomena of social contact
which are not clearly included in the hierarchy, are apportioned
among certain social sciences. Any attempt at distribution
must be merely general. The division of labor is still so unor-
ganized that wide differences of opinion exist. The chief
departments, however, are as follows:

a) Political Economy, dealing with the laws discoverable in
the social activities which have for their aim the production,
distribution and consumption of wealth.

6) Political Science which concerns itself with the principles
of government. Jurisprudence may be included under this
head in so general a survey.

c) Ethics which examines the phenomena of social as well
as individual conduct, formulates criteria and seek sanctions.

ad) Folk psychology, or that branch of psychology, which
deals with the development of social consciousness. The
comparative study of religions may be placed here for con-
venience.

¢) Demography, which is to be discriminated from statistics
as a method, The latter renders service to all social sciences
in so far as their phenomena may be represented quantita-
tively. Demography, or the science of population, has a con-
crete content and infers conclusions.

f) Anthropology and Ethnology deal with social phenomena,
although the former at least has even wider scope.

&) History employs all available data in an attempt to
describe concrete events in relations of coexistence and causal
continuity.
tion clearly presents itself. The progress thus far may be sum-
marized as follows:

a) It has been shown that knowledge about society has
grown steadily clearer and better organized so that social phe-
nomena are susceptible of scientific study.

5) Social phenomena have beenin general discriminated
from other subject matter.

c) Social phenomena have been at least tentatively classified
and

@) Distributed among certain sciences which are at present
dealing with them.

The questions confronting us then are: (a) are any social
phenomena neglected? (4) is any organization of results desir-
able.

IX. Demanps For A New DEPARTMENT OF SociAL SCIENCE.

With the progress of knowledge about society certain needs
or demands have arisen. These may be in general grouped under
four divisions

1. Demands for the codrdination and integration of all kinds
of knowledge about society into a coherent system, 7. ¢., the com-
bination of abstractions into a concrete account of reality. This
interpretation must have two aspects:

a) Insight into the contemporary order or historical régimes.

6) Explanation of the process of change by which past
régimes have succeeded each other and produced the present.
2. Demands for the scientific investigation of certain social

phenomena that are not specifically or adequately dealt with by
other sciences.

4. Demands for the construction, on the basis of scientific
observation, of social ideals to which the nature of men and soci-
ety may be gradually readjusted.

5. Demands for the utilization of knowledge about society,
z.é., the practical application of social forces in such a way as to
give development at least a tendency toward an ideal.
Comte: Philosophie Positive, Martineau’s Tr., Vol. II. chaps. iii—vi.
Ward: Dynamic Sociology, Vol. 1. Introduction, pp. 27-31.
Contributions to Social Philosophy, Amer. Journal of Sociology,
Vol. 1., 1895-6.
Static and Dynamic Sociology. Political Science Quarterly, Vol.
X., No. 2.
Giddings: The Theory of Sociology (Supplement to Am. Academy, May

1894).

DeGreef: Jutroduction & la Sociologie, Vol. I. Introduction.
De Lestrade: Elements de Soctologie, Paris, 1889, pp. I-11.
Moses: Nature of Sociology, Journal of Political Economy, Dec., 1894.
Small: Sociology and Economics, Jour. of Pol. Econ., March 1895.

Static and Dynamic Sociology, Am, Jour. of Sociology, Sept. 1895.
Simmel: Problem of Sociology, Annals of Amer. Acad., Nov. 1895.
Powers: Zerminology and the Sociological Conferences, Am. Acad, March

1895.
Mayo-Smith: Statistics and Sociology Chap. i.

Fiamingo: Sociology in Italy, American Journal of Sociology, November,

1895.
Howerth: Present Condition of Sociology in the United States, Annals of

American Academy, September, 1894.

1. The term “‘Sociologie” was first employed, as an equivalent
of ‘‘social physics,” by Comte in the fourth volume of his Phélos-
ophie Positive, published in 1839. Spencer adopted the term
which has come into general but vague use. The word has been
criticised as etymologically a hybrid, but it is defended on the
following grounds:

a) There is need for a new term to which a precise mean-
ing may in time be attached.

6) There is no Greek word for the essential component.

c) The words “social science” have been employed to
include several ‘social sciences.”

@) Sociology yields readily the adjective “sociological”
and the noun “sociologist.”

2. While technical terms have an important function, there is
too often danger of laying stress upon words rather than upon
the ideas which they are to connote. ‘Instead of discoursing
upon the merits of this infant (sociology) which men have had
the art to baptize before its birth, let us succeed, if possible, in
bringing it forth.” Tarde, La Logique Sociale, p. v.

Sociology has developed in response to the demands indi-
cated above, and has taken on forms in general correspondence
with them. These different types may be described as follows :

a) The “inclusive or codrdinating” theory. This is a phil-
osophical conception clearly introduced by Comte adopted in
the main by Spencer, recognized as important by Ward, and
accepted by DeGreef. Small regards Sociology as in one
aspect a “synthesis of the special social sciences’’ and Gid-
dings, although technically limiting the scope of the science,
says that “in the broadest sense, sociology comprehends all
social sciences, including statistics and history.”

6) The “fundamental” theory, or the study of association
as such. In the view of those who advocate this theory, there
are certain phenomena of association, ¢. g., authority and sub-
ordination, competition, imitation, etc., which are not dealt
with specifically by other social sciences although assumed by
them as data. Giddings represents this theory in the United
States and Simmel of Berlin seems to hold somewhat the same
position.

c) The “constructive” theory, or the projection of social
tendencies into ideals for guidance. Small stands for this as
one of the functions of sociology, and Ward in his early work
distinctly advanced this view. Judged by his recent articles
the latter has apparently modified his position.

d) The “art of social control” theory. Ward in his
Dynamic Sociology describes legislation as analogous to inven-
tion and advocates the study of social forces in order to
apply them. Professor Bernard Moses would limit sociology
to this service only, declaring that all other territory is already
occupied by regularly constituted sciences.

3. A hierarchical arrangement of the problems or tasks which
confront the student of society will aid in estimating the relative
importance of these theories. This hierarchy may be constructed
in an order of dependence from below up, with reaction from
above down.
e) Social Control—the art of so combining social forces as
to give society at least a trend toward an ideal.
@) Social ideals—the construction of social ideals based
upon a study of the nature of society and of individuals.
c) Social evolution—a determination of the laws of social
development.
6) Interpretation of contemporary social régimes as a basis
for the study of past orders of society.
a) Descriptions of social phenomena, present and past, to
supply materials for interpretation.

XI, Turee Divisions oF Sociotoey.

(For bibliography see under X above.)

Taking up these tasks in their order of dependence we may
designate that which deals with (a) above, as:

1. Descriptive Sociology. “.... the organization of all the
positive knowledge of man and of society furnished by the
sciences and sub-sciences .... ” Small and Vincent: Jntro-
duction, p. 62. This involves:

@) the investigation of such principles of association as are
manifested in all social phenomena (Simmel and Giddings)
and

6) the synthesis of the data furnished by the abstract social
sciences into a concrete positive philosophy (é. e. scientific-
ally based, not in the Comtean sense).

These two tasks are so intimately related that they cannot
be separated even for purposes of study, for “ principles of asso-
ciation” can be discovered only by a comparison and combina-
tion of the data furnished by the social sciences. The following
statement may be regarded as in general recognizing this view:
“Sociology is the science of society. Its field is coextensive
with the operation of the associative principle in human life.
The general laws of association form the subject of general soci-
ology, a science distinct but not disconnected from the branch
sciences of economics, politics, etc., which rest upon it, though
in part developed before it.” H.H. Powers, Am. Acad., March,
1895,

2. Statical Sociology or Social Statics views the materials of
descriptive Sociology from the standpoint of status: 7. ¢., regards
order rather than change. It studies the equilibrium of social
forces as they tend to maintain structures. Hence, Statical
Sociology concerns itself with the laws of coexistence primarily
and chiefly in contemporary or historical social orders. But it
may also legitimately deal with the laws of social equilibrium
as applied to an ideal social order. ‘The theory of a social
order not yet realized is as properly statical as the theory of
a past order.”—Small. To that division of Social Statics which
deals with future régimes, Small has applied tentatively the term
ideostatics. We have then:

@) Statics of the actual.
4) Ideostatics, theories of the possible and desirable.

3. Social Dynamics, on the other hand, examines the materials
of Descriptive Sociology to determine the laws of social change
or progress. ‘Social dynamics studies the laws of succession,
while social statics seeks those of coexistence.”’ ‘All considera-
tions of structure and function are static... . Merely quantitative
change is static. In dynamic phenomena the change is gualita-
tive.”—Ward. Progress may be viewed in two ways: either as
the result of undirected social forces acting in the past and
present, or as furnishing the theory for future conscious utiliza-
tion of social forces. The first has been described by Ward as
passive progress, the second as active. As in the case of social
statics so with that of social dynamics chief emphasis is laid
upon study of past and present, but this fact does not exclude
the scientific determination of methods for organizing active
progress in harmony with the criteria furnished by ideostatics.
There are, therefore, two divisions of dynamic sociology :
a) Dynamics of past and present, dealing with passive pro-
gress.

6) Dynamics of active progress, 7. ¢., conscious control of
social forces.

4. It should be remembered that this division of sociology
into static and dynamic is made for purposes of method and like
all methodic discriminations is more or less arbitrary. Giddings
goes so far as to reject even the theoretical division. ‘The
sociologist refuses to sunder in theory what nature has joined in
fact. He centers his attention on a moving equilibrium.” This
principle logically carried out would destroy all scientific divi-
sions. The truth here emphasized is important, but the sociol-
ogist must as a matter of fact fix his attention at one time upon
the equilibrium, at another upon its movement.

XII. Criticisms oF THE ABOVE SCHEME.

Balfour: Zssays and Addresses, Edinburgh, 1893. ‘Doubts about
Progress.”

7 Sumner: The Absurd Effort to Make the World Over. Forum, March,
"Moses: The Nature of Sociology, Journal of Political Economy, Dec., 1894.

De Lestrade: E¥éments de Sociologie. Introduction.

1. Criticisms of the divisions outlined under XI. come less
from difference of opinion as to the tasks themselves than from
disagreement about names for the tasks. It would be strange
if there were a consensus, and at this stage in the development
of social study, it ills becomes anyone to be dogmatic. Doubt-
less with longer experience and clearer insight, a definite division
of labor will take place according to individual points of view.
Some such tendency is already evident. The main point of con-
tention is as to the extension of the term Sociology to include
more than the general laws of social structure and evolution.

The chief objections to such extension are:
2) It is too large a field for effective work.
6) Social ideals can never be scientifically constructed ;
speculation is sure to be involved.
c) Social control is an art and not a science.
@) Social control is Utopian and cannot be exercised in a
large measure or in the interest of a remote aim.

2. In reply to these objections it may be said:

a) That the preliminary task is to outline the whole field.
If it prove too large for one scholar, it will quickly be sub-
divided. The scheme provides for such subdivision.

6) Ideals are the only spur to progress: they are universally
present; they are effective in direct proportion to their har-
mony with the possible; it may well be a scientific aim to
eliminate the speculative element from the ideals which society
is constantly constructing.

c) As to the extent to which social forces can be modified
there is room for wide difference of opinion, but so long as
even a slight margin of possible change is admitted, the obliga-
tion to take the wisest advantage of the opportunity remains.

d@) Again, it may be reiterated that the tasks are more
important than the name. Let the former be clearly grasped,
and nomenclature will adjust itself to the facts.

3. Conclusion.
From the relation which the tasks sustain to each other, it is
clear:

a) That chief emphasis must be laid at present upon the
fundamental importance of Descriptive Sociology, 7. e., the gen-
eral facts and laws of association as induced from the data of
the special social sciences, and properly related in a synthetic
view of society, and of those divisions of Statical and Dynamic
Sociology which deal with the present and the past.

4) It is, however, necessary to put such knowledge as is
already available, at the service of society in the most effect-
ive way. Therefore, it is important to develop a method to
accomplish this result. Ideostatics and the dynamics of active
progress undertake this task. With the development of the
fundamental pursuits these subsequent departments will
increase in efficiency. Georce E. Vincent.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO.
