Education for Social Work

Author(s): Jesse F. Steiner

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 26, No. 4 (Tan., 1921), pp. 475-518
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2764496

Accessed: 10-05-2016 17:17 UTC
EDUCATION FOR SOCIAL WORK

 

JESSE F. STEINER
Director of Educational Service, American Red Cross, Washington, D.C.

 

I. THE NATURE OF SOCIAL WORK

The term social work which has come to be the accepted designa-
tion for a large group of specialized activities in the field of social
betterment was not in general use at the opening of the present
century. Two or three decades ago such terms as philanthropy,
charity, correction, outdoor relief, care of dependents, defectives,
and delinquents, were commonly employed by those at work in
these fields. This is at once evident in the names of leading organi-
zations established during those early years—the Charity Organi-
zation Society, Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor,
National Conference of Charities and Correction. When Miss
Mary E. Richmond, in 1897, made her plea for professional training
she urged the establishment of a “Training School in Applied Phil-
anthropy.” The training class which was organized in New York
the following year developed later into the New York School of
Philanthropy, and this name persisted until very recently when it
was changed to the New York School of Social Work.

This early terminology is significant, for it indicates clearly the
nature of the field from which modern social work has developed.
The social workers of a generation ago were frankly engaged in the
work of charity or philanthropy. Their efforts were concentrated
upon the disadvantaged and handicapped and represented a grow-
ing attempt to understand their problems and solve them through
the application of scientific methods. Just because their work was
permeated with the scientific spirit it was inevitable that their
attention should be increasingly directed to the forces that were
dragging men down and making the work of relief such a difficult
task.

Thus there developed very naturally a keen interest in what is
frequently called the preventive side of social work. Those whose

475
work was commonly thought of as being in the field of relief began
to interest themselves in social legislation and in the improvement of
social and industrial conditions. From the ranks of philanthropic
workers there arose those who took up the fight against the adverse
conditions of life instead of in behalf of the unfortunate who were
disabled by those conditions. Investigations of the standards of
living and housing conditions, social surveys of various kinds, pro-
motion of recreational activities, organization of communities for the
purposes of social betterment, arousing public sentiment against
the evils of child labor, and organized efforts to give the general
public a social point of view—all these and many other activities
of a similar nature became a recognized part of the field of social
work.

This change of emphasis in social work from remedial meas-
ures to those that strike at the root of social problems caused
the whole field under consideration to lose its early definiteness of
boundary lines. As long as social work was regarded as the
adjustment of the dependent and handicapped to their environ-
ment, its activities could be grouped together in a field that
was peculiar to itself. Just as soon, however, as it attempted to
accomplish its purpose by bringing about modifications of the en-
vironment, it allied itself with forward looking movements in many
lines of work. In this sense, social work may be regarded as almost
identical with the promotion of common welfare and the social
worker is the individual of any occupation or profession whose life
is actuated by a definite social purpose. Devine’s Spirit of Social
Work is dedicated

to social workers, that is to say, to every man and woman, who, in any relation
of life, professional, industrial, political, educational or domestic; whether on
salary or as a volunteer; whether on his own individual account or as part of
an organized movement, is working consciously, according to his light intelli-
gently, and according to his strength persistently, for the promotion of the
common welfare—the common welfare as distinct from that of a party or a
class or a sect or a business interest or a particular institution or a family or
an individual.

It is at once evident that while such a broad conception of social
work may be logical, it leads us far beyond its distinctively tech-
nical aspects. An analogy may be found in education which has
both its popular and its professional sides. In one sense a large
part of our activities may be looked upon as educational, but never-
theless it is well understood that there is a very clearly defined
field for those who have to do with formal education. Social work,
because it touches life in so many intimate ways and includes
activities that are commonplace and informal in nature, must have
its popular side that can be participated in by people of every vo-
cation. This is in fact the purpose of that part of social work which
lays emphasis upon the spread of socialized intelligence. The
more intelligent people become about social duties and problems,
the more active will they be in the promotion of the common wel-
fare. One of the most hopeful signs of the times is the active
interest of such agencies and institutions as the school, the church,
chambers of commerce, farmers’ organizations, etc., in social pro-
grams designed to bring about a solution of social problems.

But, however legitimate it may be to speak of social work in this
broad sense as merging into many different fields, there is without
doubt a point beyond which popular effort cannot go and main-
tain a high efficiency. It is evident, for instance, that social inves-
tigation involves processes for which is required a technique of its
own. It is even more clear that technical equipment is needed to
deal with the situations that arise in connection with the care of the
dependent and handicapped. No one can doubt that the adjust-
ment of the social forces of communities requires the sure touch of
a hand trained for its task. These and other similar activities in
the general field of social welfare stand out in a well-defined group,
not primarily because of what they attempt to do, but because they
can be carried on successfully only by those who possess the proper
technical training and experience. The social worker may be work-
ing hand in hand with many people interested in the same general
problems but he is distinguished from them because he is qualified
through special training to accomplish well certain tasks that only
incidentally come to the attention of those in other fields. Social
work defined in this way loses something of the indefiniteness that
comes from its close relation to efforts to improve the common
welfare. While its results are accomplished through the aid of
many allies, it has its distinctively technical aspects which, taken
together, form a group of highly specialized activities that may
very well be regarded as the beginning of a new profession.

But the confusion in regard to the proper limits of the field of
social work has not resulted entirely from its far-reaching ten-
dencies. Complications also arise from the domination of certain
types of social work which more or less consciously regard themselves
as occupying a fundamental position in the field of social welfare.
This is especially true of the Charity Organization Society move-
ment which must be recognized as the beginning of scientific social
work in this country and which has maintained its place of leader-
ship ever since its establishment more than a generation ago.
Within this movement has been developed the technique of family
case-work which was one of the first examples of the application of
scientific methods to social work. The family welfare group have
long been prominent in state and national conferences of social
workers, and have made very significant contributions to the litera-
ture dealing with social problems. It is not surprising, therefore,
that family case-work should sometimes be used as synonymous
with social work, and that there should be a tendency in some
quarters to judge the standing of social workers by training and
skill in this particular field.

The natural confusion that results from this point of view can be
easily seen. Social work is frequently identified with social pathol-
ogy in spite of the efforts, led in many instances by family case-
workers themselves, in the wider fields of social investigation and
community work. There is no clear recognition that social work
has progressed to the point where remedial work represents only
a part of its field. Instead of placing family case-work in its
legitimate position as one of the most important of the special
activities of social work, there is a tendency to continue to regard
it as the center from which all phases of social work naturally
develop.

A scientific interpretation of social work, upon which can be
based an adequate plan for professional education, must place in the
right perspective the activities that make up its technical field.
Unquestionably its remedial and ameliorative activities come first
in importance. The problem of dealing with the subnormal and
handicapped presses upon us from all sides. Many generations of
social neglect, of toleration of indecent conditions of life, of wilful
choice of the things that degrade, have produced their evil results.
The proper care of dependent families, of orphaned and neglected
children, of anti-social and subnormal individuals, requires skill, and
no social worker, whatever his specialized form of work, dare be
ignorant of the technique needed in this field.

On the other hand due importance must be given to methods of
social investigation, analysis of community life, construction of
community programs, the technique of organized recreation, and
problems of social work administration. These are aspects of social
work that are now demanding many skilled leaders and unfor-
tunately there is no general agreement as to the technique involved
or as to the way workers in these fields should be prepared. No
system of education for social work can be regarded as adequate
until the methods of training in social investigation and social
organization are as carefully worked out as is the technique of
instruction for the remedial side of social work.
The apprentice method as it has been developed in the social-
work field has been simply a means employed by organizations to
train their new workers. The employee in training sometimes re-
ceives formal instruction from his superior through assigned read-
ings and conferences, but the training consists chiefly of practical
work carried on under supervision. Such an apprenticeship there-
fore cannot be called training for social work for it gives the worker
no well-rounded view of the whole field but prepares him merely
for specific tasks within a single organization.

The organization that conducts the training often safeguards
its own interests by requiring the new worker to remain in its em-
ploy for a stated period of time. In 1898 the Boston Associated
Charities requested its agents in training to agree in advance to
remain for three years in the service of that Society. The United
Charities of Chicago in 1915 demanded a two-year period of service
of those whom it undertook to train. This rule, which was quite
generally followed, makes it clear that the well-established social
work organizations in the larger cities have not desired to accept
responsibility for the training of workers not in their employ. Ina
report read at the National Conference of Charities and Correction
at Topeka, Kansas, in 1900, it was stated that
there is but one Society which is making a special effort to train agents
and secretaries for positions in newly organized societies and so spreading the
gospel of organized charities in other cities. This has no reference to the
New York Society which is conducting an excellent six weeks’ mid-summer
course for those who wish to take advanced work.

Eight years later Mrs. John M. Glenn discussed this same
subject in a paper read at the National Conference of Charities
and Correction in Richmond, and quoted a field secretary as follows:

I do not know whether large societies feel a responsibility toward small
societies or not. The engagement of a field secretary for Charities and the
Commons would seem to be an indirect evidence that they do. I don’t think
we are ready to train workers sent us from other cities, expecting them to go
back to work in other cities.

An apprenticeship system that was limited to the large organi-
zations of a few cities, and admitted to training only a number
sufficient to take care of their labor turnover, could never meet the
demand for trained workers in a line of work that was constantly
expanding. The first public evidence of recognition of this fact in
this country was a paper read by Miss Anna Dawes, in 1893, at
the International Congress of Charities in Chicago. In this paper,
which had as its subject “The Need of Training Schools for a New
Profession,” Miss Dawes pointed out the desperate situation in
which the Charity Organization Society found itself because new
societies were springing up more rapidly than trained workers could
be supplied. As a result of this lack of skilled leadership an undue
proportion of these organizations were either failing utterly or were
carrying on their work in a feeble and inefficient manner. In com-
menting on this situation, Miss Dawes said:

I am convinced that it is not so much lack of willing individuals as entire
lack of opportunity for training that is the real trouble. For no matter how
much a man may wish to go into this work there is no place where he can learn
its duties... .. What is needed, it seems to me, is some course of study where
an intelligent young person can add to an ordinary education such branches
as may be necessary for this purpose, with a general view of those special
studies in political and social science which are most closely connected with
the problem of poverty, and where both he and his associate already learned
in the study of books can be taught what is now the alphabet of charitable
science—some knowledge of its underlying ideas, its tried and trusted methods,
and some acquaintance with the various devices employed for the upbuilding
of the needy, so that no philanthropic undertaking, from a model tenement
house to a kindergarten or a sand heap, will be altogether strange to his mind.
... . It seems to me that the time has come when either through a course
in some established institution or in an institution by itself, or by the old-
fashioned method never yet improved upon for actual development—the
method of experimental training as the personal assistant of some skilled
worker—it ought to be possible for those who would take up this work to find
some place for studying it as a profession. .. . . i

This appeal for a training school did not lead to immediate
action. However clearly a few leaders might see the need of trained
workers, there was very little recognition of this need on the part
of the public. The ninety-two charity organization societies in
existence at that time represented an important and growing move-
ment, but they were supported by a limited clientéle, and their
methods were not fully understood or approved. Even when we

1 Charities Review, III, 49-51.
add to this list of charity organization societies the organizations
that were springing up in related kinds of social work, the field was
still too limited in scope to offer many inducements to trained
workers. It must not be forgotten also that the public did not
regard philanthropic work as a technical activity that required
special skill and so quite readily employed as workers in this field
those who lacked proper training and experience. This was brought
out very strikingly by Miss Mary E. Richmond in an address made
at Philadelphia, in 1897, in the course of which she cited the fol-
lowing incidents:

“You ask me,” wrote a clergyman, “what qualifications Miss —— has
for the position of agent in the Charity Organization Society. She is a most
estimable lady and the sole support of a widowed mother. It would be a real
charity to give her the place.” Another applicant for the same position when
asked whether she had any experience in charity work, replied that she had
had a good deal—she had sold tickets for church fairs. Though those par-
ticular ladies were not employed, is it not still a very common thing to find
charity agents who have been engaged for no better reason?—like the one who
was employed to distribute relief because he had failed in the grocery business.

The National Conference of Charities and Correction, which had
been bringing together the leading social workers of the country in
annual conference since 1873, gave its first extended consideration
to the problem of professional training at its session in Toronto in
1897. At that meeting Miss Richmond read a paper on the sub-
ject “The Need of a Training School in Applied Philanthropy,” in
which she stated her belief that professional standards could not be
attained until a training school had been provided. With admir-
able clearness she pointed out the confusion that existed because
the different types of philanthropic workers were not familiar with
the common ground of knowledge that underlies all charitable work.
She says,

Tf an agent of a relief society has occasion to confer with the head of a
foundling asylum, is it not likely that the ends they have in view, that the
principles underlying their work, that the very meanings which they attach to
our technical terms, will prove to be quite at variance? What an incalculable
gain to humanity when those who are doctoring social diseases in many depart-
ments of charitable work shall have found a common ground of agreement and
Miss Richmond’s plan for the school did not go into details, but
included recommendations that it be located in a large city where
students could have direct access to the work of public and private
charitable agencies, that its affiliation with an educational institu-
tion should not prevent the placing of emphasis upon practical work
rather than upon academic requirements, and that a considerable
part of the instruction be given by specialists in the different fields
who could be engaged to give their lectures during the less busy
months of the year.

At the same meeting another plan was brought forward by
Miss Frances R. Morse, which contemplated the development of
co-operative normal-training by the larger charity organization
centers. In the opinion of Miss Morse, satisfactory training could
be provided by setting up a responsible group of advisers who
would assign students in training to different organizations for
definite periods and exercise general supervision over the students’
instruction so as to make sure that it would cover a wider field
than that of a single agency. It was in fact a sort of centrally
directed apprenticeship system whereby a new worker would be
assigned at successive periods to different agencies, thus making it
possible to secure a well-rounded experience.

Miss Morse’s plan did not meet with general favor and the time
did not seem ripe for the establishment of a training school. The
following year, however, in the summer of 1898, the New York
Charity Organization Society took the first steps in the direction
of a professional school by holding a six weeks’ training course. In
a lengthy editorial on the subject, “A Training School in Charities
and Correction,” the Charities Review of May, 1898, gave the fol-
lowing description of the course to be held that summer:

The main feature of this course is that no tuition is charged, but members
of the course are expected to enter the service of the society for six weeks.
District work, care of one or more families, investigation of special subjects
with one major and one minor report of the results of such investigation are
to be required. There will be daily sessions for lectures and discussions, An
attractive program has been arranged under the following general plan.

During the first week the subject of charity organization and general
philanthropic work will be considered with visits to the offices in the charities
building, industrial agencies of New York and Brooklyn, and other private
charitable institutions. The second week will be devoted to the care of
dependent and delinquent children and the philanthropic side of mission enter-
prise. In the third week, study will be made of the public charitable insti-
tutions with addresses from the several superintendents and from the President
of the Board of Charities Commissioners. Attention will be given to the work
of the state Charities Aid Association and the state Board of Charities. The
fourth week will be devoted to the study of the care of the dependent sick.
Visits will be made to various hospitals, dispensaries, etc. Consideration will
be given to the care for the aged, and fresh air work. The fifth week will
include some study of general sanitary improvements, the divisions of the
health departments and visits to the improved tenements in New York and
Brooklyn. The first part of the sixth week will be given to the care of delin-
quents with visits to the workhouse and penitentiary; the second half to a
review of the work of the class, with further study into the functions of charity
organization societies in developing the several branches of philanthropic and
reform work into unity and precision.

It is not expected that a thorough training will be imparted in this period.
No diploma or degrees are to be conferred and no promises made concerning
future employment of those who avail themselves of the opportunity offered.
As an experimental contribution toward the end in view, the results of the
present training class will be watched with interest.

Dr. Philip W. Ayres was placed in charge of the training class
which was attended by twenty-seven students representing fourteen
colleges and universities and eleven states. According to the report
of the New York Charity Organization Society for 1897-98, this
course was carried on along the lines indicated in a highly satis-
factory manner. The report says,

The immediate results of this experimental course are all that was antici-
pated. Permanent positions have been secured by some, others have gained
valuable material for the university class room, while still others have entered
upon special lines of inquiry which will be prosecuted in the future. It is hoped
that from this beginning a plan of professional training in applied philanthropy
may be developed which will raise the standards of qualifications and of use-
fulness throughout the entire field of charitable work.

This Summer School in Philanthropic Work, as it was called,
filled such a real need that it became for a period of seven years a
regular feature of the work of the New York Charity Organization
Society. Until the year 1903, this summer course represented prac-
tically the only organized effort to provide systematic training in
the philanthropic field. As its purpose was primarily to increase
the efficiency of active workers, its attendance was largely limited
to those who had at least one year’s experience in social work. New
workers were supposed to serve a period of apprenticeship with a
social agency before becoming eligible to register for the course.
The desire for training was so great that it was not difficult to secure
students of high grade. Two hundred and fifteen students were
enrolled during the period 1898-1904, an average of thirty for each
session, which was as large a class as their limited facilities at that
time made practicable. Among those who took this six weeks’
course are many well-known teachers and specialists in the social-
work field. The list of graduates includes: Dr. U. G. Weatherly,
professor of sociology, University of Indiana; C. C. Carstens, gen-
eral secretary, Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children; Kate H. Claghorn, instructor in social research, New
York School of Social Work; Dr. Carl Kelsey, professor of sociology,
University of Pennsylvania; Dr. E. W. Capen, professor of soci-
ology, Hartford Theological Seminary; Eugene T. Lies, formerly
general superintendent, United Charities of Chicago; W. Frank
Persons, formerly director general, Civilian Relief, American Red
Cross; Alexander M. Wilson, formerly director, Civilian Relief,
Atlantic Division, American Red Cross; Lillian Brandt, formerly
statistician, New York Charity Organization Society; Mrs. Alice
Higgins Lothrop, formerly director, Civilian Relief, New England
Division, American Red Cross; Paul U. Kellogg, editor of Survey;
Frances A. Keller, well-known writer and authority on unemploy-
ment; Porter R. Lee, director, New York School of Social Work; and
Howard S. Braucher, general secretary of Community Service,
Incorporated.

In 1903 the training program of the New York Charity Organi-
zation Society was extended to include a six months’ winter session
which provided weekly lectures at a late afternoon hour so that the
course would be available for social workers employed in the city.
One hundred and forty-seven registered for this course, but the
attendance was irregular on account of the heavy work of the
charitable societies caused by an unusually severe winter.

The following year these experimental training classes developed
into the New York School of Philanthropy under the direction of the
Committee on Philanthropic Education of the New York Charity
Organization Society. The first director of the school was Dr.
Edward T. Devine, who served in this capacity in connection with
his duties as general secretary of the New York Charity Organiza-
tion Society. A full year’s course of training was established which
was planned primarily for students without experience in social
work, The first year fifty-seven students registered, twelve of
whom completed the year’s work and received the certificate of
the school.

In the fall of the same year, 1904, a similar school was estab-
lished in Boston under the title “School for Social Workers, Main-
tained by Simmons College and Harvard University.” Its first
published announcement stated that it was
a school for the study of charity, correction, neighborhood uplift, and kindred
forms of social service, whether under private management or public adminis-
tration. Its purpose is to give opportunities to men and women to study social
problems by practical methods, particularly to those who would become
officials of institutions and agencies or would prepare themselves for service
as volunteers in this field of work.

The school opened with one classroom and a small office in
Hamilton Place, Boston, with an enrolment of twenty-six students.
Dr. Jeffrey R. Brackett, the President of the Department of
Charities and Correction of Baltimore, was appointed director
and remained in active charge of the school for a period of sixteen
years.

This demand for trained social workers which resulted in the
establishment of these schools in New York and Boston was felt
also in other cities of the country where social work was being
carried on aggressively. In Chicago the movement to secure
trained workers was led by Graham Taylor of Chicago Commons,
who took a prominent part in the development of the Chicago
Institute of Social Science which was established in 1903 as a part
of the Extension Division of the University of Chicago. In the
January, 1904, issue of The Commons Graham Taylor wrote as
follows concerning this new training course:

At the initiative of a settlement worker, heartily supported by the repre-
sentatives of practically all the private and public charity and correctional
institutions of the city, the University of Chicago will furnish the great facilities
of its Extension Department for the establishment of training centers and
correspondence courses.

Dr. Taylor was appointed director of the Institute which held its
first sessions in the rooms of the University College in the Fine Arts
Building on Michigan Avenue. The students were enrolled chiefly
from the ranks of those employed by the Chicago social agencies
and institutions. The new training course proved so successful
that the Russell Sage Foundation, which was one of the most active
supporters of the movement to develop professional training for
social work, enlarged the Institute by establishing in 1907 a depart-
ment of Research, with Julia C. Lathrop and Sophonisba P. Breck-
inridge in charge. The following year the Trustees of Chicago
Commons Association, which had, since 1906, assumed responsi-
bility for the administrative expenses of the Institute, transferred
the management of the school to a new board organized for that
purpose. Steps were immediately taken to establish the school
on an independent basis and it was incorporated in 1908 under the
name of the Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy. The
object of the school as stated at that time was “to promote through
instruction, training, investigation, and publication, the efficiency
of civic, philanthropic and social work and the improvement of
living and working conditions.” Graham Taylor still continued
to hold his place of leadership in the school and had among
his co-workers, Sophonisba P. Breckenridge, Edith Abbott and
Allen T. Burns.

Still farther west, in the city of St. Louis, this movement to
provide formal instruction in social work appeared almost con-
temporaneously with its rise in the eastern cities. The interest in
social work training in St. Louis first found expression, in the
winter of 1901-2, in a series of round-table meetings of the workers
in the St. Louis Provident Association under the direction of the
General Manager, W. H. McClain. From this beginning there
developed a series of fortnightly conferences of the social workers
in the city, followed a little later by fortnightly public lectures
given by persons prominent in different fields of social work.
Regular classroom work was not begun until 1907, when a course
was held in the Y.M.C.A. building, for a period of fifteen weeks,
at which twenty-three regular students were enrolled. The first
full year’s course was begun in the autumn of 1908. While the
school was started by the social workers in the city in order to
provide training facilities for themselves, it was not develoed on
an independent basis. Through the efforts of Professor C. A.
wood, of the department of sociology of the University of Missouri,
and Mr. W. H. McClain, manager of the St. Louis Provident
Association, the school was in 1906 closely affiliated with the Uni-
versity of Missouri. In accordance with the plan agreed upon
Dr. Thomas J. Riley of the department of sociology in the uni-
versity became the first director of the school, thus insuring a
vital relationship with the university in spite of the latter’s loca-
tion at a considerable distance from St. Louis. As first organized
the school was known as the St. Louis School of Philanthropy.
In 1909 its name was changed to the St. Louis School of Social
Economy, which remained its title until 1916 when it was re-
christened the Missouri School of Social Economy.

The success of the schools of social work in New York and
Boston stimulated the social agencies in Philadelphia to provide a
training course in that city for the training of their own workers.
In 1908 a special training class was held, which was organized the
following year as the Philadelphia Training School for Social Work.
In the 1910 report of the Philadelphia Society for Organizing
Charity, its general secretary, Porter R. Lee, made the following
statement in regard to the origin of this school:

 

 

 

 

In many ways the most important step to which the Society has lent its
influence has been the establishment of the Philadelphia Training School for
Social Work. Believing that it would be a distinct service to the community
to offer training in social work in Philadelphia to Philadelphia people who
might thereby be encouraged to remain in the city for their permanent work,
the Children’s Bureau two years ago established a course of lectures on the
practical problems and methods of social work, a large number of which were
given by experts from outside the city. The lack of opportunities for field
work in connection with the lectures and the difficulty of holding the students
to definite requirements were obstacles to the success of the plan as a training
school.

This course has now been expanded into a definitely organized school with
a curriculum providing for both class work and field work and for definite
tests for graduations. This has been made possible through the co-operation
of a large number of the city’s agencies for social work of which this Society
1s one.

The enrolment of the school for the first year was fifty-two.
Mr. W. O. Easton, director of instruction of the Philadelphia
Y.M.C.A., had personal charge of the administration of the school
in the capacity of executive secretary, during the first few years
of its existence. The teaching staff was composed of leading
specialists in social work in that city. In 1916 the school was
incorporated as the Pennsylvania School for Social Service, and
under the direction of Dr. Bernard J. Newman, and later of Dr.
Frank D. Watson, developed an extensive course of study designed
to prepare students for all the more important types of social work.

This movement to develop training centers for social work
made its first ventures in the South in 1916 with the establishment
of the Richmond School of Social Economy at Richmond, Virginia,
and the Texas School of Civics and Philanthropy at Houston,
Texas. The former is now known as the Richmond School of
Social Work and Public Health and has as its director, Dr. H. H.
Hibbs, Jr., under whose leadership the school was organized. The
Texas School of Civics and Philanthropy, which was organized by
the social agencies of Houston as an independent school, was taken
over by Rice Institute in 1918, when its director, Dr. Stuart A.
Queen, resigned to enter the military service.

These seven schools fall very conveniently into one group, not
merely because they represent similar methods of instruction, but
because they are to a large extent the outcome of the efforts of
social workers to provide training facilities and have been built up
in accordance with the ideals of practical workers rather than with
those of university teachers. The schools in this group are usually
spoken of as the independent schools, to distinguish them from the
departments and schools of social work that have been established
within recent years by colleges and universities. As a matter of
fact, only one of these seven schools enjoys the distinction of having
been entirely free from academic connections during its entire
history.

The New York School of Social Work has from its earliest be-
ginnings been under the direction of the Charity Organization So-
ciety of New York and affiliated with Columbia University. In a
communication of John S. Kennedy to the president of the New
York Charity Organization Society in October, 1904, notifying
them of his gift to that organization of securities yielding an annual
income of $10,000 for this new school, he said:

I have also considered the possible desirability of establishing the School
as a department of some university, but have decided it should preferably be
connected directly with the practical charity work of the city in analogy
rather to training schools for nurses which are connected with hospitals, than
to any separate university department.

He desired, however, the school to be affiliated with Columbia
University and arranged for the president of the university to be a
member of the committee in charge of the school. What this
affiliation with Columbia involved is stated in the Handbook of the
New York School of Philanthropy for the year 1905-6 as follows:

The students of the School of Philanthropy are admitted to any course in
Columbia for which they may be qualified without charge of tuition fees, the
selection of courses being subject in each instance to the approval of the
Director of the School and of the instructor in the University whose course is
chosen. Students of Columbia University are given reciprocal privileges in
the School of Philanthropy and the work of the School is accepted by the
University as the equivalent of one minor subject for an advanced degree.

During the early years of the school’s existence this affiliation
was strengthened by the fact that Dr. Edward T. Devine and Dr.
Samuel M. Lindsay, the first directors of the school, were also mem-
bers of the faculty of Columbia University. Within the past two
years the relation of the school to the university has been modified
by a discontinuance of the plan of reciprocal fee privileges.

The School for Social Workers in Boston was organized in
response to the requests of the social workers in that city, but
was from the first maintained by Simmons College and Harvard
University. Later the connection with Harvard was discontinued
and at present this school is conducted as a regular department of
Simmons College.

The Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy grew out of the
Chicago Institute of Social Science which was conducted under the
auspices of the Extension Department of the University of Chicago.
In 1908 the school became an independent corporation and main-
tained that status until 1920, when its work was taken over by
the University of Chicago.

The Missouri School of Social Economy was affiliated with the
University of Missouri at the time of its first organization. In
1909 this affiliation was transferred to Washington University at
St. Louis and the school was conducted as one of the University de-
partments until 1915, when the University severed its relationship
with the school because of the withdrawal of the financial support
of the Russell Sage Foundation. For one year the school was con-
ducted as an independent enterprise and then was taken over by
the University of Missouri which still conducts it under the direc-
tion of its Extension Department.

The Pennsylvania School for Social Service has maintained its
independent status from its first organization until the present
time. The Richmond School of Social Work and Public Health was
established independently, but in 1920 was affiliated with William
and Mary College.

While all but one of these schools have had at some time in
their history, college or university connections, none of their affilia-
tions, prior to the transfer of the Chicago School to the University
of Chicago, has been of such a nature that the university has had
an active part in determining the policies and standards of the
professional school. These schools, whatever their academic affilia-
tions, have been largely under the control of social workers and
throughout their whole development have laid their emphasis upon
practical training for specific kinds of social work.

Another characteristic of this group of professional schools is the
striking similarity in their curricula and methods of instruction.
The terminology used in the announcement of courses may vary in
different schools but there is little variation in the field they
attempt to cover. During the first years of the New York School of
Philanthropy, its courses of instruction were arranged under the fol-
lowing groups: (1) survey of the field, principles, theories and
methods of general application; (2) the state in relation to charity;
(3) racial traits in the population; (4) constructive social work; (5)
the care of needy families in their homes; (6) child-helping agencies;
(7) treatment of the criminal. In the announcement of the Boston
School in 1905, the topics included in the course of studies were (1)
aim of social service; (2) improvement of general conditions of liv-
ing; (3) neighborhood improvement in city and country; (4) scope
of charity; (5) the needy family; (6) persons out of their own fami-
lies; (7) the criminal. At about the same time the Chicago school
announced courses in (1) introduction to the study of philanthropic
and social work; (2) personal, institutional, and public effort for
dependents; (3) preoccupying and preventive policy, agencies, and
methods.

The course of study during those early years was centered around
the problem of poverty and methods of work with the handicapped
and dependent. This was still further emphasized by the require-
ment of field work which was carried on largely under the direction
of agencies doing case-work with families. This emphasis, which
may now seem somewhat one-sided, was then entirely natural and
proper because the students’ best opportunities for employment
were in the case-work field, and few other agencies were prepared
to give field work training of any value. This situation, which
influenced the early development of these schools, still persists,
although to a lesser degree. We are not surprised therefore to
find that while the courses of study have been widened to include
social investigation, community organization, industrial welfare,
mental hygiene, etc., the plan of field-work training has experienced
great difficulty in keeping pace with all the newer developments
in the field of social work. However much this group of profes-
sional schools may differ as to particular courses they offer, they
find a common bond of agreement in their emphasis upon their
case-work departments and in their insistence that case-work must
form a very considerable part of the training of all their students,
no matter in which field they intend to specialize.
It thus appears that professional training for social work owes
its origin and early development to the initiative of groups of social
workers rather than to any leadership given to it by the universities.
Even in those instances where university affiliations were made,
the movement was led by the social workers and the curriculum
was shaped to meet the needs of social agencies rather than made
to conform to the usual requirements of a graduate school. It is
difficult to conceive how this could have been otherwise when we
recall that at the time of the establishment of the first summer
course in New York for philanthropic workers, sociology had made
a very small beginning as a university study, and that for the next
ten or fifteen years sociologists were occupied so largely with debates
about method, that their work seemed very remote from the
problems in which social workers were interested.

Nevertheless the sociologists were not altogether indifferent to
their opportunities in the practical field and in some instances took
active steps to correlate their work with that of social agencies.
One of the earliest efforts of this kind was a co-operative plan of
study worked out in 1894 between the University of Wisconsin
and the Associated Charities of Cincinnati. As a result of a series
of lectures given the preceding year at the University of Wisconsin
by Dr. P. W. Ayers, secretary of the Cincinnati Associated Chari-
ties, and another series given at Cincinnati by Dr. Richard T. Ely,
of the University of Wisconsin, on ‘Socialism and Social Reform,”
two scholarships in the University of Wisconsin’in practical soci-
ology were established which entitled the holders to spend the
summer vacation in Cincinnati in practical social work under the
direction of Dr. Ayers. These two scholarship holders were joined
the first summer by eight other college students interested in social
science and formed probably the first group of college students
supplementing their university studies by supervised field work with
social agencies. Mr. C. M. Hubbard, writing in the Charities Review
of December, 1894, called attention to the fact that this experi-
ment demonstrated the value to universities of this type of labora-
tory work. The arrangement, however, proved to be only a
temporary one, and did not lead at that time to the establishment
of regular courses of instruction in applied sociology at the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin.

Another effort to bring about a vital relation between the study
of sociology and the work of social agencies was made during that
same year (1894) by the new School of Sociology established in
connection with the Hartford Theological Seminary. This school
planned a three-year course leading to the degree of Bachelor of
Sociology. Specialists from the field of social work were brought
in as lecturers and the course included practical field work with
social agencies.

As early as 1893, the University of Chicago announced courses
in practical sociology to be given by Professor C. R. Henderson,
which, if properly correlated with field work, would have afforded
perhaps the best opportunity for social work training to be found
at that time.

One of the first significant efforts in the university field to give
the courses in practical sociology a vocational trend was made in
1910 by Dr. J. E. Hagerty, Professor of Economics and Sociology
at Ohio State University. In a bulletin issued that year by the
university announcing courses for the training of students in busi-
ness administration and social science, the following statement was
made:

The Social Science group of courses has been arranged for the training of
professional and volunteer social workers. The state of Ohio has thousands
of paid and volunteer social workers, most of whom are untrained for their
work. If it is the duty of the state university to train its students for efficient
citizenship, it should offer facilities for the training of professional and volun-
teer social workers. The new ideas of philanthropy, if put in practice, would
reduce the number of dependents and criminals, and make more efficient the
state and county institutions and the private charities.

The curriculum, which was primarily designed for the last
two years of the undergraduate course, included such subjects as
charities, criminology, accounting, psychology, labor organization,
labor legislation, races, poverty and preventive philanthropy,
animal psychology, abnormal psychology, folk psychology, a
seminar in social research, and field work under supervision run-
ning throughout the last year. The university had already been
conducting courses in applied sociology for a period of five years
and was well equipped to give the required instruction in this
field.

This training course differed from the usual courses offered by
the independent schools of social work in that it was planned to
fit into the undergraduate curriculum, laid a great deal of emphasis
upon knowledge of fundamental subjects, and did not give the
customary amount of time to field work experience. The demand
for training of this kind was sufficient to justify its continuance,
and in 1916 social service training became a regular activity of the
newly organized College of Commerce and Journalism. This move-
ment at Ohio State University was in a measure typical of what
was undertaken in a few other colleges and universities, but in
general the technical courses in applied sociology offered by uni-
versities prior to the world-war could not be regarded as con-
stituting much more than an excellent background for professional
study.

The need of active university participation in education for
social work was set forth in a striking manner by Professor Felix
Frankfurter of the Harvard Law School at the National Conference
of Charities and Correction at Baltimore in 1915. After pointing
out the successive steps in the development of medical and legal
education in this country, Dr. Frankfurter said:

I submit that what has been found necessary for adequate training for
those social activities which we call the profession of law and medicine, is
needed for the very definite, if undefined, profession we call social work. I
can not believe that the preliminary training of a lawyer, most of his life spent
in the adjustment of controversies between individuals, requires less of a
background, less of an understanding of what has gone before in life, less
of a rigorous critical discipline, than is needed by those of you who go out to
pass judgment on the social conditions of whole communities; by those of you
who administer laws like the minimum-wage laws, and the other social legis-
lation now administered in great numbers by social workers. Secondly, I can
not believe that a training fit to discipline people who shall guide and deal with
the social forces of the day, can be done in less time than the time found
necessary for the training of lawyers. Thirdly, I can not believe that the
experience of medicine and law as to the quality of teachers to train men in
those professions, applies less in regard to teachers of social work. I believe
social workers, to reach the professional level, must be guided by teachers who
give their whole time and thought to it. The time has gone by when the
teaching of any profession can be entrusted to persons who from their exacting
outside work of practice or administration, give to teaching their tired leavings.

Finally, and at the center of it all, is complete association with a university.
The schools for social work have sprung up, of course, in our large industrial
cities. Is not their evolution destined to become an integral part of the uni-
versities in those cities to which they are now, in most cases, somewhat platoni-
cally attached? For the university is the workshop of our democracy. If it
is not that, it has no excuse for being. The university should be the laboratory
of this great new mass of scientific and social facts, and the co-ordinator of these
facts for legislation, for administration, for courts, for public opinion. The
nineteenth century necessarily was a period of specialization, even over-
specialization. Our task is to unify and correct the partial facts of the all too
scattered social sciences. Mr. Flexner truly pictured the character of social
work in showing its close interrelation with medicine and law, and sanitation,
and the other applied social sciences. In a scattered way these professional
studies are now pursued by the university. The function of the university,
however, is to accommodate these various social sciences, to unite in a whole
all these facts of life. The schools for social work must be intimate parts of
the university, because they must have contact with the other branches of the
university’s work. I suspect that by a careful scheme of co-ordination our
great universities could establish schools of applied social science with very
little addition to their existing plant or personnel. These schools need the
university. But the university needs the school for social work. Just as
the medical school can not do its job well without a connected hospital, so the
medical school, and the law school, and other branches of the university, need
the experience and the experimentation which a school for social work should
produce. These various aspects, necessarily specializations of one common
endeavor, should be parts of a single intellectual community.

At the time when this statement was made, only a few of the
universities were at all conscious of the important service they
could render in this field of professional education. The social
workers on their part were not inclined to urge universities to
develop their curricula in this direction. As a matter of fact, the
belief was quite generally held among social workers that training
could be given much more advantageously in an independent school
unhampered by academic traditions. The university courses, it
was felt, would give an inadequate place to field work and would
turn out theorists instead of persons equipped along practical
lines.

Without doubt, the prevailing type of instruction in university
departments of sociology gave considerable ground for the attitude
of the social workers. Graduate students in sociology preparing
for teaching positions were seldom required to supplement their
university instruction with clinical experience in the social work
field. Their acquaintance with social agencies was usually limited
to what could be gained through observational visits or assignment
for research based on the data available in their files. It was not
uncommon for sociologists equipped in this way to underestimate
what is involved in learning the technique of social work. Their
attitude toward the social agency was not similar to that of the
medical instructor toward the hospital clinic. They were not
accustomed to regard participation in the work of a social agency
as a valuable means of acquiring scientific knowledge of social
problems.

To the extent that the foregoing justly characterized the usual
attitude of sociological instructors, it is clear that they were not
fitted for leadership in training for social work. But what must
not be overlooked was the growing tendency in all the social
sciences toward active participation in practical affairs. The
psychologists and economists as well as the sociologists were rapidly
making a place for themselves outside their customary academic
réles.

Undoubtedly this movement which had been gaining momentum
for a considerable time was greatly accelerated during the world-
war. Men in academic positions suddenly found themselves
called upon to aid in organizing and conducting the network of
industrial and social agencies that sprang into activity because of
the military situation. The experience gained in this way could not
fail to have a profound effect upon their attitude toward practical
work.

Moreover, the experience of the universities in modifying their
courses of study so as to provide practical training along lines of
war work must not be forgotten. Of special significance for depart-
ments of sociology were the emergency training courses in home
service, which these departments were asked to give in co-operation
with the American Red Cross. These training courses were held
during and immediately following the war in fifteen universities
where, previously, practical training for social work had not been
undertaken. In order that these courses might be as nearly as
possible uniform in quality and content, the Red Cross outlined
the subject-matter, prescribed the standards of the course, supple-
mented the teaching personnel of the university and usually as-
sumed responsibility for the field work of the students. Through
these home service institutes there was demonstrated the need of
training facilities for social work in wide sections of the country
where schools of that kind had not existed. By actual experience
the university men who participated in these courses came to a
proper appreciation of the requirements in this field of professional
education. Without doubt the efforts of the Red Cross to establish
these training courses were an important factor in stimulating the
interest of universities in education for social work.

At the time of the organization of the Association of Training
Schools for Professional Social Work in 1919, it was found that nine
colleges and universities were doing work of a sufficiently high grade
in this field to warrant their enroJment as members of this Associa-
tion. This list comprised Bryn Mawr College, Carnegie Institute of
Technology, Smith College, University of Chicago, University of
Minnesota, Ohio State University, University of Pittsburgh, Univer-
sity of Toronto, and Western Reserve University. This group by
no means includes all the colleges and universities now actively at
work in this field. Other institutions that are offering this year pro-
fessional courses in social work are the following: Berea College,
Kentucky, University of California, Harvard University, Johns
Hopkins University, University of Indiana, University of North
Carolina, University of Oklahoma, University of Oregon, Uni-
versity of Washington, McGill University, Tulane University, and
University of Wisconsin. In addition to these, brief training
courses were given during the past year in Cornell University, New
Jersey State College of Agriculture, University of West Virginia,
University of Virginia, Converse College, University of Kentucky,
University of Iowa, University of Texas, University of Colorado,
Syracuse University, University of Nebraska, University of Missouri,
and Iowa State College of Agriculture.

While the experience of these institutions in this field of pro-
fessional education has covered a very brief period, there are
already evident certain outstanding tendencies that are exercising
a profound influence upon methods of education for social work.

In the first place their curriculum is built up to meet the needs
of college students and graduates. The usual university standards
of admission discourage the attendance of those whose qualifications
are based on practical experience rather than upon attainments
along academic lines. Students with inadequate academic prepara-
tion may gain admission as special students but their inability to
get university credit tends to restrict attendance to people of college
grade. It is reasonable to expect that the university schools of
social work will follow the example of the older professional schools
in the universities and gradually raise the entrance requirements
until students ineligible to work for a degree will be denied ad-
mission.

A second characteristic of their work is their insistence on pre-
requisite studies in the social sciences as a basis for professional
instruction. This of course does not represent so much a new
departure as a change of emphasis. The older schools of social work
have always recognized the value of knowledge of the social sciences,
but with few exceptions they have not insisted upon a thorough-
going study in this field as preliminary to a professional course.
The attitude of the universities, on the other hand, is seen in their
attempt to build up a four or five-year course in which students
would, from the beginning of their undergraduate work, specialize
in the social sciences.

Again a majority of the university schools of social work have
given chief emphasis to courses in small town and rural community
problems. The universities have been stimulated to enter this
field of community organization largely because of the recent wide-
spread demand on the part of the Red Cross for community workers.
The location also of many of these university schools in compara-
tively small towns has made it natural for them to study the social
problems nearest at hand. At present courses in community
studies, community organization, recreation, and similar courses
dealing with preventive and constructive rather than remedial social
work, are receiving increasing attention in most of the universities’
schools of social work.
In order to provide suitable field work for these courses dealing
with small town and open country problems, it has been necessary
to depart widely from the usual methods. Instead of turning
students over to a well-equipped agency for practical training, it
has been necessary to give them much of their experience in com-
munities where social work had not been well organized. Family
case-work has not been neglected but in adapting its methods to
small towns and rural situations, the university schools of social
work have faced a difficult problem. Of equal importance with
this family work is field work with communities and with groups
within these communities. This involves experience in com-
munity studies, development of community programs, community
recreation, and the building up of a public interest in social prob-
lems. The university schools of social work located in small towns
have had to concentrate their efforts on the development of training
facilities in unorganized communities, instead of relying upon social
agencies to provide practical training for their students.

The colleges and universities therefore have not only entered
the field of education for social work but are already beginning to
place their stamp upon standards and methods of instruction. At
least twenty-one colleges and universities in this country and in
Canada have definitely undertaken to develop schools of social
work as a regular part of their activities. The effect of this in
taking the control of instruction in social work away from the
practical workers and placing it in the hands of educational special-
ists is already being seen.
Within recent years marked changes have occurred in the stand-
ards of admission to professional schools. In 1904 there were only
four medical schools in this country that required any college work
for admission; in 1917 the number that required one or two years
of such work had increased to eighty-three, which was 92 per cent
of the total number of medical schools. This same tendency to
lay greater stress upon a high standard of general education char-
acterizes also the schools of law, education, and engineering. The
inadvisability of specialization without a broad foundation is now
generally recognized. In all the well-established professions it is
taken for granted that general culture, breadth of view, and a
common knowledge of fundamental subjects must go along with
technical skill and knowledge, if high professional standing is to be
attained.

But even more significant is the growing insistence upon pre-
professional studies as a prerequisite to vocational courses. A
general education as represented by a high-school or college course
has a varying content and therefore cannot be regarded as pos-
sessing uniform value as a preparation for the professional schools.
Each profession has its fundamental sciences upon which its tech-
nical instruction must be based. The student of medicine is soon
out of his depth unless he is well grounded in biology and chemistry
and is familiar with the laboratory technique of the natural sciences.
The engineering student’s task is hopeless without an adequate
knowledge of mathematics and physics. The legal student should
bring to his professional studies a mind well-informed along lines
of political and economic science. The instructor in a school of
education ought to be able to take for granted that his students are
familiar with the principles of psychology and sociology.

As a matter of fact there is as yet no uniform agreement on the
part of these professions as to the amount and quality of the strictly
preprofessional studies that should be made a requirement of ad-
mission to their professional schools. The schools of medicine and
engineering which must look to the natural sciences as a basis for
their work, have, as might be expected, taken the greatest strides
forward in their insistence upon prerequisite studies. On the other
hand the professions that find their basis in the broad field of the
social sciences find difficulty in setting up similar standards for
prerequisites in that field. Social science from its very nature
cannot be as exact as natural science and seems less indispensable
perhaps because it is so intimately connected with facts and prin-
ciples that are more or less matters of common knowledge.

But in spite of the lack of uniform insistence by all the pro-
fessions on prerequisite studies the tendency in that direction is
clear and its correctness unquestioned. Professional schools can-
not attain a high standard unless they can assume that their
students are properly equipped for technical instruction. The best
medical schools recognize this by their encouragement of pre-
medical courses designed for the college student who desires a college
degree, and at the same time is endeavoring to prepare himself for
the study of medicine. While it may be a long time before pro-
fessional schools are placed on a thoroughgoing graduate basis, the
nature of their task and the increasing demands that are made upon
them are steadily raising their standards of admission.

In the newer field of professional education for social work
efforts to approximate the standards set up by the best professional
schools have been hampered by the undeveloped state of social
work itself and by the failure of the public to appreciate the value
of thoroughly trained workers. Much more than in other profes-
sions the apprenticeship system of training for social work is an
active competitor with the professional school. Such a large num-
ber of people still find employment in social work without the
technical equipment that a professional school is expected to furnish
that insistence upon high standards of professional education does
not yet seem very practicable. For this reason professional schools
of social work have usually followed the custom of admitting stu-
dents to their courses without rigid insistence upon academic
requirements. Even though high standards of admission may seem-
ingly be set up, these are likely to be offset by qualifying phrases
or alternatives which result in the admission of any student who
would be passed upon favorably by a social agency seeking an ap-
prentice worker.

That this is not an overstatement seems evident from the pub-
lished statements of the entrance requirements of the professional
schools of social work. The New York School of Social Work,
which stands among the first in its teaching equipment and high
standards of work, states that

the standard of instruction is that of a graduate school. A college edu-
cation, therefore, or equivalent preparation is essential in order to do the work
of the school satisfactorily and profitably. Familiarity with the following
subjects is recommended as a foundation for the course: Economics, Biology,
History (Industrial and Social), Psychology and Political Science.

The School for Social Workers in Boston requires its applicants
to have had either a college education or a high-school education
supplemented by sufficient subsequent experience. Their Bulletin
states:

As a desirable preparation fot the school and social work, students in col-
leges are advised to study the following subjects: physiology bearing on
hygiene, psychology, economics, the structure of society, the family, state and
local government, one laboratory course in science.

The Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy gave in its last
Bulletin the following as its entrance requirements:

All candidates for admission must have a general education equivalent to
that of a good secondary school and in addition, either, (2) must have taken a
considerable part of a college or university course, or (5) must have shown
ability in practical work. Satisfactory evidence of good health, good character,
capacity for practical work and earnestness of endeavor must be presented.

Students who are graduates of colleges and universities of recognized
standing will be admitted to the regular second year courses of the School as
candidates for the diploma of the School. Such students must, however, show
during the first quarter of the School, ability to do work of a high grade.
Otherwise they will be required with the opening of the second quarter to
tegister in the first year courses.

The first year course is offered to meet the need of a large group of persons
who wish training for social work, but who have not had the advantage of the
pre-professional courses now offered in colleges and universities. It is assumed
that those who complete satisfactorily this introductory course will remain a
second year. To those who remain and complete a curriculum composed of
second year courses arranged by the Registrar and approved by the Dean, a
certificate of the School will be granted.

Mature persons who have had practical experience testing in some measure
their fitness for social work, trained nurses, teachers, church workers, and
others who feel that it is too late for them now to undertake college or univer-
sity work, will be admitted to this introductory course. Younger persons
applying for admission are advised to prepare themselves for the second year
at a good college or university.

In the Bulletin of the Pennsylvania School for Social Service it is
stated that
candidates for admission to the School must have sufficient intelligence
and maturity to deal with social problems. They must be able to express
themselves in oral and written English. They must also have studied sys-
tematically some of those branches on which a knowledge of society is based,
such as history, economics, biology, psychology and sociology. Some labora-
tory training is deemed essential to insure a scientific approach to social
problems.

The Missouri School of Social Economy states that its candi-
dates for admission must fulfill one of the following requirements:

(1) The completion of a college course. (2) Graduation from a recognized
secondary school. (3) Definite social service experience in which they have
shown special aptitude. Among the general subjects in which proficiency is
desirable are economics, sociology, psychology and English.

The Richmond School of Social Work and Public Health re-
quires a high-school education or its equivalent for admission to its
courses.

The standards of admission as quoted above indicate the unwill-
ingness of these schools to place themselves on a thoroughgoing
graduate basis. Even if it is granted, as they maintain, that their
standard of instruction is that of a graduate school, students are
admitted to their courses who according to the usual tests would
not be eligible for graduate work. The Pennsylvania school makes
no academic requirements that can be definitely measured in terms
of secondary school or college work. The Missouri school gives
three alternatives arranged in descending scale from the point of
view of academic standards.

The Chicago school opened its first-year course to those who
have a general education equivalent to that of a secondary school,
while college graduates were admitted at once to their second-year
courses. The Richmond school sets up a similar standard with the
exception that the way is left open for mature persons of practical
experience to enter the second-year course along with college gradu-
ates. The New York school modifies its requirements of a college
education with the statement that it will accept ‘equivalent prepa-
ration” the nature of which is not defined. The Boston school
sets up practically the same alternative but defines its ‘‘equiva-
lent”? to mean secondary school education supplemented by prac-
tical experience.

When these entrance requirements are subjected to another test
of a graduate school, namely, insistence upon preprofessional studies
that would give the students a knowledge of the sciences related to
their field of work, an equally unsatisfactory showing is made. In
general the value of preliminary instruction in the social sciences is
recognized but such instruction is not made an absolute require-
ment. In their references to these subjects the Bulletins usually
adopt such phrases as “familiarity is recommended” or a “desira-
ble preparation,” instead of a recognizing that technical instruction
in social work must be based on a knowledge of the social sciences.
Even the Pennsylvania school, which requires candidates to have
“studied systematically some of these branches on which a knowl-
edge of society is based,”’ does not enforce this rigidly, for it offers a
course called “Scientific Bases of Social Work” which is intended
“to provide a background of certain fundamental concepts in biol-
ogy, psychology, economics, and sociology for those who have not
had these subjects in college.”

The Richmond school makes no reference at all to the desir-
ability of knowledge of the social sciences. It is worthy of mention
that the New York, Boston, and Chicago schools do not include
sociology in the list of studies mentioned as desirable preparation
for their training courses.

Lack of uniform agreement in standards of admission is found
also in the departments of social work maintained by the nine
colleges and universities that have membership in the Association of
Training Schools for Professional Social Work, but in the case of these
institutions, the differences are of another nature. These colleges
and universities may be conveniently divided into two groups, each
representing a distinct point of view in its methods of providing
professional training. The first group includes the institutions that
place their departments of social work on a graduate basis and
limit attendance to those who hold a bachelor’s degree. Strong
emphasis is placed on the satisfactory completion of undergraduate
courses in the social sciences and in most cases such courses are an
absolute requirement for admission to the technical courses of in-
struction. This group includes Bryn Mawr College, Smith College,
Western Reserve University, and University of Toronto.

In the second group are those institutions that place their chief
emphasis upon a four-year undergraduate course of instruction in
social work leading to a Bachelor’s degree. A year or more of
graduate work is also provided but even this, it is urged, should
follow the specialized undergraduate course instead of being re-
garded as giving adequate professional training to any college
graduate. It is obvious that the requirements of a secondary-school
education for admission to a four-year undergraduate course spe-
cializing in preparation for social work cannot be compared with a
similar requirement for admission to a so-called graduate school of
social work. The institutions that make up this group are the
University of Chicago, University of Minnesota, Ohio State Uni-
versity, University of Pittsburgh, and the Carnegie Institute of
Technology.

The foregoing analysis of the present actual basis of education
for social work as is shown by the standards of admission of pro-
fessional schools indicates the wide divergence of opinion among
those at work in this field. It reveals on the one hand the tendency
of the independent schools to distrust the value of college courses
in the social sciences and to make concessions to candidates for ad-
mission who have had approved kinds of practical experience. On
the other hand the movement in the universities to set up a course
of instruction that would begin early in the undergraduate school
and cover a period of four to five years, has grown out of their
feeling that the social-work student needs a more thorough founda-
tion in the social sciences than is usually obtained in the college
course.

In the field of education for social work we find therefore not
merely varying standards of admission to the professional schools
but important differences in regard to what should constitute the
basis of their technical instruction. Should a college education be
made a requirement of admission to a school of social work regard-
less of the subjects included in the college course? In view of the
varying content of the subject-matter of the courses in the social
sciences in different institutions, as well as the differences in the
quality of instruction, is it practicable at the present time to set up
a high standard of attainment in these sciencés as a prerequisite to
a professional school? Since social work from its very nature makes
such heavy demands upon soundness of judgment, strong person-
ality, and practical experience, should not factors of this kind rather
than academic requirements be given chief consideration? Is it
wise at this stage of development of social work to set up academic
standards of admission to professional schools that cannot be at-
tained by many who otherwise seem admirably fitted to become
useful social workers?

It is of help in trying to answer these questions to remind our-
selves that the heart of the difficulty lies, in the last analysis, in the
chaotic state of social work itself. As long as there is in the wide
field of social work no professional organization that concerns itself
with standards and gives real unity to the profession it is to be ex-
pected that each type of social work will set up its own standards
based upon its own experience and point of view. In such a stage
of development of social work, science has no assured place. Scien-
tific studies seem far removed from practical work and therefore any
alliance with them that places restrictions upon the entrance to
social work is regarded as inconsistent with its proper development.
It is nothing more or less than the age-long misunderstanding be-
tween the practical worker and the man of science. The former
was first in the field and is inclined to regard the scientist as an
intruder until science has outstripped practice and gained the right
of leadership.

In the medical profession the confusion between medical prac-
tice and medical science existed until the latter was able in com-
paratively recent years to demonstrate its proper place in the
determination of professional standards. While the social sciences
have not advanced as far as the natural sciences they are sufficiently
well developed to justify their claim that they must be taken into
account in efforts to solve social problems. Any difference of opin-
ion about this must be regarded as due to ignorance of the present
status of the social sciences or failure to appreciate the place of
science in modern progress.

If technical instruction in social work is to be based on the
social sciences, what is the extent of the foundation that should be
required? Certainly the minimum requirement would seem to be
the usual undergraduate courses in sociology, economics, history,
political science, psychology, and biology. It is difficult to see how
anything less could give the student a scientific equipment com-
parable to that which is expected of the medical student. In the
four-year undergraduate course in social work offered by several of
the universities this equipment in social sciences comes as a matter
of course. The graduate schools of social work, however, will not
find it easy to require their candidates for admission to be thor-
oughly familiar with the social sciences. Taking the country as a
whole the majority of those seeking training in social work are
deficient in these subjects. Maybe the graduate schools could
meet the situation by establishing a preliminary year for the benefit
of students who need a better foundation for their technical studies.
A better solution perhaps would be to increase the number of
universities that give an undergraduate course in social work. The
graduate schools then could maintain a real graduate status and
would no longer need to give their attention to elementary courses
of instruction,

During a period of adjustment it might be necessary to make
provision for special courses to meet the extraordinary demand for
social workers. This would be especially true in those sections of
the country where few colleges and universities give adequate
attention to the social sciences. But in a reasonably brief time a
sufficient number of students could be found properly prepared for
their professional studies. The number that would be lost by the
setting of higher standards would be at least partially offset by those
who would not have been attracted to the professional school under
its present system of instruction.

This emphasis upon academic attainments as a basis of educa-
tion for social work must not force unduly into the background the
personal qualifications that should be possessed by those seeking
training in this particular field. While in all the professions the
highest success cannot be won unless technical equipment is sup-
plemented by a high grade of personal qualities, in social work
this is pre-eminently true. The social worker’s stock in trade
seems much less tangible than that of the engineer, physician,
lawyer, or teacher. His services to individuals and communities
may be vital and based on expert knowledge, but they do not
always stand out in such a clear-cut and definite manner that they
are easily understood and readily acceptable. For this reason
technical knowledge alone is not sufficient. The social worker must
be a salesman, a promoter, an organizer. His personality should
be such as would command respect and win confidence. He must
be a community leader and at the same time possess those qualities
of tact, and sympathy, and common sense, and power of will that
give him personal influence over those whom he is trying to help.

Personal qualifications, therefore, must also be regarded as
necessary prerequisites for technical training in social work. Ac-
curate means of measuring these qualities in applicants for admis-
sion to a professional school do not exist. A careful study of a
candidate’s references often proves insufficient. In order to arrive
at a correct judgment, this should be supplemented by personal
observation of the student during his period of training. In the
undergraduate school of social work a decision about the student’s
qualifications can be made after the first two years’ work before
the specialization has gone far enough to make it difficult for the
student to change his line of study. In the graduate school, an
accurate decision ought to be made about the student’s personal
qualifications before he enters upon the course. Efforts to raise
the standards of education for social work must include due atten-
tion to an accurate measurement of personal qualities as well as of
academic attainments.
their technique than in following the usual academic type of
instruction. Just because the schools of social work were organized
in this way they escaped some of the shortcomings that have
hampered the progress of other fields of professional education.
The first engineering schools were manned by university instructors
who carried their university teaching methods into the professional
school and as a consequence failed for a long time to adjust them-
selves to the real needs of engineering students. Medical educa-
tion also passed through its didactic method of instruction and only
gradually built up courses growing out of a scientific handling of
experience.

The schools of social work on the other hand began with training
classes held by social work organizations for the benefit of their
own employees. They were interested in technique rather than in
research and sought their teaching material in daily experience
instead of in textbooks. The graduates of these schools there-
fore were usually acceptable to the social agencies, and fitted into
available positions without the necessity of making radical adjust-
ments. But while these results were fortunate it must not be
overlooked that schools of this kind have a tendency to place
emphasis upon immediate needs rather than upon the thorough-
going scientific foundation demanded by the best professional
standards. It thus happened that the schools of social work, in
avoiding the mistakes of academic instruction, went to the opposite
extreme of depreciating the value of the scientific studies carried
on by the universities. As a natural result the professional schools
lost in academic standing and were generally given the same rating
as normal schools of the older type. The universities on their part
failed for many years to receive the impetus to the development
of their work in the social sciences which would have resulted from
a frank recognition of the value of laboratory and clinical work in
this field.

Within the past few years this traditional gulf between the social
scientist in the university and the social worker seems in a fair way
of being bridged. Both are finding that they have much to learn
from each other and that through a union of effort their common
goal can more easily be attained. The social worker is not merely
a practitioner but is also a social scientist. He must therefore be
equipped in the use of scientific methods as well as in the practical
technique of his daily work.

This new attitude cannot fail to have a marked effect upon the
curriculum of the schools of social work. It at once makes it
evident as has already been pointed out that this curriculum must
be built upon the foundation of scientific studies rather than upon
the foundation of general education and practical experience. It
is difficult to see how instruction in schools of social work can be of
graduate quality if their curriculum is adapted equally well to the
needs of college graduates who have specialized in the social sciences
and of other students with either less or a different type of pre-
liminary education. As long as students are permitted to plunge
into technical courses of social work, as is now frequently the case,
without careful study of those sciences that deal with the social
order, it is useless to attempt to standardize these courses and
maintain them at the high level required in other professions. But
while this insistence upon a proper scientific foundation represents a
real step forward, it would be unfortunate if the social scientists in
the universities attempted to make radical changes in the courses
of instruction in social work without an appreciation of the value
of the methods that have been followed.

In working out the curricula of schools of social work the
custom has generally been to have the courses follow very closely
the different types of work carried on by the various agencies. For
example the courses given by the New York School of Social Work
are grouped under eight departments: case-work, child welfare,
industry, social research, community work, mental hygiene, crimi-
nology, and medical social service. In some of the courses certain
processes characteristic of the different kinds of social work are
singled out and the technique of carrying on these processes is
made the subject of instruction. Examples of such courses are
those dealing with the technique of case-work, the technique of
social research, the technique of community organization, and the
technique of record keeping. Other courses deal directly with types
of social work carried on by the more important social agencies.
In this group we find such courses as family welfare, child welfare,
recreation, juvenile delinquency, housing investigation, psychiatric
social work, and medical social service.

While some of these courses are similar in title to those offered
by a well-equipped university department of applied sociology,
their distinguishing characteristic is their emphasis upon technique.
The point of view is action, not contemplation and reflection. The
students do not stand off and study the problem in a detached
manner but are made to feel that they are actively participating in
all the processes connected with its solution. They find them-
selves surrounded by the atmosphere of social work rather than
that of social research. As a result they do not learn merely about
social problems; they learn how to deal with them. A typical
university course in the administration of charities may make quite
clear the problems in this field A student in such a course may
with great profit to himself make a study of different types of
administration and secure results of value as social research. It is
an entirely different matter to present this course in such a way
that the student assumes the attitude of the participator rather
than that of the observer and thus is made to feel as living realities
the different methods and points of view of those at work in this
field.

This type of technical instruction represents one of the great
contributions of the schools of social work to the field of applied
sociology. Without courses of this nature a high type of profes-
sional instruction cannot be given. A great mistake will be made
by the universities that have recently become interested in edu-
cation for social work if they believe that the addition of a field-
work course to their traditional courses in social science will equip
them for professional instruction. Nothing will more quickly
discredit the recent efforts of universities to enter this field. It
would represent a backward step in professional education in which
the social scientist will have failed to take advantage of the painful
experiences through which the technical schools of other profes-
sions have passed.

If the universities are to succeed in this field of instruction it is
essential that they clearly recognize the difference between the
course that lays emphasis upon knowledge through research and the
course that is interested in technique. At present the tendency in
a few universities is to combine these two types of courses under
the direction of an instructor who may know something about
technique, but has himself never mastered it. Such a situation
would not be tolerated in a medical school for there it is taken for
granted that an instructor in therapeutics must himself at some
time have acquired experience in that field through successful
practice. Just here is the great difficulty the universities face in
developing professional instruction in social work. Men of aca-
demic standing with experience in practical work are not easily
available for teaching purposes. The bearing of this fact upon the
problem under discussion should be recognized. Nothing can be
more fatal to the influence of the university in this field of pro-
fessional education than to assume that courses can be made voca-
tional by a change in name and a slight modification of content.
Vocational courses worthy of consideration in professional circles
must be conducted by instructors whose minimum participation
in practical work is sufficient to enable them to create the atmos-
phere of the social agency under discussion and to impart to the
students its point of view.

The influence therefore of the university on the curriculum of
schools of social work may not necessarily be in the line of progress.
Their methods of instruction and attitude toward practical work
will in many instances need considerable modification before they
are equipped for effective leadership in this field. If, however, the
necessary adjustments are successfully made, there is reason to
believe that the universities’ entrance into professional education
for social work will exert an influence upon its standards similar
to that brought about by their participation in other fields of pro-
fessional education.

Where their influence is particularly needed is in giving greater
emphasis to intellectual standards. The curriculum of schools of
social work has been built up almost entirely by practical workers
whose emphasis has chiefly been laid on the side of experience.
The courses of study have been designed to teach how particular
processes should be carried on and definite situations met. Along
with this emphasis upon the value of training by doing there has
grown up, if not a distrust of intellectual studies, at least a failure
to appreciate their proper place in a scheme of professional educa-
tion. This tendency is by no means new for it has characterized
the early stages of legal, engineering, and medical education. It is
an inheritance from the apprenticeship system of training and must
be outgrown as standards of education are raised.

It would be unfair to leave the impression that present courses
of instruction in schools of social work pay no attention to academic
standards. Much progress has been made during the past two
decades since the organization of the first training classes. Courses
of instruction usually incorporate the best results of social research
and carry with them the customary quota of assigned readings.
The chief difficulty is that the requirements in practical work are
placed first throughout the whole course and are in some cases so
heavy that time for study is reduced to a minimum. In one in-
stance, the students in a school of social work spent their mornings
in practical work with a social agency, their afternoons in classes
at the school, and their evenings in participating in the varied
activities of social settlements. The usual amount of readings
supplementary to the courses were assigned to the students but it
was manifestly impossible to insist upon the outside study necessary
to make these courses comparable to a graduate school. While
this may be an unusual instance it is fairly typical of the prevailing
tendency. What is needed is not merely a recognition of the value
of study but an arrangement of the curriculum that would make a
proper amount of study possible. It is to be expected that the
influence of the universities will be in the direction of increased
time for study. Indeed, unless they modify to a certain extent
their traditional point of view, they may go too far in their intel-
lectual requirements and fail to build up a well-balanced cur-
riculum.

Another serious problem of the curriculum has to do with the
organization of the courses of instruction. What principles shall de-
termine the arrangement of the subject-matter? Can these courses
be made to give a better historical perspective and a wider knowledge
of general principles without detracting from the interest that is
always aroused by the immediately practical? Here is a problem
that is vital to the success of the professional school. If the inde-
pendent schools of social work have erred in concentrating too great
attention upon practical problems and immediate situations, the
university courses in this field have usually gone to the opposite
extreme. Will it be possible to build up courses that will avoid
the shortcomings of both?

It would seem that the solution of this problem does not demand
a radical change in the general type of professional course that
has become most common. In so far as these courses are built
up around a study of the problems with which social work has to
deal they are essentially right in principle. Courses dealing with
problems of the family, the community, child welfare, juvenile
delinquency, immigration, housing, recreation, and similar problems,
not only cover subjects with which social workers must be familiar
but represent the best pedagogical method of approach.

Where they frequently need strengthening is in an increased
emphasis upon the more general facts and principles that give a
comprehensive understanding of the whole situation rather than a
definite solution of the immediate problem. The problem itself
should continue to be the point of departure and should lead in a
natural way to a study of the historical facts bearing upon it. By
beginning with the problem instead of the historical introduction
so common in university courses, the interest necessary for con-
centrated effort is aroused and the interpretative value of the his-
torical elements stand out more clearly. But the point where the
usual professional course lays itself open to criticism is in its
tendency to lead directly toward a consideration of methods and
technique. The failure to give sufficient emphasis to the complex
factors that enter into the problem under discussion and the causes
that underlie it bring about a concentration upon mechanical pro-
cesses and an overrefinement of technique, that may be useful to
specialists who are to deal with particular situations but does not
make them professionally educated in the broadest sense. The
ideal in technical courses of instruction is to make everything con-
tribute to a thorough knowledge of the whole problem which will
as a matter of course include attention to the most approved
technique.
If the technical courses of instruction deal in this way with
specific problems there would seem to be less necessity for courses
in which the entire emphasis is upon technique. The technique of
family case-work would not need to be taught as a distinct process
because it would be a natural part of the courses dealing witli prob-
lems of the family, child welfare, juvenile delinquency, etc. In the
same way the technique of community organization would be taught
in connection with courses in community problems. Such subjects,
also, as methods of publicity, financing of social agencies, office
management and routine, and other aspects of social-work admin-
istration, might be considered more effectively in their immediate
application to specific problems than in courses dealing exclusively
with the technique of executive management and administration.

In this connection it ought to be stated that methods of social-
work administration have never been given adequate attention by
the professional schools. Courses in social work have usually been
designed to prepare technicians rather than executives. Since the
graduates of schools of social work have found their most available
opportunities of employment with social agencies in large cities
where they must serve for a considerable time in a subordinate
capacity before being given executive responsibility, there has not
been much demand for instruction in administrative methods. But
with the recent development of social work in small towns and
communities the graduates of a professional school will frequently
be called upon to take a position where both executive ability and
social-work technique are needed. Even if the executive positions
in social agencies in the large cities can be successfully filled by per-
sons who have come up through the ranks, this plan will not always
be found practicable in the smaller communities. The new situa-
tion can only be met by an adjustment of the curriculum of the
training schools which will provide the needed instruction along
administrative lines. A recent effort to meet this need was the
special course the past summer at Ohio State University for organi-
zers and executives in social work. This course which was given
by the university in co-operation with the Association for Com-
munity Organization and the American Red Cross was designed
primarily for persons of social-work experience who gave promise of
capacity for executive leadership. During the eight weeks’ sum-
mer session the attention of the students was concentrated upon
the principles and methods of community organization and the
problems connected with the administration of social agencies.
This work was carried on through classroom lectures and discus-
sions, assigned readings, and a limited amount of observation of
the methods of local and state organizations. The remainder of the
course, which covered a period of eight months, is being spent by the
students as employees of organizations doing community work
where under the supervision of skilled workers they are gaining
experience in dealing with actual administrative problems. A
course of this kind has real value for a picked group preparing for
executive positions of considerable responsibility. Its chief present
significance, however, is in calling attention to the value of specific
instruction in administrative methods and in demonstrating one
way in which this may be given with a fair degree of success. The
course will have met more than an immediate need if it results in a
greater emphasis by the professional schools upon instruction along
administrative lines. Such a strengthening of the curricula of
schools of social work will represent an important step forward in
building up a well-balanced professional course of study.

This addition to the courses of study, together with the in-
creasing number of courses that must be added to the curriculum
to keep pace with the rapid development of the many different
types of social work, has brought professional schools to the point
where they must group their courses under separate departments
and direct their students to specialize in certain lines of work. The
time is past when students can take a general course of training in
social work and then be equipped for a position with any agency
they may select. The New York School of Social Work is attempt-
ing to meet the situation by devoting the first year to fundamental
courses that may be regarded as common to all forms of social work,
while vocational training in one department makes up the work of
the second year. This selection of fundamental courses that should
serve as a general introduction to the more highly specialized voca-
tional work is a step in the right direction. Too early specialization
has been one of the tendencies of the schools of social work which
has had the unfortunate result of turning out graduates incapable
of seeing beyond their own particular field.

Just what should constitute the fundamental courses that should
precede the highly specialized vocational studies is doubtless a mat-
ter about which general agreement cannot now be reached. It
depends to a certain extent upon what is included in the prepro-
fessional studies that have been completed before entering the pro-
fessional school. Among the first-year courses listed by the New
York School of Social Work are courses in immigration, labor prob-
lems, crime and punishment, methods of social research, American
government and administration—topics which are ordinarily cov-
ered in a university curriculum. The difficulty is that with the
present lack of uniform standards in college requirements in the
social sciences it is practically impossible to know where to begin in
a course of professional education for social work. Certainly no
one would be so bold as to claim that the average college graduate
has made such a study of the social sciences as would definitely pre-
pare him for the technical studies in this field. The fact that he has
taken certain courses may not be of any real significance. The
content of the courses and the way they are presented must de-
termine whether they are of preprofessional value.

The undergraduate course in social work given by a few univer-
sities would seem to be better adapted to meet this situation. Ina
training school of this kind it is not only possible to provide the
proper number of preprofessional courses but also to see that they
are properly correlated and conducted in such a way as to fit into
the whole scheme of social-work education. Under this plan the
preprofessional courses of the first three years would be followed
in the Senior year by the more fundamental technical courses that
would give a general knowledge of the field of social work. If then
this is followed by one graduate year of specialized vocational
training a standard of professional education would have been at-
tained which under present conditions cannot generally be realized
by the usual two-year graduate course.
