The Interpretation of Sociological Data

Author(s): Gustav Spiller

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 21, No. 4 (Tan., 1916), pp. 521-532
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763908

Accessed: 10-05-2016 06:00 UTC
I. INTRODUCTORY COMPREHENSIVENESS AND COMPLETENESS

1. It is suggested that when the most general sociological or social
problems (e.g., the development of primary institutions or the reality

«The writer of this argument is the author of a textbook of psychology which
has received unusually favorable notice in England. His letter of transmission is
subjoined, as well as the main communication. It is superfluous to say that the
editors of this Journal do not accept the rendering of sociology which the communica-
tion proposes. It is published, however, as a stimulus to criticism. Mr. Spiller’s
first letter is as follows:

“Dear Sir:

“T sincerely trust that you may find space for the inclosed letter in the American
Journal of Sociology. America is the country par excellence where the study of soci-
ology is assiduously cultivated, and one naturally turns to its sociologists for counsel
and criticism. This could not be more completely and effectively accomplished than
through the instrumentality of your valuable Journal.

“The Letter manifestly does not reflect or represent a casual or capricious
thought. Three years ago the (British) Sociological Review published an article of
mine purporting to show that theoretical and practical race bias and race discrimina-
tion had slender foundations in fact. The following year the same review con-
tained a brief sketch by me relating to the mentality of the Australian aborigines as
revealed in official and other documents. And last year there appeared in that
periodical a lecture by me on “Darwinism and Sociology,” where the ground for the
present Letter was prepared. Indeed, the background for these various efforts is a
volume on the subject of the distinctive nature of man which I have nearly completed,
and I am seeking to publish this Letter in order that the volume might comprehend the
minimum number of serious blemishes. But for the Sociological Review having
temporarily suspended publication, I should have also asked its editor for similar

hospitality.
“Hoping to hear that you will grant my request,
“TI remain,
“Yours truly,

&C SprrtRR”
3. Similarly, instead of examining chance facts of a more or less
restricted order, a comprehensive and inclusive classification of the
subject-matter of sociology, like the following, is indispensable:

a) Language and transport.
6) Buildings and furniture.
c) Implements and industrial production.
d) Domesticated animals and cultivated plants and discovered
energies and raw materials.
e) Trade and tribal intercourse to internationalism.
f) Dress and education.
g) Play and pastimes and inner life and its expression.
hk) Nutrition and care of health.
4) Morals and religion.
j) The family and other groupings (excluding state, district, and
commune).
k) Law and government.
2) Science and art.
m) Miscellaneous.
Il. HUMAN NATURE ELUCIDATED THROUGH A COMPARISON
WITH ANIMAL NATURE

Since human activities are the expression of human nature, therefore
to understand the former we must ascertain the latter.

5. In all species of plants and animals (disregarding man for the
moment) we remark that, for all intents and purposes, unless vast epochs
are focused during which one species is transmuted into another—

a) the species remains stable as regards more important character-
istics, and

6) its groups or members are virtually equal in their capacity of
dealing with their environment in given circumstances.

Accordingly it seems fair to assume, provisionally at least, that
this universal law applies to man; that is, that—

a) the human race is virtually stable as regards more important
characteristics, and

6) its groups or members are virtually equal in their capacity
of dealing with their environment in given circumstances.

Characteristics in man seemingly contradicting this would be, on
this assumption, ascribed to secondary factors. Else it is difficult to
conceive why only the human race should be unstable or its groups and
members alone should prodigiously vary in capacity—that is, if natural
selection readily changes the stability and uniformity of one species, it
should as readily transform all; but if this happened, species attributes
and enduring qualities would cease to exist—ie., the kinds constituting
the animal kingdom would be in the constantly altering and endlessly
varying condition of human culture and most of the higher animals
would culturally be approximately as advanced as man.
6. Entering more circumstantially into the nature of animal life,
on the basis of 5, we learn—

a) that with particular animal species there has taken place
during their past virtually no increase in possessions (such as
nests) and in intellectual capacity (such as power of dealing
with the environment);

6) that individuals and groups of particular animal species do not
appreciably vary either in space or in time so far as possessions
and intellectual capacity are in question;

c) that virtually nothing capable of being denominated as
improvement in the nature of the possessions and of intel-
lectual capacity is discernible in any given animal species,
even when enormous epochs are considered; and

d) that either co-operation between members of an animal species
is altogether wanting or it is restricted to co-operation among the
living members of comparatively small and non-co-operating
groups, in which case, however, the co-operation is virtually
determined and guided by inborn needs and methods and
virtually precludes individuals or groups profiting by the
experience of fellow-individuals and fellow-groups, contempo-
rary and ancestral.

Yet so far as man is concerned—judged by 3, treated according to 1,
2, and 4—

a) there has taken place during the human past an incalculably
great increase in possessions and intellectual capacity, as
exemplified in the present-day contents of the great cities of
the West and in man’s present power of dealing with his
environment;

6) individual men and groups of men vary incalculably in space
and time so far as possessions and intellectual capacity are in
question—e.g., pauper and multimillionaire, illiterate and
Doctor of Science, Central Africa and England of today, and
Paleolithic times and the present;

c) stupendous progress is traceable from pre-Paleolithic times to
our day—i.e., gradual development of language from a few
inarticulate signs to speech, writing, printing, and telephone
and telegraph with and without wires, or transport including
roads and bridges and conveyances on land, water, and air,
or buildings, furniture, implements, etc. (to the end of the list

in 3);
7. Carrying the analysis of the animal outfit a step farther still, we
might enumerate the hereunder-mentioned factors:

a) inborn needs or native impulses;

6) innately determined modes of procedure or instincts;

c) congenital means or organs wherewith the need might be
satisfied—e.g., senses, claws, poison fangs, spinning apparatus;

d) general adaptive structure—e.g., the suppleness of the cat or the
peculiar organism of the mole;

e) certain protective structures, as fur or the tortoise’s armor;

f) automatic acts;

g) reflex acts;

h) individual intelligence to meet particular or unusual circum-
stances; and

2) the fundamental structure and the correspondingly funda-
mental needs and modes of procedure—e.g., system of obtain-
ing, maintaining, and utilizing energy.

In man, on the contrary, 7) is alone of salient import, together with
the unique peculiarity of dependence on species-thought. Nevertheless,
being descended from the primates, his physical structure intimately
resembles in many material respects the structure of the highly de-
veloped biological family to which he belongs. Indeed, man is an
animal in whom a) to h) have been largely superseded or supple-
mented by a new method of approaching his environment and fulfilling
his needs.

Note.—To speak of “instinct” as generally explaining the activities of
human beings is to rely on a singularly nebulous term in an exceptionally
important matter. Subtract man’s culturability and culture and he is just
one of a countless number of animals, except that they are fitted for their
environment and he is not.
8. There being thus an almost infinite difference between man and
animals, we must search for an interpretation of this anomalous fact.
We propose the ensuing explanation:

a)

i)

Individual members of any animal species, be they flourishing
in isolation or in groups, depend almost exclusively on inborn
needs and impulses, means or organs, and methods or instincts,
for the purpose of doing justice to their nature. Their life is,
therefore, self-contained, and whatever lessons experience
teaches them are almost entirely buried within them and with
them. Hence results virtually complete stability and uni-
formity.
Man, on the contrary, appears to depend almost exclusively
on pan-humanly discovered, preserved, adapted, and improved
needs, means, and methods, and for this reason—because
billions of human beings pool their possessions and reflections
(instead of as among animals where each individual is self-
limited)—human life is—
(a) almost infinitely richer;
(i) almost infinitely more diversified as to space and time;
(si) almost infinitely more progressive; and
(iv) almost infinitely more interdependent in relation to
individuals, groups, and periods, than the life of any
particular animal species whatsoever. For the satis-
faction of their needs animals depend, then, primarily on
their organic outfit, and secondarily on individual thought;
human beings primarily on the thought of their entire race,
comprising untold legions of individual thinkers. Accord-
ingly, the cultural data appear to be consistent with the
law of the stability of animal species and the virtual
equality of their groups and members. That is, human
culture may be explained without postulating that man
forms an exception to the universal law controlling all
species, by assuming that culture is the massed product
of the microscopic contributions of individuals of all
human groups and ages. (See, however, 15.)
The true human unit is therefore not the individual, as with the
tiger, say; or the group, as with the ant, say; but the whole
human species, embracing all its members of all lands from
man’s emergence from apehood to his exit from life’s stage
(if that ever occurs). (See 18.)
6) Accordingly it appears inappropriate to speak of man as a
social being or of the science of man as sociology. Rather
should we speak of man as a species being, of culture as a
species product, and of the science of pan-human culture or
pan-sophiology, since unfettered and collective thinking is only
observable in human beings.

c) Culture, again, might be conceived as a comprehensive term
equivalent to cultivation and be employed in contradistinction
to native power or spontaneity. Culture would be thus
divided into physical, intellectual, moral, religious, aesthetic,
economic, and political culture, and would comprehend the
totality of the products of the corporate human mind.

d) And the term civilization may be said roughly to express at
any date the last stage of the total of the material and other
inventions and discoveries developed, and postnatally pre-
served, by the co-operation of the whole of mankind from
the earliest times, in order to meet the demands of human
nature which depends for effective guidance and satisfaction
on culture and not on heredity.

e) We might also state that what heredity is to the animal,
heritage, or the cultural heritage, is to man, and heritage
we might define in the largest sense as the tradition of
mankind.
IV. THE NATURE OF MAN

13. With man, then, a novel and momentous factor enters in bio-
logical evolution—dependence on the material and other inventions and
discoveries of virtually all the members of his race from the earliest
times to his own. From this ensues—

a) that but for fundamental structure, and fundamental needs
resulting therefrom, a human being is obliged to place
reliance primarily on his fellows far and near in space and
time in order to realize himself;

6) that the more extensive the accumulated fund of thought,
the more propitious are his chances of realizing himself;

c) that he depends on completest culture for completest living
and that he will therefore be able to realize himself fully only
when the quality and the quantity of this fund of thought
have reached infinity;

d) that hence only the ideal satisfies man truly, the ideal being
simply that which adequately satisfies his needs and which
corresponds to the plant’s and animal’s fixed hereditary
outfit; and
that since the individual who truly realized himself would
have achieved this through absorbing the substance of what
trillions have accomplished, he would be trillions of times
the superior of any individual animal, omitting here the
additional superiority due to the active co-operation and
comparison of these trillions. (Man even learns from ani-
mals, plants, and inanimate nature.)

14. Moreover, reasoning from the past to the future, we appear
justified in concluding that with the ages collective or pan-human thought
leads necessarily—

a) to an almost infinite growth of material and other inventions
and discoveries;

6) to an almost infinite improvement of these;

c) to a complete equalization of economic, political, moral,
intellectual, aesthetic, and other advantages among indi-
viduals and peoples; and

&

é
15. Is it, however, correct to contend that a) peoples and 6) indi-
viduals are virtually one another’s equals so far as native capacity is in
question ?

a) is rendered probable, inter alia, by the statement in an official
report relating to the school education of the dusky offspring
of the Australian bushman (who is regarded as touching the
zero level of human culture) that “age for age and opportunity
for opportunity the attainments and mental powers of these
children are equal to the average white children,” and by the
fact that thousands of Africans have passed through the high-
est seats of learning in Europe and the United States with
apparently no greater effort than Europeans and apparently
constituting no more exceptions than the European students;
and

6) is shown to be probable—

(i) by a closer study of the relevant data—e.g., on applying
1 to 4 systematically by consulting specialized histories
we shall find that the almost painfully slow, piecemeal,
and continuous human advance excludes the assumption
that a few “men of genius” are responsible for what we
call human civilization, or that men are “born” to solve
the almost infinitely minute portion of the problem
which happens to emerge in their day and which they
have more or less successfully coped with; and

(ii) by the consideration of the fact that the cultural causes
which account for the cultural diversity of peoples and
ages persumably account for the prodigious cultural
differences between individuals, the same causes being
necessarily operative in the two instances.
a) and b) should be experimentally tested by the adoption, under
equal but decidedly elevating circumstances, of newborn infants repre-
senting different sexes, classes, peoples, and races. (The children
should be unaware of being adopted and the foster-parents should act
as genuine parents.)

Note.—it is likely that the belief in men of genius is a survival of the
belief in the ancient gods and heroes. If the precise individual contribution
of any “great” man be envisaged, our conclusion will probably appear to be
consonant with the facts of history. It might be also noted that possibly
over 95 per cent of man’s inventions and discoveries are admittedly uncon-
nected with “great men.” (Apply 1 to 4 to the problem.)

16. From man’s dependence on pan-human thought and from his
being subject to the biological law of stability and uniformity it follows—
a) that the individual human being (allowing for germinal,
prenatal, and postnatal malformation) is capable of absorb-
ing the substance of any civilization, however advanced, and

6) that he is able to advance this civilization in an infinitesimal
degree.

Expressed in the form of a definition: The stock of humanity’s
acquisitions, divided by the number of human beings who have lived,
assuming the actual physical and cultural conditions, approximately
yields the single individual’s intellectual, moral, and practical capacity
for invention and discovery, and, vice versa, the single individual’s
intellectual, moral, and practical capacity, multiplied by the number of
human beings who have lived, assuming the actual physical and cultural
conditions, approximately yields the stock of humanity’s acquisitions.

17. We might define man accordingly as—

a) the sole cultural or species being;

or stated less ambiguously,

6) man is the sentient being which primarily depends on species
developed and traditionally preserved culture (for satisfying
its needs);

or, more exhaustively,

c) what defines man most truly is that the necessary means
for adequately gratifying his needs are, in a growingly satis-
factory form, provided—not, as in animals, by instinct, by
individual intelligence, by learning incidentally from neigh-
boring members of the same species, by accidental traditions,
by group co-operation, or by a combination of several of the
just-enumerated means—but by the steadily increasing
Vv. PRACTICAL DEDUCTIONS

19. The suggested definition of man also implies—

a) the existence of societies or communities, the individual
being wholly unfitted by nature to live by himself;

5) the innate mental and moral equality of individuals, sexes,
families, classes, castes, nations, and races, from which
follows the demand for equal opportunities and treatment;

c) the need to provide thorough home and school education for
all—physical, intellectual, moral, aesthetic, civic, and voca-
tional;

d) science becoming man’s guiding genius in all departments of
life and thought;

e) the indispensability of co-operation in all spheres of life and
on an equal basis;

f) the need for institutions which shall store the accumulations of
the past, present, and future—e.g., government, law, mar-
riage, etc.;

g) equal respect for past, present, and future, or for conserva-
tism, presentism, and futurism (which might be merged into
pan-temporism) ;
h) as the supreme end the striving collectively and individually
to promote the cause of the ideal, and a sense of oneness
with all humanity, of which the individual is but an expres-
sion;

4) as a rule of conduct and action the exhibiting in all the rela-
tionships of life of a profound fellow-feeling, guided by fullest
information and circumspect thought, accompanied by
geniality and refinement, and intelligently realized by
strenuous and firm-bent will—the mind acting as a whole;

j) and respect for the fundamental needs—hunger, exercise, etc.
