Science Without Concepts

Author(s): Herbert Blumer

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 36, No. 4 (Jan., 1931), pp. 515-533
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2767 159

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:39 UTC
SCIENCE WITHOUT CONCEPTS’

HERBERT BLUMER
University of Chicago
ABSTRACT

The constant presence of concepts in science, in face of a recurrent skepticism of
their value, sets the problem as to the réle of the scientific concept. Psychologically,
the concept functions to circumvent obstacles in the field of perception and so release
activity along new lines. In this way the scientific concept makes possible the solution
of problems in the field of science. The scientific concept enables the isolation and
identification of an abstracted content in experience which may become the subject of
a separate study. Functionally, the scientific concept (1) introduces a new orientation
or point of view, (2) serves as an instrument of handling one’s environment, and (3)
makes possible deductive reasoning and so the anticipation of new experience. Im-
proper usage of the concept arises when it is accepted as an ultimate and kept apart
from the realm of perception,

The title of this paper is not the choice of the writer. It has been
conferred by the Program Committee of this Institute. As a title
it is anomalous, since it seems to involve a contradiction of terms.
It is probably designed to shock blasé and weary students—perhaps
to insure at least one element of stimulation to listeners of what will
prove to be a dull paper.

To speak of science without concepts suggests all sorts of analo-
gies—a carver without tools, a railroad without tracks, a mammal
without bones, a love story without love. A science without con-
cepts would be a fantastic creation. Neither my understanding of

my task nor your lines of interest would lead me to undertake to

* Address given before the Ninth Annual Institute of Social Research, University of
Chicago, August 20-23, 1930.
give substance to such a fantasy. I accept the title as a well-known
logical device of revealing the actual by considering the impossible.

Let one think of any reputable science, and he will likely think
of concepts. In physics one recalls the atom and electron, mass and
matter, velocity and inertia, space and time; in chemistry, valency,
isomerism, colloids, combustion, decomposition, atomic nuclei; in
biology, heredity, environment, genes, unit characters, variation,
natural selection; in psychology, habit, reflex, feeling, integration,
the unconscious, inhibition; in sociology, culture, the group, cul-
tural lag, socialization, social disorganization. The most casual sur-
vey of the history of any of these sciences shows a persistent use of
such concepts. One can scarcely regard such concepts as survivals
of earlier philosophical preoccupations, for one finds them in use
today in the most exact of sciences. He who should declare serious-
ly that science as we know it has no concepts, or has no use for them,
presumably attaches some esoteric meaning to the term which sci-
ence does not recognize.

Yet alongside of this picture of the constant presence of concepts
in historic and contemporary science one may place another show-
ing recurrent skepticism, and criticism of their use. Tough-minded
scientists apparently have ever suspected an affinity between con-
cepts and metaphysics. Frequently in their reflective writings they
voice their belief that conceptual concern is the doorway to sterile
philosophizing. That famous utterance of Newton, “hypotheses non
fingo”’ is a classic instance of this attitude. Science clings close to
real sense experience; interest in concepts is a philosophical con-
cern.

There seems to be ground for this attitude of suspicion toward
concepts. The sterile preoccupation of the medieval logicians and
theologians with the notions of levity, gravity, wetness, dryness,
actuality, and potentiality is a case in point. There are others: the
ancient Greeks, for example, who, on the point of observing their
world experimentally, “lost nerve,” as Gilbert Murray says, and
relapsed into comfortable cogitation over the inherent forms of
things; the numerous treatises of philosophers on the physical con-
cepts of space and time which physicists have long since found it
best to ignore; or the still more conspicuous instance of the plight of
social scientists in their efforts to construct a science out of their
heads by elaborating the character of such concepts as society, eco-
nomic man, sovereignty, progress, natural right, association, etc.
In general, it might be said, scientific workers become sterile when
they turn themselves to conceptual preoccupation. Modern science
seems to have made headway only after wrenching itself loose from
philosophical preoccupation. Its heritage is too precious to be jeop-
ardized by a return to conceptual enterprise.

To oppose these two pictures is to set our problem. One suggests
the inevitability of concepts in science; the other portrays the deep
suspicion with which conceptual preoccupation is regarded. Either
view may be defended in polemic; their opposition suggests the ad-
visability of showing the réle of the concepts in scientific procedure,
so that one may come to understand its functions, and, if need be,
to protest its improper use. I propose to do this.

In outlining the problem I am bound to confess that my interest
is in the function of the concept; in what it does, or rather in what
it enables scientists to do. I have slight interest in the controversies
as to whether the concept is real or nominal, whether the universal
is being or pure idea, whether abstraction is a process of disclosing
reality or of distorting reality. I say this because the bulk of the
literature on the concept concerns such issues. Anyone with the
interests I have indicated will find this literature dull and of slight
value. It is possible to consider the concept as an incident or an
episode of the scientific act and not as a detached entity. In that
case, it is not important to specify its epistemological properties,
but rather to consider its scientific use.

I think it best to introduce this account of the concept with a brief
psychological discussion. Let us begin with the simplest situation:
simple perceiving and conceiving. The individual, in orientating
himself in his environment, perceives. What he perceives arises
from and ties back into his activity. It may organize him for effort;
it may release or strengthen some particular action; it may lead to
the abandonment or redefinition of a particular project. Perception
arises in the interplay of activity and environment and serves to
guide the course of the activity. However, not only may the activ-
ity be facilitated by perception, but it may be balked, blocked, or
frustrated. The conceptual process is a mode of behavior, charac-
teristic of humans, which permits them to circumvent such ob-
stacles. When, in a situation, perception is insufficient, one can con-
ceive the situation in a certain way and act on the basis of the con-
ception. In such a case, conceiving serves the same biological func-
tion as perceiving; it permits new orientation, a new organization
for effort, a new release of action. Further, if conceiving originates
in the breakdown or insufficiency of perceiving, it, in turn, flows
back into perceiving, that is, the conception one forms will shape
or influence the perception one gets. Conception is not merely a
stop-gap to perception, but a fashioner of perception.

These simple points in the relation of perceiving and conceiving
are familiar to anyone acquainted with functional and pragmatic
psychologies. I submit that they are sufficient to answer our prob-
lem as to the réle of the concept in scientific procedure. I mention
them again: conception arises as an aid to adjustment with the in-
sufficiency of perception; it permits new orientation and new ap-
proach; it changes and guides perception.

These points seem to apply equally well to the percept and the
concept. The affinity of concept to conception and of percept to per-
ception is psychological as well as lexicographical. The concept, in
one of its aspects, is a way of conceiving. Mass, motion, electricity,
atom, culture, gene, heredity, integration, reflex, probability, as-
similation, etc., are ways of construing certain contents of experi-
ence. We can illustrate this in a simple way with the concept of
electricity. The observation of the attraction by rubbed amber of
light particles, of the turning of the freely suspended lodestone
toward the north, of the repelling of light bodies coming in contact
with an electrified body, of the galvanic reflex in the frog, of the be-
havior of the Leyden jar and the voltaic pile—all these were experi-
ences which in the reflective consciousness of certain individuals
suggested the existence of something not directly perceived. In this
case, this something became known as electricity.

Perhaps it might be better to say that, on the basis of given tan-
gible perceptual experiences which were puzzling, certain individu-
als fashioned constructs which would give these experiences an
understandable character. As far as I can see, scientific concepts
come into existence in this way. They refer to something whose
existence we presume, but whose character we do not fully under-
stand. They originate as conceptions occasioned by a series of per-
ceptual experiences of a puzzling character which need to be bridged
by a wider perspective. I hasten to add that the concept does not
merely suppose the existence of something which bridges percep-
tual experiences, but it implies that this thing has a nature or certain
character.

I think that if you will keep in mind specific concepts you will
easily understand these points which have been made. Mass, mo-
tion, electricity, atom, culture, gene, heredity, etc., arise through
man’s reflection. They are not items of direct perceptual experi-
ence; they have originated as conceptions from direct perceptual
experiences which have been puzzling and problematic. They serve
to introduce order or intelligibility into such experiences. As con-
ceptions, they imply a content conceived; this content may be speci-
fied, discussed, studied, and reorganized—as such we may say it has
a character.

From my remarks so far you will see that I regard the concept as
a way of conceiving and of having a content which is conceived.
Treatment of the concept from either of these two aspects will show
something of its function. As a form of conceiving the concept liber-
ates frustrated activity and enables new action. In any field of be-
havior beset by problems, as is noticeably the case in the field of
science, this function is particularly significant. It requires prob-
ably little elaboration. On the bare psychological side, without con-
cepts, activity would be tied to a given perceptual level with scarce
opportunity of reaching a higher perceptual plane. Identical prob-
lems would be recurrent; there would be, essentially, no methods
of gaining control over them. The world would remain constant;
frustrations of activity would be suffered in recurrent fashion and
would scarcely lead to any reorganization of the given content of
experience. Such existence I suppose to be true in the case of ani-
mals. The worlds of man in general and that of science in particu-
lar are of a different kind. The reorganization of both in the face of
problems can take place only by transcending, so to speak, the given
perceptual world. In this transcendence the concept occupies a
pivotal place.

For centuries the peasants of Europe and Asia suffered the loss
of cattle through anthrax. This serious malady was a common oc-
currence. Many accepted it as something natural and inevitable.
Others were puzzled by it and treated it as a problem. As a problem
it was a recurrent one—the perception of the event was persistently
puzzling and problematic. Scientists had studied the malady for
decades, but their efforts to control it were balked. Release of ac-
tivity waited on a satisfactory conceptual view—to be provided, in
this instance, by Pasteur. It had been known for some time previous
to Pasteur’s interest in this disease that in the blood of the cattle
stricken with anthrax were small rodlike organisms called “vibri-
ones.” These were regarded as interesting curiosities, but of no sig-
nificance; they were epiphenomena of the malady. Pasteur ap-
proached this field of perception with a new concept—that of the
infinitely small. This concept permitted him to organize experi-
ments in a way previously unthought of, to show the specific influ-
ence of the vibriones, and eventually to yield solution to and control
over the disease. This incident illustrates the way in which the con-
cept as a way of conceiving may liberate balked activity. It also
shows how in science beset with problems the concept releases and
guides experimental activity and determines its direction.

Let me consider the significance of the other aspect of the con-
cept which I have mentioned—the content conceived. As I see it,
the concept permits one to catch and hold some content of experi-
ence and make common property of it. Through abstraction one
can isolate and arrest a certain experience which would never have
emerged in mere perception. Our perceptual world is one of par-
ticulars, for although conception is always involved, it is conception
working through particulars. The abstraction of a relation from
this world of particulars, and the holding on to it, is possible only
through conceptualization and necessitates, ultimately, a concept.
That is to say, the very act of abstraction is an act of conception; if
the conception is to be held on to it must be given a name, a sign, or
an identifying mark. By identifying such an isolated content, two
developments of paramount importance for science are possible:
(1) this content may become the object of separate investigation
and reflection, (2) it may enter into the experience of others and
so become common property. I propose to take up, in order, these
two possibilities.
When I declare that the content conceived in a concept can be
studied separately, what I mean is that one can take an abstraction
which has been made, test and specify its characters, ascertain its
range, and endeavor to determine more of its nature. I need not for
the moment indicate how this is done in science; all that I wish to
say here is that it is constantly being done in science. Through such
study new problems and approaches emerge which make the con-
cept all the more instrumental to a richer experience and a larger
world. The point is a little abstract; let me illustrate it.

I choose, as a familiar illustration, the concept of motion as it
emerges in the work of Galileo and Newton. As students of the his-
tory of philosophy know, in the eyes of the ancients and of the
philosophers of the Middle Ages motion was not divorced from ob-
jects in motion. Motion was one of the inherent properties of the
particular object. Thus, it was natural for a planet to move in a
circle, for fire to move toward the sky, or for a heavy object to move
toward a state of rest on the surface of the earth. Motion was defi-
nitely identified with particular objects. No one conceived of it as
distinct from the happenings of these particular concrete objects.
It remained for Galileo and his contemporaries in modern science
to make the abstraction. In his famous experiments in measuring
the swing of the lamp in the Cathedral of Pisa, in dropping pellets
from the leaning tower of Pisa, and in rolling balls down smooth
inclined planes, Galileo was making a definite shift from particular
objects to general motion. The swing of the lamp, the fall of the
pellets, and the roll of the balls were separate happenings; a dis-
tinctive kind of movement inhered in each. Through conception
Galileo abstracted a content held to be common to all—a content
which in being identified by a term became a concept. By concep-
tualization, then, the item of motion became detached and held.
Those who are familiar with the history of modern science know
that its development began in major part with the introduction of
the concept of motion. Motion, as such, became a subject of experi-
mental and reflective study resulting in the law of falling bodies,
Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, leading eventually to the law of
gravitation.

I suppose that this one illustration is sufficient to reveal clearly
the point that through the concept one may detach a content of ex-
perience and make it the object of separate study. It is only with
this possibility that science may come into existence. Study instead
of being diffuse may be concentrated; research effort may be fo-
cused on a circumscribed field, yet with the promise that the results
obtained may be applied on a wide scale to many particular situa-
tions.

I return now to the other development made possible by the con-
cept—the communication of experience. I have mentioned two
significant aspects which a concept has: a way of conceiving and a
content conceived.

The third aspect bulks large—the verbal character of the con-
cept. The concept involves an identifying mark or symbol; so it
presents itself as a word or expression. Energy, radiation, morale,
competition, society, etc., are at least words. Some writers have
said that they are nothing but words. As I see it, the word is an ele-
ment of the concept, but not all of it. The word occasions a way of
conceiving and stands for that which is conceived. The word, then,
is a symbol of a given process of conception. By reason of its verbal
or symbolic character, the concept may become an item of social
discourse and so permit the conception that it embodies to become
common property. A concept always arises as an individual experi-
ence, to bridge a gap or insufficiency in perception. In becoming
social property it permits others to gain the same point of view and
employ the same orientation. As such it enables collective action—
a function of the concept which, curiously enough, has received lit-
tle attention. It is by reason of the fact that the concept is an item
of social discourse that concerted procedure is possible as far as
science is concerned, and that a structure of science may emerge in
place of a mere assemblage of disconnected actions.

Much of what I have said of the function of the concept applies
equally well to common-sense concepts and to scientific concepts.
To lump these together, as many would do, is to lose sight of the
peculiar value of the latter. In showing the difference between them
it will be possible, I think, to delineate more clearly the character of
scientific concepts and show better their réle in science.

To my mind, the chief difference is that the abstraction embodied
in the common-sense concept is just accepted and is not made the
subject of special analysis and study. Consequently, abstraction is
soon arrested and not pushed to the length that is true in the case
of scientific concepts. I should like to illustrate this with such a
common-sense concept as burning. In ordinary perceptual experi-
ence people become aware that different objects will burn under
certain general conditions. Leaves, twigs, wood, hair, grass, etc.,
when dry and coming in touch with some form of fire, will burn.
This event of burning may be conceived as a separate happening;
it may be designated by a word, and so become a concept. As such
it has the advantage of the concept in guiding and controlling sub-
sequent experience. However, it seems to be limited in the way
which I have mentioned. Its abstraction is abbreviated. The smol-
dering of the manure pile, the spontaneous firing of the hayrick,
slow combustion, the inability to get wet wood to burn, the smoth-
ering of the fire by casting earth over it, are incidents of common
experience, but they either are not associated with burning or else
are regarded as its limiting conditions. They do not raise questions
as to what is burning, as a distinct happening, and so do not reach
the point of modern scientific concern with oxidation and chemical
transformation. The happening of burning is not singled out as an
item for separate study and analysis. Of course, it is not to be ex-
pected that common sense would push abstraction to this point—
there is no need of it. The common-sense concepts are sufficient for
the crude demands of ordinary experience. Minor elements of in-
consistency within experiences and a fringe of uncertainty can be
ignored and are ignored. Hence experiences that might be produc-
tive of more refined abstractions do not arise as problems.

With such a background it is to be expected that “common
sense,” as the term strongly suggests, refers to what is sensed, in-
stead of to what is acutely analyzed. This seems to be true in the
case of common-sense concepts in much greater measure than in the
case of scientific concepts; they are more a matter of feeling than
of logical discernment. It seems that it is for this reason that an or-
dinary individual is puzzled when you ask him to define some com-
mon-sense term. He takes its meaning for granted; if pressed for
its meaning, he is likely to resort to denotation, to pointing to ob-
jects of what he has in mind. Such particularistic indication is, of
course, in no sense to be criticized. It does, however, show that the
individual does not have the elements of his conception clearly in
mind as separately comprehended items. This becomes apparent,
if, in the quizzing of the individual, you compel him to stick to con-
notation. The meaning that he will give is likely to be very indefi-
nite and vague, owing, as far as I can see, to the fact that he has not
made separate study or scrutiny of the abstracted happening cov-
ered by the common-sense concept. It is not, perhaps, unfair to say
that common-sense concepts are in the nature of stereotypes. Their
meaning is just taken for granted, their character just naturally
sensed. To question them is unthought of; indeed, to question them
is to evoke emotion. So different is this from the tentative character
of the scientific concept inside of the experimental field that it seems
unnecessary to prosecute further the distinction.

What I do wish to emphasize is that the scientist is preoccupied
with the relation covered by the scientific concept and because of
this reflective concern opportunity is had for greater knowledge of
this relation and so for the revision of the concept. When experi-
ment is pushed into new domains along the line of the concept, one
must expect to encounter new facts which, in turn, require a revi-
sion of conception and so of the content of the concept. Scientific
concepts have a career, changing their meaning from time to time
in accordance with the introduction of new experiences and replac-
ing one content with another. Common-sense concepts are more
static and more persistent with content unchanged. Since the ab-
straction covered by the common-sense concept is not made the
object of separate study and of experimental testing, there is little
occasion for the uncovering of new facts and so for the challenging
and revision of the concept.

There is another difference between common-sense concepts and
scientific concepts which strikes me as important. Common-sense
concepts are detached and disparate; scientific concepts show “a
strain toward consistency.” The abstraction embodied in a com-
mon-sense concept tends, I think, to have an absolutistic, independ-
ent existence; the abstractions within scientific concepts are always
being related to one another. It is no accident that concepts in a
given science hang together in a system, nor that by so doing they
make possible the structure of science. One needs only to think, for
a moment, in the history of mechanics of the concepts of motion,
mass, inertia, force, space, and time. These were interrelated and
linked together in a conceptual pattern which made possible and
guided experimentation and became the framework of the early
knowledge and laws of physics. It is in the coherence of concepts,
as I understand it, that one can get the meaning of the statement
that science is systematic knowledge.

I have a suspicion that many of those who decry concern with
concepts in science do not really wish to stop conception but are
opposed to the building-up of a conceptual framework or structure.
They urge us to cling closely to facts and confine ourselves to sepa-
rate, specific problems. I know of no notion more out of harmony
with the historic experience of science. To follow this program
would mean not to have a science. At the best, one would have a
series of discrete and separate studies, maintaining no organic con-
nection with one another, fructifying one another only by accident,
having but accidental strain toward consistency, and showing little
that progressive accumulation of knowledge that comes with the
organization and reorganization of experience. Some such picture
is presented, perhaps, in the work of technicians, politicians, and
statesmen, where concern is with immediate practical problems,
where each problem must be given immediate solution, and so es-
sentially separate treatment. Procedure is opportunistic, knowl-
edge unsystematized, and control uncertain. But this is not the
picture of science. Occasionally, to be sure, in the career of any
science there may arise a crop of technicians coincident with the
appearance of some new technique. With their technique as a tool
they may move from one situation to another without conceiving
these situations in terms of a larger framework and so without pene-
trating to or studying fundamental relations. They encounter gen-
erically the same problems, work in essentially the same fashion,
and yield but detached bits of information. Such individuals may
be called scientists because of academic affiliations; actually, they
are mere artisans using the technique as a tool to the fulfilment of
immediate ends. For mere purpose of illustration and without the
desire to make invidious distinction, I suggest that such is the condi-
tion today of many statisticians. I do not wish in any sense to im-
pute any inferiority in achievement to such individuals, but I would
say that their work and results are unorganized and unsystematic.
Unless marshaled and brought to bear on central conceptions or
concepts, they would never attain the character of science as we are
acquainted with it in historic experience.

The main points which I have made so far in this paper may be
given here in a few sentences. The scientific concept, as a way of
conceiving, enables one to circumvent problems of perceptual ex-
perience; the content of the scientific concept consists of an ab-
stracted relation which becomes the subject of separate and inten-
sive study; the concept, because of its verbal character, may be
shared, and so it permits concerted activity in scientific procedure;
scientific concepts in their interrelation make possible the structure
of science.

I propose now to look at the matter from a new angle and to con-
sider not so much what the concept permits but what it does in
science.

As I see it, the concept more specifically considered serves three
functions: (1) it introduces a new orientation or point of view;
(2) it serves as a tool, or as a means of transacting business with
one’s environment; (3) it makes possible deductive reasoning and
so the anticipation of new experience. Each of these three results
merits separate treatment.

It is not a lexicographical accident that conceiving carries a
double meaning: that of a way of looking at things and that of a
way of bringing things into existence. That a new concept repre-
sents a new way of approaching the world is a commonplace. This
is its intrinsic character. As an invention to fill a deficiency in per-
ceptual experience it contributes a novel and original orientation.
In the scientist’s concern with his problem this new orientation and
point of attack loom large. On one hand it permits him a flexibility
in his attack of his problem; on the other hand, it sensitizes his per-
ception and reveals the object in new aspect. Each of these two
effects is implied by the other, but each may be considered sepa-
rately. Those of you who have read any of the biographies of Pas-
teur will recall the new attack that he could make on his problems
with the developing concept of the infinitely small. “Seek the
microbe” was his proverb. The mysteries of fermentation, the silk-
worm disease, anthrax, septicemia, rabies, hydrophobia, and puer-
peral fever yielded to the approach made with the concept of the
infinitely small. These had puzzled people for years, had been
studied industriously, but had defied understanding and control.
A new approach made possible by a new conception brought them
to solution.

The réle of the concept in sensitizing perception and so in chang-
ing the perceptual world may be neatly illustrated with the experi-
ence of Darwin while on a geological trip through Wales in company
with the geologist Sedgwick. Bear in mind that this was before
Agassiz had advanced his idea or concept of glaciation. Darwin
tells us:

We spent many hours in Cwm Idwal, examining all the rocks with supreme
care, as Sedgwick was anxious to find fossils in them; but neither of us saw a
trace of the wonderful glacial phenomena all around us; we did not notice the
plainly scored rocks, the perched boulders, the lateral and terminal moraines.
Yet the phenomena are so conspicuous that, as I declared in a paper published
many years afterward in the Philosophical Magazine, a house burned down by
fire did not tell its story more plainly than did this valley. If it had been filled
by a glacier, the phenomena would have been less distinct than they are now.

This illustration is impressive in suggesting how conception may
sensitize perception and yield one a new realm of objects.

Earlier in this paper I declared that conception arises from per-
ception but flows back into it. The meaning of this remark is prob-
ably much clearer in the light of what I have just said. Through
conception objects may be perceived in new relations, which is
tantamount to saying that the perceptual world becomes reor-
ganized. It is well to bear in mind that in the process new problems
may arise, new techniques may appear, and new interpretations
may suggest themselves. An entire new field may open up; scienti-
fic energy may be released in new productive ways. As I see it, this
has been the experience of science on the adoption of a new orienta-
tion or, what is equivalent, on the adoption of a new conceptual
framework. A conspicuous case which may be given in illustration
is the origin of modern physics. The work of Galileo is usually
chosen, with good reason, as marking the change from the meta-
physical preoccupation of the medieval logicians to the scientific
endeavors of modern scientists. His work is significant not only
for the introduction of experimental technique but also for the de-
velopment of new concepts which became the basis for the new at-
tack of modern physics. These concepts are familiar. Mass, motion,
inertia, force, impenetrability, etc., came to take the place of the
concepts of the medieval logicians: essence, quality, substance,
potentiality, etc. They provided a new perspective; they opened
up a new field of endeavor. They raised new problems and sug-
gested new techniques; they sensitized perception to new relations
and guided it along new directions; they made experimentation pos-
sible, and ultimately they yielded new forms of control. A similar
picture, I suppose, is being presented in contemporary physics in
the new orientation and conceptual framework surrounding the
work in relativity and quantum relations.

To construe our own discipline from this point of view is not
without interest. I suspect that the milling and halting condition of
our own science does not come directly from the inadequacy of our
techniques, as almost everyone contends, but from the inadequacy
of our point of view. The effort to rescue the discipline by increas-
ing occupation with method and by the introduction of precision
devices is, I venture to suggest, working along the wrong direction.
Perhaps, like other sciences in the past, we await a conceptual
framework which will orientate our activities into productive chan-
nels.

Let me turn to the second specified function of the concept. The
expression, “Concept is a tool,” is probably the one that we hear
most. Its meaning should be clear in the light of what has been said
concerning the aid which conception gives to the release and com-
pletion of activity. This function defines the character of the con-
cept, for it means that it becomes instrumental to activity. The
conception, in filling the deficiency in perception, not only provides
new orientation and releases activity but directs such activity,
either effectively or ineffectively. The success of the activity to
which it gives rise becomes the test of the effectiveness of the con-
cept. The concept is thus bounded on one side by frustrated activ-
ity and on the other by consequences which arise from the activity
to which it gives direction. In so far as it lies in between these por-
tions of an act it has the characteristics of a tool. At first, like all
tools, it may be crude and may be used quite experimentally; later,
like perfected tools, it may become refined and its use quite stand-
ardized.

A few words about both of these stages—the initial trial stage
and the highly refined stage—will permit one to see more clearly
the instrumental character of the concept. In the first stage, the
concept represents merely a primitive conception applied to some
situation requiring solution or adjustment. It is in the nature of
a hypothesis; its value is suggested but unknown. It promises some
comprehension and control, and it is used on the basis of this prom-
ise. It may be unsuccessful in this promise, in which case some new
conception will perforce be adopted. In either event it represents a
mode of attack or a plan of approach to the situation. Its analogy
to the trial use of a primitive lever or ram should be apparent. In
being refined the concept functions none the less to aid activity,
but its function changes character somewhat. Its field of operations
becomes more definitely understood, its possibilities better gauged,
and the consequences of its use more secure. By applying this con-
cept to some new particular or, stated otherwise, by bringing some
new experience or situation inside of the domain of the concept, one
can deal with this particular or situation effectively, in known ways.
The physician called in to diagnose an illness seeks for symptoms
which will enable him to make as reliable a classification as possible.
If diagnosed as a disease or as a particular kind of disease, as ty-
phoid or malaria, by bringing the particular illness under the given
concept or, stated otherwise, by applying to the particular illness a
given concept, treatment may be made. One knows that certain
happenings are likely to be followed by others; that is, if certain
things are done, certain consequences will probably ensue. Thus
the knowledge of the use of the concept as gained in prior experience
serves instrumentally in the new situation.

With reference to the third function I may repeat that one signi-
ficant value of the concept lies in its possibility of deductive con-
sequence. The aid which the concept may give to the prosecution of
immediate inquiry is perhaps easily appreciated; its character as a
logical premise with deductive implications merits, perhaps, a little
elucidation. What I mean by this remark is that by reasoning from
the concept one may gain a new perspective and visualize problems
and procedures which transcend the immediate problems which
have given rise to the concept and in response to which it functions
as a tool. The most outstanding illustration we have of this pro-
jective character of the concept is the number system. The his-
torians of mathematics have made it clear that the early concepts
of number arose out of practical experience and were tied to it. Cer-
tain developments, which we need not consider here, permitted the
use of number concepts in other than a mere utilitarian way. De-
ductive consequences of number concepts were perceived, and the
implications of their alignment and interrelation with one another
have given rise to the huge complex structure of modern mathe-
matics, seemingly endless in growth. This growth has proceeded not
always in empirical but in logical fashion, and seemingly has raced
far ahead of experience. Thus formulas for numerical functions
have been worked out which may lie idle for decades before gain-
ing practical use. But if the structure of mathematics may grow
logically and not empirically, outdistancing actual experience, its
interesting feature is that it ties back so successfully into actual
experience. So clean cut has been this application to experience
and so productive of control that it has given rise recurrently to
views that the cosmos was numerical. Without doubt, all science on
its deductive side seeks to approximate the ideal character of mathe-
matics. Although no science has enjoyed more than partial success
in this effort, the attempt signifies an appreciation of the deductive
value of concepts.

So far in this paper I have stated what seems to me to be the
function of the concept in scientific procedure. My remarks, per-
haps, extol its virtues; one should not be oblivious, however, to its
sins. I feel that there is room for a brief statement of the improper
use of the concept.

As I see it, most of the improper usage of the concept in science
comes when the concept is set apart from the world of experience,
when it is divorced from the perception from which it has arisen
and into which it ordinarily ties. Detached from the experience
which brought it into existence, it is almost certain to become in-
definite and metaphysical. I have always admired a famous state-
ment of Kant which really defines the character of the concept and
indicates its limitations. Kant said brilliantly, “Perception without
conception is blind; conception without perception is empty.” Con-
cepts without a perceptual base are indeed insecure. Unfortunately,
in current thought we suffer a tradition descendant from ancient
Greek philosophy and medieval scholasticism which favors the
gaining of knowledge through elaboration of the concept. ‘The con-
cept is regarded as having intrinsic meaning, to be extracted by
proper cogitation. It is unnecessary, perhaps, to call attention to
the tenacity of this tradition in the social sciences. Each social
science has many protagonists or devotees who strive to attain
knowledge by “manufacturing it out of their heads.” They start
with an array of concepts which, while abstract, are abstruse, and
then proceed to erect a system by drawing out meaning from these
concepts. The result is a pompous and formal structure which,
however, is as hollow as an empty shell. The fault in their systems
lies in the fact that the original concepts were mere constructs, un-
grounded or tested in empirical experience. Because of their orig-
inal irrelevance to experience or activity it is not surprising that
whatever meaning is drawn deductively from them is a mere gos-
samer, of no value for the understanding and control of the actual
world. The difficulty seems to be due to a failure to recognize that
the function of the concept is to bridge perplexed perception and to
release and guide behavior inside of this perceptual field. To be
valuable it must tie back into the activity, the break in which
brought it into existence. It must be kept in relation to facts, its
character tested by these and other facts, and its significance gauged
in terms of its instrumental possibilities with reference to these
facts. To treat the concept as an archetype instead of an imple-
ment, or to devise a concept which does not embody a plan of action
with reference to certain facts, is to run counter to the procedure
of modern science. Possibly such usage is not improper or unpro-
ductive in metaphysics; in science it is stultifying.

Not less abominable than this tendency to treat concepts apart
from the demands and tests of specific kinds of facts is the tendency
to manufacture them with reckless abandon, with no concern as to
whether there is need for them. The charge has been made against
sociology that it has the greatest number of concepts and the least
knowledge. I hope never to be chosen to deny this charge and to
prove the opposite. I suspect that this steady production of new
concepts arises from the effort to pose as scientific and to be judged
profound and learned. It is a common experience which I, at least,
have in reading our literature to find the author taking what is
already understood in simple language and translating it into more
recondite terminology. This may satisfy a pretension to be scien-
tific, but it in no sense constitutes a scientific procedure.

Another faulty use of the concept is to apply it as a label to an
object of study and to believe that such labeling constitutes ex-
planation and terminates the study. This vice—I call it such—is
widely practiced in contemporary social science by both those who
advocate concepts and those who inveigh against their use. Unless
one comes to know something about the object that was not known
before, there is no value in labeling it or putting it in a certain con-
ceptual category. Much conceptual usage is mere labeling without
yielding anything but the label. In the second place, to direct a
series of conceptions toward an object, as one does when one ap-
plies a concept to it, is merely to orientate one’s self for further
action. To stop at this point is to miss again the instrumental char-
acter of the concept. One gets no control over the object, nor does
one test out the concept as an instrument. On one hand, one does
not know how much or how little the object is amenable to the use
of the concept, nor how effective or ineffective is the concept as an
aid to understanding or control. Such an approach is to remain on
uncertain terms with one’s environment and to block improvement
in the instrumental character of the concept.

To treat a scientific concept in a loose, common-sense way strikes
me as another sin. By this I mean to sense its content instead of to
comprehend it; to be unable or unwilling to specify its character
instead of being aware of its operational application. I had occa-
sion before to distinguish between scientific and common-sense use
of concepts; I might have added at that time that the latter form
is not at all rare in‘science. Some workers in the field of science
accept their concepts as ultimates, take their meaning for granted,
and resent their questioning as foolish theorizing or personal attack.
This attitude, by the way, seems to be more conspicuous of those
who decry the use of concepts than of those guilty of over-indul-
gence. Because the former shun conceptual preoccupation they are
unlikely to examine critically their own concepts, which, of course,
they inevitably possess and use. Such naive, uncritical acceptance
leads to dogmatism and vitiates much thought and work. One
might illustrate, perhaps, with the concepts of the subjective and
objective. I know of few terms within the field of science used
more lazily and emotionally than these. In almost every paper or
discussion on method one will find them employed with abandon,
and used, ultimately, as terms of reproach or approbation. It seems
to me that these concepts in typical common-sense usage are taking
on the form of stereotypes. I do not believe that their use in this
fashion is of much aid to the logical discernment needed in scientific
discourse.

What I would declare, then, is that to use concepts in science as
natural ultimates instead of tentative convenient conceptions, or
to be uncritical or unreflective as to their import, is not likely to
lead to genuine understanding and control. Few things are more
irritating than to read a piece of research conforming most strin-
gently to accredited techniques and abounding in numbers, or units,
or elements, only to discover outstanding sloppiness in conceptual
usage. Others may be impressed by the proficiency in the use of
technique, or by the clean-cut numerical relations between units,
but I only regret our stereotyped methodological notions which
permit and encourage students to play with mental toys in the
belief that the manipulation of these empty terms constitute sci-
ence.

Let us recognize the instrumental character of the concept inside
of the field of science. By accepting it in this character and using
it critically perhaps we can avoid being mere bookkeepers of facts
or spinners of metaphysics.
