Social Mobility and Social Distance Among Hungarian Immigrants in Detroit
Author(s): Erdmann Doane Beynon

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 41, No. 4 (Tan., 1936), pp. 423-434
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2768953

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:51 UTC
ABSTRACT

Hungarian immigrants in Detroit may be divided into two principal classes, based
upon the social stratification of Hungary. To the one class belong the members of the
intelligentsia, who are relatively few in number owing to the selective character of the
migration. To the other class belong both skilled and unskilled laborers and tradesmen.
Members of the intelligentsia who cannot maintain their former occupations or any of
commensurate status tend to sever all connection with their fellow-countrymen.
Another group consists of those members of the intelligentsia who have been able to
maintain their occupational status through the protection of the foreign-language
colony. A third group is made up of those who have been able to maintain, or improve,
their status outside the Hungarian colony. Among these successful members of the
Hungarian intelligentsia there develop hostile attitudes accentuating the class prejudice
toward Hungarians of lower status, while at the same time an effort is made to gain
acceptance among the socially élite of the American group. Hungarian immigrant
society is thus deprived of the leadership of its successful members.

The social relationships of the Hungarian immigrants in Detroit
may be considered from the viewpoint of the following types of asso-
ciation: that of persons, that of classes, and that of national groups.
In order that the social distance involved in each of these types of
association entered by immigrants in an American urban community
may be understood, it is necessary to investigate the social stratifica-
tion prevailing in the country from which these immigrants have
come.

Prior to the War of Independence in 1848, Hungary’s social strati-

1 This study is based upon 100 interviews with Hungarian immigrants in Detroit of
the occupational and social classes dealt with.

423
fication was very rigid. The two great classes were the nobles and

the non-nobles. The prerogatives of the nobility? were guaranteed

by a law’ which made no distinction in their constitutional rights.

Custom, however, established marked gradations among the three

principal classes of nobles:

1. The magnates—fourak—titled families corresponding to the English peerage.

2. The untitled nobles—kéznemesek—corresponding to the English gentry.

3. The “one house” nobles—kurta nemesek or bocskoros nemesekt—men who
possessed the hereditary rights of nobility, but who in every other respect—
in property, education, and manners—were little above the peasant.

At the time of Paget’s visit the total number of the members of
the three grades of nobility amounted to about half a million, out of
a total population in the country of about ten millions. The remain-
ing nine and a half millions were compelled to provide taxes for the
state, rent for the noble landlords, and a livelihood for themselves.
Article IX of the Hungarian Reform Bill of 1848 abolished at once
the robot, or forced labor of the peasants for the landlords, and all
forced dues, whether in money or in kind.5 This abolition of serfdom
changed the stratification of Hungarian society from a hereditary to
a functional basis, although the latter has its roots in the hereditary
stratification of the past. Hungarian society of today may be divided
into four principal classes, each of which has several subclasses:

1. Peasant agriculturalists and urban laborers
2. “Specialists in trade and industry”

3. The intelligentsia
4. The land-owning aristocracy

The contribution made by the titled aristocracy of Hungary to
American immigration has been negligible since the period immedi-
ately following the Hungarian War of Independence, because virtu-
ally all immigrants belong to the first three classes. Problems of social

2 John Paget, Hungary and Transylvania (London, 1839), I, 398-421, lists these
prerogatives: the person of the noble was inviolable; he was subject to no one but his
legally crowned king; he alone might hold landed property; he was subject to neither
tithe, tax, nor toll.

3 The Bulla Aurea, signed by Andrew II, in 1222.

4L.e., short, or sandaled nobles. They were also called félsarkantyus, or half-spurred
nobles.

s Arthur J. Patterson, The Magyars (London, 1869), I, 318-35.
mobility and social distance among Hungarian immigrants are con-
cerned almost entirely with the relationship between the intelligent-
sia and the members of the first and second classes.

Specialists in trade and industry and members of the intelligentsia
are superficially rather sharply differentiated. Social barriers, how-
ever, exert an influence and confuse the apparently simple occupa-
tional differentiation. An illustration of this is furnished by the
difficulty encountered in making an occupational survey of a Hun-
garian county.® In this survey, agriculturists and unskilled labor-
ers, on the one hand, and members of the landed aristocracy, on the
other, were not listed. In the two classes dealt with, there was no
confusion in regard to certain occupations; thus barbers, butchers,
inn-keepers, carpenters, cabinet-makers were always treated as
“specialists in trade and industry,” while clergymen, school-teach-
ers, village clerks were always listed as belonging to the intelligent-
sia. Confusion arose, however, when an attempt was made to classi-
fy mill-proprietors, druggists, alcohol distillers, lawyers, and veter-
inaries. The commune of Egercsehi even reported its sole physician
as a “specialist in trade and industry,” rather than as a professional
man. In this particular case the physician seems to have lost status
in the local community. The report from the large commune of
Hatvan listed one of its two veterinaries as a “‘specialist in trade and
industry” and the other as a member of the intelligentsia. Of nine
lawyers in Hatvan, one was given the lower status and eight were
listed as professional men. The explanation of this confusion seems
to be that certain occupational groups, such as lawyers and veteri-
naries, were considered to occupy a marginal position between the
two classifications.”

Members of the Hungarian intelligentsia form a social as well as
an occupational class. Persons belonging to the uri osztdly (the
gentry), are included in this class, while persons whose social status
is of the 2ép (the people), i.e., the common people, are classified as
“specialists in trade and industry,” if they are not engaged in the

6 Hevesmegyei Compass az 1923 Eure (published by the Eger Press for the Business
Men’s Association of Eger, Heves Co., Hungary).

7 Robert Redfield, Tepoztlén (Chicago, 1930), pp. 148-55, points out a similar classi-
fication—between los correctos and los tontos—in Mexican villages.
basic economic occupations. There is a very keen class conscious-
ness among virtually all members of this occupational and social
class. They feel themselves marked off from the aristocracy on the
one hand and from the lower classes on the other. The historical rea-
son for this social distance is the fact that a large proportion of the
members of the old kéznemes, or squire class, entered and still enter
professional and public service occupations. The old dividing line
between non-noble and noble seems now to be placed between the
“specialists in trade and industry” and the intelligentsia.

A compilation of the statistics of the City of Budapest for March
I, 1928,® assigns 77,478 persons to the class of the intelligentsia.®
This class thus constituted 15.64 per cent of all gainfully employed
persons in Budapest at that time. The selective character of the
Hungarian migration to America is shown by the greatly reduced
proportion of members of this class among immigrant groups. Out
of a sample of 805 Hungarian immigrants in Detroit who had been
employed prior to emigration from Hungary, only 36, or 4.47 per
cent, had been members of the intelligentsia.

Three principal types of occupational adjustment may be found
among the immigrant Hungarian intelligentsia settled in Detroit:

1. Those persons who have been unable, after migration, to main-
tain themselves in their old occupations or in occupations of similar
status. Of the 36 members of the Hungarian intelligentsia in the
foregoing sample, 14 were found to be engaged in occupations con-
sidered to be of lower status. A former university professor had be-
come a cleaner and dyer. Another intellectual had become a peddler.
Unskilled factory labor had become the occupation of 11.1 per cent
of all the immigrant intelligentsia. The protection afforded by the
foreign-language colony is limited. Only a comparatively small num-
ber of immigrant intellectuals can find for themselves a satisfactory

8 Known in Hungarian as szellemi foglalkozdsuak, which is translated in Yolland’s
Hungarian-English Dictionary as “brain-workers” and which includes a wider range
of occupations than the combined categories of professional, public service, and clerical
occupations of the United States census.

9 Illyefalvi I. Lajos, Budapest Székesfovdros Statistikai és Kozigazgatdsi Rukinyve
(1930), pp. 59, 696. The total number of gainfully employed persons in Budapest in
1928 was 495,145.
occupational niche within the colony. Those who cannot in any way
capitalize their previous occupational experience tend to move away
entirely from their fellow-countrymen. Feeling keenly their loss of
status, they settle among persons of other nationalities who know
nothing of their past. This spatial removal from the colony is fre-
quently accompanied by a change of name. There is a more or less
complete severance of all contacts with persons of their own nation-
ality.

2. Those persons who have been able, after migration, to maintain
their occupational status through the protection of the foreign-
language colony. Although this group represents a wide variety of
occupational adjustments, still in all cases there is found the common
factor of protection afforded to immigrant intellectuals through sym-
biotic relationship with the laborers and tradesmen of their own
nationality resident in the foreign-language colony. Some of these
intellectuals, especially physicians, have been able to continue in
America the occupation which was theirs prior to migration, but for
some reason have not been able to enter into competition with
American professional men in American neighborhoods. In most
cases, however, Hungarian intellectuals settled in the colony have
maintained their status through entering certain new and sheltered
occupations provided by the colony or else through the parasitical
exploitation of the laborers and tradesmen. Hungarian newspapers,
steamship offices, private banks, real estate offices, and insurance
agencies, all offer or have offered an occupational shelter. A number
of those who can find no niche among the legitimate occupations
earn their living through direct exploitation of the despised “dumb
laborers” to whom factory jobs may be sold.

In almost all cases the intellectuals of the foreign-language colony
confess themselves to be disappointed and disillusioned. One Hun-
garian professional man who had been able to maintain his old occu-
pation gave the following statement:

When I came to America, I hoped that I could enter American professional
circles. I haven’t yet made the grade. So I have to stay here among these
laborers of Delray. I don’t have the money to associate with the people I want
to meet, but the people around here are too dumb for me to associate with. So
I don’t associate with anyone at present.
This man’s use of the English language, influenced by long associ-
ation with Hungarian laborers in the colony, was probably a signifi-
cant factor in preventing his acceptance in American professional
circles.

3. Those persons whose occupational “success” after migration
has removed them out of social contact with the Hungarian immi-
grant group. These “successful” persons are very few in number and
are spatially removed from the foreign-language colony and from
each other. They are found sporadically in districts peopled by
Americans of high economic status. They speak English, usually
with scarcely any “foreign accent.” Their social, as well as their
spatial, contacts are entirely with well-to-do Americans, with whom
they have intermarried in a number of cases.

These “successful” immigrants are almost always engaged in one
or other of the following occupations—engineer, physician, artist,
and musician.?? They have brought with them to America some
type of occupational training which is readily adapted to the occu-
pational needs of the American people among whom they tend to
settle. It is true that some Hungarian physicians have been forced
to seek the protection afforded by the colony. The need of such pro-
tection indicates “defeat,” caused by lack of skill, inability to over-
come language difficulties, or some other cause. The successful Hun-
garian physician in Detroit seeks an American, rather than a Hun-
garian, clientéle.

Owing to some peculiar skill or ability, these “successful” Hun-
garian intellectuals have been able to compete with Americans.
Their success has created an extreme social distance between them-
selves and the Hungarian laborers. The changed conditions accom-
panying migration to America have intensified the social distance
which prevailed in the society of Hungary between intellectual and
laborer and which was based upon the old division between nobles
and serfs. The successful Hungarian engineer in Detroit is much far-
ther removed socially from the Hungarian laborer than he would
have been had both remained in Budapest.

%0 This has reference only to those musicians who belonged to the intelligentsia.

Gypsy musicians, as well as members of peasant “bands,” have a status even lower
than that of the laborers for whose entertainment they play.
A Hungarian resident of Grosse Pointe, Detroit’s “Gold Coast,”
described his situation as follows:

I was a first lieutenant in the Royal Hungarian Army. I was also a graduate
of the Royal Academy of Music in Budapest. I came to America twelve years
ago. I always emphasize the fact that I am a Hungarian. I am proud of my
race. When I first came to Detroit, I sought out the Delray settlement, for I
wanted to meet Hungarians in America. After three days I was entirely cured.
I saw that I didn’t belong out there, and I had to move away. I was looking for
people of the same standing as I had myself. I wanted to meet people of my
own social level. The Hungarian laborer is of a lower level. At present I live in
a different world from that of the Hungarian laborers. I have nothing in com-
mon with them. It would be difficult for me even to come into contact with
these Hungarians, since the social situation separates us so widely.

The director of the research laboratory of one of the automobile
companies made the following statement:

I was a graduate engineer in Hungary. When I came to America, I tried to
avoid Hungarian colonies in order to learn the English language more quickly.
It was purely for economic reasons that I chose to mingle only with Americans.
Otherwise I would have started in unskilled labor at the bottom. After a few
weeks’ study in an English class, I mastered the language well enough to secure
a job as a draughtsman and tool designer. After I settled in Detroit, I once
thought that I would like to meet some other Hungarians. I went to a Hun-
garian restaurant once and met some laborers there. I never went back.

Another Hungarian engineer holding a prominent position in an
automobile factory appeared to know almost nothing about his
fellow-countrymen in America:

My family belonged to the kéznemesség—the squire class—in Hungary. I
had graduated as an engineer before I came to America fourteen years ago. I
had an English governess when I was a child, so I was able to speak English
well after I had been in America four weeks. Before I left Europe I had heard that
many Hungarians live in Detroit, Cleveland, and other American cities, but I
have never heard a single word about the Hungarian people living here since
I came to Detroit. My wife belongs to the Junior League, and I do not think
that the set we associate with is apt to have any contacts with these Hungarian
laborers. Since I came to America, I have met only three Hungarians, one
engineer and two doctors. Yet they were only casual acquaintances. All my
intimate friends are Americans.

In a few cases the attitude of the successful engineer toward the
Hungarian laborer has changed from neutrality to active hostility, as
a result of personality clashes arising out of social contacts in an
American city. The two following statements were made by chief
engineers of automobile factories:

My family received its patent of nobility at the time of the Crusades. I
studied engineering in Berlin, since that had become a fashionable hobby with
young men of the Hungarian aristocracy twenty years ago. As a result of a
quarrel with my dad, I left home and came to America. I was so angry that I
resolved to earn my own living and shame my noble family. I had been in
America only a month when I secured a job as an engineer and I have been an
engineer ever since. I suppose I have made money enough here to buy out my
father’s estate if I wanted to. I belong to the Detroit Yacht Club and enjoy
very much the associations I have made with my fellow-members. I became
aware of these Hunkies of Delray a few years ago, as a result of labor trouble in
one of our plants. You surely would not expect me to associate with such people
as they are. I don’t want to have anything to do with them. Indeed, if I should
happen to be in the employment office when two laborers, one a Hunkie and
the other a man of some other nationality, applied for a job, I would say to our
employment manager: “Don’t give the job to that Hunkie. Give it to the other
man.” I don’t want Hunkies hired at this plant while I am here. They will do
me dirt every time.

If you have called to ask me about my connections with the Hungarian la-
borers of Detroit, I think you must want to insult me. Iam an American. Why
should it be cast up to me after twenty years that I came from Hungary? My
family were gentlemen in Hungary, not half-starved laborers, like these people
in Delray. I once felt sorry for the Hungarian laborers, because they came from
the same country that I did. I helped a few of them to get work in our factory.
The rascals thought that I was on the same level that they were. They tried
to climb up by making use of their acquaintance with me. That settled mat-
ters. No more of them for me! They are not my people any more, and I do not
want to hear about them.

The Hungarian intellectuals themselves are keenly aware of the
social distance which separates them from the workers and trades-
men of their own nationality, and offer many explanations for this
phenomenon.

The relatively small size of the Hungarian population in Detroit is
held to be a significant factor. Its lack of political importance, how-
ever, is due to the absence of cohesion under competent leadership in
addition to its numerical weakness.* The Hungarian group in De-

In sharp contrast with Polish political successes, the efforts made by Hunga-
rian candidates at virtually every city and county primary election have failed. In
1930, the total Hungarian population of Detroit was 22,311, or 1.42 per cent of the
total population of the city. The Hungarian candidate for county auditor at the
Democratic primary election, March 4, 1935, received only 697 votes in the city of
troit is not important culturally. Only a relatively few professional
men have been able to find niches within the colony. Consequently,
there is no large group of Hungarian intellectuals among whom the
spatially scattered “successful” engineers, physicians, and others
might find persons of like interests.

Since there is no color line to differentiate the Hungarian from the
native-born American, the “successful” Hungarian passes over easily
into the American group. He finds that Americans of his own eco-
nomic and social class are more like-minded than are the poorer
members of his own nationality. Whenever a “successful” Hun-
garian marries an American wife, this intermarriage hastens the proc-
ess of the husband’s complete assimilation in the American group
with which he has identified himself.” In some cases the Hungarian
language itself is almost completely forgotten.

Class prejudice carried over from Europe has had much to do with
the antagonism between highly placed Hungarian engineers in the
automobile industry and the mass of Hungarian laborers.3 Hun-
garians who are in the employer or managerial classes almost never
rose from the ranks of labor. They came to America as graduate
engineers. Some of them were members of the landed gentry of Hun-
gary. The suppressed hatred of the peasantry toward the aristocracy
flames out in America. The Hungarian laborer may fawn upon the
Hungarian engineer at the automobile factory, but he would gladly
harm his benefactor, if he had the opportunity. Many cases of overt
hostility shown by Hungarian laborers in Detroit toward wealthy
Hungarians have led to a defense attitude on the part of the Hun-
garians of higher economic status. Realizing that the Hungarian

Detroit; of this number, 531 votes were received in Wards 18 and 20, which include the
greater part of the Hungarian popularion. The Hungarian candidate at the primary
election for judge of Recorder’s Court, Traffic and Ordinance Division, 1935, received
a total of 3,976 votes, of which number only 1,577 votes were secured in the wards to
which the Detroit Hungarian colony belongs. Thus, more than 60 per cent of the votes
given to this candidate were polled in wards having scarcely any Hungarian voters.
The candidate’s friendship with a former governor of the state and support from that
source possibly accounted for this non-Hungarian vote. At this election the lowest
candidate securing nomination received 14,376 votes, or 3.6 times the number given to
the Hungarian candidate.

™ Suggested by Mrs. Eugene Farkas, the American-born wife of the Hungarian
engineer who is director of the Dearborn Laboratory of the Ford Motor Company.

13 Suggested by Palos Erné, editor of the Detroiti Magyarsdg.
laborers hate them and desire to injure them, they protect themselves
by avoiding all contact with the laborers of their own nationality.

Well-to-do Hungarians in Detroit claim that they realize that any
social contact they might have with the laborers would be exploited
by the latter as an opportunity for the solicitation of money or favors.

In Hungary the peasant is always trying to get something from his feudal
lord. So here in Detroit the Hungarian laborer always fawns on us for a pur-
pose. He wants to get something out of us."

The pettiness of the Hungarian laborer and tradesman is “dis-
gusting” to the “successful” intellectuals. This is probably a factor
of general significance in determining social distance between well-
to-do American and poor immigrant groups.

These poor Hunkies are more concerned with five-cent pieces than we are
with thousands of dollars. Their eyes are so fixed on cheating each other out of
a penny once in a while that they lose their chances to get rich."

Although the “successful” Hungarian is able to pass over easily
into the American group, he is not satisfied with any lesser goal than
acceptance by the socially élite. Life for him has become a struggle
to gain social status. Every other value appears inferior to this. He
wants to have his name listed in the Social Secretary and know that
he has “arrived.” In spite of their ambitious efforts, however, well-
to-do Hungarians in Detroit have not yet achieved marked success
in their “social climbing.” There is a wide margin between the status
they seek and the status which is granted to them by consent of
Detroit’s society leaders. A “successful” Hungarian frequently
boasts: “I know practically everyone who matters in Grosse Pointe.”
Yet closer questioning reveals that only a few persons of actual social
status, and those only who are noted for their Bohemian tendencies,
are willing to accept the hospitality of the ambitious Hungarian. A
Hungarian woman of this group remarked, naming a well-known
post-debutante: “She is my warmest friend. We are always to-
gether.” The post-debutante, however, said icily: “Yes, I have met
this woman you speak of.” Acquaintances of a noted Hungarian
painter spoke thus of his struggles: “At last he has been accepted by
Bloomfield Hills society, but he has not yet made the grade of

™4 Statement by Stephen de Orlow, one of the most successful Hungarian engineers
and inventors in Detroit.

35 Statement by a Hungarian engineer.
Grosse Pointe society.” In their eagerness to gain social status,
some of the Hungarian intellectuals adopt methods which actually
bar them from acceptance by socially prominent American families."

Those Hungarians of the second immigrant generation who be-
come lawyers, doctors, or dentists, or enter other professions, usually
are the children of working-class families. They have been educated
out of their own class, but have not been accepted socially by classes
of higher status. Hence they remain marginal men.

My father was a laborer, but I studied law. I have been admitted to the bar.
I sought without success to be nominated for state representative on the Demo-
cratic ticket. At any rate the nomination petitions gave me a lot of advertising.
I don’t know anything about the Hungarian doctors and engineers who came
from Europe. I never have any contact with them. Those who were lawyers in
Europe have to get some other profession after they come to America, because
Hungarian law is so different from American. All the Hungarian lawyers in
Detroit are like me, sons of laborers. Yet I don’t like to associate with laborers
very much, for I am a lawyer. So my closest friends are other lawyers who have
the same kind of difficulty that I have. I have two partners—one is Italian and
the other Belgian. Both of them are sons of laborers.?7

The ascent of the sons of immigrant Hungarian laborers into the
professions does not diminish the social distance which exists be-
tween these persons and the “successful” members of the old Hun-
garian intelligentsia. In the opinion of the latter, the former still
remain members of the lower class because their fathers were such.
Hence such persons become marginal men in the Hungarian group,
but tend to form associations with persons of similar marginal status
outside their own group.

The “successful” Hungarian intellectuals have secured a status so
far above that of the remainder of the Hungarian immigrants that
there is virtually no contact between these groups. The social dis-
tance is so extensive that possible leaders are removed too far from
possible followers.* To a large extent, Hungarian engineers and

16 This is illustrated by the circular issued by the Salle de Tuscan: “We have rented
an ivy-clad castle on East Jefferson Avenue and are transforming this new home into a
salon, a social and cultural organization whose privileges and activities will be re-
stricted to a small, specially invited group and their immediate friends: at no time will
it be open to the general public: a limited number of club members may reside here.”

37 Statement by a second-generation Hungarian lawyer, who recently had his
Hungarian surname changed to an Irish one, “to help in politics.”

38 E. S. Bogardus, “Leadership and Social Distance,” Sociology and Social Research,
November, 1927, pp. 173-78.
other “successful” persons have become members of American,
rather than of Hungarian-American, society.

The leadership of the Hungarian group in Detroit has consequent-
ly fallen largely to two classes: the less successful members of the
immigrant Hungarian intelligentsia who have been able to maintain
their status through the protection of the foreign-language colony,
and those marginal persons of the second generation whose educa-
tion and professional career have elevated them above the social
status of their parents but have failed to reduce the social distance
existing between them and the members of the old Hungarian intel-
ligentsia.

Of the various types of association upon which social distance is
based, that between classes rather than that between persons or be-
tween national groups has greatest significance among Hungarian
immigrants in Detroit. Immigration to America has increased the
social distance between classes among those persons who have come
from the highly stratified society of Hungary. Persons belonging to
the upper social and economic strata of Hungary find that there is
relatively little difference in culture between themselves and the
members of the corresponding American classes. In the case of im-
migrants of lower social and economic strata a considerably greater
difference in culture separates them from the Americans of compa-
rable status. In the former case assimilation takes place so readily
that nationality consciousness has had no opportunity to develop.
In the case of the laborers and tradesmen, however, the cultural dif-
ferences between Hungarian immigrants and Americans of like
status lead to hostile attitudes and the development of social dis-
tance based upon nationality consciousness. The successful mem-
bers of the Hungarian immigrant intelligentsia, on the contrary, pass
over so completely into American society that they tend to look at
the immigrant worker of their own national group from the Ameri-
can viewpoint.

University OF MICHIGAN

19 This growing social distance between different classes of the same national group
after immigration is paralleled by that between the parents and children in the same
immigrant home. The immigrant child, adopting the American viewpoint, says: “I

grew apart from my parents.” Cf. E. S. Bogardus, “Social Intimacy and Social Dis-
tance,” ibid., XIII, 172.
