The Concept "Social Forces” in American Sociology. Section V. The "Interest" Concept
Author(s): Floyd N. House

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Tan., 1926), pp. 507-512
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2764747

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:35 UTC
We have embodied in numerous passages in other sections of
this paper discussions of Small’s attitude on the social forces ques-
tion, together with quotations displaying his point of view. We
have also quoted classifications of social forces by Blackmar and
Gillin* and Ellwood’ which make use of the interest concept; it
will not be necessary to repeat them here. We have also quoted a
passage from Ross’ Moot Points in Sociology,’ which embodies a
classification of what he called “interests,” but without any par-
ticular emphasis upon the term. Ross had published this article
in the American Journal of Sociology before Small’s General So-
ciology appeared in print. Small contends, however, that he was
not influenced in his use of the interest concept by any other writer
except Ratzenhofer, and an examination of Small’s summary of
Ratzenhofer’s presentation of “interests,” in General Sociology,
will convince anyone that he took the suggestion he received from
Ratzenhofer and manufactured something quite different out of

1A. J.S., November, 1925.

* Ibid., XXXI (September, 1925), 169. * Ibid., p. 166.

507
it. Extended deliberation over the precise assignment of credit
which should be made to each of several writers in connection with
a particular idea is indeed a futile occupation for the historians of
a science, and we may, without further preliminaries, proceed to
devote one section of the present paper to the examination of the
interests concept, taking Small’s presentation in General Sociology
as the principal exhibit. It is the impression of the present writer,
based on his general reading in the literature of sociology and
related fields, that it is especially Small’s formulation of the inter-
est concept which has given to that concept the considerable pres-
tige which it now enjoys, not only with academic sociologists, but
with social workers and others.*

It has been possible to select a series of passages from General
Sociology which set forth Small’s conception of “interests” so
clearly that comment by the present writer is largely superfluous.
We therefore reproduce these passages with very little comment.
It should be stated by way of preface, however, that Professor
Small gives the fullest credit, in his General Sociology and in other
writings, to Ratzenhofer for the general concept “interests” as a
tool of sociological analysis and explanation. Just where the ideas
furnished by Ratzenhofer leave off, and where Small’s own de-
velopments of the interest concept begin, would require a close and
extended comparison of the writings of the two men to determine.
The writer has not made such a comparison, but it may be re-
marked that Small has laid before us the most important data for
such a study in his General Sociology. In any case it appears to be
from the parts of General Soviology which are epitomized in the
following paragraphs that the term “interests” found its way into
familiar use among American sociologists.

One does not observe any type of man long without beginning to suspect
that one may find in it every other type of man more or less disguised. One

gets hold of the idea that all of these men are alike; that the one is doing
what all are doing, and that all are doing what the one is doing. We get the

* See, for example, the extended passage in Southard and Jarrett, The Kingdom
of Evils, pp. 402-6, in which the authors express their approval of Small’s definition
and use of the interests concept.
notion that, if we could look below the surface of these. lives in turn, we should
find that the conduct which on the surface seems so unlike and unrelated is
really the same essential activity, with variations to be accounted for after
slight attention to the surroundings in which they occur.®

All men, . . . . from the most savage to the most highly civilized, act as
they do act, first, because of variations in the circumstances of their environ-
ment, both physical and social; second, because of variations and permutations
of their six elementary interests. I name these, for convenience, health, wealth,
sociability,® knowledge, beauty, and rightness.

Of course, this analysis of human interests is from the standpoint of the
observer, not of the actor. Real human beings are not such prigs as to start
saying: “Go to now. I propose to secure health, wealth, sociability, knowl-
edge, beauty, and rightness.” It is only the rare individual, even in relatively
advanced society, whose powers of abstraction are so developed that he can
say: “I want food.” Most men know simply that they are hungry and want
the particular food that will satisfy today’s cravings; or they want work, be-
cause its wage will buy today’s dinner. Still less do men want the other groups
of interests, but all men act for reasons which the few reflective men may trace
back to combinations of motives conveniently classified in our six groups. The
precise type and balance of motive is a distinct problem in each social situ-
ation.”

The above sixfold classification seems to have been original
with Small, and he has apparently developed it as a logical gen-
eralization from which Ratzenhofer’s more concrete categories of
“interests,” which are the ones he uses in the second passage we
shall quote below, could be derived. The following transitional
reasoning is also apparently Small’s own:

Two general propositions are pertinent with reference to the whole sub-
ject of the differentiation of interests within the state:

1. The various institutions, political, ecclesiastical, professional, industri-
al, etc., including the government, are devices, means, gradually brought into
existence to serve interests that develop within the state.

2. Each of these devices, and even their accidental variations and sub-
ordinate parts, are likely to be transformed, in the minds of the persons who
get their status in society by working with them, into ends, to be cherished and
defended and perpetuated on their own account.®

° Op. cit., pp. 178-79.

*In later years Small substituted the term “prestige” to stand for the content
of this interest.

* Loc. cit., 197-98.
® Tbid., 233-34. Italics supplied by the writer.
TYPICAL INTERESTS WITHIN STATES

A. The universal interest ; sustenance
B. The kinship interest
C. The national interest
D. The creedal interests
F. The class interests
1. Extraction

. Artisanship
. Manufacture
. Wage labor
Trade
. Professional and personal service
. Parasitism
. The pseudo-classes

a) Massed capital

b) Capital

c) Massed industry

d) Massed agriculture
G. The rank interests
H. The corporate interests®

The passages from General Sociology which we have taken
above would perhaps serve to present the essence of Small’s con-
ception of the “interests.” A few other quotations, however, will
be useful to show more clearly the meaning which he attaches to
the concept.

The latest word in sociology is that human experience yields the most and
the deepest meaning when read from first to last in terms of the evolution, ex-
pression, and accommodation of interests.1°

The social process is a drama of human endeavors to express the whole
gamut of interests, while every effort toward expression tends incessantly to
impart to each new interest a new variant force.

OCI ANRwWDN

° This list is Ratzenhofer’s, loc. cit., pp. 251-55. Cf. loc. cit., p. 393.
® Ibid., p. 282. * Tbid., p. 284.
Without pushing the analysis too far, and without resting any theory upon
the analogy with the atom of physical theory, it is necessary to find some
starting-place from which to trace up the composition of sentient beings, just
as the physicists assumed they found their starting-place in the atom. The
notion of interests is accordingly serving the same purpose in sociology which
the notion of atoms has served in physical science. Interests are the stuff that
men are made of. More accurately expressed, the last elements to which we
can reduce the actions of human beings are units which we may conveniently
name “interests.” It is merely inverting the mode of expression to say: In-
terests are the simplest modes of motion which we can trace in the conduct of
human beings.1#

In general, an interest is an unsatisfied capacity, corresponding to an un-
realized condition, and it is predisposition to such rearrangement as would tend
to realize the indicated condition. Human needs and human wants are inci-
dents in the series of events between the latent existence of human interests
and the achievement of partial satisfaction. Human interests, then, are the
ultimate terms of calculation in sociology. The whole life-process, so far as we
know it, whether viewed in its individual or in its social phase, is at last the
process of developing, adjusting, and satisfying interests.1®

It is the essence of the findings brought together in the present
paper that the term “interests” and the concept for which it stands
in the work of Small are still at the time of writing involved in a
process of competition with several alternative schemes of classi-
fication of fundamental human motives or “social forces,” and that
it does not yet appear which terms or which conceptions will finally
survive and become a part of the generally accepted equipment of
sociological science. What is probably most likely is that several
of these terms, with corresponding conceptions for which they
stand, will survive side by side and come to be used for slightly
different kinds of analysis. Be that as it may, it is certainly true
that the interest concept as worked out by Small shares with the
desires concept of Ward—in practical independence of which the
former was formulated—the honor of having introduced into the
current of sociological thought the perception that some list of
universal classes of human motives or behavior tendencies would
prove a useful tool of analysis and explanation in both practical
and theoretic social problems.

It is to be noted before we dismiss this topic that, besides the

® Ibid., pp. 425-26. * Ibid., p. 433.
SECTION VI. WISHES AND ATTITUDES AS SOCIAL FORCES

ABSTRACT

Wishes and attitudes as items in a comprehensive new theory of social behavior.
—wW. I. Thomas and Park and Burgess have been responsible for the introduction
into the literature of American sociology of a fairly elaborate new conceptual system
for the analysis and explanation of human social behavior, with particular reference
to its motivation. The principal formal terms used to designate the concepts in this
system are “attitude,” “value,” “situation,” “definition of the situation,” “wish,” and
the “four wishes” or classes of wishes.

The wish concept—The wish concept originated with the psychologists;
Thomas and Park and Burgess appear to have been influenced especially by E. B.
Holt’s account of it. Thomas’ earlier formulations of the “attitude” concept did not
discriminate clearly between attitudes and wishes, but his correlation of attitudes
with social values or social objects was later carried over to the definition of the
wish concept. A wish is now defined as a wish for something; it involves a motor
tendency. All wishes are conceived to fall in four classes, which cannot be substi-
tuted for one another.

The attitude as a behavior pattern.—Park has abstracted the attitude concept
from the wish concept more clearly than Thomas had done, and has classified atti-
tudes as behavior patterns in four classes: approaching, withdrawing, superordina-
tion, subordination.
