International Peace-By Court or Government?

Author(s): Hans Kelsen

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Jan., 1941), pp. 571-581
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769924

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:16 UTC
ABSTRACT

The lessons which one can draw from the breakdown of the League of Nations for
a future organization for international peace are as follows: (a) that it was not possible
to insure peace within the international community and simultaneously to guarantee
against external aggression, attempting simultaneously the disarmament of the mem-
ber states, without creating an international armed force; (6) that it was a mistake,
therefore, to place in the center of an international organization an executive body
such as the League Council without a judicial body such as the permanent World
Court at The Hague; (c) and it was a further mistake not to have established the com-
pulsory adjudication of disputes among members. In order to lay the psychological
foundation for a future peace organization it is necessary to eliminate the prejudices
which stand in the way of the establishment of a compulsory adjudication of inter-
national disputes. It is equally indispensable to avoid the error of believing that it is
impossible to submit all disputes between states to an international tribunal, as long
as there is no legislative body to adapt the inadequate system of international law as
it exists today to existing political relationships. The discussion concludes with an
analysis of the problem of whether, in addition to an international court with compul-
sory adjudicative powers, an administrative body, the main function of which would
be the execution of the decisions of the court, would be expedient.

I

In order to deal with the problem posed by the editors of this
periodical—“‘the legal structure conducive to peace”—one must
first make clear, as far as the legal structure of the international
community is concerned, under what conditions an international
community might exist which would really guarantee an enduring
peace. Among the most important of these conditions are:

1. A fairly satisfactory regulation of the territorial relations of
the states forming the community. This kind of regulation is pos-
sible only if it is conducted as extensively and honestly as possible
according to the principles of the right of self-determination of
peoples. Where-minorities are unavoidable they are to be organized
as entities with constitutional rights. The treaty establishing the
international community will grant them the status of personality
in international law so that they will have the right to call upon an

1 Translated from the German by Aaron Bell, graduate student at the University
of Chicago.
international court in case of the violation of the provisions for
minorities.

2. There must be as far as possible political and economic homo-
geneity among the states forming the community. There is as little
reason to expect communist and capitalist states to exist side by
side even in a fairly loose international organization as to expect
democratic and autocratic states to combine in an enduring com-
munity. In this context one should not cling too closely to the tradi-
tional conceptions of democracy and autocracy. Both have changed
their meanings in the developments of the last twenty years. One
of the most important tasks involved in preparing the way for the
peace of the future is to clarify these meanings. For this purpose the
Constitution of the United States may be used as an example. It
represents up to the present time the best solution of the problem
which has clearly appeared in Europe in the clash of democracy
and autocracy: How can a stable and effective government be com-
bined with extensive participation by the people in the formation
of state policy and with personal liberty among the citizens?
constitution and activity of the League of Nations, and in particular
we must consider critically the activity of the Council of the League.
It may be readily conceded that of the political tasks proposed for
the League of Nations in its constitution only the functions of set-
tling conflicts between members, formulated in Articles 12-16, has
been fulfilled with any degree of succsss. Disarmament, proposed
in Articles 8 and 9, has completely miscarried. Article 10, which
guaranteed the territorial integrity of members of the League against
external aggression, was never really applied. Neither was the so
frequently invoked Article 11, at least as far as it provided for the
maintaining of peace by any means essentially different from media-
tion and conciliation. Article 19, which provided for eventual amend-
ments, was impracticable from the beginning, and Article 22, pro-
viding for the government of mandated territories, gave hardly the
opportunity for more than a sham activity. The so-called technical
functions of the League, Articles 23-25, are so distant from its real
ends that they need not be discussed further here. Nothing is more
characteristic of the failure of the League than the fact that in
recent discussions of its problems and activities there has been a
tendency to emphasize its technical functions at the expense of all
the others. But in order to combat the opium trade and prostitution
it was not necessary to establish the League. It can readily be
shown that a court is better fitted to settle disputes than a governing
body like the Council of the League. This is clear from the very
nature of the problem and will be substantiated by an unprejudiced
examination of the activities of the League of Nations in this realm.

The Covenant of the League assigned the chief role in settling
disputes to the Council of the League rather than to the permanent
World Court mainly because the drafters of the Covenant could
not consent to establish a compulsory international jurisdiction for
all conflicts. This concession could not be made because the two
preconditions considered above for an enduring community at peace
were lacking when the League of Nations was founded. Moreover,
compulsory international jurisdiction encountered, and still encoun-
ters, great prejudice. To eliminate this prejudice as much as possible
by clarifying the true nature of the problem is likewise an important
task in preparing for future peace.
Territorial disputes cannot very well be decided by the judgment
of a court if the claims cannot be supported by appealing to a posi-
tive law. The boundaries of the states within an international com-
munity must from the very beginning be arranged in such a way
that they do not violate any vital interests. Otherwise, this com-
munity will have little prospect of a long-continuing existence. Vital
interests, however, are not to be viewed as violated unless a consider-
able portion of the population is repressed by incorporation within
a particular state organization against their wills. Such repression
may be unavoidable, because the right of self-determination for some
reason or other cannot be exercised, but in such cases all justified
interests are protected if the particular element of the population
receives full minority protection guaranteed by international law.
Disputes arising out of such a situation can very well be adjudicated
by a court, which, at least in principle, has positive law* to apply
to the case. If a member of the community must be forced to re-
spect the decision, it has put itself also morally in the wrong. These
principles correspond so closely to the general conviction that a
government would have some difficulty in resorting to war in dis-
regard of these principles. Thus the way is prepared—at least ideo-
logically—in the best possible manner for collective sanctions against
the violator of the law, especially if the sanction has the character of
a judicial decision.
such a legislative body it is concluded that an obligatory interna-
tional jurisdiction is also impossible. This argument is incorrect in
every respect. The development of national law indicates on the
contrary that the obligation to submit to the decision of the courts
long precedes legislation, the conscious formulation of law by a
central power. Within the individual states courts have for cen-
turies applied a legal system which could not be changed by any
legislator, but which developed, exactly like present-day interna-
tional law, out of custom and agreements; and in this legal system
custom was for the most part, if not exclusively, formed by the
practice of the courts themselves. We have no reason to assume
that international law will or can develop any differently from state
law. The court which exercises the jurisdiction of deciding all the
legal disputes of those parties subject to the law, even if it is em-
powered by the constitution to apply only the positive law, will
adapt this law in its concrete decisions gradually and imperceptibly
to actual needs—in other words, will decide on the basis of “equity.”
The history of Roman and Anglo-American law shows how judicial
decisions create law. But even from a purely theoretical standpoint
the assumption of an absolute opposition between the creation of
law and the application of law, between legislation and judicial de-
cision, is untenable. The opposition is in reality only very relative,
and every act applying law is at the same time an act creating law.
One should not overlook the important fact that in the last analysis
the law is not what the legislator more or less clearly sets forth or
what the rule of custom more or less comprehensibly implies. The
law is what the court finally decides. If one judges the institution of
legality properly, if one is satisfied to observe that the concrete actual
law is embodied only in judicial decisions in the individual case, if
one sees that there is no absolute guaranty of the individual decision
corresponding to the general law which should be applied, then one
will view the general and abstract form of law—the statute, the
tule of custom, and especially the function of legislation—in a new
light. One will avoid overestimating the function of legislation and
will understand why there can be no legislator without a judge even
though there can very well be a judge without a legislator.
v

The incorrect assumption—that there can be no compulsory in-
ternational jurisdiction because there is no complete and satisfactory
international legal order—lies at the basis of most of tne arguments
with which governments justify their refusal to submit all interna-
tional disputes to the decision of a court; take, for example, the ever
recurring appeal to the gaps in international law. An international
court cannot be intrusted with the decision on all disputes because
for very many cases the legal order to be applied by the court lacks
any applicable norm. This argument is taken from the theory of
national law and has often been refuted in that realm. It is false
because it alleges the logical impossibility of a decision, although
it can easily be shown that a decision is always logically possible.
Either the claim raised by one state against the other in a legal dis-
pute is justified by the legal order, because a particular legal norm
obligates the defendant to act in the required way; in this case the
complaint is admitted or else the claim raised cannot be justified by
the legal order, since it contains no legal norm which might obligate
the defendant to act in the required way. And in the latter indeed
the claim is to be rejected; and it is rejected on the basis of the
positive, actually valid legal order which permits all its subjects to
do or omit anything it does not forbid them to do or omit. This
logically possible application of the legal order may be undesirable
from a juridico-political or moral or any other standpoint. But this
may happen even in cases where one does not speak of “gaps” in
the legal system because the complaint is allowed on the basis of
the positive law. This reference to a gap in the legal system is only
a way of expressing a desire to reform the legal system. If one has
recognized the way in which judicial jurisdiction exercises the func-
tion of reforming the legal order, then the argument from ostensible
gaps in the legal system against the obligation to submit all conflicts
to judicial jurisdiction no longer holds.

VI

We can treat in the same way the assertion, which has already
become a dogma, that an international court can indeed decide
about legal disputes but not about political conflicts. A dispute has
VII

In this connection we should like to observe that the statement—
positive law is from one viewpoint or another inequitable or un-
just—is a subjective value-judgment. The party to a dispute whose
interests in a concrete case are not protected by positive law will
be easily persuaded that the law itself is inequitable, unjust, and
needs to be reformed, while the other party will be convinced of the
opposite. If some question should be withdrawn from the directly in-
terested parties and turned over to an objective party to decide, then
the question of the equity or justice of the positive law is involved.
Indeed, paradoxical as it may seem at first sight, a group of inde-
pendent, experienced, and conscientious men, professionally in con-
tact with law, who are not themselves involved in the particular
conflict of interests are better fitted to decide than the legislator
who is always more or less politically committed; especially since
the decision of the court is fundamentally limited to the special
case and can therefore take account of its special character. The
disinclination of governments to subject all disputes to the decision
of a court can, therefore, not be justified by alleging the inability
of courts, according to their very nature, to adapt the law to the
requirements of equity or justice. The exactly opposite argument
seems more acceptable, for it is not so much the party desiring a re-
form of the actually valid international law but rather the party
interested in its being kept unaltered who has cause to hold back
from obligatory jurisdiction. For a court which has a monopoly on
deciding all disputes within a community needs to give due con-
sideration to equity and justice even if it is not explicitly empowered
to do so by the constitution. Under such conditions of jurisdiction,
consideration is likely to be given to questions of equity and justice
in much greater measure than in a court whose jurisdiction has only
an optional character. The establishment of obligatory jurisdiction
is, therefore, first of all a problem of confidence. Much depends on
the possibility of finding a procedure by which a really independent
court can be formed which is able to fulfil its duties in a way satis-
factory not only from a moral but also from a technical point of
view. We can as little doubt the possibility of such a procedure as
that the procedure underlying the permanent international court at
The Hague left much to be desired. Above all, the dependence of
the judges on the states to which they belonged was not restricted
as much as was actually possible. A careful investigation of all the
methods involved in this discussion from a psychological and a
social-technical viewpoint and an evaluation of all our experiences
in this direction are further tasks in preparing the way for the fu-
ture peace.
Ix

The Covenant of the League of Nations established not the per-
manent World Court but the League Council at the center of the
international organization, because the League of Nations had not
only the task of maintaining peace within the community but also
the task of protecting its members against attack from outside.
This was necessary because the League set up armament reduction
by the individual states as one of its main purposes. A state can be
persuaded to reduce its armaments appreciably only if it is assured
at the same time that, in case of attack by a state which is outside
the League and, therefore, not obligated to disarm, all the forces
of the other members of the League will be available. If their help
is to be effective, they must keep their disarmament within very
definite limits. A real disarmament of the members is only possible
if at the same time the League establishes a central military force.
Although nothing was further from the minds of the founders of the
League of Nations than just this solution of the problem, neverthe-
less they proposed the idea of disarmament so vigorously that, di-
rectly after the first seven articles setting up the organization,
comes Article 8 naming disarmament as the first of the tasks which
the League is committed to perform.

Because the Covenant of the League treats the disarmament of
its member states as one of the principal problems of international
organization, it ignores the distinction, essential from the standpoint
of the social technique of an international community, between the
maintenance of peace within and the protection against attack from
outside, between the sanctions against an unconstitutional recourse
to war on the part of one of its members and the measures to be
taken against a nonmember disturbing the peace. In this last con-
nection the League of Nations and, above all, the organ having juris-
diction in this matter, the League Council, have failed as badly as
in regard to disarmament. Nothing can demonstrate this more
clearly than the fact that the violation of the territorial integrity
of member states, when it came from outside and led actually to the
complete annihilation of these states, as in the cases of Austria,
Czechoslovakia, and Poland, in open opposition to the provisions of
Articles ro and 11, did not even reach the stage of discussion in the
League, whereas in the cases of the treaty-violating attacks by mem-
bers of the League, the League at least made an attempt to perform
its duty, as in the Manchukuo, Abyssinia, and Finland cases.

Considering the two tasks—(z) the maintenance of peace within
and (2) protection against attack from the outside—if we consider
the means normally at the disposal of such an international organiza-
tion, the experience of the League of Nations teaches that the second
task can hardly be performed satisfactorily. It is perhaps no acci-
dent that it is just this task which an international court would not
be expected to fulfil, that an international function is involved which
lies completely beyond the possible competence of an international
court. It should be completely clear then that if an international
organization is to be established in the future which from the be-
ginning will be concerned only with the maintenance of internal
peace, this community should be organized around a court. In the
light of the experience of the League, protection against external
attack should be left to a policy of alliances among the member
states.

—
Indeed, the mere establishment of an international judicial com-
munity with obligatory jurisdiction would be a considerable limita-
tion of the sovereignty of the member states. But experience teaches
that states submit more easily to an international court than to an
international government. Treaties embodying court decisions have
proved up to now to be the most effective. Seldom has a state re-
fused to execute the decision of a court which it has recognized in a
treaty. The idea of law, in spite of everything, seems still to be
stronger than any other ideology of power.

Harvarp UNIVERSITY
