Some Biological Considerations About War

Author(s): Raymond Pearl

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Jan., 1941), pp. 487-503
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769920

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:10 UTC
RAYMOND PEARL

ABSTRACT

The basic biological principle underlying belligerent behavior is the ‘“‘will to live,
which is a characteristic of all living things. This characteristic has played an im-
ortant role in the evolution of individual and collective human behavior. The stimuli
leading to belligerent behavior arise from three sorts of situations: namely, (a) preda-
tion, (6) invasion of territory, and (¢) courtship, mating, and reproduction. These
stimuli lead to essentially the same types of response in birds and mammals as they do
in man, indicating the evolutionary background lying behind war as a form of human
social behavior. The propaganda element in modern warfare has definite psychobiologi-
cal effects. The alleged harmful genetic effects of warfare upon large population ag-
gregates have been greatly overrated. Other adverse biological consequences of modern
wartare may be temporarily severe but do not last long. The fundamental biological
problem that war presents is the problem of the evolution of new patterns of sociality in
which organized warfare will have no part.

I
The essence of the biological forces and principles underlying war
has been stated with greater economy of words by an English poet,
Edgar Foxall, in his “Flux, 1939,” than perhaps by any biologist:
Here crawl we

Through the long lusts of tribulation,
Mastered by nothing save the will to live.t

”

For “the will to live” is the most fundamental of biological urges or
drives, and war is one of its most important manifestations. It ex-
tends to and embraces all living things and is indeed an ineluctable
characteristic of life itself. Badley has stated the matter adequately
in the following words:

For however much the behaviour of living things of different kinds may differ
in detail, the main needs of life that prompt the behaviour are the same. The
same urge of life is shared by plant and animal, by amoeba and by man, showing
itself in organised activity, co-ordinated in effort for the maintenance and extension
of the life of the organism. All such purposive effort—purposive, in this sense,
even if completely unconscious—is a manifestation, we must infer, of the in-
tegrating principle at work in all, which . . . . “sleeps in the plant, dreams in the
animal, and wakes in man.”?

« The Water-Rat Sonata and Other Poems (London: Fortune Press, 1940).

2J. H. Badley, The Will To Live: An Outline of Evolutionary Psychology (London:
Allen & Unwin, 1931). Italics mine.
Naturally the present discussion will be primarily concerned with
man and that aspect of his collective behavior that is called war, but
it is biologically of the first importance to any approach to a real
understanding of this aspect of human behavior to realize profoundly
—as many persons not biologists do not—that man’s ways of acting
are primarily the resultants of a long process of evolution. They
find their roots in the ways of life of lower organisms. For something
of the order of two thousand years past men have been, subcon-
sciously and consciously, conditioned against such a view by theo-
logical propaganda to the effect that man is separated from all other
animals by a gulf that is qualitative as well as quantitative in na-
ture. The result is that most human beings, even including some
first-class intellects,} are really obsessed with the biologically quite
false notion that man’s behavior is something sui generis. The real
position may best be made clear by again quoting Badley:

The life of every living unit consists of continual effort against the physical
forces that threaten it with destruction. It maintains itself only by creating an
equilibrium, continually disturbed and continually renewed, between the dif-
ferent physical processes at work in it, so that none of them comes to entire
completion. It is here that we see a further characteristic of this energy of effort
in distinction from physical energy: it implies working for an end which is not
the natural outcome of the processes at work in the physical universe. For the
familiar sequence of cause and effect it substitutes the psychological connection
of effort and purpose, in which the action is the outcome not merely of previous
happenings but also of the result that is to be produced. Not that the result is
necessarily foreseen. In ordinary parlance, it is true, “purpose’’ is used to ex-
press the conscious direction of activities to a foreseen end. In this sense, of
course, it cannot be applied to activities of living things in which neither any
kind of foreknowledge nor even consciousness can be assumed. We can only say
that they act as if they had such a purpose.....

This mode of energy, which is known to us .... in the feeling of self, and
which may be described, in psychological terms, as purposive effort, is thus the
most fundamental characteristic of life. It shows itself alike in the initial effort,
common to all living things, to combat the law of inertia for the sake of main-
taining life, and in the power, greatest of man’s acquisitions, of following the
road of highest resistance and carrying through his purposes in spite of all
obstacles—the power that we know as will. And so, even though we cannot, of

3 An example of the point here is the fact that in Man the Unknown Alexis Carrel
does not once mention, let alone discuss, evolution as an element in making man what
he is today, although the book has for its purpose to reach, primarily through biological
considerations, an understanding of the nature of man.
course, attribute will to the lower forms of life in the full sense of the term in
which we apply it to human beings, it is no mere poetic metaphor to speak of all
purposive effort, from its simplest to its highest forms, as the will to live.4

II

Because men, like all other organisms, want to go on living, they
collectively go to war when group survival is threatened, or is
thought to be imperiled, just as individuals will fight against threat-
ened extinction of their own lives. Graded in the intensity of its
overt manifestations according to the real or fancied danger that
threatens survival, there is no known or conceivable form of human
behavior to which the will to live may not lead. Under its domina-
tion normally decent men will lie, steal, murder, and commit such
atrocities as to make the usual comparison with beasts grossly unjust
to merely animal behavior. One of the major evidences that this is
so is found in the phenomenon of war. For in war the individual
identifies himself with the group. The process goes according to a
definite and essentially invariable pattern. The continued survival
of a human group, either in its existing state or absolutely, is really
threatened or is alleged to be threatened as a consequence of either
the mere existence or the activities (or a combination of these two
elements) of another human group. This menace to group survival,
whether real or merely imagined, is then magnified by all possible
applications of the arts of propaganda during a period of “negotia-
tions” preceding actual combat, with biological effects presently to
be discussed. Eventually war ensues. At once all restrictions on
group behavior of the sort normally associated with such terms as
law and decency automatically go by the board, if, as, and when any
belligerent finds such restrictions irksome. Denials of this categori-
cal statement will doubtless be raised by the unrealistic, having in
mind the so-called “laws of warfare.”’> But if any such sentimental-
ist will bring forward indisputable proof that just one of these “laws”

40p. cit., pp. 28-29.

5 As laid down in the Declaration of Paris in 1856; the Red Cross conventions of
1864, 1906, and 1929; the Declaration of St. Petersburg of 1868; the conventions and
declarations of the Hague conferences of 1899 and 1907; the Poison Gas Protocol of
Geneva, 1925; and other attempts to codify rules by which the game is to be played.
A lucid historical summary of the efforts to make war more humane by processes of

international law will be found in J. W. Garner, ‘“‘Laws of Warfare,” Encyclopaedia of
the Social Sciences, XV (New York, 1935), 359-664.
has not been broken at some time since 1914, by some nation or group
at war, he will have rendered a signal service. Actually events in
World War I, and subsequently in Manchuria, Ethiopia, Spain, and
China, to say nothing of World War II, have demonstrated with
devastating clarity that nations and groups can, and do, flout these
“laws” just as blithely as individuals did the prohibition amendment
and the laws instituted to enforce it. When group behavior is law-
less, as in war, the actions of individuals will inevitably also be so
in greater or smaller degree and frequency. It is interesting in this
connection to note that a statement that soldiers have not committed
atrocities at a particular time and place is always regarded as im-
portant war news.

On the other side of the picture it is clearly to be understood that
baser types of behavior are not universal among all soldiers all the
time they are engaged in war. Habits of decency, fairness, and hu-
man dignity are too deeply ingrained for that in the great majority
of human beings. It is only under the all too frequently occurring
situations of strain—periods during which the individual feels that
his personal survival is about to be, or is, or just has been seriously
and immediately endangered—that these habits of decency that are
deeply imbedded in his very protoplasm are sloughed off. The in-
herent decency and inoffensiveness of men, grounded deeply in their
evolutionary history, have always been a source of concern to mili-
tary commanders. From their point of view such types of behavior
as fraternizing with opposed combatants, attitudes of individual
kindness and fairness toward them, and the like, do not contribute
to the defeat of the enemy, which is the main objective of military
operations. Consequently in all wars strenuous efforts are made by
officers to prevent such types of behavior on the part of the men.
The success of such efforts is always far from complete.

Furthermore, in addition to the habituations of decency and fair-
ness characteristic of the behavior of individual human beings, it
must never be overlooked that, in all higher animals certainly, “the
tendency toward a struggle for existence is balanced and opposed
by the strong influence of the co-operative urge,” as the matter is
put by Allee.“ How “strong” this urge or instinct for co-operation

6W.C. Allee, The Social Life of Animals (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1938),
Pp. 210.
is relatively, considered as a factor in evolution, is a matter about
which there is neither universal agreement among biologists nor
completely satisfactory evidence, qualitative or quantitative. But
its existence as a factor in mammalian behavior cannot reasonably
be doubted. Allee, and Patten before him,’ hold that it penetrates
all nature.

Belligerency for its own sake is not a normal way of life for any
organism, including man.’ Animals fight others of their own or dif-
ferent species in response only to a limited set of stimuli, all con-
nected with the basic survival urge. These causal stimuli relate es-
sentially to three sorts of situations only: namely, resistance (a) to
predation, (b) to invasion of territory, and (¢) fighting in connection
with courtship, mating, and reproduction. The latter two of these
categories, (b) and (c), are really at bottom only different aspects of
the first, resistance to predation, which is fundamental.

Predation upon other living things, plant or animal, is a normal
and universal component of the business of food-getting, which is
an obligate element of living and survival. Among civilized men the
process of food-getting has become so extremely complicated and
intricate that the element of predation might seem superficially to
have been completely lost. This is not really so; it is merely the pat-
tern and mechanics of predation that have been altered. The primal
pattern is still preserved among peoples in the hunting stage of cul-
ture and among cannibals. To the utmost power at its command
every predated organism fights to prevent its being gobbled up by
the predator. In the more complex patterns of sociality associated
with the term “civilization,” predation and resistance to it largely
take economic forms.

Among the higher but infra-human vertebrates, mammals and
birds, as well as among some of the invertebrates, notably the social
insects, the evidence accumulated from ecological and behavior stud-
ies particularly during the present century indicates that a deeply
rooted sense of territory as appertaining or “‘belonging”’ to the indi-
vidual or the group is widespread among many species. Any at-
tempted foreign invasion of an occupied territory is immediately
resisted by fighting on the part of the occupiers. This is not the
place, nor is there space, to review the evidence in any detail. Men-
tion must, however, be made of the beautiful and exact studies of
Eliot Howard on territory in relation to bird life and behavior.? In
detailed accounts of painstaking and prolonged field observations he
shows that groups of various species of birds choose particular pieces
of territory as their fields of operation, of definite shapes, sizes, and
positions, and defend them rigorously and aggressively against in-
vasion for definite durations of time. He says:

Territory is not merely localized space, it is the objective aspect of a bird’s
subjective state; it is action on the part of the bird from which emerges shape,
size, position and duration. All these qualities, save shape, are determined by
action which is provided in a bird’s inherited organization; and all, save posi-
tion, have their being in that organization. Shape is individual not specific,
acquired not provided at birth, and comes from landmarks which each individ-
ual chooses for himself. A landmark is part of the organization and in so far as
it ministers to the success of territory has biological value; but its interest lies
in the act of choosing, which it discloses, not in itself as a physical thing. If a
cock does not choose, neither does he fight nor sing nor break away from his
winter routine to isolate himself; and if this act has no foundation in his in-
herited nature neither have they. We cannot isolate it, or explain it save in
terms of the whole or of some principle that pervades the whole. Were it not
for the whole and the unity of the whole, were it not for choice and the quickness
of it we should be unaware of any pervading principle. That principle is refer-
ence. Were it not for reference, defence of territory would melt into random
expressions of anger, landmarks would merge in the general background. When
a cock spies an intruder his boundary checks his attack but not his anger; when
he chases his mate his boundary checks his pursuit but not his passion; many
actions related to reproduction are qualified by territory. So the act of choosing
landmarks, since it is part of the whole, quickens with the whole, and stands in a
similar relation to it as do the other actions which confirm territory, must itself
be qualified by some property of the whole.”

9H. E. Howard, Territory in Bird Life (London: John Murray, 1920); An Introduc-
tion to the Study of Bird Behaviour (Cambridge: University Press, 1929); and The Nature
of @ Bird’s World (Cambridge: University Press, 1935).

10 The Nature of a Bird’s World, pp. 75-77-
While it would be unwise to read more into the matter than the
facts warrant, the evidence is clear that those factors in the causa-
tion and conduct of human warfare that relate to defense of terri-
tory against invasion, actual or threatened—and the associated and
deeply involved factor of population density in relation to territory
—have an evolutionary foundation lying far back and deep down
in man’s animal ancestry.

The linkage between the (6) and (c) types of incitements to bellig-
erence (namely, fighting to maintain exclusive territorial possession
and fighting to maintain exclusive reproductive rights and privi-
leges) and the fundamental will to live (the survival urge) is found
in a transfer or spreading of the instinct for survival from the indi-
vidual to include his stirps and from that ultimately to the group of
beings generally like himself to which he belongs. The reproductive
urge is really only the survival urge expanded relative to time and
space.

Heredity is most clearly to be apprehended as an aspect of reproduction.
Living things do not merely reproduce; they reproduce themselves. This fact
makes it clear that, philosophically viewed, the urge to reproduction is really a
part—an extension if you like—of the primal urge to survival. If the individual
cannot ensure his own indefinite earthly immortality he can and does try his

very best to see that his stirp shall keep on living forever and ever. Naturally
this self-reproductive process tends towards social as well as biological stability.

In a significant and important book that has been too much neg-
lected by both biologists and sociologists the British entomologist
Walker” puts food, security, and propagation as the basic elements
in the manifestations of man’s “will to live” and presents detailed
evidence to show that the greatest part, if not all, of human history
and human evolution can be explained as the consequence of man’s
efforts to secure these three essentials for himself, individually and
collectively. He summarizes his discussion of war in the following
words, with nearly all of which the present writer is in agreement:

Summing up, the following laws can be considered fundamental:

x. Every engineering device which facilitates transportation over natural
physical barriers, lessens the security of peoples.

1 R, Pearl, “Biology and Human Trends,” Journal of Washington Academy of Sci-
ence, XXV (1935), 253-72; reprinted, with slight changes, in Smithsonian Institution
Annual Report for 1935, PP. 327-44.

2C. C. Walker, The Biology of Civilization (Toronto: Macmillan & Co., 1930).
War is a form of social behavior and, as such, is a phenomenon of
group biology. In it, as has already been mentioned, the normal
nonbelligerent ways of life and attitudes of individual human beings
have to be overcome in order to get the individuals to act together
in this particular form of group behavior. After each actual war the
surviving and disillusioned combatants, on the one hand, and the
youths too young at the time of the war to have been combatants,
on the other hand, exhibit almost invariably and universally the
psychological reaction epitomized in the phrases “There must never
be another war” and ‘“‘Never again so far as we are concerned.”
Just as invariably, and about as universally, when the next war first
impends, and then later begins, these very same categories of indi-
viduals are found once more at the forefront in both the preparatory
phases and later in actual combat. Incidentally it would be an in-
teresting, if ironic, statistic to know just what proportion of those
Oxford and Cambridge students who a few years ago signed solemn
declarations that they would never, never fight in a war have in re-

13 [bid., pp. 314-15.
cent months become willing and extremely efficient airmen, artillery-
men, and infantrymen.

The explanation of this recurring volte-face is found in the effects
of propaganda, referred to in the preceding section. After examining
realistically the historical facts as to the immediate causation of
war and the “organs of society in which the war-making power is
lodged,” as well as the considerations controlling the “bellicose de-
terminations” of those organs, Alvin Johnson reaches the following
conclusion:

It is impossible to say with certainty whether in all history any people as a
whole or by an actual majority has willed to make war. A war situation arises
in which the only possible alternatives appear to be victory or defeat; and how-
ever little the majority of the citizens of one state may desire to crush another
state, they are still less willing to contemplate being crushed. After war is on,
the union of the great majority in support of the war is effected, mainly by the
inherent force of the situation but in part by propaganda. It is by this ex post
facto consent, given unavoidably, that wars inaugurated by minority interests or
in response to traditional policies present a pseudo-popular character."

The chief criticism of this statement is that it seriously under-
estimates the relative part played by propaganda in the process.
What Johnson characterizes as the “inherent force of the situation”
derives its “force” almost wholly as the result of propaganda, so
far as concerns its effect upon the opinions and behavior of individ-
uals. For the individual—the common man—is not in a position
really to know anything about “situations” of the sort under dis-
cussion, except from “information” reaching him through so-called
“organs of public opinion” or through governmental pronounce-
ments, specifically designed and intended to instil into the public
mind a prefabricated set of ideas, attitudes, and emotions. The “in-
formation” so received is always and inevitably colored by propa-
ganda. Furthermore, an objective appraisal of the events of the
last quarter-century clearly shows that military men have come
more and more to regard propaganda per se as one of the most
effective direct agencies in bringing about and conducting war.

14“War,” Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, XV (1935), 338.

15 Anyone doubting this needs only to read in the periods just preceding and during
an actual war the accounts of the same identical objective events in the leading newspapers
of different countries, in order to be convinced of the truth of the statement; always
assuming, of course, that the reader is in a state of mind capable of being convinced by
evidence.
The psychobiology underlying the effective operation of propa-
ganda in altering objective behavior as well as in forming and ma-
nipulating what men firmly believe to be their “opinions” or “rea-
soned convictions” is well stated by Burrow:

In accordance with the investigations of phylopathology it is extremely im-
portant for students of human reactions to recognize that the phenomenon of
man’s social behavior, universally governed as it is by his conditioned “likes and
dislikes,” is a phenomenon which, though phyletic in its range, possesses in point
of fact no conscious directive influence whatsoever over man’s intrinsic be-
havior-processes. These “likes and dislikes” are the mere symptomatic, parti-
tive reflections of similar and dissimilar index-responses—responses to which
people are unwittingly, affectively subjected and over which they habitually
delude themselves into believing they have conscious control when, in truth,
these reflexly conditioned responses occurring inter-individually among us have
everywhere reflex (“unconscious”) control over man. However distasteful to
contemplate, the fact is that, due to his inadvertent affect-linkages, the “sym-
bols” which social man “thinks” he employs quite voluntarily are... . really
employing man as a quite involuntary instrument subject at all times to their
arbitrary commands. In this outlook I think it may be safely predicted that
primary, internal, proprioceptive man will prove to be a very different animal
from the animal which, in his symbolic, projective, reflex conditioning, he now
“thinks” he is.

The discussion of this most important element in the biology of
war cannot be carried further here. And, indeed, there is no need
to; with ghastly clarity its manifestations are being spread on the
record day by day as this is written.
of soldiers for war, whether by voluntary enlistment or conscrip-
tion, deliberately and of set purpose chooses the physically and
mentally superior part of the young adult male population existing
at the time; and since, furthermore, the casualties will tend to be
higher among the more superior portion of the combatants already
selected for their biological fitness (because the biologically more
superior individuals will tend to have more initiative, be braver,
and generally tend to run into bullets faster than will the inferior
individuals), the net result will be that an undue proportion of the
best germ plasm will be irrevocably drained off from the national
or group germ plasmic pool and lost forever, to the lasting biological
detriment of the group. This argument is familiar to everyone.
Hunt in 1930 brought forward new statistical evidence alleged to
be in its support.”

On the other hand, there have been, and are, those who have
urged that the basic biological effect of war is generally eugenic
rather than dysgenic. It is alleged that recurring wars are essential
to the maintenance and further development of “racial vigor,” what-
ever precisely that may mean. It is not unfair to say that this was
the official philosophy of Germany in Hohenzollern times and is now
in Hitlerian. Such biological basis as this philosophy has is essen-
tially Lamarckian. The argument is that, since war is a tough busi-
ness, peoples who are to be successful at it must make themselves
tough by self-discipline, hard and meager living that eschews all
forms of indulgence, hedonism, and “‘softness” generally. If all this
is done, so the argument runs, the population will be improved bio-
logically, and the “race” will get stronger and stronger all the time.
A minor variant of this argument always comes to the front when-
ever national conscription is up for political consideration. It is ar-
gued that the disciplined life, the better knowledge of personal hy-
giene acquired, and the physical and mental effects upon the indi-
vidual of military regimentation will be “good” not only for the
conscripts themselves but also for the nation. As Allee wisely points
out,?° the history of the Chinese people counts strongly against any
theory that recurring wars are necessary to maintain or promote

a R. Hunt, Some Biological Aspects of War (New York: Galton Publishing Co.,
1930).

* Op. cit. p. 232.
racial vigor. That history unmistakably shows that a peaceful way
of life may be associated with unsurpassed biological vigor of the
race, however appraised, over an extremely long period of time as
human affairs go.

It seems on the whole fair to say that at the present time the
weight of really informed and unbiased biological opinion inclines
to the view that both of the opposing theories that have been set
forth imply far greater group biological consequences of war than
any actually known facts or any really sound genetic theory would
warrant. The truth probably is that no war that has occurred in
either the nineteenth or the twentieth century, at least, produced
any significant or measurable genetic effect upon a race, nation, or
group involved, considered statistically as a whole group.

There are many reasons for this view, involving a number of perti-
nent variables. Some of these are:

1. The relatively short duration of wars as compared with the
effective reproductive span of human life. Most combatants return
from war at or near the very prime of reproductive life, so that they
can, and to a large extent do, have children and so pass on their own
genes (for better or worse).

2. The proportion of combatants actually killed in war, and there-
for biologically eliminated as individuals together with the genes
they bear, to the total number actively involved in the enterprise
is always small—so small that, if all the fatalities were adversely
selective to the extreme degree envisaged by the Jordan theory, the
form of the total gene frequency distribution for the whole popula-
tion from which the combatants were drawn would probably not be
sensibly altered, if it could be precisely measured. Consider the fol-
lowing statistics in this connection. The total population of the
United States in 1910 was 91,972,266, and in 1920 was 105,710,620.
According to War Department figures, the total mobilized forces of
the United States in World War I numbered, in round figures,
4,355,000, or 4.7 per cent of the 1910 population and 4.1 per cent
of the 1920 population. The total number “killed and died” in the
war was approximately 126,000, or 2.9 per cent of those mobilized,
and 0.14 per cent of the total population of the United States in
1910, or 0.12 per cent of the total population in 1920. But the mat-
ter can be pursued still further. Some of those who died in the war
would have died during the same period of time had they not been
among the mobilized forces. There were “killed in action” and “died
of wounds received in action,” taken together, a total of 2,215 offi-
cers (of all ranks together) and 48,295 enlisted men, or, all told, a
grand total of 50,510 men. So that there were genetically lost to the
“race” (in the sense of the total population of the United States)
as a direct and obligate result of engaging in the business of fighting
a war, 0.055 per cent of the 1910 population, or 0.048 per cent of
the 1920 population. Five one-hundredths of 1 per cent is a small
proportion. It seems unlikely that any geneticist would regard as
particularly significant any such a subtraction from the total gene
pool of a population of roughly one hundred million. But the matter
may be pursued still further. On the Jordan theory it is alleged that
the adverse selection of war is most stringent in respect of the offi-
cers. Officers are chosen to be such because they are thought to be,
and on the whole in fact are, the best men involved in the enter-
prise—the superfit on an all-round appraisal. The total of 2,215 offi-
cers “killed in action” and “died of wounds received in action” con-
stituted 0.0024 per cent of the total population of 1910, and 0.0021
per cent of that of 1920."

2t It may perhaps be contended that it is not fair to take the United States for such a
discussion of World War I, because of the facts that we were involved a shorter time
than most of the other combatant nations and did not have so high a proportion of the
population mobilized. Actually the choice of the United States was determined because
more detailed figures were available. But let us see what can be made out of the avail-
able data for France. In rgr1 the population of France was approximately 39,602,000.
The total mobilized forces in World War I included 8,410,000, or 21.2 per cent of the
total population. The total ‘‘killed and died” in the war numbered 1,357,800, con-
stituting 16.1 per cent of those mobilized, and 3.4 per cent of the total population. So,
then, on the basis of 1910-11 population France mobilized about a 4 times greater
proportion of her population than the United States. The percentage of the mobilized
who were killed or died was 5.6 times greater for France than for the United States. If
the same proportion between total “killed and died” and “killed in action” + “died of
wounds received in action” held for the French troops as for the United States troops,
the expected number of the latter category for France would be 126,000: 50,510 ::
1,357,800 : x. And * = 544,305, which is approximately 1.4 per cent of what the total
population of France was in 1911. Doubtless the proportion of “‘killed in action, etc.,”’
to total ‘‘killed and died” was actually higher for French troops than for United States

troops, so that the 1.4 per cent figure is too low. But 3.4 per cent of the total French
population “killed and died” is certainly too high a figure to charge completely to a war
3. From a statistical point of view the loss of germ plasm to the
nation or population by the loss of life of combatants in war must
be trifling in its racial effect because the sisters of these male casual-
ties remain at home and can and do marry and breed. Supposing
the adverse elimination of the males to involve a sample of highly
superior genes, the sample of genes carried by the sisters of the
eliminated men will be statistically substantially identical with the
eliminated sample, considered as an aggregate.

4. Whether approached from the Mendelian or the Galtonian
point of view the precise study of genetics during the present cen-
tury has demonstrated that the gene distribution of the ancestors
of any particular individual rapidly (in the sense of a small number
of generations) approximates the gene distribution in the general
population as a whole.” This is true even though the genetic di-
vergence of the individual be extreme in either the positive (su-
perior) or the negative (inferior) direction. An example derived
from studies in human longevity’ will perhaps make the meaning
clearer. A sample of 365 extremely longevous persons (all living at
ages of ninety years and above) was compared with a sample of 136
persons representing the general average of the population in re-
spect of longevity. In mean living age at observation the propositi
of the two samples differed by 46.6 years, or 95.5 per cent, from
each other; and in computed total completed longevity by 26.7
years, or 36.7 per cent. In other words, the selection, as regards the
propositi themselves, was extreme and drastic. But the fathers of
the two groups differed in completed mean longevity by only 12.3
years, or 20.5 per cent, and the mothers by only 17.7 years, or 31.8
per cent. The differences became still smaller in the grandparental
generation, where they amounted to but 11.3 per cent for paternal
effect. So then we have established outside limits and can fairly see that the genetic
loss to the French population as a direct result of World War I fell somewhere in be-
tween 1.4 and 3.4 per cent of that population. Sad as this loss is to contemplate hu-

manistically, a geneticist would not regard it as a major catastrophe or one likely to
alter significantly the general gene distribution of the French population as a whole.
22 Cf. K. Pearson, “(On a New Theory of Progressive Evolution,” Annals of Eugenics,
IV (1930), 1-40.
23 Raymond and Ruth DeWitt Pearl, The Ancestry of the Long-lived (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins Press, 1934), chap. viii.
grandfathers; 10.0 per cent for paternal grandmothers; 11.0 per cent
for maternal grandfathers; and 14.2 per cent for maternal grand-
mothers. The next (great-grandparental) generation would have
shown only trifling and quite insignificant differences. As Pearson
says: ‘It would be difficult to find a man with 16 exceptional great-
great grandparents, and the average even of 16 individuals, if they
are selected at random, will not be very different from mediocrity
for any single character.’’4

In sum, modern genetics clearly teaches that before the adverse
selectivity of warfare can seriously, or even sensibly, affect the ag-
gregate composition of the gene pool of a large population, nation,
or race, the selection must be much more widespread and drastic
than it has been in any war that has ever yet occurred.

The discussion thus far in this section has been confined to the
genetic effects of war. This has been deliberate, because in the past
it has been this aspect that has been most emphasized in discussions
of the biological consequences of warfare. It is not to be overlooked
that there may be other directly biological consequences of much
greater seriousness. By interferences with national nutrition, and
with national psychology—particularly in such affective matters as
general morale, hopefulness, and initiative—extremely serious con-
sequences may follow war, manifesting themselves in such forms as
damaged national health, lowered fertility, and in other ways. These
adverse biological consequences are usually merely temporary but
may be somewhat prolonged, depending upon the course of events
after the war has overtly and technically ended. Apart from all
other considerations, the blockade of Germany by the Allies in
World War I did serious damage to the national health of that
country.
an idea. Biologists find no present reason to subscribe to it.** The
earlier sections of this paper have set forth some of the considera-
tions that underlie the biologist’s pessimism about the matter. These,
and others that could not be developed for lack of space, all converge
to the generalization that war is an intrinsic element in all patterns
of human sociality that have so far been evolved. And patterns of
sociality are among the most fundamental elements of human biol-
ogy. Boodin has clearly and forcibly put it in this way:

The social group relations are as much part of the realization of the life of
man as are the physical and organic environment. We have looked upon society
too abstractly as though it were an artificial addition to man’s biological evolu-
tion. It is in fact part of his biological evolution. The gestalt of the life of man
requires the social relations for its completion. The social group is an invention
by the life urge as truly as is the stomach.?6

The real and fundamental biological problem that war presents
is the problem of the evolution, or the invention by evolutionary
processes which is the same thing, of new patterns of sociality in
which war as it has hitherto existed will play no part. Objectively
the major result of man’s evolution since he first became established
as a distinct species has been the unremitting, and in the last few
centuries tremendously accelerating, control of natural forces and
resources to his own purposes. This has been the achievement of
science and its applications. The magnitude of the achievement is
enormous. And intrinsically it is good. No sensible intellectual or
moral objection can be raised against the material progress of civili-
zation that science has accomplished. But such progressive develop-
ment as there may have been in the moral and spiritual nature of
man himself, if any, has not been at anything approaching the same
rate as his material progress. The result is that today a species of
mammals that is morally and spiritually at a low and primitive
stage of evolution finds itself in possession of colossal material
powers and resources—such powers and resources as no other species
ever had, either absolutely or relatively, nor for the most part did

25, Pearl, “Biology and Human Trends,” of. cit.; “Biology and War,” Journal of
Washington Academy of Sciences, VIII (1918), 341-60; also reprinted in Studies in
Human Biology (Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1924), chap. xxii.

26 J. E. Boodin, The Social Mind: Foundations of Social Philosophy (New York:
Macmillan Co., 1939), p- 12
man himself possess until within the lifetime of persons now living.
Furthermore the sociality of this mammalian species is so primitive,
so ill-kempt, so badly organized, and so lowly evolved generally that
these enormous material powers can, and regularly do, fall com-
pletely under the control of single individuals, or small groups of
individuals, who are selfish, greedy, vicious, dishonest, and hypocrit-
ical; whose souls know neither human decency, sympathetic and
loving kindness for their fellow-men, nor social morality. Is it re-
markable that this species Homo sapiens finds itself currently in
trouble?

Any sort of world-wide harmonious and sympathetic co-operation
by which men may live decently together simply does not exist. The
complexity of the world of today in respect of its sheerly material
aspects imperatively demands such co-operation if it is to continue
to be a possible abode for human beings. Yet every single one of the
protagonists of new social patterns, from Washington to Moscow
and including assorted colleagues along the way, struggles to make
his ideas prevail by the application of the techniques of chicanery,
demagoguery, “purges,” and military force. Selfish greed and lust
for power find such methods temporarily suitable to the achievement
of their ends. The standard pattern of national behavior, to which
there are no exceptions, is to combat evil with evil. But real and
enduring peace will never be achieved by such techniques. For a
true evolution of new patterns of sociality that will be lasting and
embrace all mankind there must first evolve among men more de-
cency and dignity, more tolerance and sympathy, more kindness and
forbearance, and more capacity of co-operation for the common
good in the conduct of human life. The prime condition necessary
for the meek to inherit the earth is that they shall abound in the
qualities of meekness.

Jouns Hopkins UNIVERSITY
