Social Change and Isolation in the Ozark Mountain Region of Missouri
Author(s): Walter O. Cralle

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 41, No. 4 (Tan., 1936), pp. 435-446
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2768954

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:52 UTC
ABSTRACT

Fiction regularly depicts the culture of the Ozarks as strikingly different from that of
the rest of the United States, while chamber of commerce literature, seeking to dispel
this “hill-billy” stereotype, presents the picture of a highly developed rural civilization
similar to the most favored parts of the United States. The Ozark mountain region of
Missouri is an area in transition in which an archaic rural American culture, protected
until recently by relative isolation, is rapidly giving ground before the impact of urban
civilization introduced by the automobile and improved highway, the newspaper, the
radio, and other agencies. The rate of change is closely correlated with accessibility.
Agencies of communication and transportation are more important than density of
population, wealth, or ethnic stock in influencing the rate of change.

The Ozarks region within the state of Missouri is neither urban-
ized to the degree depicted in chamber of commerce literature, nor
is it the illiterate, lawless, or even super-rural civilization so fre-
quently depicted in the fiction allegedly pertaining to the region.

More accurately, the Ozarks is an area in transition in which
urban civilization is making rapid inroads at the expense of an essen-
tially early American rural civilization which had been able to main-
tain itself with little change until the development of the automobile
and improved highways. Today 198 approved high schools, repre-
senting every county in the region, turn out annually a flock of
graduates, a representative number of whom find their way into
colleges and universities. Circulation of urban daily newspapers
ranges from 1.84 copies per family in Cole to 0.098 per family in
Ripley County. Automobile registrations range from 3.8 persons per
auto in Gasconade County to 9.5 persons per auto in Carter; while
the percentage of all families reporting radios in the 1930 census
ranges from 35.8 per cent in Jefferson County to 2.2 per cent in
Ozark County. These, along with other influences such as the sum-
mer tourist, the agricultural experiment stations, and the motion
picture are rapidly transforming a large part of the region into some-
thing which approximates a typical urbanized American culture

«An abstract of theses presented in part fulfilment of the requirements for the
Ph.D. degree at the University of Minnesota in December, 1934.

435
while leaving other, and more isolated, sections untouched. It was to
correlate these differential rates of social change with certain ac-
cepted carriers of culture that this study, begun in 1930 and com-
pleted in 1935, was undertaken.

Geographically the region is typically American, being located in
almost the exact center of continental United States. It was in the
vanguard of the Great American Frontier roughly between 1800 and
the Civil War, although, with the discovery of gold in California, it
became more and more a way-station to the newer frontier. From
the beginning it drew the greater portion of its people from Anglo-
Saxon sources, but it was an Anglo-Saxon culture tempered by a few
generations of rural life in the colonies and states adjacent to Vir-
ginia. Influenced somewhat by topography, it drew from two diver-
gent types: the small farmer and hill man, hostile to slavery because
in competition with it, and the prosperous plantation owner who
found in Missouri a region favorable to the institution. While these
two elements were considerably intermingled throughout Missouri,
accounting for the sharp division of sentiment during the Civil War,
there was a general tendency of the slave-owning class to occupy the
northern fringe along the Missouri River and to penetrate the Ozarks
proper only by way of the valleys of those streams of the region
flowing to the north. The hill man, traveling lighter, sought a higher
country away from the swampy lowlands and where he might find an
abundance of game and a convenient source of spring water. Thus,
each sought to reconstruct in this new frontier the type of culture to
which he was accustomed. Largely for this reason the northern
counties of the Ozarks are more typically southern in political affilia-
tion while a tier of counties along the southern border elected Mis-
souri’s only Republican congressman in the last election.

While this early American culture has always predominated in
the Ozarks, two other elements have been important in shaping the
culture of certain counties on the northern and eastern border.
These were the early French and German settlements. The former
may be said to constitute the original white settlers, for even prior to
1800 they had occupied the lead mining region of St. Frangois and
Ste Genevieve counties. The French, however, were not attracted
to agricultural life, and their influence was confined almost wholly to
the villages. Two or three decades before the Civil War settlements
of German immigrants were being made along the northern border,
and by 1860 the German population of these counties was between
fifteen and twenty thousand. After the Civil War other foreign-born
groups, chiefly German, settled in other counties, but their influence
was never strong enough to modify the essentially rural American
character of the region.

The years have brought a decided change in composition of popu-
lation of the Ozarks. Whereas in 1860 every border county, together
with Greene and Laclede, had Negro populations ranging from 6 to
15 per cent of the total, the 1930 census finds only Cole County (7.2
per cent) with more than 5 per cent of its population Negro. The de-
cline has been absolute as well as relative, only Cole, Greene, Jeffer-
son, and Wright counties having as many Negroes in 1930 as they
had in 1860. Ten Ozarks counties report no Negroes whatever, and
four additional counties have only one.

The decline in foreign-born since 1890 strikingly parallels that of
the Negro. While in 1890 the former made up 9g per cent of the total
population, by 1930 they had declined to about 4 per cent; the abso-
lute decline in number of foreign-born being from 234,869 in 1890 to
149,390 in 1930. There has been little movement of foreign-born
into the Ozarks since 1890, and this is confined almost wholly to the
cities, while the older immigrants have been replaced by children and
grandchildren who are undifferentiated from the native stock.

In gains and losses of population the Ozarks region is fairly typical
of the state as a whole. Twenty-one Missouri Ozarks counties
reached their peak of population in the 1900 census; seventeen in
1910; five in 1920, while the remaining seven were largest in 1930.
Of these seven, however, only three (Cape Girardeau, Greene, and
Cole) showed increases between 1920 and 1930 of as much as 200.
The configurations of gains and losses suggest that the urban
counties are steadily gaining while the rural but accessible counties
are losing heavily. This is confirmed by a more detailed study which
shows the cities themselves gaining in population, the villages and
small towns about holding their own, and heavy losses of population
in the open country.

In measuring the degree to which demographic and cultural
changes are associated with agencies of accessibility, as distinguished
from density of population or economic wealth, it seemed useful to
develop an index of accessibility. This index is based on the com-
posite rankings of the counties in urban daily newspaper circulation
as revealed by the A.B.C. audit of circulation for the ten daily news-
papers circulating within the region; the percentage of all families
owning radios; the ratio of automobiles to population; and the per-
centage of all farms adjoining an all-weather road. Other items might
have been used, but these seemed to be the most useful of the avail-
able data. For example, distance from railroad appears to be an
important factor, but for this nothing better than air-line distances
could be computed, and these would be misleading in the interior
and rougher counties. Telephones were also considered but excluded
because census data on telephones does not distinguish the party-line
privately maintained telephone, which predominates in the greater
part of the region, from the type which represents an extension of
urban telephone service. It is the opinion of the writer that the
former is more properly understood as an agency of the neighbor-
hood primary group than a factor in urbanization. In other words,
the typical rural telephone increases the frequency of contacts within
the neighborhood but contributes little toward urbanization.

The correlation of gains and losses of population with accessibility
thus measured is fairly high with r=+.545, which is somewhat
higher than that for density which is +.487. However, a mere state-
ment of gains and losses does not reveal whether these are due to
natural increase or to migration. Detailed examination of birth- and
death-rates throughout the Ozarks, together with other indexes such
as the ratio of children under five to married women between fifteen
and forty-five, reveals that the Ozark region is most singularly fa-
vored in natural increase of population, and this, together with the
age distribution, suggests the extent of migration from the region.
The birth-rate and the ratio of children to adult population are both
strikingly higher than for the state as a whole, while crude death-
rates for the greater part of the region are surprisingly lower. The
ratio of children under five to married women between fifteen and
forty-five for the state as a whole in 1930 was 45.68 children per 100
married women. Within the Ozarks the ratio was 51.46, with a range
from 35.48 in Jasper County to 68.93 in Carter County. Other
counties with especially high ratios of children to married women in-
clude: Ozark with 45.63; Stone, 62.99; Ripley, 62.46; Madison,
61.96; Shannon, 61.82; Iron, 61.38; and Oregon, 60.85. All of these
counties, with the exception of Madison, which ranks in the upper
quartile of Roman Catholic population, are in the lowest quartile of
accessibility. The correlation between the ratio of children and the
index of accessibility is y= —.65. Five selected Ozark counties show
more than one-third more children under five in proportion to popu-
lation than the state as a whole, and about one-fourth more than for
the rural population of the state. The correlation between the ratio
of children and the percentage of the population Roman Catholic is
also negative and high with r= —.70. This seems to be explained by
the fact that the Ozarks is predominantly non-Catholic, and the
interior counties almost wholly so, while the Catholic population is
found almost entirely in the urban and more accessible counties.
The conclusion here reached is that either the percentage of Catholic
population in each county is too small to modify the result greatly,
only four counties having more than one-third of the population
Catholic, or that the religious complex is less effective here in influ-
encing the birth-rate than are the general factors of accessibility.
The simplest explanation which accords with the geographic dis-
tribution is that the early Ozarks culture, in common with that of
rural United States, called for large families. In this region the mod-
ern conventional small family is becoming more common, in the
more accessible portions. Family limitation seems to have spread
along channels of accessibility precisely as other traits of urban
civilization, more rapidly than some, and less rapidly than others.
The Early American rural family pattern similarly included early
and practically universal marriage, a large number of children, a
family income derived almost solely from agriculture, women and
children employed on the farm, and a strong “greater family,”
which included practically all relatives by either birth or marriage,
together with infrequent divorce. This would seem to be a fairly
accurate picture of the rural Ozarks family at the opening of the
present century. In contrast with this there is the modern urban
family in which social class influences the age of marriage as well as
the percentage of persons who marry; in which there are few or no
children; with the “greater family” either non-existent or meaning-
less, and with divorce as a fairly common occurrence. Fortunately,
the impact of the urban family pattern on the early Ozarks culture
can be measured to considerable degree.

In the percentage of all females fifteen years of age and over who
were married, the Ozarks considerably exceed the remainder of the
state. Only six Ozarks counties, all of them border and urban, were
below the state average of 62.09 per 100 in 1930. On the other hand,
Stone, Ozark, Reynolds, Hickory, Douglas, Shannon, and Carter
counties all show percentages above 70. The correlation between
accessibility and the percentage married was found to be r= —.514.
The percentage of women gainfully employed outside of agriculture
reveals a similar situation. Within the Ozarks, only two counties,
Jasper and Cole, exceed the state average of 19.3, and the median
Ozarks county shows only 6.7 per cent thus employed. At the lower
extreme are the interior and isolated counties of Bollinger, Maries,
Dallas, Ozark, and Carter, with less than 4.0 per cent gainfully em-
ployed outside of agriculture.

As to divorce, only ten Ozarks counties exceeded the state ratio of
divorces per 1,000 population in 1930. This, too, is to be expected in
line with the general rural character of the region. The range within
the Ozarks, however, is wide, being from 0.09 in Ste Genevieve to
5.43 in Jasper County. As in the case of the birth-rate, the two fac-
tors of accessibility and the percentage of Roman Catholic popula-
tion tend to neutralize each other. The isolated interior counties,
low in divorce, are also strongly non-Catholic; while the few strongly
Catholic counties have low divorce rates in spite of the fact that they
are border counties. The strongest influence in this case ceems to be
accessibility, however, as the correlation here is r= +.434; while the
correlation of divorce with density is somewhat lower with r= +.334.
Catholic influence predominates in too few counties to influence
greatly the region as a whole, for here the correlation is r= —.11.

A more detailed study of marriages and divorces in three counties
—Greene, Christian, and Stone—for 1931 indicates that with grow-
ing accessibility not only is there an increase in divorce but that the
percentage of all divorces granted to the wife increases and the per-
centage of contested divorces decreases. The period covered, how-
ever, is short, and should have further verification over a larger
number of counties and a longer period.

Another phenomenon of considerable interest in view of the re-
puted lawless character of the greater part of the region is the dis-
tribution of homicides. Even a cursory study reveals that in this
respect, at least, the Ozarks region has been greatly misrepresented.
In order to present a more accurate picture than would be revealed
by a single year, the four-year period, 1927-30, was selected. Over
the four-year period the state homicide rate was 11.74, while the
state rate exclusive of cities was 7.40. In the Ozarks but seven of the
fifty counties exceed the state rural rate, and but five exceed the
state rate. Homicide is revealed to be more characteristic of urban-
ized and accessible regions than of the more remote and isolated sec-
tions. Fourteen counties, all of them interior and more or less iso-
lated, show no homicides whatsoever during the period, and thirty-
nine additional counties averaged less than one per year for the
period. At the other extreme 38 of the total of 138 homicides for the
four-year period took place in Franklin and Jefferson counties, on
the northeast border and adjacent to St. Louis. Of the remaining
nine counties which averaged more than one homicide per year only
Oregon and Stone, with one and a half each, are interior counties.

Nevertheless, the problem of law enforcement, particularly in the
case of crimes against property, has been intensified greatly in those
counties crossed by hard-surfaced roads. Older inhabitants comment
on the fact that in the nineties cattle roamed the unfenced hills pro-
tected only by the brand of the owner, which brands were scrupu-
lously respected, while today cattle thefts, even from inclosed pas-
tures, are a fairly common occurrence. Reports of the Missouri
Bankers Association over a period of years indicate a decided in-
crease in the number of bank robberies, particularly in the smaller
towns, though these figures lose some effectiveness, owing to the
fact that the number of banks was also increasing during the period.
Greater mobility and increased opportunities for escape have prob-
ably contributed greatly to the ineffectiveness of the sheriff.
The 1930 census also included information as to the number of
farm homes equipped with telephone, the number with running
water in the house, the number with water piped into bathrooms,
and the number equipped with electricity. Accepting these as readi-
ly obtainable indexes of change in the material culture as well as
habits of living, it is interesting to note that the percentage of farm
homes equipped with telephone correlates with our index of accessi-
bility fairly highly, with r=+.78. Farm homes with running water
are correlated in the same manner with ry = +.84, and for water piped
into bathrooms the correlation is again high and positive with
r=+.75. In the case of electricity on farms the correlation with
accessbility shows 7 = +.82. These were further verified by a detailed
study of house furnishings and farm machinery of approximately
one hundred families in each of three communities selected on the
basis of most accessible, most isolated, and one intermediate com-
munity. In this case a large number of items commonly associated
with more progressive farming and more advanced living were found
to be increasingly prevalent in the more accessible community,
while found in only one or two of the more prosperous families in the
isolated community.

Among the indexes of educational activity the percentage of chil-
dren of school age who were in school, the number of graduates from
the eighth grade, and the percentage of native white adult illiteracy
were studied in detail. Education differs from other complexes thus
far discussed in that it is only in part a matter of individual and com-
munity volition due to the fact that state law provides for at least an
elementary school in every community and a compulsory school law,
though indifferently enforced in many counties, does provide con-
siderable external stimulus. As to the percentage of native white
adult illiteracy the state average was 1.5 per cent, with only two
Ozarks counties, Greene and Jasper, falling below that figure, while
two other counties equal the state rate. Thus a total of forty-six
counties out of the fifty in the Ozarks show a higher precentage of
adult illiteracy than the state as a whole. The range, however, is
significant, being from 1.0 per cent in Greene to 11.6 per cent in
Washington County. In defense of the Ozarks it may be pointed out
that every county in the region reduced its percentage of illiterates
between 1920 and 1930, while twelve counties of the state actually
showed increases during the same period. Counties, other than
Washington, showing high rates of adult white illiteracy include
Ozark, with 9.8 per cent; Bollinger, 7.3 per cent; Iron, 7.0 per cent;
Reynolds, 6.6 per cent; and Shannon, 6.0 per cent. A glance at the
map reveals these as among the most isolated interior counties. The
rank order correlation between illiteracy and accessibility was r=
—.56. In the case of educational activity the economic factor seems
to outweigh the factor of accessibility in most of the indexes. The
reason is not hard to find. In Missouri approximately 75 per cent of
the cost of maintaining the local school is borne by the community
itself, and serious inequalities in the ability to maintain schools often
exist, not only between counties but often between adjoining dis-
tricts. The school law of 1930 sought to correct this situation, but
depleted state revenues have rendered it impossible for the state to
assume its share of the burden under that law.

Definite indexes of religious change are somewhat more difficult to
obtain. There are no figures on gains and losses in church member-
ship available for the entire region or for counties, and figures on
gains and losses for particular denominations and particular
churches are hardly comparable due to the tardiness with which
church rolls are revised, especially in the more rural sections. Such
figures, moreover, would have to be checked against gains and losses
in population by communities to have any real bearing on the reli-
gious situation. The Ozarks Interdenominational Survey, a co-oper-
ative undertaking in 1930, found thirty-two townships, embodying a
total of more than 13,000 population, without a Protestant church,
and a total of 166 abandoned churches. Their figures show that
thirty-one counties lost in both church membership and population,
while nine counties lost in church membership while gaining in popu-
lation. On the other hand, five counties gained in church member-
ship while gaining population, and another five counties gained in
membership, though losing in population.

In general, however, urban churches and those of the towns seem
to be holding their own as against a decided loss in membership and
effectiveness of the rural church. While loss of population is a very
real factor in declining church memberships, it is not the only one
nor perhaps the most important. Other factors are competitive de-
nominationalism, dating from excessive church building which took
place about the turn of the century, and which led to the rise of too
many weak struggling churches; the failure of the churches to offer
sermons and music in keeping with the rising standards of the peo-
ple; and the breakdown of a degree of social isolation in which the
church afforded the principal opportunity for social contacts.

Along with these should be mentioned the rise of the Pentecostal
or Holiness sect, which has resulted in wholesale defections from the
more orthodox churches and has split others into hostile camps.
The growing conservatism of the older denominations, the gradual
abandonment of emotionalism in religion, and the creation of a paid,
or more often underpaid, ministry have served to alienate a con-
siderable number from the conventional churches. Undernourished
emotional lives find little satisfaction in the formal church service,
and it is here the Pentecostal group, whose services are characterized
by an emotional fervor reminiscent of the “canebrake revival” days,
finds ready reception. Preachers of this sect, moreover, make much
of the fact that they obey the apostolic injunction to “take neither
scrip nor purse.” Demanding no salary, they move into a communi-
ty and subsist on whatever reward may be given them in produce
and foodstuffs. Bearing in mind that for a long time there was no
such thing as a paid ministry in the region, it is natural that many
feel that the Pentecostal way, which conforms more closely to the
older pattern, is the more holy. Thus, while the religious complex
seems to be lagging behind other elements of the culture for a con-
siderable portion of the population, it is probable that it has changed
too rapidly for others.

Agriculturally, change in the Ozarks has been rapid and striking.
For example, only three counties of the entire region devote as much
acreage to corn as they did in 1899, and but one county devotes as
many acres to the production of wheat. On the other hand, every
county in the region shared in the increased production of poultry
and eggs, which in the case of eggs amounted to more than 1,500
dozen per farm in Polk and more than 1,200 dozen per farm in
Greene. No Ozarks county had as many horses or beef cattle in 1929
as it had in 1919 (which latter year was artificially high due to war-
time demand) but forty-four counties showed increases in cattle de-
voted to milk production, amounting in about one-fourth of the
counties to approximately 200 per cent. Increases are also shown in
acreages devoted to orchards, vegetables, and small fruits (especially
strawberries), particularly in the counties in which transportation
facilities are best.

It is unfortunate that one cannot graph similarly the inroads of
conventional English on the archaic Ozarks dialect. The Ozarkian in
fiction is always presented as speaking a dialect of Elizabethan Eng-
lish with some American Negro and perhaps a few neologisms pecul-
iar to the region. Sometimes it is poorly done; sometimes, as in the
case of the books of Vance Randolph, it is exceedingly well done; but
always the reader gets an impression of linguistic uniformity which
does not exist in the Ozarks. To find the Ozarks dialect, except per-
haps for an occasional word or ungrammatical phrase, one must go
into the most isolated communities. Even here the rural teacher, the
summer tourist, and even the radio have made considerable inroads,
especially upon the speech of the younger members of the popu-
lation.

Similarly, even less can be done about portraying the geographic
configuration of myth, superstition, magical practices, and a wealth
of folk lore which still abounds in the more isolated sections. Almost
the only groups available for such a study are those in schoolrooms,
and here superstition, as well as dialect, finds itself in strained and
hostile environment. It seems to the writer that superstition is more
widespread and more tenacious than dialect because less often ex-
posed to criticism and ridicule. There is a wealth of such material in
the Ozarks but it was not possible to treat it adequately in this
study.

In general, the Missouri Ozarks may be accurately considered as
an internally marginal subculture area whose essential uniqueness is
being rapidly lost under the impact of modern civilization. The es-
sentially super-rural character of the region did persist long after it
had been outgrown in the greater part of rural America, due to its
protective isolation from the ordinary agencies of communication
and the inadequacy of its transportation. Largely within the life-
time of those now living this protective isolation has been broken
down, and only in the interior and isolated counties does the unique-
ness remain. The agencies of transportation and communication are
playing the most important part; far more important than density of
population, the economic factor, or ethnic stock.

Sournwest Missouri State TEACHERS COLLEGE
SPRINGFIELD, Missouri
