The State and Semi-Public Corporations

Author(s): Albion W. Small

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Tan., 1896), pp. 398-410
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/276187 1

Accessed: 08-05-2016 22:37 UTC
Tue problem indicated by the subject of this paper may be
formulated as follows: What have been and what should be the
relations of a given society —7.¢., of the organized people,
represented by government, municipal, state or national —to
corporations carrying on semi-public functions? This form of
the problem emphasizes the necessary distinction between the
people, on the one hand, and government, or the people’s most
prominent agency for social control, on the other hand. This
distinction leads to the preliminary suggestion that the govern-
ment is supposed to represent the whole people, whereas cor-
porations are at best segregated parties, and as such their imme-
diate interests appear antagonistic to those of the whole. Hence,
the obvious task of government is to promote the establishment
of a properly balanced coGrdination not only between the
incorporated and the employed parties on the one hand, but
also between these and the other members of the state.

What, then, are semi-public corporations? There is general
agreement in the use of C. J. Marshall’s description of a cor-
poration, viz.: ‘An artificial being, invisible, intangible, and
existing only in contemplation of law.’ We are also generally
agreed in taking for granted the doctrine of public corporations,
familiar since the Dartmouth College case, viz., that a public
corporation is the legally recognized body of people in a given
area; the body so constituted existing for the benefit of all its
constituents; the constituents meanwhile, so long as they reside
within the area, having no choice about membership of the cor-
poration.

The most definite and workable definition of a semi-public

*This paper is a by-product of the seminar in sociology conducted by the

author. It has made special use of work done by Messrs. J. D. Forrest, Paul Monroe
and H. W. Thurston.

an
corporation that I can propose or discover is that it is every
corporation which is not public. The public corporation is dis-
tinguished in kind from other corporations by the fact that it is
inclusive and involuntary. All other corporations are exclusive,
but at the same time they are related to the members of the
body politic, because whatever they do sooner or later in some
measure affects these fellow-citizens. Whether we speak of
private corporations or semi-public corporations, we are in real-
ity using varied terms for what is essentially the same thing.
The parish, the school district, the village, the county are public
corporations. The legal persons not falling in this class are bodies
that move and have their being within the societies making up
the public corporations, and are properly distinguishable from
each other only by the difference of degree in which their cor-
porate conduct affects the public.

This view corresponds rather with the traditions of the com-
mon law than with recent attempts of economic theorists to
discover a principle of distinction between semi-public and pri-
vate corporations. Thus the position just taken is implicitly in
the opinion rendered more than three hundred years ago by
Lord Chief Justice Hale, that when private property is “affected
with a public interest it ceases to be juris privatis only.” Beach
on corporations (Vol. I., ch. 3, § 30) says: ‘Property does
become clothed with a public interest when used in a manner to
make it of public consequence and affect the community at
large.” Reaffirmatives of this doctrine are numerous enough in
American decisions (¢. g., Munn vs. People of IIl.; 94 U. S.,
115, 26).

Field on corporations asserts (Ch. 3, § 35): “All private cor-
porations, however, are in a certain sense of public interest. In
fact, the conferring of ...... powers and functions upon a
society of persons, and giving them privileges not commonly
enjoyed without such grant, and thereby surrendering to the
corporate body authority which otherwise must remain in the
sovereignty of the state, can only be justified on the ground of
the public benefit to be derived from the grant, and that the
state in this way will be fully indemnified for the surrender or
transfer of the supreme rights in respect to the authority con-
ferred.”

Thus the growing legal usage bases distinctions between
private and semi-public corporations on their relation to public
interest. This view practically assumes that the difference
between private business and public business is only one of
degree. All private business affects the public, and the question
involved under our present subject is: What is the status of pri-
vate business, especially in corporate form, when a general
interest in it becomes evident to the public ?

I will subdivide the question and ask first :

What is the functional relation of corporations to the state ?

The answer is already implied. In a word, I regard the cor-
poration, the syndicate, the trust, the capitalistic monopoly as
pioneers of a better era of industrial gain and of social growth.

The first colonial charter of South Carolina reflected a phase of
doctrine affecting a few at the time in England, byincorporating a
clause which made it a punishable offense for anyone less closely
related than a cousin german to plead a cause for another in
court, or for anyone to accept pay for such service. It has
become the fashion during the last three decades for states in
adopting revised constitutions to reiterate in them words which
had different associations from those which led to their
formulation in protest against Elizabethan grants. Thus:
‘Monopolies are odious, contrary to the spirit of a free govern-
ment and the principles of commerce, and ought not to be suf-
fered.” I venture the prediction that the time will come when
the citizens of industrially freer America will regard these omni-
bus denunciations of monopolies as equally naive with the colo-
nial proscription of attorneys at law. We shall learn that
monopoly is like fire —a good servant but a bad master. When
we are ready to rewrite history upon the hypothesis that the dis-
coverers, the inventors, the leaders of previous generations, have
been so many retarders of civilization, we shall be prepared to
continue autobiography of our own period in terms of the
abuse which restless men are heaping upon organizations of cap-
ital without discrimination.

For nineteen centuries Christians have been preaching and
trying to believe that we are members one of another; that we
must work together in order to live ourselves out. We are just
beginning to realize this conception intimately in devices by
which many scattered financial interests are bound into a closely
knitted whole. And now we turn upon these unperfected
devices, upon which men with all their hereditary and acquired
selfishness have begun to experiment—these prophecies of bal-
anced and adjusted and justified codperation— and we charge
them with all that is unregenerate in the people who make them
their tools !

A railroad syndicate or a gas trust may be quite as innocent
and quite as useful as a ward caucus or a Christian Endeavor
convention. In other instances it may be simply a softer sand-
bag than ordinary footpads.use. Both patriots and traitors use
firearms, and they both use public franchises. They alike choose
these latter means because they are economically effective. If
we have the purest zeal for the common good that has ever fired
the'soul of ancient or modern reformers, we cannot apply that
zeal to best purpose among our industrial problems without set-
ting it to the task of perfecting the checks and balances of
industrial combination, which corporations of all kinds have
begun to apply. The correct view of the situation is this: The
evolution of demand for particular kinds and quantities of work
has been accompanied by the evolution of a peculiar industrial
organization, having certain obvious adaptations to the tasks to
be performed. This organization affords a unique medium for
exhibition of new variations of human ingenuity and efficiency as
well as perversity. These opportunities are embraced both by
aggregations of capital on the one hand and by aggregations of
labor on the other hand. These complementary factors are at
once and perhaps equally the security and the menace of modern
industry.

My answer to the question what is the functional rela-
tion between the state and corporation is, therefore, that the
corporation has a tributary and subordinate function within the
state as truly as the government. It is a specific function, dis-
charging specified tasks. The corporation sustains a part of the
necessary economic activity of society, over the whole of which
the government exercises general supervision. Up to date we
have no more expedient means at hand than the corporation on
the one side and government on the other to provide for their
respective shares of divided social labor. Neither of these parts
of social machinery is to be considered unalterable, any more
than present models of battle ships or communion cups. Each
is the means at present most available for discharging its
respective kind of function. With reference to the corporation
our problem is, how may we secure just that function without
defect or excess, and without disturbance of the other functions
of society? We have to learn how to secure for the public the
advantages of monopoly, administered in the anti-monopolistic
spirit.

No student of political history doubts that Prussia is deeply
indebted to Frederick the Great for his application of the
theory of “benevolent despotism.” We are passing through the
benevolent despot stage of corporate development — that is, so
far as the despots ave benevolent. The imminent social task in
this connection is to convert corporate power to the service of
benevolent democracy.

I turn to the question: What is the ethical relation between
corporations and the state?

This question exposes these economic devices from another
angle. In this light they are seen to be properly inventions that
deserve social endorsement, in so far as they promote the pub-
lic weal. There is no more sacredness about a corporation in
itself, apart from its service to society, than there is about an
ox-yoke or atide-mill. Charter privileges imply corresponding
corporate services; they imply that the party making the
grant, as well as the party accepting it, is better off because
of the arrangement than before. They imply further, that
when the advantage ceases to be reciprocal, the privilege may
be withdrawn from the non-reciprocating party by the party from
which it was derived. In other words, a corporate franchise has
no reason for being, except as it is in effect a pledge on the
part of the corporation to do a public service to the greater
advantage of the public than could otherwise be secured. Any
theory of corporations, or of contracts smuggled into the doc-
trine of corporations, which denies to the public the right to get
itself better served by adjustment of claims and termination of
contract and franchise, is fiction for the gullible. There isa very
general superstition that the legal person known as a corpora-
tion may dawdle, and waste, and neglect and destroy, but that
the party paying for its presumed services may not discharge the
unprofitable servant. The superstition goes further, and believes
that for a moderate Wehrgeld a corporation may rob, maim,
oppress, banish, kill, but that it may neither be executed nor
disfranchised for its felony.

No legislative franchise has any more of the attributes of
divinity than the law of entail or of primogeniture. Corpora-
tions are presumptively servants, not masters, of the public. They
are to be judged by their performances, and should be treated
accordingly. A corporation which is deficient in the discharge
of its delegated function should be restored to usefulness by
vigorous measures, if necessary, just as the proper public author-
ity should repair a bad road. This principle was assumed by
congress, when it passed the interstate commerce bill in 1886,
in view of the eighteen distinct classes of delinquencies on the
part of the railroads, recited by the Cullom committee of the
senate. A corporation that has turned its social office into a
personal “snap” should be abated like any other nuisance.

These opinions are sustained by the law of the land, as inter-
preted by our courts. At the same time, it must be confessed
that the complexity of our administrative and judicial system has
been a stumbling block to many persons of large intelligence
who have not been specially instructed in constitutional law. The
interlocking state and federal jurisdictions, the curiously dis-
tributed powers of regulating commerce, of enforcing police
regulations, of sanctioning and interpreting and enforcing con-
tracts, etc., seem to the uninitiated to furnish easy means of
nullifying the popular will as expressed in the laws. It is hard
for the ordinary man to understand that a railroad corporation is
not held to be above the law-making power, when a state law
regulating railroads within the state is declared unconstitutional
by a United States court, on the ground that the law is a regula-
tion of commerce. Yet, in spite of such afflictions to the lay
mind, the accepted rules of law are sufficiently explicit to leave
no proper doubt that in theory corporations are held to be
accountable to the people for their stewardship of public trusts.

For example: It has been held (Ohio and Miss. R. R. Co.
vs. McClelland, 25 Ill., 140) that a “corporate charter, though
a contract, is subject to the power of the state to regulate
the action of the corporation as it would that of a natural per-
son by proper police regulations.” *

In the case: Peoria and Rock Island R. R. Co. vs. Cool Val-
ley Mining Co. (68 Ill., 489) the doctrine was announced that
the primary object of such corporation was the public accommo-
dation, and promotion of public interests; that the dividends of
stockholders are incidental.”

A single reference may be made to the claim that a charter,
being a contract, may defy legislation. Judge Cooley has written
as follows :3

“But even the agreement of a state that the grant shall be
exclusive cannot prevent the making of another, subject to the
obligation to provide compensation, under the principles govern-
ing the law of eminent domain. An exclusive privilege only gives
to the franchise additional value as property, and all property is sub-
ject to be taken and appropriated to public uses on making payment
therefor. Therefore, notwithstanding the existence of an exclusive
grant to construct a railroad between two named places, or a bridge

*So in Northwestern Fertilizing Co. vs. Hyde Park, 70 Ill., 634; so Galena and
Chicago Union R. R., 28 IIL, 283.

2 So Chicago and Alton vs. People, 67 Ill., 11; also Munn vs. People, 69 IIl., 80.
3 Constl. Law, 307.
But we must turn to a third question: What is the present
operative or practical relation between corporations and the
state? The facts are, first, that there is no authoritative code of
corporation ethics to which the public can appeal in judgment of
corporations; and, on the other hand, corporation managers have
evidently very vague conceptions of their functional and ethical
relations to the public. There was a notable struggle in Chicago
recently over a certain franchise, involving the use of streets in
the vicinity of its plant by one of our largest manufacturing
corporations. The president of one of the most important com-
mercial organizations in the city told the writer, while the con-
test.was going on, that he had just discussed the points in con-
troversy with a high officer of the encroaching company, and
that official seemed utterly incapable of entertaining the idea
that the citizens in general had any proper rights in the public
streets which the corporation was bound to respect.

It would be trite and commonplace to multiply illustrations
of the reversal by corporation managers of the functional and
ethical relation upon which society predicates corporate priv-
ileges. The morbid and extreme suspicion of corporations, and
especially of trusts as such, to which reference was made at the
outset, is the natural consequence of corporate defiance of obli-
gation to the sanctioning and sustaining public. The popular
mind is at present tending to the view that capitalistic organiza-
tions are inherently and necessarily evil. Innumerable cor-
porations are acting on the presumption that the public is a
mine, to be worked for all it is worth till the lead runs out. A

West River Bridge Co. vs. Dix, 6 Hon., 507; Eastern R. R. Co. vs. B. and M.
R. R. Co., 111 Mass., 125; also Judge Gaynor 7” ve Brooklyn Heights R. R. Co.
change of public opinion is unlikely, therefore, until there is an
evident change of front in corporate management.

We have to ask then what shall we do about it?

I answer: First and foremost, the thing at which the “ prac-
tical’? men smile, which professional ‘‘ reformers” sneer at as an
evasion of the issue, viz., teach the fundamental principles of
corporate and state relationship to all sorts and conditions of
men. Whatever more direct measures we may hereafter devise,
to reduce the evils of corporate selfishness and to harness capi-
talistic organization to public tasks, society cannot afford to per-
sist in rule-of-thumb policies toward agencies with such enor-
mous capacity to promote or to endanger the public good. It
is as reactionary for us to treat capitalistic organizations indis-
criminately and on principle as beasts of prey, to be baited at
will whenever we can catch them at disadvantage, as it was for
the English peasantry to resist the building of railroads, or for
the Russians, of whom Wallace and Tolstoi tell, to demolish
improved farm implements. On the other hand, the day is past
in which men can be awed into acquiescence in the divine right
of corporations. But if we cease to venerate without learning
to appreciate, we may harm ourselves worse in the first instance
than by retaining the dominant superstition. Between ceasing
to pray to idols and beginning to smash them is a shorter step
than to the intelligent use of them as monuments of art and
indexes of culture. Corporations, trusts, monopolies are
here. They have begun to reveal their incalculable potencies
for social service. Men must be taught to distinguish between
these devices, as controllable social agencies, and on the
other hand the unsocial personal volition, which at present
often acts the réle of a possessing devil perverting the agency.
Men must be taught to study the social adaptabilities of
capitalistic organization as expectantly as we study the appli-
cations of electrical energy. Everybody except the anarchist
anticipates the next grand social gain through some manner
of extension of the principles of industrial organization. Let
us promote this gain by spreading intelligence about actual
and possible economy of effort through organization of organ-
izations.

In the second place, let us encourage /egis/ation that shall
prescribe the lines within which corporate action must recognize
public interest. 1 admit that this is only another way of saying:
Let us face the necessity of evolving superior citizens in order
that there may be superior legislators. In other words let public
opinion register itself in authoritative public standards as rapidly
as the social consciousness becomes intelligent. Let there be
careful study of the developing needs and opportunities of
society, and let the results of study declare themselves in devel-
oping legal principles of social self-control. I am not now
referring to any particular measures, but to the principle that
legislation which creates corporations without corresponding
regulation is as anomalous and socially dangerous as a régime of
domestic relations ruled solely by the instinct of propagation,
without responsibilty for the training of children.

The Jaissez faire doctrine is today as fast in the limbo of
political impotence as is the Queen of the Sandwich Islands. The
high priests of this doctrine—Herbert Spencer in England,
and Professor Sumner in this country—never meant what they
have been supposed to teach. They have not said ‘legislatures
should do nothing,” but “legislatures should not do the wrong
thing, and they will do the wrong thing till men put more brains
and fairness and knowledge of affairs into legislation.” It would
be as rational to set about improving the type of human beings
by attempting to breed the nervous system out of our bodies, as
to calculate upon social progress without development of the
coérdinating agency of legislation. So long as there is society
there must be social volition correlating parts of society to the
whole. Corporate hands are wont to act as though they would
say, “I am the body!” There will be no more important and
complicated legislative tasks in the epoch on which we have
entered, than those which are already upon us in the necessity of
reducing these usurping organs to normal vicarious agency
within the social body.
Third, let us by all means fit ourselves to assume direct pub-
lic control of many properties which belong by nature to the
public; properties which we have hitherto farmed out at enor-
mous public sacrifice. I do not fix a limit to the number of
these properties, for I do not know where the limit will be found,
and so far as any fears are concerned about consequences of
public proprietorship as authorized by the principles cited, I do
not care. I am sure of this, that so long as men agree to main-
tain society, they will more and more agree that the question of pri-
vate or corporate or public control of the industrial opportuni-
ties upon which the good of all depends is in the last resort
a question of administration. Is the public welfare most likely
to be subserved by public or by proxy management?

Readers may be inclined to decide at this point that the argu-
ment is a total surrender to socialism. On the contrary, I am
neither a socialist, nor a consorter with socialists. But supposing
the inference were correct, candid men have no business to ask
whether a thing is socialistic, but only whether it is true. Let
others retain the practice of damnation by label. There is no
room for it with enlightened thinkers. It should be no secret,
among men capable of considering the interests involved in con-
temporary social conditions, that no man is likely to have his
mental vision accurately focused upon the present situation
unless he has learned to look occasionally upon our institutions
through the lenses of socialism. It does not follow that we
must adopt the philosophy or the programs of socialism, neither
does it follow that we must repudiate the consequences of
rational social analysis because they correspond with certain
elements of socialistic opinion.

The first lesson in political economy of which.I have any dis-
tinct recollection was to the effect that no government can carry
on any industrial enterprise as profitably as it can be managed
by individuals. As an abstract proposition this may be true. It
cannot at present be proved or disproved. It has been abun-
dantly demonstrated, however, that governments can and do
carry on some very important classes of business with financial,
political and social advantages to the whole public, incomparably
superior to those obtainable previously from private performance
of the same service. I say nothing about the ultimate method
of managing these and other kinds of business. Until we have
developed and applied, much beyond present standards, the policy
and practice of social agency on the part of individuals in the
conduct of business, direct public control, and even public man-
agement of many kinds of business is the dictate of reason, of
prudence and of patriotism. The town which does not today
own or control its gas, electric lights, water supply and street
railway rights, is presumably a town of low grade both in eco-
nomic intelligence and in civic virtue.

If a man is too lazy to brush his own coat and adjust his own
cravat, and if he have money to spare, it is his legal privilege
to hire a valet. That functionary is a precious fool if he does
not make his master pay roundly for the service. If the citizens
of a town are so absorbed in their more particular business, or
so unskillful in public combination that they prefer to depend
upon private enterprise for the supply of such general wants as
those just specified, it is cause for public congratulation if private
caterers presently grow so rich that the public at last grows jealous.
Enormous private gains from operation of franchises to supply
these public needs is, in itself, evidence not so much of the
culpability of the corporations as of the unthrift and political
inefficiency and supineness of the people.

I venture a single reference to the practicability of improve-
ment in the relations discussed. We are just fairly enter-
ing upon the observing and describing and analyzing stage
of social relations. Our national and state and municipal
governments have already done an enormous amount of
necessary preliminary work in gathering and organizing
essential information. Popular and systematic thought is
asserting its freedom from arbitrary conventional philosophies.
A quickened social consciousness is assuming the right,
the privilege, the duty of life—‘ life more abundant,” in the
individual and in society. As never before in the history of
society, we are anticipating problems of social order, and pro-
posing solutions, instead of being satisfied to explain solutions
after the centuries have worked them out. We are learning to
formulate what we want as freely in civics as in mechanics. We
are learning to set ourselves in as businesslike fashion in the one
field as in the other to the task of getting our wants supplied.
Better than all, some of the choice and master spirits of our
age are showing by word and deed that in these tasks of peace
there is service to be rendered and renown to be won not less
splendid than the victories and laurels of war. We are already
within the line of operations of a campaign for human improve-
ment. The end will not be till every toiler with hand or brain has
secured social guarantee of more secure industrial status. The
coming lot of the capable and faithful laborer will beas superior to
his present condition of industrial dependence and insecurity as
the political status of citizens ina democratic republic is to that of
the unprivileged class in ancient oligarchies. I calculate confi-
dently upon progressive public absorption of corporate and
monopolistic advantages as a certain incident of this glorious
gain. Axsion W, SMALL.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO.
