Research Barriers in the South

Author(s): Wilson Gee

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 41, No. 4 (Tan., 1936), pp. 484-491
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2768958

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:58 UTC
ABSTRACT

Fundamentally, the quality and quantity of research produced by an educational
institution are determined by such factors as the presence or absence of a research
environment, the size of the teaching load, salaries which draw or repel the best grade
of intellect, and availability of grants for research. The South has had little of this to
offer in the past, and, as a consequence, has lost to the North and West more of her
notable scholars than she has been able to attract. Her hope for the future would
seemingly lie in the assembling of first-class graduate facilities, and the provision of a
large number of first-class opportunities for superior talent.

A decade or two ago a volume of a research nature seldom ap-
peared under the authorship of a professor in a southern university or
college. Now there are a considerable number of such studies orig-
inating from several quarters of the region. Thus one could now
paint an encouraging picture of what has been and is being accom-
plished in the matter of social research in the South, mainly in a few
centers of concentration of such work, but by no means entirely
limited to these.

When the difficulties to be overcome, in the achievement of such
work in the South, are given proper consideration in comparison with
the more abundant opportunities and resources in the North and
West, the situation is all the more to the credit of the southern in-
vestigator. We have learned a great deal in recent years with regard
to the conditions which tend to produce research in American uni-
versities and colleges. Of course, there will always be the exception
to the rule, the professor who has the indomitably ardent research
spirit that enables him to triumph over time and material limita-
tions. Unfortunately, such instances are altogether too infrequent.
Where one such intransigent occurs, there are dozens who must or do
yield to the realities of the physical and mental demands made upon
them by heavy teaching loads, a multiplicity of faculty committee
and like duties, oftentimes severely limited financial resources both
institutional and personal, meager library equipment, and not least

tA paper delivered before the organization meeting of the Southern Sociological
Society at Knoxville, Tennessee, April 20, 1935.

484
of all the damning inertia in the atmosphere with regard to the im-
portance of research achievement.

Even a cursory examination of the underlying characteristics of
the university and college centers in this country where the largest
amount of research, if not always the best in quality—and there is a
considerable correlation between quantity of research and quality of
research from the institutional point of view—occurs, will-reveal that
it is indispensable that certain fundamental conditions prevail. First
among these is what may be termed the research atmosphere. This
is developed in part by the faculty themselves, but perhaps more
largely by the policy of the institution and the extent to which it is
concurred in by the president or chancellor. Every university has
its quota? of those to whom the card table, the afternoon tea, the
role of the raconteur, the delights of gentlemanly living at leisurely
paces, are supreme over all other claims upon his time outside the
classroom. But the number of such ornamental figures is greatly re-
duced in the presence of an institutional atmosphere where a pro-
fessor is rated by his creative achievement, because it is a part of the
mores of the place. There is much lip-service paid to the cause of re-
search in the South, and in the North and West, but a valid case can
be made out that the degree of it is greatest in this section of our
country. Certainly, if the importance of research to effective teach-
ing, in the creation of a vigorous intellectual environment for pro-
fessor, student, and community, as well as in the prestige of even the
small college, were honestly appreciated, a great deal more could be
accomplished throughout the South, in spite of limited resources,
than is being done. It is most important that the research atmos-
phere be developed, and that it become the expected thing for the
professor to carry forward some work in research. It is inevitable
that he will receive recognition for any research that he does, but it

?In an article in the Atlantic Monthly for April, 1935 (p. 442), President James
Bryant Conant of Harvard University says in somewhat the same connection: “I am
sorry to say that there are signs that another element has been injected into many
colleges and universities in recent times. We all know too many cases where a man once
appointed for life to a professorship proceeds by slow degrees to betray his trust—he
enjoys the security of his office and neglects all but the most formal duties. To anyone
who ponders on this problem the fate of the monasteries in the storm of the Reforma-
tion comes grimly to mind.”
should be more generally true that preferment in rank, salary, and
opportunities for further research be accorded him on such a basis.
Research flourishes best in an atmosphere which is distinctly favor-
able to it, where it is the expected thing to do, and only slightly in
the neutral or hostile environment.

But there must be something more than atmosphere. It cannot
be denied that too heavy a teaching load is an effective barrier to any
large amount of substantial research. The teacher must have at
least a passing acquaintance with what is taking place in the national
and local arena, and such conversancy calls for extensive reading.
The more teaching he has to do, the more reading he should have to
do in preparation, and of course the less energy and time there is
left him with which to accomplish it. A survey of Research Barriers
in the South,’ made a few years ago for the Social Science Research
Council, compared the teaching loads in forty-seven southern and
fifty-one northern and western universities and colleges. It was dis-
covered that the southern professor, all ranks combined, teaches, on
the average, a load about 30 per cent greater than his northern col-
league, in both the items of aggregate hours taught and the number
of teaching hours per teaching week. On the average, his load was
found to be 413 hours per academic year, at a rate of 13 hours per
week. In many instances, with some ranks, it was as high as 14, 15,
and even 16 hours per week. No institution in this region reported
a lower rate than 9 hours per week. The northern and western sam-
ple in summary revealed an average of 320 hours, or 10.3 hours per
week. A few of the universities in that part of the country have some
ranks of professors teaching less than 4 hours per week. In general,
research thrives in the atmosphere which provides for painstaking
and detailed searching and accumulation of facts, and for leisurely
analysis and reflection upon the meaning of the assembled data.
These things are practically impossible where every ounce of the in-
dividual’s creative energy is absorbed in teaching year in and year
out. Even from the standpoint of really effective teaching such a
situation is most undesirable. The honorable profession of teaching
is one calling for highly inspirational qualities which do not emerge
in any large measure from a fatigued mind in a fatigued body. It is

3 Wilson Gee, Research Barriers in the South (Century Co., 1932).
emphatically certain that if southern universities and colleges wish
better teachers, more effective teaching, and a desirable share in
scholarly productivity, and they certainly do, this barrier of too
heavy a teaching load must be broken down. And it is especially im-
portant that the individual who has demonstrated research ability
of a high order should be given only enough teaching to stimulate
both him and a limited number of graduate students who are inter-
ested in his particular specialty.

Few, if any, factors in an educational institution operate to affect
more potently all phases of its life than does that of salaries. The
college professor occupies a position of leadership in his community,
and is expected to measure up to good standards of living. And, un-
less he and his family are enabled to live up to the requirements of
the good life, his general state of happiness and the effectiveness of
his work are greatly impaired.

The university or the college which can pay the higher salary, per-
haps, not invariably, but certainly as a general rule, attracts the best
grade of men in intellect and equipment. It commands the superior
type, because the reward it offers creates the environment that is
favorable to carrying forward the aims and ideals which have in-
duced such individuals to enter the teaching profession. This was
the line of reasoning about which first President Gilman of Hopkins
and later President Harper of Chicago built up the well-deserved
prestige of their emerging universities, giving them names which
quickly became famous the world around. The institutions with the
lower salary levels find their ranks slowly depleted, and, customarily,
it is their best who leave them for the better opportunities elsewhere.
Such a loss is more often than not permanent, for the vacancies thus
occasioned usually must be filled by those of less ability than the
ones who have left. It is mainly because of this process that a com-
paratively few universities and colleges in the world become not only
the haven of much genius which they have developed within their
ranks, but great because they have been able continually to draw the
best from other institutions everywhere.

The South has seriously neglected, to its substantial detriment, the
considerations just mentioned. The results of my comparative sur-
vey of this situation in the South, and in the North and West, indi-
cate that, on the average, professors of all ranks in the North and
West are actually paid, in round numbers, about one-third higher
salaries than their colleagues in the South. These data are for the
academic year 1931-32, and, of course, have been modified consid-
erably by the all but universal cuts which have been made in sal-
aries, a situation which has fallen perhaps more heavily on the South
than in any other large region of the nation.

A related matter concerning which there are no definite figures is
that of grants from the educational institutions where they are lo-
cated to professors for research. This condition is widely prevalent
among the universities in this country where research is carried for-
ward to any considerable extent. It is too much to expect of the pro-
fessor, even upon an adequate salary basis, and altogether unreason-
able for the professor upon a low-salary scale, that he should use his
personal income, upon which there are so many heavy demands, to
finance research. The fact must be faced that research is expensive.
Except for a few institutions, which could easily be numbered on the
fingers of one hand, the South is notably laggard in its provision for
such fluid research funds, and a good part of what is available is
largely due to the soundly based vision of the Rockefeller philan-
thropies.

A stock argument in justification of the lower salary scales in the
South has always been that it costs less to live in the South than it
does in other parts of the nation. While the data regarding the mat-
ter are not as adequate as is desirable, and it would be very expen-
sive to make them so, I feel after a careful investigation of the
pertinent facts that the statement is fully warranted to the effect
that there is a very serious question as to whether in total subsistence
costs of living to the same standard one can live more cheaply in the
South than in other parts of the nation.

It is certain that the prevailing impression, that living is cheaper
in the South, is so clearly a questionable one, with the preponderant
evidence at present against such a contention, that no such opinion
should be valid as a factor justifying lower wages and salaries in the
South. With subsistence costs for the same level of living much the
same in the South and outside of it, the problem shifts to the com-
petition between the subsistence and the advancement elements of
the family’s standard of living. If the income of the southern pro-
fessor is lower than that of his colleague in the North and West, it
means that he is denied the very things which operate to make him
more effective in and useful to the institution and community which
he serves.

The extent of the influence of this lack of adequate salary scales,
the severely limited funds available for aid to research, and the
things these factors connote, cannot be overestimated as effective
fundamental barriers to research in Southern universities and col-
leges. In spite of the disastrous effects of depression days, significant
improvement must be made along these lines if the South is to fulfil
the destiny which is its responsibility and which is expected of it. Its
dereliction in this matter has been too long excused on grounds upon
which it may no longer validly stand. The South cannot progress as
it should without the retention, attraction, and exploitation of its
proper share of creative talent. Without its due share of inciting,
creative leadership, it will continue to lag behind the national pro-
cession. By all means preserve its worth-while distinctive culture.
But this will never be done without aggressive and talented leader-
ship on its part.

A case in point regarding which I have made specific data avail-
able concerns the southern-born social scientists in Who's Who in
America: 1930-31. An analysis of these data indicates a “drag”
of 45 per cent of these out of the South to other parts of the country.
To compensate in some measure for this loss of eighty-nine such indi-
viduals, there were fifty-eight northern- and western-born social sci-
entists in Who’s Who that migrated into Southern territory. Thus
there was sustained a quantitative net loss of thirty-one persons.
However, it is clear that this quantitative replacement, man for
man, is not commensurate with the qualitative loss sustained. A
more or less imponderable factor in such a phenomenon is the larger
number of superior opportunities for attaining distinction in the
North and West. This is the attractive influence, and at the same
time gives the southern-born migrant, even when of equal attain-
ments with those who remain in the South, a better chance to con-
struct a career which brings recognition. Moreover, the northern-
and western-born migrant to the South often must achieve his dis-
tinction under seriously limiting factors in environment and re-
sources. In spite of such considerations, the evidence points to the
fact that the South is sustaining a serious net loss of its superior
talent to the North and West.

During the past year and a half I have carried forward, with the
aid of students, a study of the same situation with regard to all
southern-born people in Who’s Who for 1932-33, as well as those in
the same directory born outside of the South but now living in this
part of the nation. This analysis shows that of the 6,015 southern-
born in that edition of Who’s Who, 2,229 are living in other parts of
the nation or world. This is a loss of 37 per cent. However, there
was an accretion of 1,416 such individuals who were born outside the
South, but were then living in this region, reducing the net loss in the
South to 813 persons. It would be interesting to analyze this situa-
tion according to the various classifications, but this must be re-
served for another time and place.

The qualitative nature of the loss of talent which the South is ex-
periencing is still more strikingly illustrated by the data in American
Men of Science for 1927. In that volume there are eighty-eight
southern-born individuals of sufficient distinction to be included in
the total of 1,428 that are starred. Of these eighty-eight, the South
has lost seventy-one, or 81 per cent, to other regions. As a partial
compensation for this tremendous loss of brain power, there were
thirty-three northern- and western-born starred scientists located in
the South. These data, together with those just cited, would seem to
confirm the widely existent opinion that for many decades a steady
stream of the best in intellectual and leadership qualities has been
pouring from out the borders of the South toward superior advan-
tages elsewhere, and that this region has, as is true in so many re-
spects, given in larger measure than it has received in return.

To outline a program for the amelioration of this set of conditions
would be to chart progressive development along every significant
phase of the South, and to exceed the time and space limitations of
this particular discussion. From the point of view of higher educa-
tion two outstanding corrective measures suggest themselves. Really
first-class graduate facilities must become more prevalent at strategic
points in the South, because it was found in the sample of social sci-
entists studied that approximately 65 per cent of the individuals
trained in southern graduate schools tended to remain in this region.
On the other hand, where southern-born social scientists of distinc-
tion have been trained in northern and western graduate centers,
about half of them locate outside of their native region. In the case
of the natural scientists the corresponding figure is 66 per cent. The
second ameliorative factor is related to the first. A larger number of
first-class opportunities for superior talent must be provided in the
South. The more extensive development of high-grade graduate
centers will go a long way toward accomplishing this result, but ac-
companying such a movement there must be an increased emphasis
upon research and the support, financial and otherwise, necessary to
its achievement.

UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA
