Philosophical Anarchism: Its Rise, Decline, and Eclipse

Author(s): Victor S. Yarros

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 41, No. 4 (Tan., 1936), pp. 470-483
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2768957

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:57 UTC
ABSTRACT

Philosophical anarchism was an American phenomenon propounded by Benjamin R.
Tucker of New Bedford, Massachusetts, who was influenced by Proudhon’s What Is
Property? He founded the journal Liberty in 1882 and continued to edit it for nearly
thirty years. He was a pacifist and advocated an absence of all compulsion even in
government. From American associates he came to advocate extreme individualism,
holding that all coercion was immoral. The four major monopolies which he attacked
were land, money and banking, trade, patents and copyright. He held that to abolish
these would abolish poverty. He had great difficulty with the problem of the punish-
ment of criminals, but believed that crime would tend to disappear under an anarchistic
society. He opposed all paternalistic reform movements; believed in labor unions, but
opposed their legislative programs. His journal had several imitators. His following
was never large, and he alienated the followers of Herbert Spencer as well as his religious
disciples. The growth of trusts and syndicates in America and the increasing develop-
ment of socialistic forms of organization were, perhaps, most influential in causing
the decline of philosophical anarchism.

Occasionally, in the more scientific of contemporary political dis-
discussions, someone calls himself, or is called, a “philosophical
anarchist,” or an individualist-anarchist. The younger generation
of students and professors is unfamiliar with this variety of political
or economic radicalism. An account of the nature of the doctrine,
its origin, development, and decline should be of interest to students
of social thought.

Philosophical anarchism was as American a contribution as prag-
matism. The man who evolved it and decided to devote himself to
its propagation was Benjamin R. Tucker of New Bedford, Massa-
chusetts. Tucker was the son of a banker of Quaker descent and
affiliations. He received a conventional education, and planned,
with his parents, to make civil engineering his profession and at-
tended the Boston Polytechnical Institute for a period of two years.
Several causes or accidents then led him to abandon engineering and
turn to radical journalism. He informed his parents of his decision
and asked them to finance a year’s travel and study in Europe,
pointing out that the cost of such travel would not exceed that of a
third year in Boston. The parents readily acceded to his request,
and that ended his academic or formal education.

47°
In Europe he read much, attended meetings and lectures, and be-
came an admirer of P. J. Proudhon and his works. In Proudhon’s
What Is Property? Tucker first encountered the terms “anarchism”
and “anarchist” and Proudhon’s own original, not to say whimsical,
definition of those terms. In later years, Proudhon admitted that
this definition was a jeu d’esprit, not to be taken too seriously, but
Tucker took it very seriously indeed.

Upon his return to America and Boston, he decided to start a
fortnightly journal for the aggressive propaganda of anarchism. He
also hoped and planned to translate into English all of Proudhon’s
major works. He did translate two, What Is Property? and A System
of Economical Contradictions, but lack of time and of money pre-
vented him from completing his self-imposed task.

In 1882 he launched Liberty, a journal which, with not a few
interruptions and suspensions, he continued to edit and publish till
1910. He doubtless would have continued to publish it, since his
views underwent no substantial change, had not a fire destroyed
his printing shop and equipment. He had never insured his assets,
declaring that the insurance companies were charging unwarranted
and exorbitant rates.

Tucker lost his religious faith very early in his life, and became a
militant atheist. He translated, from the French, Michael Bakou-
nine’s pamphlet, God and the State. But he never quite lost his
Quaker sentiments. He remained a pacific and philosophical an-
archist. Although he hated and denounced government, and took
keen pleasure in calling the plutocrats and capitalists “the brother-
hood of thieves,” he never advocated violence, physical force, or
armed revolt. Resistance to government was to be passive—taking
such forms as refusal to pay taxes, evasion of jury service and mili-
tary duty. Resistance to plutocracy was likewise to be purely pas-
sive. There were to be individual and collective strikes against land-
lordism and rent, for example. There was to be organized competi-
tion with the commercial and other banks on the part of mutual, co-
operative banks as well as co-operation in industry and trade on a
voluntary basis in opposition to the profit system.

Tucker’s personal life was almost monastic. He worked hard,
slept little, ate simple and frugal meals, and allowed himself little
recreation. He was fond of the theater and of music, but he seldom
attended plays or concerts. He practiced the gospel of simple living
and high thinking. He was a severe and austere critic, and demanded
rigorous consistency of himself and of others. Compromise and op-
portunism he detested and fought with a fanaticism which re-
minded some of his friends of his remoter witch-burning and heresy-
hunting ancestors. He had few, if any, intimate friends, and was
reserved, cold, aloof in all his personal relations.

He was a forceful and clear writer, but a poor speaker. He had
marked journalistic ability, but he never wrote a sentence or line
which did not express his own convictions. To write for capitalistic
or bourgeois newspapers was, in his eyes, the worst form of prostitu-
tion. Although he was a member of the editorial staff of the Boston
Globe for several years, his duties were limited to the re-writing and
editing of news items and reports. His honesty and consistency com-
manded the respect and admiration of his associates on the paper,
few of whom had the slightest sympathy with his ideas. It is inter-
esting to note that in the eighties and early nineties of the last cen-
tury the publisher and editor, as well as the stockholders, of the
Boston Globe were not afraid of philosophical anarchism and not un-
willing to give employment to the leader of the anarchistic move-
ment in America.

As already indicated, Proudhon gave Tucker the terms he used as
well as certain basic concepts. But other men and other ideas—or,
perhaps, ideas differently formulated or expressed—had also influ-
enced his thinking. Among these were Josiah Warren, the grandson
of the Warren who fell at Bunker Hill; Lysander Spooner, Stephen
Pearl Andrews, and Col. William B. Greene. Warren, Tucker wrote,
first opened his eyes to economic and political truth by advocating
and elucidating two important principles, “the sovereignty of the
individual,” and “cost the limit of price.” Warren’s principles were
elaborated and defended, in various ways and from various points
of view, by Spooner, Andrews and Greene.

Tucker’s teachings grew and evolved and in their final phase and
form, as he acknowledged, they embodied a sort of synthesis, of
which the doctrines of John Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer, and
Auberon Herbert were significant ingredients.
The individualistic anarchist, wrote Tucker, was simply “an un-
terrified Jeffersonian democrat.” Government, according to the Jef-
fersonians, was a “necessary evil,” and its encroachments and ag-
gressions could be prevented, or controlled in part, only by an atti-
tude of profound distrust and by frequent revolutions. Well, if this
was true, then why not draw the inevitable conclusion that govern-
ment ought to be gradually abolished and voluntary co-operation
established in its place? The process, of course, would require time,
but the point was that if one knew the goal to be reached, one also
had a tolerably exact idea of the steps to be taken, the tactics to be
adopted, with the view of moving steadily toward the objective.

Again, all thoughtful democrats and advanced liberals believed,
with Macauley, that the remedy for the ills of liberty was to be
found in greater liberty. Anarchism, then, boldly took a stand for
the maximum of liberty, or the abolition of the state with its com-
pulsions and invasions. Further, all good democrats insisted on gov-
ernment “‘by the consent of the governed.”’ But few ever stopped to
ask whether the consent of the governed, as a fundamental prin-
ciple, was realized by institutions built on the principle of majority
tule. The consent of majorities, nominal or actual, was certainly not
the consent of all the governed. Government by consent of all the
governed was anarchism, and therefore the pumb-line democrat
must accept anarchism as his own conscious ideal, and not shrink
from it. Moreover, had not Herbert Spencer asserted and proved
that the state was conceived in aggression, founded upon aggression,
and maintained by aggression, and that majority rule was the great
political superstition of modern times? If we are to discard majority
tule as well as rule by tyrants, oligarchies, and dictators, then we are
logically forced to make anarchism our goal.

Finally, Proudhon had argued that liberty was the mother, not
the daughter, of order, and Sir Henry Maine had demonstrated that
social progress had represented a definite movement away from
“status” and toward “contract,” or free and voluntary association.
There was no reason, Tucker contended, why this march or trend
should stop short of anarchism.

To these arguments the still small voice of Quakerism added that
its was absolutely immoral to coerce other individuals, whether di-
rectly or indirectly, by supporting the state, by voting, by helping
to place power in the hands of officials, tax-collectors, jailers, and
executioners. The conscientious and loyal man must never cast a
ballot for any candidate for public office, or for any measure or pro-
posal involving coercion of non-consenting individuals. Thus the
dictates of the highest ethics enjoined the high-minded individual
against taking part in the processes and activities of the state.

Tucker realized that the issues of the period in which he carried
on his work were mainly, if not almost exclusively, economic, not
political. Anarchism, therefore, needed an economic program and a
set of economic principles to justify and sanction that program. The
individual does not live by bread alone, but neither does he live by
logic and political metaphysics alone. How would anarchism solve
the economic problems—the problem of human exploitation, of
monopoly, of special privilege, of low wages, or unemployment, of
poverty and slavery?

Tucker answered this all-important question by affirming that
the state was responsible for the existence of the economic problems
just mentioned. The state created and backed the monopolies and
the unjust privileges which, singly and in combination, caused un-
employment, miserable wages, and cruel exploitation of labor. “The
State—that is the enemy”—the enemy of the poor, the disinherited,
the downtrodden. Abolish the state, and the monopolies will dis-
appear.

The four major monopolies which Tucker attacked and held re-
sponsible for poverty and economic slavery were: land, money and
banking, trade, and patents and copyright. The abolition of these
monopolies, he argued, would solve all our economic problems, Full
and real equality of opportunity—the original American promise
and ideal—would be achieved; land would be free again; the only
title to a farm or home in a city would be one based on occupancy
and use, and millions now idle and jobless would gladly take up
land and cultivate it. In the cities and towns slums would be re-
claimed and rehabilitated, since no rent to landlords would have to
be paid, and interest on capital would be unprecedently low. Inter-
est rates would fall to 2 per cent, and eventually to 1 per cent, since
banking would be freed from monopolistic control, state banks would
regain their right to issue circulating notes or currency under a few
reasonable regulations designed to prevent deliberate cheating and
wild inflation, and mutual, co-operative banks would spring up
everywhere under the auspices of labor and consumer organizations.
Customs duties would be abolished, and trade and commerce would
be free. Patent and copyright privileges would be done away with,
and invention would be stimulated rather than checked, since the
only advantage an inventor or a purchaser of a new device would
enjoy would lie in the chance of building up good-will by an early
start.

In short, according to the argument, all our multi-millionaires
and millionaires, all our predatory capitalists owe their ill-gotten
wealth to monopoly and the plunder and ruthless exploitation
licensed by monopoly. The gross and disgraceful inequalities in
modern society are due not to competition, but to legal robbery.
The state is the servant of the robbers, and it exists chiefly to pre-
vent the expropriation of the robbers and the restoration of a fair
and free field for legitimate competition and wholesome, effective
voluntary co-operation.

Anarchism, Tucker emphasized again and again, is not synony-
mous with individual isolation, selfishness, primitive forms of indus-
try, failure to utilize the potentialities of science and technique.
What anarchism objects to is compulsory co-operation, not to in-
telligent, free, experimental co-operation.

Tucker was often asked what he, or his system, would do with the
criminal elements of a community. Does anarchism involve the
freedom to commit murder, burglary, arson, theft, and like offenses
against person or property? If so, it is utopian and unworthy of
serious consideration. Does it imply non-resistance to all forms of
evil? If so, human nature would reject it with scorn and contempt.
If it contemplates and permits the punishment of crime, then it be-
lieves in government and all the paraphernalia of so-called justice and
repression.

Tucker never encountered a more stubborn difficulty than this—of
satisfying critics and doubters of the soundness of his distinction
between crime in the sense of harmful anti-social behavior and
crime in the sense of violation of conventions and rules adopted by
accidental majorities and not at all essential to social security and
social solidarity.

But his position was this: No individual or group of individuals
should ever be punished or penalized merely for refusing to work
with the community. The individual has a perfect right to ignore
the state—as indeed Spencer had argued in the first edition of his
Social Statics—and do as he wills, provided he does not infringe
upon the equal liberty of all other individuals. But if he becomes
aggressive and “invasive”; if he violates the principle of equal
freedom, then he merits restraint and punishment. But to punish
him for injuring others is not to “govern” him. For, by definition,
government means interfering with and controlling the non-invasive
and non-aggressive individuals.

The question at once arises, How is the proper punishment for
crime to be determined, and by whom? After some hesitation and
uncertainty, he met this serious question by adopting the ideas of
Lysander Spooner—a very keen lawyer and student of legal history
—concerning trial by jury. His final statements on the subject may
be summed up thus: The issue of guilt and innocence in any actual
case would be decided by an authentic common-law jury—that is,
by twelve persons selected by lot from the entire list of the adult
members of the community. Before this jury the facts and the
principles of the case would be argued informally and thoroughly;
all technicalities and jargon would be eschewed; the appeal would
be the fundamental doctrine of equality of liberty. and opportunity.
The jury’s verdict would be final.

In the last analysis, the penalties inflicted would depend on the
intelligence and humanity of the community, which a representative
jury would reflect and translate into specific judgments. Some com-
munities might inflict capital punishment in certain cases; others
might reject that degree of punishment as barbarous or ineffectual.
Science and experience would suggest, from time to time, changes or
improvements in the anarchistic codes of criminal procedure and
criminal law. In any event, the wilful offender, the antisocial indi-
vidual, would have no one but himself to blame.

It should be added that Tucker and his followers did not believe
that an anarchistic society would be embarrassed and troubled by
much crime. Economic justice and equality of opportunity, they
held, would remove most of the causes of crime. Contracts would be
broken now and then, owing to misunderstanding, individual per-
versity, arrogance or folly, and the principal duty of juries would be
the interpretation and enforcement of contracts.

According to Tucker, anarchism would evolve gradually and not
be precipitated by a sudden revolution. Therefore, in all probability,
the police, or protective, functions of the state would be the last to
go—that is, to be taken over by voluntary associations. There would
doubtless be considerable competition in the field of protection
against crime as there is in the field of life, property, and accident
insurance, and the fittest would survive. But conflicts of opinion
among these protective associations might be expected; and, again,
juries would have to pass upon such conflicts and apply the will of
the entire community. True, the community might not reach a
strictly unanimous opinion in a given case, and this lack of agree-
ment, ordinarily, would be reflected in the jury’s deliberations.
Compromise verdicts would perhaps follow, but it was the conten-
tion of Lysander Spooner that compromise verdicts are fair and
reasonable. Trial by jury, under the common law, was supposed to
be, and meant to be, “trial by the county,” or trial by the whole com-
munity. Exemptions from jury service on account of differences in
mere opinion were wrong in principle, since any offender facing trial
was entitled to benefit of the fact that such differences existed.

Many socialist and other critics of Tucker’s philosophy insisted
that a voluntary association was a sort of government, and that
complete anarchism was an impossibility. His invariable reply was
that the critics failed to appreciate the significance of the definitions
of the terms they pretended to discuss. All that anarchism involved
was the abandonment of the element of compulsion in government.
To recognize the right of the individual to join, or decline to join,
the state, as well as resign his membership, or secede, after fulfilling
his contractual obligations, was “complete anarchism.”’ The mem-
bers of a voluntary association might enact any constitution or by-
laws they deemed sensible and expedient; no outsider had any right
to protest. The dissatisfied member had the right to resign.

The better to illustrate these principles, Tucker and some eight or
ten followers organized the Boston Anarchist Club. This was a pure-
ly educational body. It held meetings, arranged debates, invited
speakers, hired halls, and collected funds. One of its by-laws pro-
voked much surprise and ridicule. It provided that the president of
the club should preside over the meetings and rule, without appeal,
on all matters of procedure, such as the time to be allowed for ques-
tions, remarks, etc., or on points of order. What despotism! many
exclaimed. Here is your notion of liberty, Messrs. Anarchists! But,
Tucker argued, there is not the slightest violation of liberty in that
by-law. It was adopted unanimously because it seemed expedient
and businesslike. It was experimental. The members had the right
to change it at any of their meetings. The delegation of power for
certain purposes by a voluntary association, and for a limited period,
was wholly compatible with anarchistic principles.

In fighting the state and government, Tucker tried to make it
clear that he was fighting a certain principle, not a special institu-
tion, and that he would fight the same principle wherever it found
expression. He opposed savagely any and all reform movements
that had paternalistic aims and looked to the state for aid and ful-
fillment. He believed in labor unions, but he fought their legislative
programs. He believed in a short day, but not in a law imposing a
short day. He had no patience with minimum-wage-law proposals,
compulsory pension systems, compulsory insurance. For the same
reason, consistent, unrelenting opposition to compulsion, he com-
batted “populism,” “greenbackism,” the single-tax movement, and
all forms of socialism and communism. He denounced and exposed
Johann Most, the editor of Fretheit, the anarchist-communist organ.
The end, he declared, could never justify the means, if the means
were intrinsically immoral—and force, by whomsoever used, was im-
moral except as a means of preventing or punishing aggression.

On the other hand, Tucker was always happy and delighted when
any political party or other powerful organization espoused the
principle of liberty and recommended the repeal of an obnoxious,
tyrannical, restrictive law. Anti-tariff planks, anti-monopoly planks,
law-repeal planks always pleased him. He expected little, to be
sure, from political action, but he welcomed the educational effects
of “libertarian” moves or declarations.
At no time had Tucker’s Liberty more than a few hundred sub-
scribers. But among these were eminent and remarkable men and
women—distinguished lawyers, Wall Street financiers, men of
letters, journalists, liberal ministers. Through his exchange list he
influenced editors of labor and reform journals. Several prominent
trade-union leaders read Liberty faithfully and shared some of its
central ideas. The president of the Boston central labor union, a
man named Gibbs, resigned that office and joined the anarchist
club. It was believed that Samuel Gompers, in his opposition to
independent political action by organized labor and to compulsory
unemployment insurance, was in some degree guided by Tucker and
his disciples, one of whom wrote the editorials for the American Fed-
erationist during a decade or more.

Liberty was not long in inviting emulation and imitation. Several
other anarchistic journals were launched to support Tucker’s propa-
ganda: Lucifer in Kansas, edited by Moses Harmon; Fair Play in
New York, edited by E. C. Walker; and others. In appearance, in
style, and in the character of its contents, Liberty was a paragon.
Bernard Shaw, although a socialist, wrote for it and praised its intel-
lectual and literary tone and quality. Vilfredo Pareto sent it an
article, which Tucker printed with much satisfaction.

Tucker’s economic and political views remained essentially the
same throughout his career as anarchistic editor, teacher, and writer.
But his ethical and philosophical ideas, rather unfortunately, were
completely revolutionized by “Max Stirner,” or Caspar Schmidt,
the German pedagogue and author of a singular book, Der Einzige
und sein Eigenthum—available in an English translation under the
title, The Ego and His Own, Tucker was introduced to this volume
by John Henry Mackay, the Scotch-German poet and novelist,
whom Tucker had converted to anarchism. Stirner was a sort of
political metaphysician. He repudiated the ideas of the philosophers
of social and moral evolution. The individual or ego, he argued,
owed no allegiance to anyone. He was supreme, and, if intelligent,
governed himself entirely by utilitarian considerations. He might
or might not co-operate with others; self-interest and expediency
were his only guides. A society composed of conscious egoists would
be based on contract, and on nothing else. There would be nothing
mystical or supernatural about it. Men want peace, and peace can
be achieved by discussion and agreement. Altruism was nonsense, a
figment of the romantic imagination. All men are selfish, but selfish-
ness assumes different forms and manifestations. It is selfish to
please one’s self; it is just as selfish to please others whom one likes
to please, or whom one loves; it is selfish to devote one’s life and
abilities to a cause; it is selfish to give up one’s life for an ideal. One’s
kind of selfishness is determined by environment, by books, by acci-
dents, by temperamental traits. But no selfishness is “higher” than
any other selfishness.

These crude, naive notions were adopted by Tucker and some—
but not all—of his disciples as the height of wisdom, science, and
realistic psychology. Tucker renounced ethics and all lines of ethical
reasoning. He resolved to make his appeal exclusively to self-
interest and the supposed instincts, desires, and aspirations of the
“emancipated ego.” He became the champion of egoism as well as
of anarchism.

He no longer condemned government, politics, and voting as
“immoral.” He no longer spoke of the duty of the self-respecting
and upright individual to do the right thing, or of the “augustness”
of the thing felt to be right. He knew that all his masters and teach-
ers—Proudhon, Warren, Spooner, Spencer—had written in terms of
morality and right, but he dismissed that fact as unimportant and
irrelevant. Anarchism was to be brought about by conscious and
enlightened egoists, and from a rigorously utilitarian point of view.
The social contract of Rousseau was to become a fact, because free
men would throw overboard all religious and moral sanctions and
reorganize life on the basis of mutual advantage.

This pseudo-realistic gospel irritated and alienated those of
Tucker’s followers who had come to him via Spencer and who ac-
cepted evolutional ethics. It also offended the few sincerely religious
Christians who saw no conflict between the teachings of Jesus and
pacific and democratic anarchism. The movement was bound to
suffer from these losses. It could not but be adversely effected, too,
by the emerging school of social psychology, which made hash of
Stimer’s arbitrary and verbal distinctions. But these, doubtless,
were minor factors in the decline and virtual disappearance of
anarchism. Far more potent factors and forces tended to undermine
and discredit that movement.

In the first place, the amazing growth of trusts and syndicates, of
holding companies and huge corporations, of chain banks and chain
stores, gradually and insiduously shook the faith of many in the
efficacy of mutual banks, co-operative associations of producers and
consumers, and the competition of little fellows. Proudhon’s plan
for a bank of the people to make industrial loans without interest to
workers’ co-operatives, or other members, seemed extremely remote
and inapplicable to an age of mass production, mechanization, con-
tinental and international markets.

In the second place, the whole trend in politics and economics
since the end of the last century had been away from individualism
and laissez-faire-ism. The state, obviously, was not dying of inani-
tion or making room for voluntary institutions. Union labor was
becoming more and more paternalistic, and so were the individualis-
tic and self-reliant farmers. Everybody, in short, was looking to the
state for aid and support. State lines were vanishing lines; de-
mocracy had forgotten Jefferson. Cleveland had called protection
“the communism of pelf,” and the democratic party was finding low-
tariff planks and free-trade principles serious handicaps.

In the third place, thinkers and reformers of distinctly libertarian,
not to say anarchistic, sympathies, were saying that, whatever the
ideal society of the future may retain of compulsion in government,
it is practically certain that the next several decades will witness a
radical extension of governmental functions and responsibilities,
notably in connection with industry, finance, and commerce. In
other words, we are to reconcile ourselves to a great deal of collectiv-
ism, whether we relish the prospect or not, and anarchism may
be a post-collectivist stage of social development. Bertrand Russell
and others, who are not enamored of government, have reached
the definite conclusion that some form of socialism is inevitable,
and coming rather fast. Under socialism the individual, the minor-
ity, and the heretical groups generally may enjoy much less free-
dom than capitalism has tolerated, and the struggle for liberty may
have to be carried on with redoubled vigor. At all events, the task
of abolishing compulsion in favor of voluntary co-operation and
a régime of contract is not one for the present generation or even
the next.

The Marx-Proudhon contention that the state is merely the tool
of the class in power economically and financially, the protector of
privilege and ill-gotten property, has not been verified under Re-
publican-Democratic régimes. The dominant classes have had to
make concessions again and again to the dominated and exploited
elements of society. Agrarian reforms have been wrested from the
industrial lords; labor has managed to gain the right to organize,
strike, and boycott. There has been some democratization of
financial power, some regulation of rent, interest, and profits.
Plutocracy has not had its own way, and Burke’s formula, govern-
ment is compromise, has encouraged the masses to force reforms in
their own interest.

In fine, conditions, not theories, have directed the efforts and
struggles of the victims of plutocracy and privilege. The state has
not been boycotted; on the contrary, it has been courted, cajoled,
used, occasionally even captured, in part, by the spokesmen of labor
and agriculture, and by the intellectual groups who have deserted
their own class and made common cause with the masses.

Thus individualistic and philosophic anarchism has been relegated
to the limbo of abstractions and dreams. It has become irrelevant
and devoid of vital content. The streams of tendency have deprived
it of reality and significance. They have had the same effect, as we
all know, on the old type of liberalism, of laissez-faire-ism, which, as
Professor John Dewey has pointed out, forgetting relativity, has
pedantically identified itself with the narrow concepts of a particu-
lar era and a particular economic situation.

The anarchists have adjourned, finding their occupation gone.
But they claim to have made important contributions to political
science and to have rendered progress valuable services. Society,
they are satisfied, will have to recur to the principles they have
stressed—the principles of equal freedom, of full economic oppor-
tunity, of voluntary co-operation, of occupancy and use as the only
valid title to land, of the extension of the co-operative principle to
banking and credit, of simplified and rationalized legal procedure,
and trial by genuinely representative juries. Even the talk of the
absolute sovereignty of the individual, pedantic and academic as
it sounds, may be sobering and refreshing during a period of naked
reaction, of fascist regimentation, of the revival of the mystical, all-
powerful state, of the unity and peace of death, of the divine mission
of dictators ignorant and contemptuous of the clearest lessons of
history.

Lewis InstiruTe, Caicaco
