The Mind of the Citizen. III

Author(s): Arland D. Weeks

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 21, No. 4 (Jan., 1916), pp. 501-520
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763907

Accessed: 10-05-2016 05:10 UTC
CIVIC PUBLICITY AND THE VOTER

Opposition to experimentation and change in the social order
has a cause in a suspicion that things might be worse. The citizen
often has little confidence, distrusting his own knowledge and that
of others with regard to the social machine. Civic ignorance breeds
a diffidence and a willingness to leave matters as they are. The
fullest confidence is not reposed in public agents because so much
of their work is not generally known. A better attitude would be
established through civic publicity.

Government is work for the expert, but with the transfer of
power to individuals there is the danger of the unobserved abuse
of that power, and it becomes necessary to develop agencies which
will have the effect of placing public servants on a platform of
observation and in a light which leaves nothing to the darkness
which evil loves. Such transparency of office can be secured by
developing official publicity far beyond its present stage. True,
we have the reports of officials, as treasurers, commissioners, and
boards, though, for example, the services of a congressman are not
formally reported. Probably ninety-nine constituents out of a
hundred have but the faintest ideas of what their representatives
actually do. This is due less to the incapacity of constituents to
understand language than to the absence of authentic, skilful, and
ample reporting.

Moreover, the governmental report is often unduly difficult to
comprehend, and, while its bulk may assure the citizen that his
interests are amply protected, its obscure recesses would discour-
age even the specialist. The art of reporting official acts to the
general public should be developed. Men are needed to tell of the

50r
work of the various offices, and thus lay a foundation for an under-
standing of plans of improvement and of an appreciation of exem-
plary service.

Even the laws are largely unknown by the public. While
every citizen is presumed to know the law, no one believes that the
citizen has more than an inkling of the laws under which he lives.
To learn whether a city has a given ordinance may entail a visit
to the city hall and exploration of a poorly arranged mass of legis-
lation. Legislatures adjourn after sending statutes to the public
printer, with little concern as to making known to the citizen what
laws have been enacted. The voting public is a board of directors,
but could it be imagined that a successful private corporation would
be so uninformed in regard to the activities of its agents as is the
voting public? Every significant detail of social administration
should be flashed upon the public mind through the perfection of
agencies of civic publicity, and the limitations of public attention
should be recognized in ingenuity of reporting. It is idle to expect
the citizen to be himself a competent collector of that information
which he must possess in order to vote and legislate properly at
the polls. The miscarriage of modern politics is probably due
more to lack of civic publicity than to lack of mentality or character.

Of special interest are the attempts at civic publicity repre-
sented by the municipal journals of Baltimore, Los Angeles, New
York, Tacoma, and various other cities. The voters’ pamphlet
in Oregon, and the project of a state journal of governmental
information in that commonwealth show an awakening to the need
of agencies of civic communication in excess of those represented
by the private newspaper, whose aims and interests render it not
the most useful or perfect medium of political intelligence. The
universities should train men and women in the technique and
ideals of civic journalism. Probably most voters need only to
know the sensible thing to do it, and only from lack of information
vote incompetents into office or respond to disingenuous appeals
which result in legislation deviously contradicting their most
cherished interests.

Much is said first or last—or left unsaid—in regard to the
ignorant voter. With over five million illiterates in the United
States, there is a vast amount of ignorance in regard to general
subjects and an amount of ignorance in regard to civic matters
which should be alarming. But the essential consideration is
whether ignorance represents mental incapacity in many cases or
merely lack of information. It is probable that the general and
civic ignorance of the illiterate and the civic ignorance prevailing
among literates are but rarely due to lack of ordinary capacity.
The average citizen would be found able to reach up to the point
where the functions of the civic expert should begin. It is impor-
tant that the special knowledge which functions in good citizenship
be widely diffused and that there be actual preparation for civic
responsibilities.

The idea that ballots should be weighed rather than counted is
likely to occur to one when instances of civic ignorance come under
observation. It is not pleasant to realize that the most judicious
exercise of the ballot may be neutralized by the vote of the indi-
vidual who would not appear at the polls except for the diversion
of a free ride. The value of some ballots is vastly greater than of
others; there are the widest differences in the actual qualifications
of voters to make intelligent decisions. There are differences in
age, experience, traditions, mentality, and specific information.
Statutory equality by no means implies equivalence of fitness,
and in fact the exclusion from the ballot of all below twenty-one
years of age and of women would indicate that prevailing tests of
fitness are far from exact. Who should vote? What qualifies
a person to vote?

Evidently one should know the subject-matter of elections—
issues, candidates, measures, political conditions, and the trend
of society. One should have a preparation comparable to that
which would warrant expressing an opinion on architecture, sani-
tation, engineering, agriculture, or poetry. If issues have been
reduced to simplicity and there is a leadership in which confidence
may justly be reposed, a minimum of social science may serve, by
making use of the analytical powers of others. A person who would
fail in every test of specific information might vote right from
intuition or by accident, but the test of information is one which
is relied upon in judging the qualifications of physicians, pilots,
chemists, and postal clerks, and it evidently should have exceptional
weight in ascertaining fitness to fill the position of voting citizen.

But how could a mental test be applied? While there is a
sentiment in favor of educational tests for voters, and in at least
one state (North Dakota) the constitution enjoins upon the
legislature the duty of establishing educational tests, practical
difficulties interpose. Yet no one can question the need of dis-
tinguishing between fitness and unfitness. With constitutional
amendments and measures in detail coming before the electo-
rate, especially under direct legislation, it is reasonable that the
civic board of directors, which is the collective body of voters,
should be admitted to the exercise of their function only upon
proof of competence.

Fortunately an effectual educational test is within easy reach
and indeed is in process of realization. The submission of specific
measures, as under the initiative and referendum, tends to make
voting difficult, requiring not only interest but attention and
reasoning. Heretofore voting has required the barest minimum
of information. But with a lengthy ballot containing matter
which must be read with attention to be understood, and with the
relegation of partisan and personal considerations, voting becomes
a feat of slight appeal to any who are not conscious of the nature of
public questions. A weeding out in the electorate accordingly
results, as witness the diminishing vote of Wisconsin under direct
primaries and direct legislation. The relatively small vote usually
cast upon constitutional amendments and city charters when
submitted to the electorate is evidently not due to their unimpor-
tance but rather to the absence of an interest derived from knowl-
edge. There is an inevitable mental test when measures are
submitted to voters, and a diminished vote may be construed as
meaning that a stimulus is being applied which should result in
citizens studying their lessons more thoroughly. The person who
knows nothing about the merits of a proposal on his ballot will
naturally not vote on it, thus becoming automatically disqualified
by ignorance. Mechanical voting, even for candidates, should
be rendered unlikely or impossible. While perhaps sufficient
difficulties are inherent in direct legislation, surely no predigestion
of subject-matter should be attempted in behalf of those, no matter
how large their numbers among rich or poor, male or female, who
are indolent, careless, illiterate, or incompetent. The intelligent
and the thoughtful should rule, and civic incompetence should not
be afforded an opportunity to vote by means of a ballot so designed
as to allow voting to be an unthinking process. Voting has been
much too easy. The man who conscientiously follows political
questions should not have his vote counteracted by that of one
careless of knowledge of public affairs. The inequitable char-
acter of easy balloting is evident, for the person who takes pains
to inform himself is not rewarded by a larger measure of partici-
pation. With the ballot itself so devised as to be an educational
test every citizen fitted to vote has the privilege, and disqualifi-
cations may be removed by effort. Voting should necessitate
reading and understanding whatever might appear as an edu-
cational test upon the ballot.

Inasmuch as one’s interest in a subject is closely related to his
knowledge of it, the actual number of those voting upon a measure
would approximate the number of voters really prepared to vote,
and the smallness of the number of votes cast should not be at all
disconcerting. Such provisions of law, as that of the constitution
of the state of Minnesota, which requires that a high percentage
of the electorate must ballot upon proposed constitutional amend-
ments for a valid decision, are of doubtful wisdom, especially if
adequate provision is made for publicity with reference to pending
measures. When once freely informed of issues, the individual
who does not vote may wisely in most cases be thought to be lack-
ing in those qualities which should count for most in elections, and
the smallness of the number balloting be regarded as good evidence
of itsselect character. Surely the right to vote should be contingent
upon the correlated duty of knowing upon what one is voting;
it is a common rule of life that one should know what he is doing.

No educational test would work properly in the absence of
stringent enforcement of corrupt-practices acts. The citizen who
has so little interest and information as not to go to the polls
of his own volition should not be solicited. That one should have
to be urged to vote indicates that his ballot might safely be
dispensed with, and the ardors of rival candidates or the self-seeking
of special interests should not be allowed to inject into the results
of elections the foreign substance of the unintelligent ballot.
Improper solicitation of votes should be made impossible, and the
few worthy citizens who forget election days if not sent for might
well be a sacrifice to the general cause. Under the foregoing
conditions balloting would take on a character of distinction, and
the seriousness of an examination for the credentials of the pro-
fession would to a degree appear.

The questions of negro and woman suffrage would easily be
resolved under the principle of mental fitness. Such negroes and
such women, and as well, such present voters, as whose capacity
and information qualified them to vote, would realize the right.
The line of separation between voters and non-voters would not
be tortuously and artificially drawn according to sex, property, or
color, but would nearly coincide with actual personal fitness.
Thus there would be every incentive to acquire acceptable attain-
ments, and no one would be excluded from voting for any except
purely appropriate reasons.

The submission of propositions under direct legislation stimu-
lates civic intelligence. If balloting be merely upon names, perhaps
followed by party symbols to guide the unthinking and ignorant,
as in Massachusetts and New York, there is less incentive for
political exertion. The intelligent voter even is affected when
channels of civic expression are through party candidates whose
attitudes upon issues cannot be fully foretold; whereas in voting
upon definite proposals there is incentive to study government.
So indirect and faulty is popular control of government when based
upon the voting merely for candidates that citizens disgustedly
keep away from the polls. The submission of question after
question to the electorate, perhaps with greater frequency of votings
during the year, would connect public opinion directly with
government and result in a far higher level of civic intelligence.
an opportunity to secure subsistence by supplying a utility or
service there appears a functionary to provide it for compensation.
Such improvisation ultimately crystallizes into commercial custom,
which in turn implies clergy, judiciary, and legislatures. Social
institutions represent a glorified elaboration of the impulse to
snatch at food when hungry. The basis of historical explanations
could hardly be other than economic.

Institutionalism has on the psychological side a foundation
upon the primal instinct of self-preservation. The nut-hiding
tendency of the chipmunk or the blue jay, as well as the active
sense of possession exhibited by the child, find expression in higher
forms in the market place. In the life of the miser the instinct
to possess attaches narrowly to money, while in more normal lives
possessions include a variety of values. With the trust the in-
gathering impulse finds peculiarly effective expression, and, in the
light of biology, such vast acquisitiveness suggests a giant amoeba
surrounding its food.

The problem of a more equitable distribution of wealth becomes
urgent in view of the existence of remarkable opportunities which
have come about for individual absorption. Like a tumor whose
cells cheat the rest of the body of nourishment, octopi of acquisitive-
ness drain the body politic; and a situation develops from the
license of instinct which needs to be dealt with by rational methods.
The greedy, clawing disorder which characterizes present economic
distribution is unworthy of a race possessing ideals of science and
system. The world approaches a parting of the ways: either a
better system of distribution must be developed or society will
stand a fair chance of being wrecked through the evils of plutocracy
and of poverty. Man has overcome nature through science; the
the supreme challenge to his intelligence is now the controlling of
social forces. Even the preservation of the state is threatened by
economic powers virtually superior to the law—subverting justice,
ruling and pensioning subjects, making war with private gunmen,
supplanting the government of civil divisions, and limiting the
sphere of state action by creating vast foundations and institutions.

The paramount social issue is the distribution of wealth,
an issue in which are comprehended a multitude of subsidiary
questions. The identification of wealth with self-preservation and
with welfare in a thousand relations exalts this issue. Life cannot
continue without a measure of wealth, and access to utilities is
one with happiness and welfare. Men press forward for life, which
is almost synonymous with the possession of wealth. The suste-
nance which is sought by the prowling wild beast or the fish darting
about in quest of food appears, raised to a higher power, in the
money hunt in modern society. In following almost any clue to
social explanations one is likely to come at last upon an economic
fact. We live notably in terms of wealth. The seeming exception
of the monk or the “poor scholar” is explainable on the ground that
they do not really live; they renounce various relationships which
others must sustain; and even under the vow of poverty the benefits
of wealth are virtually assured through the utilities which a pro-
ductive society supplies in manifold ways.

Is popular intelligence sufficient for solving the problem of dis-
tribution? There is need of clear thinking and a reorganization
of popular sentiments. To loosen the grip of instinctive possession
calls for a new culture with reference to property. There are
considerations which should have force in establishing attitudes
more consistent with the aims of democracy.

In a multitude of cases the personal ownership of a utility is
not at all important for its enjoyment. A concrete walk in front
of one’s house is of no more utility to the owner than is his neigh-
bor’s walk over which he passes; of course as such walk would
raise the value of his property and would therefore have an exchange
value when he came to sell and buy something else, there would be
a decided advantage in its ownership. But for practical enjoyment
a multitude of objects are perhaps even best owned by someone
else. It was Thoreau who visited various farms, talked with their
owners in regard to his purchase of them, and went away without
buying, having absorbed, so he wrote, the real value in them from
having seen the views from the road or from having clambered over
their picturesque acres. He left to the farmer the burden of
ownership while he stole away with the principal delights. Even
the Great Man who talks for a dollar admission fee may deign to
say a few words to the group at the railroad station, and anyhow
his likeness is in the discarded magazine, and his remarks, even
perhaps more inclusive than those actually made by him, may be
found in a newspaper from the waste-paper basket. So many
values become uncorked that the veriest hobo is not to be denied
his share in a free wealth of society. Here and there are indi-
viduals who say they cannot really enjoy unless they own the book
or the picture, but of such are not the ideal commonwealth. What
difference does ownership make provided one has the use of a thing ?
It is only for use that ownership rests at all in reason rather than
solely upon the acquisitive instinct.

Now under modern conditions it is coming about that uses
can be enjoyed increasingly in common, and to this extent private
ownership is growing to be an anachronism. Not by any means
that great wealth has become more than faintly reduced to common
uses, but the tendency is manifest. The number of utilities in
whose use the public may readily share is growing. Why should
a man having boys buy them sets of tools when the city school has
it equipment of hammers and saws? Few private collections of
books can equal those of a modest public library, and one’s home
may well be used for other purposes than the storage of books not
in active use. Free lectures are as inspiring as if paid for dearly,
and they are numerous. The counsel of an expert of the United
States Department of Agriculture is as valid as if he took fees for
advice and one were to give him two-thirds of the first year’s crop
upon the contingency of a good yield. The public school returns
one’s child in as good condition as if from the ministrations of a
tutor, and the postman who delivers one’s letters would not be
complimented to be told that he has all the faithfulness of the
expressman.

But, to be sure, we all own a share in these governmental
agencies—we own them, but not as private owners. Joint owner-
ship thus is not exclusive, and it carries with it a distinctly higher
social sense. And this sense of common ownership is a most
desirable trait. Property sentiments may be transferred to public-
owned utilities. The feeling in favor of exclusive ownership is
mostly prejudice. Really only a few things need be privately
owned, these being utilities whose use could not be shared; but
in an increasing number of cases joint enjoyment is possible
and tolerable. The things one would not share with others belong
especially to the sphere of food, clothes, and physical maintenance.
The fruitlessness of the holding of wealth by the overrich is
revealed by willingness to part with it for a slight consideration of
repute, and the inability to make other than social use of great
wealth is evident. The development of common wealth stores
will follow the conviction that one need not own in exclusion in
order to enjoy.

With social ownership the sense of possession would simply
be transferred to social types of property, and what is “mine”
would include an undivided share in what society owns. One
requires wealth only for its actual consumption or for the assurance
of future income; accordingly the primal instinct of self-preserva-
tion, which appears as the desire for possession, would be amply
recognized in the common ownership of social utilities, which are
legion, and especially in the guaranty by the state of an adequate
income, resting upon individual contribution to the total production
of society.

The effect of social ownership upon the outlook of the citizen
would be far-reaching. The government would be his business.
The interest of the man of independent means is now often solely
that there be no interference with his income; he rarely feels a
common cause. A social point of view can scarcely develop under
dominant private ownership. Common ownership affords a basis
for a brotherhood preached but not practiced. The antagonism
between ethics and business will continue until economic causes
are removed.

Not only may culture establish a sense of public property, but
definite gratification may be developed with regard to the partici-
pation of others in all those utilities which might be made accessible
through social ownership or through the impressing upon private
ownership of ideals of common enjoyment. Narrowly instinctive
possession is accompanied by callousness with reference to the
privations of others. At the present stage in the evolution of social
sentiments striking indifference to the extent of others’ deprivations
unfortunately appears.
The dealer in pianos is indifferent as to whether he sells one
piano at a profit of a hundred dollars or two at a profit of fifty
dollars each. In numberless cases a far wider use of commodities
would be made if the principle of maximum use were substituted
for an indifference as to the number making purchases provided
the profits are the same with a large or small number of sales.
Tf the success of a railroad were judged by the number of persons
or tons of freight transported for a given annual net profit, rather
than by profits alone, public welfare would be immensely furthered.
Under social ownership the opening wide of the gates of trans-
portation would be an ideal and the actual extent to which the
public uses railroads would be the test of efficient management.
The extent of consumption is the most acceptable criterion. The
management of the telegraph should be judged by frequency of use.
Today when a citizen of the United States receives a telegram he
fears someone has died. The public librarian counts success by
the number of volumes drawn for use. Consumption, not profit,
is the true measure of success.

Through the ownership of the means through which labor
operates to produce wealth, namely, capital and tools, a few are
enabled to exclude the many from utilities which might be caused
to exist, and indeed bring it about that in a world where endless
productivity is possible, with resulting welfare, the securing of a job,
at modest compensation, becomes a goal of intense rivalry, to
obtain which laborers not infrequently break one another’s heads.
The exclusion of people from work is, upon consideration, a remark-
able fact; but as work is merely a means to a living, the real fact
illustrated is the exclusion of people, sometimes in great numbers,
from the privilege of securing goods whereby to live. When the
producer creates more wealth than he can buy back with his wages
he contributes to his own downfall, and is even denied the oppor-
tunity of further employment, for “overproduction” occurs and
men are thrown out of work. Ownership results in the exclusion
of would-be producers from tilling idle lands, and occasionally from
working more than half-time at factories which turn out commodi-
ties which the public would be very pleased to consume if they
had the money with which to buy. Joblessness is a strange feature
of a system of production. Of all economic mysteries that of
exclusion from productive labor is the most outstanding. It is
possible so to order industry that production would not need to
back-pedal lest there should be too much produced of those things
people really want.

A phase of privation to which even some honor is accorded is
that of self-exclusion from enjoying the utilities which one actually
succeeds in securing the means to pay for. Thrift, so far as it
inures to increased production, evidently has merits, but, so far
as it implies a pinching of life, is distinctly opposed to a higher
civilization. The effort to save up enough money with which to
pay one’s self a pension during old age often results in a life of
meagerness, and a legacy. The recipient of a two-thousand-dollar
income who saves half of it is a thousand-dollar man in the mean-
time, with the limits of experience and outlook which go with such
expenditure. One must spend to grow; hence the doubtful virtue
of strict economy. And such economy most often falls hardest
upon the wife; is this a reason why woman has been so long retarded
in civic and intellectual development ? The world is really relieved
from the possibility of a desperate stagnation by the person who
spends money. Were saving governed only by discretion as to
choice among ways of spending money, an immense acceleration of
progress would ensue from the development of new wants and a
consequent broadening of experience and mentality. To save
money so as to be able to buy desirable goods or services, resulting
in personal development, is one thing; but to save to accumulate
a fund the interest from which will support one in old age, in the
meantime paring down life to meagerness, may be necessary under
present conditions but should not be mistaken for a virtue.

Consumption is really the test of civilization, and by it may
general advancement be judged. It is accordingly significant
when the exclusion of the masses from wealth and its absorption
by the few determine the character of consumption. As a result
almost different species of people are created, for, as in the lower
animal world, the organism tends to come into adjustment with
its environment, and the traits and markings of the slum dweller
and the factory hand become differentiated from those of indi-
viduals of higher economic status. Differences of breed accumulate
under economic extremes, and equality disappears under a distri-
bution of goods which creates wide contrasts of environment.

The sentiment of exclusion and the emphasis on private owner-
ship tolerate a waste illustrated in the cost of advertising. That
such commodities as salt, soap, or flour should require pages of
text and illustration in the most expensive advertising mediums
is a most notable fact. It costs millions, it would seem, to convince
the consumer of wants of which he could by no possibility be
ignorant. It would indeed be a kindness to instruct the public
in regard to a new device, and a paragraph of description would
be a welcome service, but the thunderous persuasion of a public
that knows what it wants, and whose principal difficulty is in
securing the means with which to buy, not only, in spite of the
solemnity of commerce, irritates the sense of humor, but represents
downright miscarriage of energy and enormous loss. Energy
which might properly be placed upon a larger, and, what is more
important, a better, production is expended in acute competition
to find buyers, and the spectacle is afforded of a score of shoe
salesmen “making’’ the same few stores in a small town in a season,
leaving behind a trail of lithographs. And yet there are people
who need shoes. The shifting of emphasis in the commercial
world from the producing to the selling activity and the hysteria
of advertising are evidence that the natural appetite of the con-
sumer suffers from an artificial indigestion. There is rarely pro-
duced a quantity which consumers might not quietly receive if
they had the money with which to buy.

But it is objected that if everybody could buy everything he
wanted, he would want the earth. Is there any reason why he
should not have it? The nineteen superfluous shoe salesmen might
easily contribute to production to the extent of providing shoes
enough for everybody, eliminating pasteboard soles and litho-
graphs. The things which any person would want for exclusive
personal use could no doubt be very well supplied by productional
forces; and as for the things the use of which he would willingly
share with others, like books, schools, parks, steamboats, and
trains and telegraphs, he could have the earth along with others.
Congested wealth gives rise to desperate efforts to push over to
the consumer the things which he really wants but cannot buy,
and causes the occupancy of a job to be regarded with suppliant
awe. The means whereby to purchase being largely centralized,
the purchasing power of the lowly public is often not sufficient to
keep labor employed or to supply an open channel through which
utilities may pass to the would-be consumer. Hence a standard
of living which consorts ill with civilization. Instead of being
governed in consumption by the limitations. of nature and of pro-
ductional forces, the consumer is subjected to an exclusion resting
rather upon peculiarities of a social order. Poverty is an unscien-
tific and an unhappy state. The citizen needs the services of a
physician, and the physician waits for employment; he wants
fruit, which is dumped by carloads lest the market price fall; he
wants to travel, but the braid and buttons of exclusion call for
three cents a mile though the car is empty—a strange disharmony
in the man-made world, strange by confession; for a captain
of industry says, “What is one man’s privilege is another man’s
right.”

Immeasurable benefit would follow if only the things which
might be, and even the things which are, could be dispensed under
ideals of maximum consumption. Now and then an owner is struck
by the absurdity of exclusion and opens an art gallery or private
grounds to the public; it would be acceptable if exclusion from
satisfying the humbler but more insistent needs might be declared
against by a democratization of capital which would cause con-
sumption to be limited only by factors of production and which
would turn the fear of losing a job into the joy of being useful.
Private ownership runs riot when it takes the form of choking off
the public from a possible access to utilities.

Very likely the instinct to own would not appear in so extreme
form if it were not for the ever-present fear of not being well taken
care of in old age. Impelled by this fear many find less than pos-
sible enjoyment in life year by year, and an unworthy obsession
drives them to accumulate more and more. When actual happiness
comes to be given due consideration in the social economy the
abolition of unnecessary concern about support in old age will
receive attention. The net result of this fear is to subtract from
daily joy, without supplying the best set of motives for conduct and
enterprise. The greed of property and the disputatiousness of
bargaining rest to a large degree upon considerations of personal
safety which might be more happily recognized in social assur-
ance of care in disability and old age. Even the possession of
large means does not dispel such fear, for one’s property may
be lost.

The tendency to private rather than social ownership arises
partly from great expectations. The individual dreams of the
golden fleece, of a lucky strike, of great good luck. A much-
advertised success fires with the hope of individual aggrandize-
ment and puts the virus of non-co-operative selfishness into the
blood. With every man expecting that he will be the one to
“strike oil,” the prosaic certainty of fairly uniform meagerness
of income has little chance of credence. To face the truth that
under existing conditions the fate of the great majority is to
remain below a certain economic level, and that personal ambition
can rarely avail if system is opposed, is less agreeable than to
indulge hopes of special providence. The most stupefying social
inequalities therefore pass without challenge—for tomorrow I
may also be of the chosen. Under exceptional conditions, as in
the industry and trade of pioneer communities, based on limitless
natural resources, self-sufficiency has a degree of justification, but
under more usual conditions the expectation of individual wealth
lacks support. One of the first steps for economic democracy
is to convince the individual of the fact that no bank has more than
one president, and that the wealth of the world would not suffice
to make every clerk-a man of millions. Upon which considerations
a bristling assurance of not being as others are would suffer a
certain eclipse. There is a kind of hope which delays the arrival
of a rationally ordered economic society. The billions of organ-
ized wealth in a few hands rest largely upon the obsession of money
adventure which afflicts the miracle-loving and luck-expectant
mind.

A state of mind which constitutes a real obstacle to progress as
well as reveals a feeble logic is illustrated in opposition to paying
taxes. The dislike may be partly due to fear lest one should pay
more than his share, but presumably is rather because the services
and utilities which the state affords are not so clearly realized as
are those bought individually. To the extent to which public
money is expended inexpertly the citizen may well resist, but only
through civic nearsightedness could the collective purchasing by
society of schools, medical attendance, expert service, fire protec-
tion, parks, and transportation be opposed. A common play-
ground renders it unnecessary for every family to own sufficient
backyard to serve as a private playground. One may see the ocean
and reflect upon barnacle-incrusted rocks as fruitfully in the public
park of a seaport town as from any other vantage point, and one’s
contribution to the social purchase of utilities should be made with
a downright satisfaction not even attending the paying of the
druggist. Far from grumbling upon payment to the state, the
citizen should suppress such emotions of laissez faire, and in their
stead cultivate a satisfaction in social ownership. By contributing
to the purchase of public libraries the citizen secures the vastness
of literature for next to nothing. Under equitable circumstances
one should watch the mounting rate of taxation with real satis-
faction, not to say enthusiasm, and realize that when his public
contributions perhaps far exceed his private expenditures the trick
will be turned and the day of common wealth will have dawned.

To be consistent in the dread of taxes the citizen should flinch
as little from direct as from indirect payments; but the atavistic
nature of this fear is evident when one considers that a dollar paid
out indirectly under the tariff is as really spent as if paid to the tax
collector. The future psychologizing historian may well class
among the monstrous incunabula of humbug the indirect tax and
exclaim at its actual popularity in various forms. What changes
would follow the translation of every indirect tax into direct taxa-
tion! Then the seemingly sourceless money so prodigally spent
on battleships would seem to be dug out of the private purse, and
peace would be popular.

The fallacy of indirect payment appears likewise in the reserve
attending the compensation of public servants as contrasted with
the prodigality of incomes paid indirectly. The community which
would cavil at paying a public servant three thousand dollars a year
pays uncomplainingly perhaps ten thousand dollars to the president
of the local bank and beholds with equanimity the gathering in of
the unearned increment on a township of land by the prominent
citizen amounting to scores of thousands of dollars annually. In
either case the public pays, but whether directly or indirectly,
whether by formal act or merely in reality, makes a difference.

The farmers of a state pay with acquiescence their contributions
to individual commercial incomes ranging upward to hundreds of
thousands of dollars a year, but demur at the payment of more than
meager living expenses to men employed in state universities, who,
if properly buttressed financially, might declare an intellectual
independence taking the shape of a more active espousal of the
interests of citizens of small means.

That the origin of wealth, under organized political and indus-
trial society, is social is beyond question, and the payment of
incomes to individuals is as truly by society when in the form of
dividends or profits as when voted by public boards and paid on
warrants drawn by public officials. But the popular reaction to
incomes paid directly differs widely from the reaction to indirect
payment. Thus it comes about that while the man who markets
a scientific product may receive an income of a hundred thousand
dollars a year, the nation pays the director of federal experiment
stations less than five, and that while a member of the cabinet
whose work relates to manufacturing is paid twelve thousand
dollars a year, a beneficiary of the steel trust is awarded by the
same public an income which permits the easy gift of library edifices
sufficient in number to serve as mileposts from Salt Lake City,
Utah, to Providence, Rhode Island.

Emphasis upon private possession and failure to conceive the
larger freedom of co-operation result in an unnecessarily severe
subsistence competition, in which the aim is to get the most for
one’s self regardless of how others are affected. The tricks and
cruelties of trade are inevitable under an economic and industrial
disorder.

It would be fortunate if conditions were arranged to bring out
the best in people. Human nature has its fundamental and abiding
tendencies and also qualities which are simply reflections of envi-
ronment. Whether a man becomes a prize fighter or a soldier of
the Lord depends upon a few guiding influences. The channels
of expression afforded by one’s social setting lead to large conse-
quences. A power of imagination which under right culture might
issue in scientific hypotheses may under a wrong culture qualify
the consummate liar. Mere exhortations to integrity have but
slight effect if the whole pressure and argument of daily circum-
stance are to the contrary. The individual is responsive to condi-
tions under which he must maintain himself, even to the disregard
of ideals. The iniquity of circumstances is as real as the depravity
of men. If one manufacturer puts shoddy in his cloth others are
likely to do the same or go out of business; we are good or bad
together. There is scarcely a lawyer who would not prefer to fight
the battles of the poor—if he could support his family as well.

With society habituated to a subsistence competition it is not
surprising that money success should lead to vanity. Lavish dis-
play and unbridled expenditure appear, and, at the lower end of
the economic scale, a feverish and exhausting effort to keep up
with leaders, with values passing rapidly out of goods because of
shifts of fashion originating in an abnormal power to purchase.
Competition in display naturally accompanies competition for
maintenance. This competitive consumption is not noble; it is
opposed to higher development.

With physical maintenance assured, and in the absence of dis-
proportionate private wealth, competition would assume forms
now barely possible. Instead of being controlled by financial con-
siderations, the individual would be relatively free to apply his
energies to ideal tasks. There are millions today whose aptitudes
for creating things in the spirit of art are stunted because of dog-
eat-dog economic conditions. To compete in advancing the com-
mon good under a system permitting co-operation rather than
resulting in collision and the neutralization of efforts would amount
to being civilized. The desire to excel may be enlisted for social
purposes. It is a matter of social organization whether two retailers
or physicians hate and envy or pull together. People prefer to
compete for good opinion but they have to live first.
That an unpleasant competition for subsistence must prevail
is a fallacy of the popular mind. Harmonious relationships and
enterprise would be possible were there social provision for physical
maintenance. For a higher civilization a minimum subsistence
must be assumed, that energies may be set free for better forms of
effort.

There is about as much moral excellence in the world as there
can be considering the stake in making money. Without a better
economic order one can imagine the people of ten thousand years
hence cheating, grafting, adulterating, skinning jobs, hiring lawyers
to find loopholes in statutes, swearing off taxes, and gouging the
helpless. A low form of subsistence competition emphasizes these
activities and gives the trader a foxy air.

It is not to be argued, however, that what Stevenson calls a
“strong sense of personal identity” is not a valuable social asset.
Unselfishness is pleasing, so let a word be spoken for selfishness.
The preferring of others to one’s self has bounds beyond which the
results are harmful. Whenever individuals in a class are content
with little they place a ball and chain upon others who have spirit
and ambition. The school teacher who is willing to work for forty
dollars a month, because of undeveloped wants, supplies an ele-
ment which causes professional solidarity to crumble, and through
a consequent weakening of education tends to defeat the very aims
of civilization. The working-man who does not mind eating from
the confines of a hot tin pail delays the arrival of an industrial com-
missariat and the uplift of labor. The assertion of self is self-
respect, and one cannot properly respect others until his own wants
are positive. A willingness to be nothing is a crime against man-
kind. The amount of actual damage which the humble and con-
trite of spirit can inflict upon the class to which they belong, upon
the coming generation, and upon relatives is equaled perhaps by
nothing short of war and pestilence. To fail of self-assertion is
to carry backward the hopes of others.

The course of civilization is the resultant of forces exerted when
individuals press forward for what they want. No ideal society
can be set up which will exempt the individual from pulling his
own oar. The alternative to a state of social strain in which
law-makers, manufacturers, educators, and journalists are sharply
directed by public demand is an infinitude of mush.

But with selfishness discredited there must be offense, and for
selfishness without imagination little that is good may be said.
There is self-seeking in whose defense no one can speak. It is the
altruistic variety of self-assertion which may be commended. Let
us work for pure milk, for if others’ children are safe mine will be.
Here is the circle of considerations which enlightened selfishness,
more reputably known as altruism or social service, pursues. To
be selfish in a large way is to help others. In seeking personal
ends with imagination advantages gained overflow to the general
good.

tm. 2...

 

oa
