Economic Foundations of the German Totalitarian State

Author(s): Melchior Palvi

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Tan., 1941), pp. 469-486
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769919

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:08 UTC
ECONOMIC VERSUS IDEOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF NAZIISM

That the economic man of reality is subject to a variety of non-
economic motivations, rational and otherwise, is a commonplace
recognized by the most academic of equilibrium theorists. But it
does not seem equally recognized that the “political man’s” motiva-
tions are also largely of the rational-economic type. Perhaps a reac-
tion against the primitive economism of Marx is responsible for the
prevalent trend to seek the foundations of totalitarian power in psy-
chological or sociological analogies. The popularity of this trend is
exemplified by such attempts as dissection of the Nazi party and
state into “charismatic” or similarly irrational structures, the reduc-
tion of their loyalty bases to pure Machiavellism, on the one hand,
and to German mystical philosophy, on the other—to say nothing
of explanations in terms of German “nature,” of the magic of Wag-

nerian music, and of Hitler’s “magnetic personality.”? At least one

«H, Gerth, ‘“‘The Nazi Party: Its Leadership and Composition,” American Journal
of Sociology, XLV (1940), 517-41, is the outstanding attempt. Cf. M. Florinski, Fas-
cism and National Socialism (New York, 1935); E. Hambloch, Germany Rampant (New
York, 1939); A. Cobban, Dictatorship (London, 1939), pp. 207 ff.; K. Loewenstein,

469
imaginative philosopher discovered the satanic principle embodied
in Germanism and Reformation,” while his counterpart sought the
metaphysical source of the authoritarian evil and found it institu-
tionalized in the Roman church.’

The present approach to the “foundations” of a dictatorship as-
sumes that economic interests are the primary driving force of its
political mechanism. A few preliminary observations have to be
brief and dogmatic. Economic motives are by definition “rational”
and must be known to those whose actions they supposedly deter-
mine, even if no “logical” expression of the objectives is forthcom-
ing. The rationality must be understood from the point of view of
the acting individuals whose outlook is formed by their particular
twist in interpreting current history. People may have “foolish”
ideas about what their interests are, but they do not choose them
without “reason” and will act as rationally in their pursuit as they
are able to. Noneconomic ideologies are (in an irreligious age of
mass movements) mostly interpretations of history, consisting of
analogical generalizations—the “teachings of history”—and imply-
ing, of course, basic norms of group conduct, which are taken for
granted. The primary significance of the economic motive expresses
itself at least in the wishful coloring of the ideology

The present approach deals not with the “truthfulness” of certain
historical interpretations but with the actors’ own belief in them.
Needless to say, it is not feasible arbitrarily to impute beliefs to a
group; nor is empirical evidence of the existence of a belief sufficient
proof of its effectiveness as a “motive force.” Moreover, particular
care is necessary to avoid confounding ex post facto rationalizations

Hitler’s Germany (New York, 1939), pp. 5 ff.; O. D. Tolischus, They Wanted War (New
York, 1940)—all more or less dilettante. For the approach in terms of Marxian class
conflict, discarded since the Nazi-Bolshevik co-operation, see F. L. Schuman, The Nazi
Dictatorship (New York, 1935).

2 Goetz Briefs, “Limes Germanicus,” Review of Politics, I (1939), 261 ff and 444 ff.

3 Paul Tillich, The Interpretation of History (New York, 1937).

4“As yet, the great bulk of mankind live on the physical plane; and therefore,
physical conditions, as yet, exert the most powerful influences in shaping civilization”
(J. Strong, Expansion under New World-Conditions [New York, 1900], p. 10). For a dis-
cussion of the concept of “ideology” see Louis Wirth, “Ideological Aspects of Social
Disorganization,” American Sociological Review, V (1940), 472-82.
with real motives. On the other hand, subsequent developments
may (and often do) bring underlying motives to the light.

Obviously, “facts” are open to as many interpretations as imagi-
nation may create. The interpretation has to be gauged in terms
ot its ability to provide a systematic “understanding,” all elements
of which must be consistent with the empirical material and with
one another. This leaves the selection of the relevant facts to judg-
ment (“relevance” itself is a matter of valuation)—a selection that
is based on a number of assumptions or generalizations of an empiri-
cal nature. It is, for example, taken for granted that the leading
men in Germany, such as Schacht, Thyssen, and Hindenburg, who
were instrumental in bringing Hitler to power were not motivated
by sentimental patriotism, romantic hero worship, and charismatic
or quasi-religious delusions. They “knew” what they were doing (or
so they thought). True, the rank and file might have been affected
by Hitler’s propaganda technique, but it would be very naive to
assume that millions of Germans decide their own fate without
thought about the meaning of the regime they vote for.’ (The
Townsend plan, propaganda for silver, the “Kingfish” movement,
etc., may be based objectively on delusions about economic possi-
bilities, but the motivation of the followers is certainly not “irra-
tional.”) In short, it is assumed that the political choice of the
masses in a modern country, provided as they are with all superfi-
cial paraphernalia of a secularized civilization, is largely dictated
by considerations of prospective maximum results to benefit indi-
viduals and groups.

Lastly, the pursuit of economic aims does not necessarily imply
the use of “economic” means. Disregarding the fairly common con-
fusion of aims and means, which affects rationalizations rather than
actions, the strict distinction between “politics” (and war), on the
one hand, and “business,” on the other, is typical only of a pacifistic
capitalism. A realistic approach has to accept it as a fact that eco-
nomic aims can be, and often are, promoted by any device by which
men manipulate one another.

s One source of confusion arises from overlooking the fact that seemingly irrational
(‘‘meaningless”) propaganda may have a more or less definite symbolic meaning; the
mystical air assumed by apparent inarticulateness may actually provide a more emo-
tional, and therefore more effective, coloring than a logical formulation is able to create.
THE MYTH OF THE VERSAILLES TREATY

The fundamental fact to face is this: the major part of the Ger-
man people had been convinced of the futility to continue or to re-
store the economic system which seemed to go to pieces in the
1930-33 catastrophe. The thoroughly dissatisfied strata included
the farm population (about thirteen millions), the unemployed and
their families (fourteen to eighteen millions), the millions of “dis-
inherited” middle classes, broad sections of small and “large” busi-
nessmen, many if not most professionals, etc. The overwhelming
conviction that a new system was needed has found innumerable
expressions. By 1932 the economic psychology and political temper
of the country—especially of the ‘‘countryside”’—were well prepared
for a social revolution. The disaffection against the democratic Re-
public and a temporarily New Deal-ish capitalism was economic in
most of its significant aspects, and the totalitarian collectivity which
it engendered was founded on economic expectations. The basic loy-
alty which since supports it is also economic in the underlying ex-
pectations, enhanced, of course, by the “chance of violence,” to use
Max Weber’s term; by ethical rationalizations; by appeal to his-
torical sentimentalities and traditions, etc. The course of the Nazi
regime—and the same holds probably for every European totalitar-
ianism—has been determined step by step by the naked realism
of well-definable group interests, the representants of which rarely
conceal the “rational” character of the sacro egoismo for which they
stand.

German political oratory of all shades during the crucial period
of transition has been eloquent about the underlying economic mal-
contentment. Subsequently, the Nazi boast of achievements in elim-
inating unemployment, stabilizing farm prices and property rights,
“rationalizing” production, preserving and obliging numerous vested
interests, etc., to say nothing of loot at home and in conquered
countries, is another aspect of the same emphasis. To justify them-
selves, the Nazis used rationalizations combining political, ethical,
and economic interpretations. One of these rationalizations they
had in common with German politicians of virtually every shade:
the blaming of the Versailles Treaty, and in particular of the repara-
tions, for the country’s trouble. It is instructive to note that the
imposing literature on political propaganda consistently ignores the
unusually successful propagation of this theme which became so
generally accepted that one is usually unaware of its controversial
character or of the fact that it had to be “propagated.”

In reality, “Versailles” had little to do with Germany’s post-war
maladjustments. It may suffice to mention that between 1924 and
1931 Germany transferred barely more than one billion (gold) dol-
lars in reparations while she received six and one-half billions in
credits; that for five years she enjoyed a “boom,” raised the living
standards of the masses, replenished inventories and gold and for-
eign-exchange reserves, expanded and “rationalized” plants in a
seigneurial fashion, and gave over a billion marks in credits to Rus-
sia—all in face of the reparations, the payments on which actually
ceased in the summer of 1931, while the German fury against Ver-
sailles artificially fanned by the Nazis, raged. Nevertheless, the
myth about the vicious treaty and the pernicious reparations re-
mains one of the pseudoscientific dogmas of this generation.

The continuous resentment-raising by Anglo-American “liberals”
and pacifists (J. M. Keynes, W. Lippmann, H. G. Moulton, etc.)
against Versailles and the reparations has greatly promoted Hitler’s
victory, a fact skilfully sidestepped by all concerned. According to
the Nazis, the treaty was a documentary proof of the fact that the
Allies had no respect for right and justice or for Germany’s vital
interests. They argued that in face of the treaty Germany had no
way out but by force, and every “moral” right to use it—an ex-
cellent rationalization to justify Nazi objectives. Consequently, the
German intellectuals of Western orientation had to defend the
treaty and to deflate the adverse propaganda. But the Hitlerian
ranks could claim both the Western liberals as crown witnesses
(Keynes even appeared in Berlin to harangue the ultra-nationalistic
students) and “scientific” dignity for their own antiliberal tenden-
cies. The same propaganda had perhaps even more to do with the
success of the Nazis in tearing up the treaty and conquering the
Continent. The anti-Versailles ballyhoo has pervaded the broadest
newspaper-reading strata of the Occident and has become rigidly ac-
cepted by the “man on the street” because it fitted as a rationaliza-
tion into the prevailing longing for peace, implying not only eco-
nomic security but also less taxation or more social expenditures.
The consequence was the rise of a pro-German sentiment, especially
in England, or at least of a “bad conscience” toward Germany. The
British appeasement policy of the thirties would be unintelligible
without the effective propaganda against Versailles during the twen-
ties.

No doubt, between 1919 and 1924 an amount of disturbances and
maladjustments was due to the political and financial uncertainties
which the lack of definite settlement with Poland and France cre-
ated. But the treaty did not interfere with Germany’s ability to
recuperate; its territorial and economic clauses meant little to her
productive or export ability—so little indeed that, after coming to
power, the superpatriot Hitler could reverse his own propaganda
and loudly recognize the Versailles boundaries.”

INFLATION AND POLITICAL LOYALTY

A debtor country with a surplus population until the early 1890’s,
Germany had to import capital and export men to build industries
and secure rising living standards for a population which trebled
in less than a century. By that time her railroad system had been
completed and the legal remnants of the patrimonial age eliminated.
Based upon large coal reserves and potash deposits, an aggressive
commercial and industrial system of first magnitude and great
wealth was developed. High-grade export industries helped to repay
the railroad debt and other foreign liabilities and to accumulate
foreign assets estimated in 1914 at seven billion gold dollars.®

6 “There still ring in our ears the indignant clamor with which Europe and Amer-
ica .... had greeted our [France’s] occupation of the Ruhr. I rather hope that those
who, in 1923, raised all that indignant clamor are feeling a little silly in r940. They

have their own small part in the psychological responsibility for the ‘collapse’ of the
democracies” (Jules Romains, ‘The English Mystery,” Saturday Evening Post, Octo-
ber 19, 1940, p. 19).

7 See the keenly impartial book of W. J. Rose, The Drama of Upper Silesia (Brattle-
boro, 1935).

8Lamprecht’s Deutsche Geschichte (Berlin, 1894-1909) and Sombart’s Deutsche
Volkswirtschaftim 19. Jahrhundert (Berlin, 1903) are still the best presentations of the
process of Germany’s industrialization. See also J. H. Clapham, Economic Development
of France and Germany, 1815-1914 (Cambridge, 1921), and W. H. Dawson, The Evolu-
tion of Modern Germany (New York, 1908).
In 1914, Germany’s public debt was about 14 billion marks, most
of it the purchase price of the nationalized railroads. The war raised
the debt to some 130 billions, most of it unloaded on the central
bank. The mark had already depreciated by 40-60 per cent, and
the gold reserve more than halved. The industrial apparatus had
been overstrained and mismanaged for war purposes; the merchant
fleet was gone and so were the foreign investments which had been
largely liquidated to buy war materials or confiscated by the enemy
and lost through other countries’ breakdown. Commercial relations
were disrupted and export markets lost. Labor trouble made internal
readjustment extremely difficult.

War finance started the inflation, and the Republic resorted to
the printing press until the end of 1923 to overcome the post-war
difficulties. This futile attempt was full-heartedly supported by such
powerful and otherwise violently antirepublican groups as the old
administrative and academic bureaucracy, business, and landed no-
bility. The runaway inflation used up the national resources to pro-
cure employment for labor and enormous paper profits for industry
and agriculture.

The voluminous literature on the German superinflation virtually
ignores its political mechanism and consequences.’ The latter were
more profound than the purely financial and economic after-effects.
That they did not lead to an immediate overthrow of the Republic,
the moral credit of which was as badly, and more permanently, im-
paired than the financial, was due to Poincaré’s army in the Ruhr.
But the moral blow delivered at democracy as a form of government
shook the nation’s political loyalty by undermining its reliance upon
the basic security provided by “saving” and the elementary “jus-
tice” of capitalistic wealth distribution. Both depend on some de-
gree of monetary stability. And the impoverishment of the middle
classes through inflation was the more serious, since they were al-
ready carrying much of the burden of professional dislocation which
the war created.

9 Cf. C. Bresciani-Turoni, The Economics of Inflation (London 1927); F. D. Graham,

Exchange, Prices and Production in Hyper-inflation (Princeton, 1930); F. Hesse,
Deutsche Wirtschaftslage von 1914 bis 1923 (Jena, 1938).
THE POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE GREAT CRISIS

The inflation ended in November, 1923, but a stabilization crisis
of extreme sharpness was on hand. Interest on best short-term cred-
its rose to 20 and 25 per cent, and capital appeared to have only
one source left—the central bank, which had to “ration” its credit.
Capital values declined accordingly, and real estate and corporate
securities were practically unsalable. The financial system of the
country was paralyzed, with commercial bank deposits reduced from
twenty billion marks in 1914 to less than one-half billion; the eco-
nomic machinery came almost to a standstill, with unemployment
rampant. A nation-wide prospect of bankruptcy again shook the
foundations of political loyalty.

The crisis was overcome with the aid of the reparations. To en-
able Germany to pay, the Dawes Plan was framed under banking
leadership (creating, incidentally, substantial intermediary profits).
The former enemies and neutrals “flooded” Germany for five years
with credits. Germany could not take all that she was offered. The
years 1925-30 were for the Germans a New Deal period of govern-
ment expenditure for so-called social purposes including swimming
pools, public parks, “uneconomic” housing, and similar projects
which amounted to large-scale subsidies. It coincided with a new
era of speculative capital expansion on the part of industrialists
and bankers.

Post-inflation Germany enjoyed a wave of borrowed prosperity.
Gold and foreign-exchange reserves were restored, depleted inven-
tories were replenished by great import surpluses, and the industrial
apparatus was greatly but not “soundly” expanded.*? Then came
the Great Crisis. For the third time in twelve years German econ-
omy was threatened with “stoppage” and faced financial collapse.
By 1931 not only had her last resort of getting rich quick (by foreign
credits) vanished but she was under a “run” and the partial repay-
ments more than exhausted her cash reserves and inventories. The
worst of it was that even the prospect of an early return to prosper-
ity seemed to have faded. Germany’s export markets had become
so weak that even an inflation, the thunder of which had been stolen
by English devaluation, could not promise their reopening.

10 Cf. D. Warriner, Combines and Rationalization in Germany (London, 1931).
Exports provide Germany with vital raw materials and foodstuffs.
But after 1929 crude material prices went down 4o per cent or more,
breaking the purchasing power of the basic producers as well as
that of their suppliers. Export markets had been further reduced
by extreme neo-mercantilist policies all over the world. It started
with the American tariff of 1929, the highest of its time. By 1931,
under Britain’s leadership, the free-trading countries turned to high
tariffs and the protectionists to more protection. Export subsidies
came again into world-wide use, while France excelled in the tech-
nique of quotas and similar restrictions, adopted by one country
after another. Moreover, monetary manipulation, such as by deval-
uations, added in most countries further protection against imports
and more subsidies to exports.

Three depression years of unemployment and wild political strife,
the breakdown of international credit and trade, the bankruptcy of
one customer-country after the other, the defeatism of a profitless
capitalistic system, the virtuosity of “planning” propaganda, and,
above all, a nation’s longing for security and stability at almost any
price after several consecutive financial catastrophes—all these cir-
cumstances have to be visualized to understand the success of an
apparently “irrational” demagogy.

The essential formula which Adolf Hitler intimated and succeeded
in “putting over” was in reality to eliminate unemployment by pub-
lic works and armaments, to restore “confidence” by armaments,
and to foster foreign trade by armaments. A large sector of the
German people were willing to follow him, owing to their “despair”
as well as to the appeal of armaments to their political imagination
shaped by the education which a Frederick the Great and a Bis-
marck have disseminated, to the unhealthy swelling of German self-
admiration during World War I, the inclination of broad strata
toward a “reactionary” philosophy of life, and to the example of
totalitarianism in Russia, Italy, and Japan.

IS THERE A GERMAN SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY?

The Germans appear to be imbued, just like other occidental na-

tions, with the idea that they are “entitled” to what they regard

11 Especially since the “last” hope of international co-operation—the London Eco-
nomic Conference of 1933—was first postponed for half a year and then “torpedoed”
by President Roosevelt.
as the proper or customary level of prosperity and living standards.
They were not willing to wait in the face of a seemingly dark outlook
by following orthodox lines of painful adaptation (notwithstanding
their willingness to carry great sacrifices if regarded as temporary
with “recompensation” in prospect). In distress public works, “con-
trolled” inflation of one kind or another, and some degree of au-
tarchy are at present the answer of dictators and democracies alike,
and the Germans have experimented since 1916 with virtually every
known type of economic “management.” But in spite of Russian
and Japanese examples, the world was taken by surprise when Hit-
ler’s public works assumed, with popular approval, a military char-
acter with aggressive implications.

For centuries the German people received an education of the
bellicose brand. The underlying philosophy is supposed to be dis-
tilled from a long history. Was not Germany poor and exploited
each time when she was weak and divided as in the Thirty Years’
War and in the Napoleonic era, while Prussia obtained new prov-
inces when Frederick the Great managed to fight the big powers,
and Bismarck brought home German unity as well as Schleswig,
Alsace-Lorraine, and five billion gold francs—after three victorious
wars?

The larger one’s army and the more one can exploit other nations
the richer and more prosperous is the country, such is the gist of a
traditional Prussian interpretation of history. The theory that rich
nations draw their wealth from the exploitation of colonies or other
controlled territories has been widely current among German school-
teachers (and professors). They rationalized further, at least since
Nietzsche, that utilitarian mass happiness, democratic humanitar-
ianism, and the allegedly immutable laws of prosperity are as many
ideologies by which the possessors safeguard their “loot” against
the “have-nots” (the latter allegedly short of “living space”). Thus,
a naive theory of imperialism was closely knit to a “reactionary”
social doctrine.”

32 An adequate “ideological” history of modern Germany is still lacking. Lévy-
Bruhl’s L’Allemagne depuis Leibniz (Paris, 1890) and F. Meinecke’s Weltbiirgertum und
Nationalstaat (Munich and Berlin, 1919) are first approximations. Gooch’s Germany
(London, 1925) is a superficial compilation. M. J. Bonn’s Crumbling of Empire (Lon-
don, 1938) offers good observations. Cf. also W. Gurian’s analysis, The Future of
Bolshevism (New York, 1937).
Both have strong traditional backing. The fact that the French
Revolution which carried over Europe the flag of liberation from
obsolete “chains” also meant Germany’s political and economic
humiliation left deep traces on the nation’s ‘“mind.’"3 However,
the secondary role of the ideology ought to be obvious. Under the
impact of Napoleonic victories, the Prussian bureaucracy became
the center of economic and social progress (in the Adam Smithian
sense). When, in 1815, under czarist lead, the feudal and patrimo-
nial interests recovered their power, a long “reactionary” era fol-
lowed, shaken by subsequent French revolutions. The influence of
a vastly expanding free English capitalism led to a definitely new
turn of the ideological tide, and economic liberalism became pre-
dominant in German thought of the 1860’s. Then, Bismarck’s vic-
tories by the old-fashioned “iron and blood” technique again re-
versed the trend. Treitschke is a typical representative of this last
change: originally a liberal (brossdeutsch) historian, he became after
1866 a chief apologist of ultra-Prussianism. The break between Wil-
helm II and Bismarck brought again a fresh swing toward liberal-
ism, interrupted by Caprivi’s fall; but the prosperous years after
1g0o witnessed a definitely “progressive” trend in German politics,
social attitudes, and intellectual life, largely due to the competition
with a progressive Anglo-American capitalism and to the revolu-
tionary rumbling of the Slav earth. Another reactionary reversal
came with the 1914 war on the democracies and the wartime pre-
ponderance of the military. Then again, in the agony of defeat,
whole Germany looked for a while at Wilson as the savior, until the
disappointment with internal economic conditions and the rising
hope for external politico-economic chances made them return once
more to the old-time idols.

In short, German political philosophy tends to be on the side
of the “stronger battalions.” It accepted and glorified eighteenth-
century ideologies when they were impressively supported by French
bayonets as well as the nineteenth-century bourgeois outlook when
convincingly suggested by British capitalistic success and naval
supremacy, and Bismarckian power politics when “tested” on the
battlefields. It is very naive, therefore, to attribute to the Germans
any rigid philosophy. Their philosophical cycles fluctuate according
to what appears to be to their “interest” at each time.™ If there is
a national characteristic at all, lack of ideological continuity and
stability, and possibly an exceptional ability to sublimate worldly
aims into quasi-religious enthusiasm, distinguish the “German
mind” from that of Western nations.

THE DYNAMICS OF THE NAZI ASCENDANCY

An attempt to reduce a genuine break in the continuity of a
nation’s loyalties to a few “essentials” necessarily risks oversimpli-
fication. Some contributing factors may be briefly enumerated.

a) It has been indicated that after 1930 a chiliastic outlook be-
came prevalent in Germany. The attitude in all shades of this wide-
spread utopianism was anticapitalistic; an outstanding political ex-
pression was the rising tide of the radical vote. Virtually all pres-
sure groups clamored for governmental rescue; the entrepreneurial
group turned in the 1930-33 crisis overwhelmingly “planning”
minded, demanding state protection and monopolistic “freezing”
of its interests. Like Italian and Hungarian fascism, the Nazis met
with sympathy on the part of broad nonlabor groups by offering
to use Lenin’s methods in favor of those groups. With Hitler’s com-
ing to power, radicalism became as official as (say) Lutheranism was
under the Prussian kings, adding dignity to its mass appeal. Its
meaning was fluid from the early days of the Nazi movement but
with strongly “state-socialistic” implications in favor of the “for-
gotten men.” Without reference to this radical tinge neither the
broad popularity of Naziism nor the internal coherence of a party
recruited mostly from the lower strata (especially of peasantry)
could be understood.

4 It is typical, too, that German groups in foreign countries are more easily ab-
sorbed than almost any other groups. Unless “‘persecuted,” German minorities are as
a rule subservient to any form of government including American democracy, Russian
czarism, and Hungarian semi-feudalism.

3 Some combination of etatism with quasi-socialistic tendencies was a Prussian
bureaucratic “tradition” of long standing (cf. W. H. Dawson, Bismarck and State Social-
ism [London, 1890]; E. A. Clark, “Adolf Wagner,” Political Science Quarterly, LV
[1940], 378-411; and H. Oncken’s Lassalle: Eine politische Biographie [Stuttgart and
Berlin, 1920]).
6) The 1931 banking crisis affected not only the entire commer-
cial and investment banking system of Germany but also the four
thousand or so savings banks, mostly municipal, and some twenty
thousand co-operatives, mostly rural. Virtually all were insolvent,
involving a liquid wealth of over thirty billion marks in ownership
capital and deposits.* Bankruptcy and subsequent value liquida-
tion on such a scale appeared inconceivable. Hoping for foreign
help, the Briining government chose to postpone the evil day by
“freezing” the credit system with the aid of international (Stand-
still) agreements and exchange restrictions. But foreign help was not
forthcoming, while the gold reserve dwindled and the “flight” of
foreign and home capital continued. The artificial structure had to
be maintained by more and more artificiality. Restrictions grew into
an array of regulations, gradually separating Germany from normal
international traffic, degrading the mark to a purely internal ac-
counting unit, and putting industry under governmental control.
This unique process still waits for its historian to analyze its intri-
cate effects. It may suffice that Germany imposed thereby a large
amount of self-sufficiency upon herself, providing at the same time
“sales talk” for those with vested interest in bureaucratic manage-
ment and in more autarchy. The enforced independence from foreign
credit made the Germans feel free to “experiment” at home, fur-
ther opening the dams to the mounting radicalism. Making the Ger-
mans self-conscious about their economic isolation was also instru-
mental in adding fuel to the fire of militant nationalism and impe-
rialistic sentiments.

c) The political setup of the Republic was in many respects help-
ful to its enemies. The Weimar constitution gave virtual dictator-
ship powers to the president in an “emergency” (to be declared by
him) and with the indulgence of emasculated courts three chancel-
lors utilized this device before Hitler. The latter appeared, there-
fore, as merely continuing on a legally permissible road—an impor-
tant appearance at the outset of his rule, when the loyalty of a
legalistic-minded bureaucracy was at stake. More important, how-
ever, was the fact that the Republic, to satisfy the communists, had
greatly emphasized its own allegedly revolutionary break with the
past, thereby officially breaking the “continuity” of the law. The
law-abiding among its enemies could rationalize accordingly about
embracing illegal and even “‘otherwise’’ unethical objectives.

d) To overestimate the appeal to class sentiment by the anti-
bolshevik propaganda of fascism (before the present war) is prob-
ably a far less serious error than to ignore the involuntary contribu-
tion of bolshevism and “social democracy” to the victory of fascist
movements (and also to anti-Semitism). What mattered was not
whether there was a “real” communistic danger, as the Fascists
pretended and their critics rightly denied, but whether the preten-
sion was accepted as relevant by those to whom it was addressed.*7

The short-lived communistic and syndicalist revolts in Central
Europe had immense conseqeuences. One was a bitter resentment
against labor, further nourished by the wage-raising and social
spending policies of the “moderate” socialists. Consequently, every
major fascist movement had been welcomed and at one time or
another financed by entrepreneurial organizations to break the grip
of the trade-unions. All over the Continent (with the possible ex-
ception of Scandinavia) the conviction had been established that
organized labor, moderate or radical, uses the democratic process
to “exploit” other classes in a monopolistic fashion and that the
competitive system (or other groups’ monopolistic privileges) can
only be re-established if constraint by majority is met by violence
of the “oppressed” minority. It is important in this connection that
governmental jobs, including railroads, public utilities, etc., com-
prise up to 35 per cent of Continental employment. The antagonism
against the growing monopolization of these vast “franchises” by
socialists and Catholics, who were gradually replacing the benefi-
ciaries of the “‘old regime,” was easily sublimated into an ethical
indignation against “corrupt” democracies.

17 A typical example of completely ignoring this essential distinction, and conse-

quently a basic factor in the rise of Italian fascism, is G. A. Borgese’s Goliath (New
York, 1936).
e) That the combination of a theoretical threat of bolshevism
with the practice of a “moderate” socialism had been instrumental
in rallying many nonlabor groups to some sort of fascist cause, is
well known from Sofia and Budapest to Paris and Madrid. The
actual or potential competition of the communists for the labor vote
had resulted under leftist regimes—even in Austria under Renner-
Bauer, although practically without a Communist party—in con-
cessions to radical wealth redistribution and in piecemeal reforms,
largely at the consumers’ expense. This was serious enough, even
if a united front had been accomplished; but in Germany the per-
manent feud between communists and Social-Democrats virtually
sealed the Republic’s fate. The socialists enlisted the old regime’s
aid to overcome Spartakist and other rebellions and organized an
army from ranks essentially opposed to democracy. At the show-
down between the republican government in Prussia and a quasi-
dictatorship in the Reich (under Papen, 1932) even the “reliable”
Prussian police, and thereby all power, surrendered to the Hinden-
burg clique, because the socialists dared not take chances on a civil
war which might have worked in favor of the communists. More-
over, and for similar reasons, the Republic essentially preserved the
old bureaucracy so that Hitler could take it over with compara-
tively little personnel change, either in the upper or in the lower
structure of any but the municipal administrations.

f) Lastly, Germany’s fateful agricultural tangle has to be men-
tioned. Her claim of being the innocent victim of commercial per-
secution by the “have” powers is refuted by the records of her own
agricultural policy, reaching back to the tariffs and subsidies which
federal and state governments of the Republic showered upon the
East Elbean Junkers. President Hindenburg’s estate was one of the
beneficiaries; Hitler was made chancellor when no legitimate gov-
ernment could be formed to give more subsidies to the Rittergiiter
and to raise grain prices further, already up to four times higher than
the import price, free of duty. This policy did not fulfil its purpose—
the appeasement of the landed aristocracy—but it had the effect of
disrupting Germany’s already strained commercial relations with
farm countries. It also lowered her industrial competitive power by
raising the cost of living or inhibiting the wage reductions “neces-
THE ECONOMIC “LOGICS” OF AGGRESSION

For a country with high living standards but poor in natural re-
sources as well as in “liquid capital” (credit and gold), the limita-
tions of public works as a substitute for foreign trade are even more
patent than elsewhere. In the face of unsatisfactory export volumes
and prices, some other procedure of getting the raw materials was
needed. Armaments promised to bring favorable commercial trea-
ties. That did not necessarily mean war. Whether or not the Nazis
“wanted” war is not relevant to our issue. Nor do the ideological
pretexts matter which they used. The relevant thing is that the
attempt to force industrial exports by the threat or use of arms
had to lead to conflicts and conquests, or else to failure.

The attempt to substitute public works and armed pressure for
competitive exports is fraught with economic fallacies. Hitler’s
public works (1933-35) did not create the self-perpetuating pros-
perity which they were supposed to initiate according to the doc-
trine of pump-priming (Initialziindung). The “multiplier” by which
the national income is supposed to rise over and above the govern-
mentally spent amount did not go a long way. The original expendi-
tures had to be topped by more and more public works to keep the
upturn going? But unproductive investments on a vast scale, ab-
sorbing already in peacetime up to 70 per cent of the national in-
come, depressed the living standards as well as the export capacity
of the country. The necessity of more regimentation and the prob-
lem of substitutes for vital materials arose. All these consumed in
turn so much of other raw materials and of labor as to create more,
rather than less, scarcity.

Second, Hitler’s policies, while strengthening Germany’s arms,
destroyed much of her markets and all of her potential credit. The
reduction of exports to Russia within six years from some seven
hundred million to about forty million marks is one example. The
raising of American antidumping rates against German commodi-
ties is another. Germany’s exchange regulations, self-sufficiency pol-
icies, and dumping practices led to one commercial conflict after
another. Heavily unbalanced budgets due to wholesale armaments,
plus the internal and external aggressiveness of the Third Reich,
created such antagonism as to destroy all possibility of new credits.
By 1936 the country had almost ceased to be part of the interna-
tional economic and financial community. This meant that she
could not buy any more raw materials except for “cash.”’ Hence the
necessity of clearing, payment, and barter agreements to establish
a permanent equalization of exports and imports against each indi-
vidual foreign country. Up to go per cent of Nazi Germany’s for-
eign trade had been forced into this system of “strait-jackets,”
adopted by other countries in retaliation against Germany. Hence
the popularity of the outcry for colonies. (The answer of the Allies
that colonial products could be bought by anyone sounded cynical,
since the German means to purchase dwindled.)

A third pitfall arose from the geographic situation of Germany
and the character of the countries which she was able to “bully”
into economic submission. They are essentially poor countries with
underdeveloped or little resources and with untrained populations.
The control of the entire area from Poland to Turkey and Greece,
even if it could have been achieved without a devastating war,
would not have offered Germany the basis for prosperity for which
she was striving. That area of one hundred million population or
so lacks most of the minerals and all plantation products Germany
needs. Even its comparatively meager resources need development
by large-scale capital investment, i.e., by the provision of agricul-
tural implements, mining machinery, etc., on long-term conditions.
Germany could not sink vast amounts of iron, copper, etc., in such
investments without promptly receiving new raw materials. Con-
sequently, even in 1938, after five years of losing export outlets to-
ward the West and after strenuous efforts, Germany’s trade with
Mittel Europa, including Poland and Turkey, rose from some 4 to
only 12 per cent of her total trade. Germany’s markets are in west-
ern Europe and overseas, not in the Balkans. England was her great-
est single customer. Only comparatively rich countries can afford
on a large scale the high-quality products of German industry. No
expansion by threat or force could make either raw materials grow
on poor land or create purchasing power among poor people.

By 1938 the Nazi economic system was headed for a breakdown
sufficiently complete to threaten political collapse by extinguishing
the loyalty of the masses (and of the army), without which neither
a democracy nor a dictatorship can survive. War had to be risked
to keep the system going, to fulfil the virtually unlimited economic
expectations which Naziism had aroused, and to avoid the loss of the
nation’s voluntary and forced savings almost totally sunk in unpro-
ductive military equipments and in the preparations for self-suffi-
ciency.

Cutcaco, ILLINors
