The Garrison State

Author(s): Harold D. Lasswell

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Tan., 1941), pp. 455-468
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2769918

Accessed: 03-06-2016 20:07 UTC
HAROLD D. LASSWELL

ABSTRACT

The garrison state is a “developmental construct” about the future course of world-
politics, whose function is to stimulate the individual specialist to clarify for himself
his expectations about the future as a guide to the timing of scientific work. The trend
of the time is away from the dominance of the specialist on bargaining, who is the
businessman, and toward the supremacy of the specialist on violence, the soldier.
Methods: It is probable that the ruling élite of the garrison state will acquire most of
the skills that we have come to accept as part of modern civilian management. Par-
ticularly prominent will be skill in the manipulation of symbols in the interest of morale
and public relations. Unemployment will be “psychologically” abolished. Internal vio-
lence will be directed principally against unskilled manual workers and counterélite
elements who have come under suspicion. Incomes will be somewhat equalized in the
interest of maintaining morale under modern conditions of socialized danger. The prac-
tice will be to recruit the élite according to ability (in periods of crisis) ; authority will be
dictatorial, governmentalized, centralized, integrated. Value distribution: The power
pyramid will be steep, but the distribution of safety will be equalized (the socialization
of danger under modern conditions of aerial warfare). The income and respect pyramids
will be between the other two—each pyramid flattened at the top, bulged out in the
upper-middle and lower-middle zones. Value production: The élites will seek to hold in
check the utilization of the productive potentialities of modern science and engineering
for nonmilitary consumption goods. The rate of production will be regularized. Pro-
duction will be affected by the tendencies toward rigidity in a military state, but these
effects will be largely neutralized by the skill groups of science and technology.

The purpose of this article is to consider the possibility that we
are moving toward a world of “garrison states”—a world in which
the specialists on violence are the most powerful group in society.
From this point of view the trend of our time is away from the
dominance of the specialist on bargaining, who is the businessman,
and toward the supremacy of the soldier. We may distinguish transi-
tional forms, such as the party propaganda state, where the domi-
nant figure is the propagandist, and the party bureaucratic state, in
which the organization men of the party make the vital decisions.
There are mixed forms in which predominance is shared by the mo-
nopolists of party and market power.’

All men are deeply affected by their expectations as well as by
their desires. We time our specific wants and efforts with some re-
gard to what we reasonably hope to get. Hence, when we act ration-

1 For a preliminary discussion of the garrison state see my “Sino-Japanese Crisis:
The Garrison State versus the Civilian State,” China Quarterly, XI (1937), 643-49.

455
ally, we consider alternative versions of the future, making explicit
those expectations about the future that are so often buried in the
realm of hunch.

In the practice of social science, as of any skill in society, we are
bound to be affected in some degree by our conceptions of future
development. There are problems of timing in the prosecution of
scientific work, timing in regard to availability of data and con-
siderations of policy. In a world where primitive societies are melt-
ing away it is rational to act promptly to gather data about primi-
tive forms of social organization. In a world in which the scientist
may also be a democratic citizen, sharing democratic respect for hu-
man personality, it is rational for the scientist to give priority to
problems connected with the survival of democratic society. There
is no question here of a scientist deriving his values from science;
values are acquired chiefly from personal experience of a given cul-
ture, derived from that branch of culture that is philosophy and
theology, implemented by science and practice.

The picture of the garrison state that is offered here is no dogmatic
forecast. Rather it is a picture of the probable. It is not inevitable.
It may not even have the same probability as some other descrip-
tions of the future course of development. What, then, is the func-
tion of this picture for scientists? It is to stimulate the individual
specialist to clarify for himself his expectations about the future, as
a guide to the timing of scientific work. Side by side with this “con-
struct” of a garrison state there may be other constructs; the ration-
al person will assign exponents of probability to every alternative
picture?

Expectations about the future may rest upon the extrapolation of
past trends into the future. We may choose a number of specific
items—like population and production curves—and draw them into
the future according to some stated rule. This is an “itemistic” pro-
cedure. In contrast, we may set up a construct that is frankly im-

2 We use the term “subjective probability” for the exponent assigned to a future
event; “objective probability” refers to propositions about past events. The intellectual
act of setting up a tentative picture of significant past-future relations is developmental
thinking (see my World Politics and Personal Insecurity [New York and London, 1935],
chap. i: “Configurative Analysis”; Karl Mannheim, Man and Society in an Age of Recon-
struction: Studies of Modern Social Structure [New York, 1940]), Part IV: “Thought at
the Level of Planning.”
aginative though disciplined by careful consideration of the past.
Since trend curves summarize many features of the past, they must
be carefully considered in the preparation of every construct. Cor-
relation analysis of trend curves, coupled with the results of experi-
ment, may provide us with partial confirmation of many proposi-
tions about social change; these results, too, must be reviewed. In
addition to these disciplined battalions of data there is the total ex-
posure of the individual to the immediate and the recorded past, and
this total exposure may stimulate productive insight into the struc-
ture of the whole manifold of events which includes the future as well
as the past. In the interest of correct orientation in the world of
events, one does not wisely discard all save codified experience.
(The pictures of the future that are set up on more than “item”
basis may be termed “‘total.’’)

To speak of a garrison state is not to predict something wholly
new under the sun. Certainly there is nothing novel to the student
of political institutions about the idea that specialists on violence
may run the state. On the contrary, some of the most influential
discussions of political institutions have named the military state as
one of the chief forms of organized society. Comte saw history as a
succession (and a progression) that moved, as far as it concerned the
state, through military, feudal, and industrial phases. Spencer di-
vided all human societies into the military type, based on force, and
the industrial type, based on contract and free consent.

What is important for our purposes is to envisage the possible
emergence of the military state under present technical conditions.
There are no examples of the military state combined with modern
technology. During emergencies the great powers have given enor-
mous scope to military authority, but temporary acquisitions of
authority lack the elements of comparative permanence and accept-
ance that complete the garrison state. Military dictators in states
marginal to the creative centers of Western civilization are not in-
tegrated with modern technology; they merely use some of its
specific elements.

The military men who dominate a modern technical society will
be very different from the officers of history and tradition. It is prob-
able that the specialists on violence will include in their training a
large degree of expertness in many of the skills that we have tradi-
tionally accepted as part of modern civilian management.

The distinctive frame of reference in a fighting society is fighting
effectiveness. All social change is translated into battle potential.
Now there can be no realistic calculation of fighting effectiveness
without knowledge of the technical and psychological characteristics
of modern production processes. The function of management in
such a society is already known to us; it includes the exercise of skill
in supervising technical operations, in administrative organization,
in personnel management, in public relations. These skills are
needed to translate the complicated operations of modern life into
every relevant frame of reference—the frame of fighting effectiveness
as well as of pecuniary profit.

This leads to the seeming paradox that, as modern states are
militarized, specialists on violence are more preoccupied with the
skills and attitudes judged characteristic of nonviolence. We antici-
pate the merging of skills, starting from the traditional accouter-
ments of the professional soldier, moving toward the manager and
promoter of large-scale civilian enterprise.

In the garrison state, at least in its introductory phases, problems
of morale are destined to weigh heavily on the mind of management.
It is easy to throw sand in the gears of the modern assembly line;
hence, there must be a deep and general sense of participation in the
total enterprise of the state if collective effort is to be sustained.
When we call attention to the importance of the “human factor”
in modern production, we sometimes fail to notice that it springs
from the multiplicity of special environments that have been created
by modern technology. Thousands of technical operations have
sprung into existence where a few hundred were found before. To
complicate the material environment in this way is to multiply the
foci of attention of those who live in our society. Diversified foci of
attention breed differences in outlook, preference, and loyalty. The
labyrinth of specialized “material” environments generates profound
ideological divergencies that cannot be abolished, though they can
be mitigated, by the methods now available to leaders in our society.
As long as modern technology prevails, society is honeycombed with
cells of separate experience, of individuality, of partial freedom,
Concerted action under such conditions depends upon skilfully guid-
ing the minds of men; hence the enormous importance of symbolic
manipulation in modern society.

The importance of the morale factor is emphasized by the univer-
sal fear which it is possible to maintain in large populations through
modern instruments of warfare. The growth of aerial warfare in par-
ticular has tended to abolish the distinction between civilian and
military functions. It is no longer possible to affirm that those who
enter the military service take the physical risk while those who re-
main at home stay safe and contribute to the equipment and the
comfort of the courageous heroes at the front. Indeed, in some pe-
riods of modern warfare, casualties among civilians may outnumber
the casualties of the armed forces. With the socialization of danger
as a permanent characteristic of modern violence the nation becomes
one unified technical enterprise. Those who direct the violence oper-
ations are compelled to consider the entire gamut of problems that
arise in living together under modern conditions.

There will be an energetic struggle to incorporate young and old
into the destiny and mission of the state. It is probable that one
form of this symbolic adjustment will be the abolition of “the
unemployed.” This stigmatizing symbol will be obsolete in the gar-
rison state. It insults the dignity of millions, for it implies useless-
ness. This is so, whether the “unemployed” are given a “dole” or
put on “relief”? projects. Always there is the damaging stigma of
superfluity. No doubt the garrison state will be distinguished by the
psychological abolition of unemployment—“psychological” because
this is chiefly a matter of redefining symbols.

In the garrison state there must be work—and the duty to work—
for all. Since all work becomes public work, all who do not accept
employment flout military discipline. For those who do not fit with-
in the structure of the state there is but one alternative—to obey or
die. Compulsion, therefore, is to be expected as a potent instrument
for internal control of the garrison state.

The use of coercion can have an important effect upon many more
people than it reaches directly; this is the propaganda component of
any ‘‘propaganda of the deed.” The spectacle of compulsory labor
gangs in prisons or concentration camps is a negative means of con-
serving morale—negative since it arouses fear and guilt. Compul-
sory labor groups are suitable popular scapegoats in a military state.
The duty to obey, to serve the state, to work—these are cardinal
virtues in the garrison state. Unceasing emphasis upon duty is cer-
tain to arouse opposing tendencies within the personality structure
of all who live under a garrison regime. Everyone must struggle to
hold in check any tendencies, conscious or unconscious, to defy
authority, to violate the code of work, to flout the incessant demand
for sacrifice in the collective interest. From the earliest years youth
will be trained to subdue—to disavow, to struggle against—any
specific opposition to the ruling code of collective exactions.

The conscience imposes feelings of guilt and anxiety upon the
individual whenever his impulses are aroused, ever so slightly, to
break the code. When the coercive threat that sanctions the code of
the military state is internalized in the consciences of youth, the
spectacle of labor gangs is profoundly disturbing. A characteristic
response is self-righteousness—quick justification of coercive punish-
ment, tacit acceptance of the inference that all who are subject to
coercion are guilty of antisocial conduct. To maintain suspended
judgment, to absolve others in particular instances, is to give at
least partial toleration to countermores tendencies within the self.
Hence, the quick substitute responses—the self-righteous attitude,
the deflection of attention. Indeed, a characteristic psychic pattern
of the military state is the “startle pattern,” which is carried over to
the internal as well as to the external threat of danger. This startle
pattern is overcome and stylized as alert, prompt, commanding ad-
justment to reality. This is expressed in the authoritative manner
that dominates military style—in gesture, intonation, and idiom.

The chief targets of compulsory labor service will be unskilled
manual workers, together with counterélite elements who have
come under suspicion. The position of the unskilled in our society
has been deteriorating, since the machine society has less and less
use for unskilled manual labor. The coming of the machine was a
skill revolution, a broadening of the role of the skilled and semi-
skilled components of society.3 As the value of labor declines in pro-

3 See T. M. Sogge, “Industrial Classes in the United States,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, June, 1933; and Colin Clark, “National Income and Outlay,”
duction, it also declines in warfare; hence, it will be treated with less
consideration. (When unskilled workers are relied upon as fighters,
they must, of course, share the ideological exultation of the com-
munity as a whole and receive a steady flow of respect from the
social environment.) Still another factor darkens the forecast for the
bottom layers of the population in the future garrison state. If re-
cent advances in pharmacology continue, as we may anticipate,
physical means of controlling response can replace symbolic meth-
ods. This refers to the use of drugs not only for temporary orgies of
energy on the part of front-line fighters but in order to deaden the
critical function of all who are not held in esteem by the ruling élite.

For the immediate future, however, ruling élites must continue to
put their chief reliance upon propaganda as an instrument of morale.
But the manipulation of symbols, even in conjunction with coercive
instruments of violence, is not sufficient to accomplish all the pur-
poses of a ruling group. We have already spoken of the socialization
of danger, and this will bring about some equalitarian adjustments
in the distribution of income for the purpose of conserving the will to
fight and to produce.

In addition to the adjustment of symbols, goods, and violence, the
political élite of the garrison state will find it necessary to make cer-
tain adaptations in the fundamental practices of the state. Decisions
will be more dictatorial than democratic, and institutional practices
long connected with modern democracy will disappear. Instead of
elections to office or referendums on issues there will be government
by plebiscite. Elections foster the formation and expression of public
opinion, while plebiscites encourage only unanimous demonstrations
of collective sentiment. Rival political parties will be suppressed,
either by the monopolization of legality in one political party (more
properly called a political “order’’) or by the abolition of all political
parties. The ruling group will exercise a monopoly of opinion in pub-
lic, thus abolishing the free communication of fact and interpreta-
tion. Legislatures will be done away with, and if a numerous con-
sultative body is permitted at all it will operate as an assembly; that
is, it will meet for a very short time each year and will be expected to

in A. C. Pigou, Socialism versus Capitalism (London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd., 1937),
pp. 12-22. Sogge’s paper is a continuation of an earlier investigation by Alvin H. Hansen.
ratify the decisions of the central leadership after speeches that are
chiefly ceremonial in nature. Plebiscites and assemblies thus become
part of the ceremonializing process in the military state.

As legislatures and elections go out of use, the practice of petition
will play a more prominent role. Lawmaking will be in the hands of
the supreme authority and his council; and, as long as the state
survives, this agency will exert effective control (“‘authority” is the
term for formal expectations, “control” is the actual distribution of
effective power).

This means that instrumental democracy will be in abeyance, al-
though the symbols of mystic “democracy” will doubtless continue.
Instrumental democracy is found wherever authority and control are
widely dispersed among the members of a state. Mystic “democ-
racy” is not, strictly speaking, democracy at all, because it may be
found where authority and control are highly concentrated yet
where part of the established practice is to speak in the name of the
people as a whole. Thus, any dictatorship may celebrate its ‘“democ-
racy” and speak with contempt of such “mechanical” devices as
majority rule at elections or in legislatures.

What part of the social structure would be drawn upon in recruit-
ing the political rulers of the garrison state? As we have seen, the
process will not be by general election but by self-perpetuation
through co-option. The foremost positions will be open to the officers
corps, and the problem is to predict from what part of the social
structure the officers will be recruited. Morale considerations justify
a broad base of recruitment for ability rather than social standing.
Although fighting effectiveness is a relatively impersonal test that
favors ability over inherited status, the turnover in ruling families
from generation to generation will probably be low. Any recurring
crisis, however, will strengthen the tendency to favor ability. It
seems clear that recruitment will be much more for bias and obedi-
ence than for objectivity and originality. Yet, as we shall presently
see, modern machine society has introduced new factors in the mili-
tary state—factors tending to strengthen objectivity and originality.

In the garrison state all organized social activity will be govern-
mentalized; hence, the role of independent associations will dis-
appear, with the exception of secret societies (specifically, there will
be no organized economic, religious, or cultural life outside of the
duly constituted agencies of government). Government will be high-
ly centralized, though devolution may be practiced in order to miti-
gate “bureaucratism.”’ There is so much outspoken resistance to bu-
reaucratism in modern civilization that we may expect this attitude
to carry over to the garrison state. Not only will the administrative
structure be centralized, but at every level it will tend to integrate
authority in a few hands. The leadership principle will be relied up-
on; responsibility as a rule will be focused upon individual “heads.”

We have sketched some of the methods at the disposal of the rul-
ing élites of the garrison state—the management of propaganda,
violence, goods, practices. Let us consider the picture from a slightly
different standpoint. How will various kinds of influence be distrib-
uted in the state?* Power will be highly concentrated, as in any dic-
tatorial regime. We have already suggested that there will be a
strong tendency toward equalizing the distribution of safety
throughout the community (that is, negative safety, the socializa-
tion of threat in modern war). In the interest of morale there will be
some moderation of huge differences in individual income, flattening
the pyramid at the top, bulging it out in the upper-middle and mid-
dle zones. In the garrison state the respect pyramid will probably
resemble the income pyramid. (Those who are the targets of com-
pulsory labor restrictions will be the principal recipients of negative
respect and hence will occupy the bottom levels.) So great is the
multiplicity of functions in modern processes of production that a

4Influence is measured by control over values (desired events). For purposes of
analysis we have classified values as income, safety, and deference. To be deferred to is
to be taken into consideration by the environment. Deference, in turn, is divided into
power and respect. Power is measured by degree of participation in important deci-
sions. A decision is a choice backed by the most severe deprivations at the disposal of
the community (usually death). The making of these decisions in a community is the
function of government. The institution of government is what is called government by
those who live in a given community during a specified period of time; it is the most
important secular decision-making institution. It is clear that the function of govern-
ment may be exercised by other than governmental institutions, i-e., by “government”
and by monopolistic “big business.” (A state is one of the most influential communities
in world-politics.) Respect is measured by reciprocal intimacy. Society can be divided
into different classes on the basis of each value—or of value combinations. In the most

inclusive sense politics studies conditions affecting the distribution of most values; in a
narrower sense it studies power.
simple scheme of military rank is flagrantly out of harmony with the
facts. Even though a small number of ranks are retained in the mili-
tary state, it will be recognized that the diversity of functions exer-
cised by each rank is so great that the meaning of a specific classifica-
tion will be obscure. Summarizing, the distribution of safety will be
most uniform throughout the community; distribution of power will
show the largest inequalities. The patterns of income and respect
will fall between these two, showing a pronounced bulge in the up-
per-middle and middle strata. The lower strata of the community
will be composed of those subject to compulsory labor, tending to
constitute a permanent pariah caste.

What about the capacity of the garrison state to produce a large
volume of material values? The élites of the garrison state, like the
élites of recent business states, will confront the problem of holding
in check the stupendous productive potentialities of modern science
and engineering. We know that the ruling élites of the modern busi-
ness state have not known how to control productive capacity; they
have been unwilling to adopt necessary measures for the purpose of
regularizing the tempo of economic development. Hence, modern
society has been characterized by periods of orgiastic expansion,
succeeded by periods of flagrant underutilization of the instruments
of production.’

The rulers of the garrison state will be able to regularize the rate
of production, since they will be free from many of the conventions
that have stood in the way of adopting measures suitable to this
purpose in the business state. The business élite has been unwilling
to revise institutional practices to the extent necessary to maintain
a continually rising flow of investment. The institutional structure
of the business state has called for flexible adjustment between gov-
ernmental and private channels of activity and for strict measures to
maintain price flexibility. Wherever the business élite has not sup-
ported such necessary arrangements, the business state itself has
begun to disintegrate.

5 For the magnitude of these production losses see, e.g., Chart I, “Loss in Potential
Real National Income Due to Depression, Unemployment of Men and Machines, 1930-
1937,” in National Resources Committee, The Structure of the American Economy
(Washington, D.C., 1939), p. 2. The estimated loss of potential income was $200,-

000,000.
Although the rulers of the garrison state will be free to regularize
the rate of production, they will most assuredly prevent full utiliza-
tion of modern productive capacity for nonmilitary consumption
purposes. The élite of the garrison state will have a professional in-
terest in multiplying gadgets specialized to acts of violence. The
rulers of the garrison state will depend upon war scares as a means of
maintaining popular willingness to forego immediate consumption.
War scares that fail to culminate in violence eventually lose their
value; this is the point at which ruling classes will feel that blood-
letting is needed in order to preserve those virtues of sturdy ac-
quiescence in the regime which they so much admire and from which
they so greatly benefit. We may be sure that if ever there is a rise in
the production of nonmilitary consumption goods, despite the
amount of energy directed toward the production of military equip-
ment, the ruling class will feel itself endangered by the growing
“frivolousness” of the community.®

We need to consider the degree to which the volume of values
produced in a garrison state will be affected by the tendency toward
rigidity. Many factors in the garrison state justify the expectation
that tendencies toward repetitiousness and ceremonialization will be
prominent. To some extent this is a function of bureaucracy and
dictatorship. But to some extent it springs also from the preoccupa-
tion of the military state with danger. Even where military opera-
tions are greatly respected, the fighter must steel himself against
deep-lying tendencies to retreat from death and mutilation. One of
the most rudimentary and potent means of relieving fear is some
repetitive operation—some reiteration of the old and well-estab-
lished. Hence the reliance on drill as a means of disciplining men to
endure personal danger without giving in to fear of death. The tend-
ency to repeat, as a means of diminishing timidity, is powerfully
reinforced by successful repetition, since the individual is greatly
attached to whatever has proved effective in maintaining self-control
in previous trials. Even those who deny the fear of death to them-
selves may reveal the depth of their unconscious fear by their inter-
est in ritual and ceremony. This is one of the subtlest ways by which
the individual can keep his mind distracted from the discovery of his
own timidity. It does not occur to the ceremonialist that in the
spider web of ceremony he has found a moral equivalent of war—an
unacknowledged substitute for personal danger.

The tendency to ceremonialize rather than to fight will be par-
ticularly prominent among the most influential elements in a gar-
rison state. Those standing at the top of the military pyramid will
doubtless occupy high positions in the income pyramid. During
times of actual warfare it may be necessary to make concessions in
the direction of moderating gross-income differences in the interest
of preserving general morale. The prospect of such concessions may
be expected to operate as a deterrent factor against war. A counter-
vailing tendency, of course, is the threat to sluggish and well-estab-
lished members of the upper crust from ambitious members of the
lower officers’ corps. This threat arises, too, when there are mur-
murs of disaffection with the established order of things on the part
of broader components of the society.

It seems probable that the garrison state of the future will be far
less rigid than the military states of antiquity. As long as modern
technical society endures, there will be an enormous body of spe-
cialists whose focus of attention is entirely given over to the dis-
covery of novel ways of utilizing nature. Above all, these are physi-
cal scientists and engineers. They are able to demonstrate by rather
impersonal procedures the efficiency of many of their suggestions for
the improvement of fighting effectiveness. We therefore anticipate
further exploration of the technical potentialities of modern civiliza-
tion within the general framework of the garrison state.
It is clear that the friend of democracy views the emergence of the
garrison state with repugnance and apprehension. He will do what-
ever is within his power to defer it. Should the garrison state become
unavoidable, however, the friend of democracy will seek to conserve
as many values as possible within the general framework of the new
society. What democratic values can be preserved, and how?

Our analysis has indicated that several elements in the pattern of
the garrison state are compatible with democratic respect for human
dignity. Thus, there will be some socialization of respect for all who
participate in the garrison society (with the ever present exception
of the lowest strata).

Will the human costs of a garrison state be reduced if we civilian-
ize the ruling élite? Just how is it possible to promote the fusion of
military and civilian skills? What are some of the devices capable of
overcoming bureaucratism? To what extent is it possible to aid or
to retard the ceremonializing tendencies of the garrison state?

It is plain that we need more adequate data from the past on each
of these problems and that it is possible to plan to collect relevant
data in the future. We need, for instance, to be better informed
about the trends in the skill pattern of dominant élite groups in dif-
ferent parts of the world. In addition to trend data we need experi-
mental and case data about successful and unsuccessful civilianizing
of specialists on violence.7

Many interesting questions arise in connection with the present
sketch about transition to the garrison state. What is the probable
order of appearance—Japan, Germany, Russia, United States of
America? What are the probable combinations of bargaining, propa-
ganda, organization, and violence skills in élites? Is it probable that
the garrison state will appear with or without violent revolution?
Will the garrison state appear first in a small number of huge Con-
tinental states (Russia, Germany, Japan [in China], United States)
or in a single world-state dominated by one of these powers? With
what symbol patterns will the transition to the garrison state be as-
sociated? At the present time there are four important ideological
patterns.

7 For analysis of trends toward militarization in modern society consult Hans Speier,
whose articles usually appear in Social Research.
3. World-proletariat (Russia) Universalize Soviet Union, Communist
International

4. True world-proletariat (no state New élite seizes revolutionary crisis to
at present) liquidate “Russian betrayers,” all
“National Socialisms” and “pluto-

cratic democracies”

The function of any developmental construct, such as the present
one about the garrison state, is to clarify to the specialist the possible
relevance of his research to impending events that concern the values
of which he approves as a citizen. Although they are neither scien-
tific laws nor dogmatic forecasts, developmental constructs aid in the
timing of scientific work, stimulating both planned observation of
the future and renewed interest in whatever past events are of great-
est probable pertinence to the emerging future. Within the general
structure of the science of society there is place for many special sci-
ences devoted to the study of all factors that condition the survival
of selected values. This is the sense in which there can be a science of
democracy, or a science of political psychiatry, within the framework
of social science. If the garrison state is probable, the timing of spe-
cial research is urgent.®

WASHINGTON ScHOOL oF PSYCHIATRY
Wasuincton, D.C.
