The Concept of Inviolability in Culture

Author(s): Lawrence K. Frank

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 36, No. 4 (Jan., 1931), pp. 607-615
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2767 165

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:47 UTC
THE CONCEPT OF INVIOLABILITY IN CULTURE

LAWRENCE K. FRANK
New York City
ABSTRACT

The inviolability of the person and of things is a basic factor in culture. Its ob-
servance is highly differentiated according to age, sex, mental status, physical charac-
teristics, religion, position or rank or caste, occupational class, and property of the
individual ; also, it varies according to season and location. Each person must respect
these inviolabilities in others and defend himself against others, using the group-
sanctioned institutional practices for approaching otherwise inviolable persons and
property. The analysis of culture in terms of inviolabilities and related institutional
practices is urged as a promising approach to comparative culture, law, and other
social studies and for the study of personality development.

The concept of inviolability in culture is essentially an extension
of the taboo concept which is familiar to all students in this field.
Perhaps it would be more correct to say that the taboo as described
in anthropological literature is one form or instance of the principle
or practice of inviolability which forms the basis for the larger part
of the non-material culture.

Approached in the most direct and explicit fashion, we may say
that each person in a cultural group is taught, with greater or less
effectiveness, to respect the inviolability of persons, things, and ani-
mals, and frequently certain kinds of situations in which persons,
things, and animals may be congregated. That is to say, the educa-
tion or training of the young individual is focused upon establishing
in him a respect or observance of (@) the sanctity of the person of
others, (5) the inviolability of private property, and (c) the general
taboo on animals or places.

The manner in which this training is given, of course, varies, but
in general it consists in thwarting all attempts to approach or appro-
priate or violate the sanctity of the person or private property or
taboo situations, or in punishing such actions if surreptitiously or
defiantly carried out. Since these persons and things are usually
biologically adequate stimuli to action by the young individual, this
thwarting or punishing serves to condition negatively such naive
responses until the young individual learns to refrain from further
attempts.
About the time these lessons of observance have been learned, at
least in a general way, the young individual is introduced to the in-
stitutional practices which provide a duly sanctioned pattern for
dealing with persons and things protected by this inviolability. That
is to say, he learns to use contract, barter, sale, various forms of
etiquette, and later courtship and marriage, as the group-sanctioned
ways of approaching persons to obtain their services or their prop-
erty.

If we undertake a more detailed examination of the practice of
inviolability in culture, we shall readily see that the young indi-
vidual who undergoes this tuition, usually at the hands of his par-
ents and immediate family, faces a most complicated task. He must
learn at once to observe in his behavior all these restrictions or pro-
hibitions upon his approach to persons and things and at the same
time learn how to behave toward others who approach him as a per-
son or owner of property. He is at once an actor and a recipient, an
aggressive subject and a defensive or acquiescent object, depending
upon his réle in the group and his individual personality.

If we look more closely we shall discover that for his activity
toward others and their property, and for his reception of others’
activity toward him and his property, there are a variety of highly
differentiated patterns which he must observe, frequently under
severe penalty for omission or infraction thereof. Let us canvass
these distinctions in his behavior.
SEX

Next to age, the differentiated observance of group practices of
inviolability according to the sex of the actor or of the person acted
upon is most significant. The sanctity of the person usually has a
different meaning for males and females, and even the property of
males and females calls for different observances, when they are
both permitted to possess property.

Under this heading of “Sex” we must pay attention to the rela-
tionship sustained by an individual to others, especially the kinship
or marital relations. As we shall see when discussing institutional
practices for dealing with otherwise-inviolable persons, the rela-
tionship of the individual gives rise to privileges and restrictions in
the observance of the sanctity of the person and of private property.
RELIGION

Membership in a religious group, or in a family so embraced, also
modifies the operation of the practice and observance of inviolabil-
ity, especially when there are various sects. An individual of one
sect will be faced with one set of prohibitions and of observances
which a member of another group, living perhaps in the same com-
munity, may largely ignore or neglect. The presence of a dominant
or “state” religion may develop sharply drawn lines of demarcation
in this regard.

POSITION OR RANK AND CASTE

It is possible to describe position, rank, and caste wholly in terms
of the kind and degree of inviolability enjoyed by individuals of
each such category, and of their obligation (or lack thereof) to ob-
serve such prohibitions toward others. Indeed, it is difficult to see
how we can avoid or neglect this approach in studying position,
rank, or caste, since they are so largely matters of privilege with re-
spect to what an individual must observe or others must observe
toward him, and differences in the use of the institutional practices,
such as contract, barter, sale, marriage, and so on. A group hier-
archy rests upon these differentiated patterns of behavior appropri-
ate to each position, rank, or caste in their dealings with other
persons and with things and animals covered by the property classi-
fication and with those “situations” which are generally taboo.

Under this broad heading of position, rank, or caste we must rec-
ognize all kinds of social status even when not specifically desig-
nated by a title or membership in a formal group. Thus we have
citizens and non-citizens or aliens, distinguished not alone by their
participation or exclusion from political actions, but also by the
differentiated application of the inviolability practices which they
must observe or others observe toward them and in their privilege
to use the institutional practices of contract, marriage, etc.

The great gulf between the free man and the slave may be clearly
and specifically defined in terms of the inviolability of the person of
property and the use of institutional practices. What the jurists
are fond of saying, after Sir Henry Maine, that social progress is
marked by the transition from status to contract, reflects just this
emergence from a fixed, unalterable position respecting inviolabil-
ity or lack of it to a position where an individual may dispose of his
person and property by agreement and for a consideration or re-
ward.
OCCUPATIONAL CLASS

Both the membership in an occupational group and the posses-
sion of special skill in its arts serve to modify the operation of the
practice of inviolability. A particular profession may violate the
ordinary sanctity of the person of another or enjoy additional and
peculiar immunities in his own person, such as a physician today
who may more freely manipulate the person, also of the opposite
sex, or claim exemption from military or jury duty and violate the
speed laws, just as the magician, medicine man, etc., of more primi-
tive groups has his privileges and immunities. Again, special skill
or competence in an occupation, such as is found in a great hunter
or a famous artist, may confer privileges and immunities in the
sphere of inviolability and the institutional practices.
periods or occasions when a specific cycle of inviolability followed
by non-inviolability obtains, or when a particular time of the year
or season governs observances, or when inviolability has a limited
duration consequent upon some antecedent or anticipated event.
We may illustrate the periodic variations by reference to the custom
of suspending sexual taboos during certain periods of group cele-
bration, e.g., Saturnalia, the seasonal variations by reference to
open and closed seasons for hunting, fishing, and the like and the
operation of specifically limited duration in the prohibition of sex
intercourse until a specified time after menstruation or parturition.

Location also enters into the inviolability practices in that spe-
cific places may operate to suspend all rules or impose restrictions
over and above the usual rules. Thus the church or sacred edifice
may confer unusual protection upon the person of those who repair
there for sanctuary, or a particular designated place may be recog-
nized as free from the operation of the usual group prohibitions
against violation of the person or property.

With every person and almost all things and domesticated ani-
mals, if not wild animals also, covered by this principle of inviola-
bility which each member of the group is taught to observe toward
others and to maintain in his own person and property, always ac-
cording to the differentiated applications just described, it is ob-
vious that group life can be carried on only by practices which per-
mit individuals to violate the sanctity of the person and private
property in duly sanctioned patterns. Thus in every group we find,
as an accompaniment of the inviolability principle, a well-defined
set of institutional practices for this purpose, with specific rules
which legitimize approaches to the property or person of others.
Language as a conventionalized symbolism is, of course, the pri-
mary institutional pattern for approaching others to negotiate for
the shifting of these inviolabilities. Along with language we should
note the group patterns of gesture and ritual generally in all insti-
tutional practices.

Since each person enjoys a highly differentiated inviolability in
his person and property, he may, and indeed is expected to, demand
observance of that inviolability from all others according to the
rights, titles, obligations, and immunities of his case, and to defend
himself from unwarranted invasion. In approaching others he must
likewise observe their specific condition and refrain from any un-
sanctioned invasion. But if he is moved to obtain another’s prop-
erty or services (being their behavior responses to him or whatever
he designates as the focus of their behavior), he may open negotia-
tions looking to an agreement or contract, or to a sale if not an ex-
change by barter.

The essential features of these negotiations are the offer and the
acceptance thereof. This is not the place to review the law of con-
tract in its various forms, but it is appropriate to point out that the
acceptor waives his inviolability, as regards his person in agreeing
to work or serve or limit his ordinary freedom of action or usual
immunity or as regards his property, in allowing the offerer to use
his property or to take possession of it as new owner. It should be
noted that the offer and giving of a consideration, as the legal phrase
has it, is essentially a stimulus designed to evoke the response of
waiving this inviolability, and the acceptor is deemed to be the best
judge of what is an adequate stimulus, in the absence of fraud, etc.
The other point is that in waiving his inviolability the prohibition
is not set aside generally; rather, the operation of inviolability is
changed so that the offerer is now privileged to violate the prohibi-
tion for his own purposes and the acceptor is ordinarily bound not
only to acquiesce but to defend against all others, including him-
self, that privilege which he has granted. In other words, he has
divested himself of his former inviolability and bestowed it, either
partially or wholly, upon another in the case of property, or re-
moved it in regard to his person so far as that other is concerned.
Thus the whole law of contract revolves upon the concept of invio-
lability and the shifting observances thereof so far as the protection
it gives and the privileges it confers. The former owner must ordi-
narily defend the title of the purchaser and may no longer approach
or use the property transferred; the individual who lifts the prohibi-
tion upon sexual approach to his person in favor of his wife or her
husband must not only refrain from such action toward another but
resist any other’s sexual approach.

The complexity of legal rules regarding marital relations, prop-
erty, real estate, contract, torts, and so on are all to be viewed here
as so many attempts to recognize these differentiated operations of
the principle of inviolability and the use of institutional practices
addressed to these inviolabilities. The intentional or unintentional
trespass or invasion of another’s immunities or privileges gives rise
to legal remedies, involving compensation and redress or punish-
ment as in the criminal law.

For each application of the inviolability principle there is a code
or systematized declaration—legal, ethical, religious, moral, or
what is called etiquette—accompanied by a more or less well-or-
ganized scheme of explanation or rationalization and a kind of
sanction appropriate to the enforcement of the code.

A tentative generalization might be offered here, that the devel-
opment of inviolability of the person and of things with highly dif-
ferentiated observances has come with the decline of the generalized
taboo binding upon all persons, which is another way of describing
the secularization of life in which the growing material culture has
fostered the practices of inviolability and diminished the general
taboos.

Since the biological significance of the principle of inviolability
is in the interposition of a pattern between the individual and the
normal focus of his behavior, nutrition, sex, shelter, self-protection,
it is obvious that the peculiar manner in which these patterns are
imposed upon the individual and the fashion in which he learns to
use the group-sanctioned institutional patterns will give rise to this
quality or aspect we call personality.”

Thus it is suggested that a careful, detailed exposition of the
concept of inviolability, in its multitudinous ramifications and im-
plications, will provide at once a basic scheme for the study of com-
parative culture, comparative law, and indeed all the social studies
and a peculiarly significant program for investigating the develop-

* Culture may be regarded as just this intervention of patterns between the indi-
vidual and the world of other individuals and things whereby, instead of a purely
native or reflex response to a situation, there is a pause and a patterning of behavior
so that the pattern may often become more significant than the situation or the origi-
nal biological focus; thus culture, both material and non-material, as Lowie (Culture
and Ethnology) has so cogently put it, is neither wholly psychological nor biological

nor geographical but a complex such as only human behavior can comprehend in an
THE CONCEPT OF INVIOLABILITY IN CULTURE 615

ment of personality as it arises in and through the impact of culture
upon the individual. For what we call personality is essentially the
individual’s manner of behaving toward others in observing the
code of inviolability as it affects them and his own person.”

* For a number of years the writer has been concerned with an analysis of social
life, in terms of taboos and taboo-changing practices, but only recently has it become
clear to him that the prior connotations of taboo were standing in the way of any
general acceptance of such an analysis. In order to lay this analysis before the stu-
dents of culture in a more acceptable form and to illustrate the larger significance of
the concept of inviolability this paper has been prepared.

See the writer’s “The Emancipation of Economics,” American Economics Review,
March, 1924; “An Institutional Analysis of the Law,” Columbia Law Review, May,
1924; “Social Problems,” American Journal of Sociology, January, 1925 ; “Physiolog-
ical Tension and Social Structure,” Proceedings of the American Sociological So-
ciety, 1927 ; “The Management of Tensions,” American Journal of Sociology, March,
1928; Proceedings of the First and Second Colloquium on Personality Investigation,
1928 and 1929; “Personality and Rank Order,” American Journal of Sociology, Sep-
tember, 1929.
