The Scope of Social Technology

Author(s): C. R. Henderson

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 6, No. 4 (Jan., 1901), pp. 465-486
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2762288

Accessed: 09-05-2016 03:47 UTC
THE SCOPE OF SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY.

UnpErRSTANDING of the present and direction of the future
depend upon knowledge of the past. History treats the phe-
nomena of human life in their process of unfolding. Thus there
is a history of the concrete, individual facts of political life; of
educational ideals, methods, and systems; of military organiza-
tion and conflicts ; of industry and commerce; of art and religion.
Even the history of philosophy, and of economic and political
theory, may be named as distinct from the systematic presenta-
tion of philosophy, economics, or politics.*

Wundt has treated the province of psychology, individual
and folk-psychology, philology, history, ethnology, the doctrine
of population, politics, economics, jurisprudence, philosophy,
and shown their relations to each other.”

Economics? deals with the phenomena of wealth—that is, of
material, transferable, and limited means of satisfying human
desires. Grand divisions of economics are theoretical economics
and practical economics. Theoretical economics includes stat-
ics and dynamics. Practical economics includes economic poli-
tics and finance. Already we have treatises on agrarian
politics, politics of commerce, manufactures, transportation,
the economics of the “labor question,” of ecclesiastical institu-
tions, and of educational systems. It is sometimes claimed that
there is a particular practical economic science wherever the
problem is relatively wide in scope and connected with a natural
group of phenomena. The tendency to mark off specialized
“sciences”’ is seen in biology as well as in economics, and there
would be more justification for this in sociology because of the
greater complexity of the phenomena.

™MENGER, Methode der Socialwissenschaften, pp. 32, 122.

2 Compare L. F. WARD, Outlines of Sociology, chaps. 1-6; A. W. SMALL, AMERI-
CAN JOURNAL OF SocioLoecy, “Seminar Notes,” 1898.

3J. B. CLARK, Distribution of Wealth, p. 1.
465
In relation to government we have political science, jurispru-
dence, international law, all of which deal with description,
explanation, and adaptation of means to social ends.

The scope, method, and value of general sociology, as
science and philosophy, cannot here be discussed. The reply
to skeptical questions must finally come from the actual service
which the new aspirant renders to the rational and practical
demands of the human mind. If it is found that, after the
special social sciences — economics, politics, ethics, pedagogics—
have done their best work, an entirely different method of treat-
ment of the phenomena of association offers a more adequate,
comprehensive, and complete analysis, classification, and explana-
tion of the facts of society, that method will be respected.
That a more adequate and complete treatment is desirable no
one seems to question; skepticism affects only the achievements
of those who have hitherto professed sociology. It may fairly
be claimed on behalf of our attempt to construct a general
science of society that we are doing only what many economists
and political philosophers always do when they seek to satisfy
the rational demand for unity and completeness and the practical
needs of social organization: they “socialize.” If the politi-
cal philosopher must constantly trespass on the fields of the
economist, and the economist follow his own clue out into gov-
ernmental relations and agencies, and even culture associations,
there is justification for an explicit effort to codrdinate both
factors with other social forces and means when man’s estate is
in question. The sociologist is doing openly what has long been
done actually under titles which do not connote the whole reality.*

Our present concern is with practical sociology,and more par-
ticularly with the task, divisions, and method of social technology.

I. DIVISIONS OF SOCIAL SCIENCE.

Sociology, as science, deals with what is and with what ought
to be. For our present purpose we may divide the entire
rational enterprise into theoretical and practical social science.

+The eminent economist, Professor G. Schmoller, has recently opened a fairly
hospitable door to the waiting candidate by saying that we “dieser Sociologie, die

freilich nur eine Art ausgebildeter empirischer Ethik ist, ihr Biirgerrecht in dem
Reiche der Wissenschaften nicht mehr abstreiten kénnen” (Grundriss, p. 72).
Theoretical social science considers the phenomena of asso-
ciation. Its goal is an adequate view (@ewpeiv), a knowing and
understanding.*

The phenomena of community life must be described, that
is, set forth in their order of coexistence and succession, rela-
tions of space and time. The basis of this task lies in social
geography and demography. Description is not complete with-
out the discrimination, classification, and naming of typical forms
of the phenomena, since the endless number of individual facts
cannot be grasped by the mind without grouping them according
to some real characteristic or mark.

The discovery of general tendencies, uniformity of order, is
also a discovery of the ‘‘laws’’ of the phenomena.

The culmination and the characteristic of theoretical social
science is explanation, rationale, the discovery and statement of
the causes of the phenomena. This crowning achievement
implies an account of all the conditions and forces which make
the phenomenon what it is in kind, degree, and quantity.

This rationale must include a discovery and statement of all
the forces which tend to equilibrium, and this may be desig-
nated as a problem of static sociology.

The explanation must deal rationally, and as exactly as pos-
sible, with the forces which produce change, movement, evolution.
This may be called dynamic sociology, or, in a special sense,
kinetic sociology.

Practical sociology deals with precisely the same social phe-
nomena, the same typical forms, the same uniformities or laws,
the same forces, as theoretical sociology, but for a different
purpose, and therefore with some difference of method. Prac-
tical social science is ambitious to discover and present in
systematic form principles which regulate social conduct in
conformity with ends.?_ Does practical sociology deal with what

*K. MENGER, Methode der Socialwissenschaften, 1883; A. WAGNER, Politische

Ockonomie, Grundlagen, Vol. 1, chap. 1, p. 144; H. DieTzeL, Theoretische Social-
Skonomik, Vol. I, pp. 4 ff; WuNDT, Logik, Methodenlehre, Vol. I, p. 530.

?DIETZEL, 0. ¢., p. 4: Conduct, Handeln (mpdrrewv), hence “practice” and
“practical.” Dietzel (p. 5) distinguishes three tasks of practical social science —nor-
mative, critical, and technical; but he would construct only two disciplines or scien-
tific procedures, which he designates ethics (Z¢#72) and politics (ol/#ti2), Professor
II. DIVISIONS OF PRACTICAL SOCIOLOGY.

Within the task of practical social science we may distin-
guish three problems for systematic treatment: (1) the problem
of values, (2) the problem of criticism, and (3) the problem of
means. For the first problem we may use the data of ethical
science and philosophy, but not without consideration of empiri-
cal conditions. The valuation of the ideas of morality is a
problem of ethics, aided by psychology. For general sociol-
ogy the data of ethics and psychology are ultimate elements.
But as soon as the valuation includes concrete conditions, exter-
nal relations of persons to nature and to each other, laws,

A. W. Small distinguishes social telics and social technology. K. Menger calls this
practical procedure of social science a doctrine of social art (Kzmstlehre), but (p. 131)
he makes “eine praktische Wissenschaft” synonymous with “eine Kunstlehre.” A
WAGNER (0. ¢., p. 145) declares that practical social science is science, and not art
alone, so long as it aims at knowledge. “Kurz gesagt, handelt es sich also bei den
theoretischen Wissenschaften um Erlangung eines Wissens zum Kennen, bei den
praktischen um Erlangung eines solchen zum Kénnen, aber eben um Erlangung
eines Wissens um des Wissens Willen doch bei beiden. Auch die letzteren diirfen
daher den Namen von ‘ Wissenschaften’ beanspruchen.” Wunpt, AMethodeniehre, Vol.
II, p. 532, admits practical social science, as a systematic application of the data of
theoretical sciences to the satisfactions of needs; his unnecessary limitation of tech-
nology to “ politics” does not affect the issue.

In Dr. C. D. Wricut’s Practical Sociology the definition is given of the title:
“Any treatment of the subject would be practical which dealt with things as they are.”
But theoretical social science deals with things as they are, and practical social sci-
ence, according to the authors quoted above, deals with things as they are, but with a
purpose of introducing also what ought to be and is not yet, or only imperfectly,
realized.
institutions, then ethical science must wait on theoretical soci-
ology. The debt and obligation are reciprocal, and progress in
each science depends on parallel progress of the other. In many
books on ethics the writer passes from his own data to dogmatic
deductions about social relations and institutions, as if he needed
no exact knowledge of these relations and institutions to com-
plete his valuation and make it reliable and verifiable. This is a
serious error and entails endless mistakes. The second part of
the task, or criticism, implies the application of our criteria to
actual conditions as described and explained in theoretical soci-
ology. The third part of the task, or social technology, considers
(1) what should be done; (2) how to make or do that which
the situation demands. As theoretical social science culminates
in explanation of what is, so practical social science culminates
in the best methods discoverable, at a given stage of knowledge,
for bringing the actual into approximate conformity with what
is required by that situation, required by the inherent facts of
the situation.’

Dependence of practical upon theoretical social sctence—From
the preceding statement it will be seen that practical social
science derives all its data from the description, classifica-
tion, and explanation furnished by theory. Practical science
has no value except as it rests on a mastery of the facts, the
laws, and the causes which theory makes known and intelligible.

Dependence of theory upon practice—Both in life and thought
action outruns theory. Men talk and write, logically and
beautifully, before logic and grammar. If men had waited
for science before they constructed systems of state, industry,
and church, there would be nothing to explain. The forces we
interpret rose out of the subconscious and the unreflecting life.
The principles of conduct are implicit in conduct.

Yet the art of social living is helped by science. General
knowledge of financial science might have saved millions of dol-
lars in the cost of the Civil War and the management of currency

*“Schliesslich zeigt sie die concreten Mittel, welche taugen, das sociale Sein einer

concreten Zeit und eines concretes Ortes mit jener obersten Norm des socialen Sein-
sollens in Harmonie zu bringen.” (DIETZEL, a. c., p. 5.)
III, RELATIONS OF ETHICS TO PRACTICAL SOCIOLOGY.

Psychology reveals the phenomena of the ethical life in all
its elements, just as it deals with all the phenomena of intellect,
sensibility, and will; it shows the order of awakening and devel-
opment of the moral sense of obligation, of the commanding
ideas of benevolence, justice, and completeness of living. Psy-
chology also brings to light the actual beliefs of men in respect
to the virtues and duties, in various relations, which are recog-
nized by men. All the desires of men—the appetites, the zs-
thetic cravings, the spiritual aspirations, the economic demands—
are studied in relation to the central experiences called ethical.

Ethical philosophy seeks the unity of the ethical in the
ground of being, the sanctions of the moral sense of oughtness,
the ultimate good of beings as defined by hedonism and com-
peting systems.

But at the line where these subjective valuations are tested
by experience and come into the current of the social life, ethics
is dependent on theoretical sociology, as already indicated, for
the knowledge of the institutional forms through which the
moral beliefs find expression ; and on practical sociology for the
concrete means of realization.

With the greatest benevolence no man can be beneficent
without knowledge of the actual conditions of realizing satisfac-
tions ; and with the finest sense of justice a saint will injure his
neighbor in his rights, and all the more remorselessly because
he is following his “conscience.” The attempt to direct con-
duct by the light of uninstructed, though noble, sentiments and
beliefs has always made communities feel safer in the hands of
strong and shrewd selfish men than in the hands of incompetent
philanthropists. If anything is certain in morals, it is that every
man is under obligations to know all he can about what he has
to do.

= PAUL LEROY-BEAULIEU, Traité théorique et pratique d Economie politique, Vol.
I, pp. 3, 4, second edition, 1896.
IV. THE PRINCIPLES OF PRACTICAL SOCIAL SCIENCE.

By “principles” we do not mean, in this connection, the
canons of explanation, for these belong to theory; nor legis-
lative statutes, positive human law; nor divine commands; nor
rules of art, made by local administrators for particular direc-
tion of specific processes. Positively, we do mean general work-
ing directions for conduct, derived from experience, regulative
norms for associated action in view of accepted ends.*

V. THREE ASPECTS OF SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY.

It is possible to think of a system of principles (1) for
the complete organization of a community, small or great,
with reference to the attainment of all its ends; (2) of a social
technology of a natural group or class of society, a system or
mechanism adapted to further in the best possible way all the
interests of that group or class, in harmony with the interest of
the entire community; or (3) we may select a problem or a
movement whose adequate treatment by a special social science
is impossible, and demands a coérdination and coéperation of
many or all the means of the community, and the data of many
or all of the special sciences, of nature and spirit.

The first and most ambitious of these projected systems we
might be tempted to defer for the present as too visionary and dis-
tant for immediate consideration. Yet we may not dismiss it with-
out the suggestion that, approximately, many well-informed and
reflective men have, for small communities, achieved this intel-
lectual task. For example, the disciplined and broadly edu-
cated head of a household considers all the interests of the
members of his family, the relation of their welfare to the
interests of neighborhood, city, and all mankind. At the basis
of his every command or arrangement is a system of society,
rational and as complete as he can think it. All his knowledge
of the physical sciences, of economics, politics, ethics, is brought
to serve him in the construction of a scheme of group-living.

*MENGER, Methodenlehre, pp. 245-7, 255. “Die praktischen Wirtschaftswissen-
schaften sollen uns die Grundsitze lehren, nach welchen die wirtschaftlichen Absichten
der Menschen (je nach Massgabe der Verhiltnisse) am zweckmissigsten erreicht zu
werden vermégen.” SCHMOLLER, Grundriss, I, p. 64.
We have but to expand this method, based on regulative prin-
ciples as wide as the moral world, as ancient as civilization, and
we have a social technology—a system of conscious and pur-
poseful organization of persons in which every actual, natural
social organization finds its true place, and all factors in harmony
codperate to realize an increasing aggregate and better propor-
tions of the “health, wealth, beauty, knowledge, sociability, and
rightness”’ desires.

Indeed, every liberally educated citizen, alive to all the
interests about him, constructs in his mind such a rational sys-
tem in outline for the community in which he lives, and, in less
definite form, for the commonwealth and the nation. So far as
he acts reflectively, he directs his political, industrial, educa-
tional, and ecclesiastical influence according to a more or less
consistent body of regulative principles.

In one respect practical sociology is not at a disadvantage
compared with theory. Explanation is relative to a given social
system, as the ‘‘historical” school of economists has rightly
urged and all acknowledge.*

Regulative principles (Massregeln) have precisely the same
limitations and scope. But in so far as the same system of
conditions, forces, and organization obtains, to the same extent
we can discover and present, not only explanatory principles,
but also regulative principles. The extreme difficulty and com-
plexity of the problem may well make us careful and painstak-
ing, but never cynically hopeless.

And since many social forces are relatively continuous and
permanent, and since there is increasing reciprocity between
peoples, we may rationally hope to carry out on a world-scale
the principles discovered in very restricted fields of investiga-
tion. The chemist and biologist discover in the closet of a
laboratory a principle which is published to the learned world,
without fear that their conclusions will be put to shame by tests
made, under the same conditions, on the other side of the Atlantic.
True, we do not in social science deal with such uniform and

"HE. g., K. BicHEerR, Entstehung der Volkswirtschaft; MENGER, Methode der
Socialwissenschafien, pp. 130 ff.
VI. DIVISION OF LABOR IN SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY.

A division of labor might be formed on the basis of the
characteristic or predominant desire or interest. Thus, there
might be a social technology of the health desire—the social
system of public sanitation; the wealth desire—the industrial
and commercial system; the beauty desire —the organization of
communities for art culture; the knowledge desire —the educa-
tional system; the sociability desire —the organization for fel-
lowship; the rightness desire—the organization of social
control, ethical direction, religion. But I have not been able,
thus far, to make it work in detail. Perhaps someone will suc-
ceed better with it. In accordance with the principles herewith
presented the writer has, for several years, given courses on
rural and urban sociology, the domestic institution, and charities,
naturally giving far more detailed attention to some subjects
than to others.

It may be taken for granted that social technology will make
progress only by some kind of specialization. Only by minute
division of labor have the sciences of chemistry, physics, biology,
politics, and economics achieved their triumphs. This remains
true even after we have properly chastised the miserable, petty,
and useless following blind alleys which has wasted many stu-
dent lives. Specialization, on the basis of generous culture, isa
condition of advancing knowledge, even a little way, on firm
ground. And specialization involves a parceling out of the ter-
ritory defined already, with reasonable clearness, in the pioneer
and encyclopedic works of such men as Schaeffle and De Greef.

Since there is something distinctive in the task of sociology,
it must have a division of labor based on principles inherent in
the characteristics of sociology.

A tentative classification of particular tasks is herewith
offered for criticism, and this classification is based on a divi-
sion of labor already in part accepted and fruitful, and which
proceeds according to certain groups and classes of persons in
modern society.

These groups and classes of persons have already, in most
cases, been selected for separate treatment by statisticians, and
have been analyzed with great care for the purposes of investi-
gation. They are also recognized by law, and by common
speech, as having marks which characterize them.

Over against each of these social groups and classes there is
already, in most instances, a body of experts, whose lives are
devoted to the study and administration of social organization
in relation to this class or group.

These bodies of technical experts have gradually arrived at
certain regulative principles, often stated as isolated maxims,
but sometimes in systematic and logical forms, and these regu-
lative principles have been subjected to multitudes of severe and
prolonged tests.

It seems probable that we may reasonably look in this direc-
tion for a division of intellectual labor in the mighty task of
reducing to order the fundamental regulative principles of social
life.

All that can be presented is a bare outline of the boundaries
of some of the projected divisions of scientific labor in this field.

We may begin with the domestic institution, the family.
During the last fifty years the learned world has been actively
investigating the early and later evolution of the family. The
names of Bachofen, McLennan, Morgan, Spencer, Letourneau,
Westermarck represent a most important range of studies.
Ancient records, stories of travelers, investigations of ethnolo-
gists, minute observation of contemporary nature peoples, have
shed a flood of light on the development of the monogamic
family as it is known to civilized nations.

Writers on jurisprudence have worked out the legal methods
of regulating marriage, personal and property rights of spouses
and children. Physiologists and physicians have made profound
studies of the physical side of the marriage relation. Econo-
mists have collected and exploited the budgets of families.
Ethical writers have systematized the traditional beliefs and
inherited convictions of modern society in regard to marriage
duties and domestic virtues. In short, there is not a science or
art which has not made a contribution to what may be called,
and is sometimes called, a ‘‘domestic science.” Yet, a ‘‘domes-
tic science,” as a branch of social technology, remains to be con-
structed.

No better example can be chosen to illustrate the helpless-
ness and inadequacy of a special science and its data, so long as
those data stand isolated. The politician and legislator cannot
draft a law, or an amendment to a law, with wisdom, until he
has been taught in some way all the physical, intellectual,
esthetic, economic, ethical, and religious consequences of his
statute. The moral and religious teacher is in precisely the
same position. The parents, the school boards, the town meet-
ing, the city council, are constantly acting, more or less blindly
and instinctively, on the supposition that they know how their
measures of discipline or instruction will affect all families in all
their interests.

The materials for a division of social technology lie scattered
about, and society sorely needs a systematic coérdination and
construction of them in a coherent body of regulative principles
derived from critical investigation, and not from instinct and
unreflecting acceptance of traditional beliefs.

A second example may be chosen in that form of com-
munity, one of those designated by Professor F. H. Giddings as
a ‘component society,” which is called in common speech a
“rural community.”
The rural community has characteristics which mark it off
quite clearly from other forms of association, making all proper
allowance for differences in locality and fluctuations and develop-
mental changes. It is relatively homogeneous; each person has
a name and a reputation; industry is not highly specialized ;
education is elementary; the number of impressions and ideas is
limited.*

In relation to the rural community we may claim that there
is a body of experts, and that there is material for a branch of
social technology which shall present a system of regulative
principles of conduct. In dim and shadowy outlines the rural
pastors, teachers, parents, physicians, and local ‘authorities ”
have a set of ‘‘ ethical’? maxims which are enforced by stinging
criticism, praise and blame, law and constabulary, sermons and
church discipline. In isolated sections of knowledge we have
some fragmentary basis for this ethical code in the knowledge
of physicians, professors in agricultural colleges, agronomes in
universities, great organizers of markets; but nowhere, as yet,
anything approaching a social technology of the subject, a
“rural sociology.”” We have powerful and learned works on
Agrarwesen and Agrarpolitk, which on examination reveal a reli-
able and indispensable mastery of economico-political relations
of rural populations, but furnish little help as to the social organi-
zation to secure the ultimate, highest, and essentially human
goods of being. When men of science once apprehend the vast-
ness of this neglected field, they will bring to it the same acumen,
patience, and method which have won worthy triumphs in the
production of wealth. Granting that the economic basis must
first be laid firmly, may we not now insist that a part of scientific
labor be drafted off into other fields of research? We actually
have more and better books on breeding cattle and marketing
corn than on forming citizens and organizing culture. Is it not
worth while to attempt a social technology of the rural com-
munity? And would not evena failure in the attempt be worthy
of respect ?

The third example chosen is another “component society,”

™See S. M. PATTEN, Theory of Social Forces.
a social group which contains within itself, as does the family
and the rural community, all the elements necessary to exist-
ence—the urban community. Here again we find the three
necessary factors for a particular branch of science —the natural
group, the body of experts, the materials of knowledge in the
special sciences and in the maxims of experts.

And here we discover that the title ‘‘ municipal sociology ”
has already become current in common speech. It is manifest
that the city cannot, for its guidance, use the isolated results of
sanitary science apart from administration, or of pedagogics
apart from municipal finance, or of zsthetic science apart from
museums and art commissions, or of ethics apart from the tech-
nical tests of conduct in every relation and situation. It is
evident to editors and to all others who are trying to create and
educate a genuine ‘ municipal patriotism,” a common judgment
of policy, common will as to all that should be done for health
and culture, for all citizens by all citizens, that social technology
is at this crisis essential. And there are men and women of
large brains and resources, outside of university lecture-rooms,
who are honestly working at this task. Able editorials are not
economic or political discussions, but sociologial in the meaning
of the word here employed.

Of the other “component societies” which might furnish
materials for similar branches of social technology it is not pos-
sible to write within the limits of this article: the people of a
commonwealth, the people of a nation, and—in a far distant
future— mankind. Wildest speculation will long lure us toward
these grand subjects, but the social technology of humanity
must wait until we test our methodical tools on more limited
subjects, There is already a science of the state, theoretical and
practical, which rests on an implicit general sociology and leads
on to a social technology of the nation.*

But there are certain social classes, secondary products of
evolution, which may become the subjects of systematic treat-
ment in social technology. In some instances, under various
names, precisely this task has been fairly well advanced. The

*See RATZENHOFER, Wesen und Zweck der Politik.
”

“classes” to be named are found in all the ‘component societies
mentioned above. In case of the classes to be cited we have
again three factors of a social technology—a natural group already
investigated statistically, a body of experts representing the best
judgments of normal social members, and a growing and con-
sistent set of regulative maxims for community dealings with the
class.

Without going into many details we may designate some of
these classes and the name of a branch of social technology
already recognized as a legitimate field for scientific specializa-
tion.

Thus society has long been compelled to recognize and dis-
tinguish the antisocial or criminal class. The criminal anthro-
pologists and psychologists have devoted immense labor to
minute and protracted studies of the criminal traits and character
physical and psychical. Jurisprudence devotes to this class a vast
literature of criminal law and procedure, which of late is pro-
foundly influenced by studies of the criminal himself, and of
sociology in general. Penologists have formed associations,
national and international, for a careful investigation of the
methods of treatment of all classes of offenders, in prison and
elsewhere, with a view to their welfare and the good of the
entire community, contemporary and future.

One of the men who have studied our American system of
reformatories presented to the last International Prison Congress
a long and able paper whose central plea was for a sociological
treatment of the subject, since the methods of economics, juris-
prudence, and prison science, taken separately, break down in
detail before a closely and logically connected system can be
constructed.”

We already have works written from this point of view.”

The dependents are also recognized as a class by the statisti-
cians, and the numbers of the various subclasses have been
counted in the census. The biological, medical, economic, and

PROFESSOR W. MITTERMAIER, Heidelberg, Bulletin de la Commission péniten-
tiatre international, 4° série, liv. III, 1900, Vol. III, p. 465.

2 FERRI, Criminal Sociology; W. D. Morrison, Juvenile Offenders.
legal aspects of dependence have long been studied, and a mass
of information has been accumulated. In addition to this a dis-
tinct discipline has grown out of the demand for a more com-
prehensive and adequate treatment of the whole system of
charity. It has gone so far as to require a name, and, out of
deference to scientific custom, a learned Greek compound has
been offered for criticism—charitology. In the few text-books*
thus far written to present in systematic form the causes of
dependence and the regulative principles which direct the most
successful methods in philanthropy, the sociological standpoint
has been distinctly adopted, the chapter on the subject in
economics having proved wholly inadequate.

The group of industrials or wage-workers has been clearly
differentiated as a complex class in modern society. This process
of differentiation has been due to advances in technique, to the
division of labor in industry, the rise of cities, and the resulting
geographical and cultural separation of the operatives from
the managers. The antagonisms, hatred, and friction incident
to this separation have aroused the solicitous attention of states-
men, economists, and ethical philosophers. The conditions of
life and culture in this group offer a fairly well-defined field for
a branch of social technology. The economists have already
erected a discipline which some of them call ‘‘ social economics”
and others simply ‘the labor question” (die Arbeiterfrage), or
“the social question.” But no thinking man can rest satisfied
with a purely economic, or even economico-legal, treatment of the
interests of this large group and the interests of society in their
welfare. While we insist that the economic and legal factors
must be worked out by experts in economics and jurisprudence,
we must also insist that, side by side with them, all other social
factors must be considered, and that the difficult task of har-
monizing all data of special experts must be in fact, if not in
name, a branch of social technology.

In a similar way we might study the artist group, the profes-
sional class, the salaried officers of corporations and governments,

7A. G. WARNER, American Charities; C. R. HENDERSON, Jntroduction to the
Study of Dependents, Defectives and Delinquents (second edition in preparation).
VII. METHODOLOGY OF SPECIAL “PROBLEMS” IN SOCIAL TECH-
NOLOGY—NEW AND UNSOLVED QUESTIONS.

Life makes problems of the most difficult and pressing kind:
There is no end of subjects for doctor’s theses in our field, and
we are not driven to set tasks whose issues are in vacuity. In
every community, however small, the people feel the weight of
uncertainty and grope for the light. Not seldom they turn to
the university for help. Tolstoi’s wandering criticisms may be
fanatical, but he is not entirely unjust in asking whether the
social sciences may not be made to contribute more directly and
consciously to the betterment of man’s estate.

Public interest, as indicated by the headlines of newspapers,
is usually concentrated on very few “ paramount issues”’ at a
time, and moves rhythmically back and forth from one to
another. Now it is an outburst of burglary and holdups at the
onset of frosty weather; now an election, a lynching, a crash in
the market, a battle,atornado. At such a moment the study of
a lifetime is in demand to still the feverish curiosity of an hour.

There are topics which become acutely interesting to the
public at frequent intervals, and which take almost complete
possession of many persons all their lives. This is true, for
example, of the labor question, temperance reform, relief of the
poor, criminal treatment, currency, and education.

Social technology can render its best service by dealing with
genuine social problems in vital connection with a body of
knowledge and a system of principles. The statement, loca-
tion, and analysis of a situation are made comprehensive, and
the facts which are essential for a judgment are arrayed in an
intelligible form for the use of administrators, voters, and
reformers. A particular problem is always a part of a larger
view, and its solution must be found by bringing it into the light
of organized bodies of knowledge. Some of the important steps
in the process of dealing with a particular problem may here be
indicated.

There must bea clear statement of the problem as a com-
munity interest, and it must be a genuine social problem if it
belongs fairly to the sociologist. We have many studies of vast
interest to society which are properly economical, administrative,
or educational. A problem in social technology has at least
these marks; all the elements of welfare are involved; all the
members of the community are affected; and the data to be
used are normally derived from more special sciences. If the
answer can be supplied by an expert in any particular field of
science or experience, the problem may be left there. State
troops are not called out if the constable or sheriff is able to
meet the occasion.

The end of proposed social action must be defined with all
clearness; the kind of good to be furthered or multiplied; the
satisfactions to be attained.

The third step is a clear and complete arrangement of all
the causal relations and conditions in the situation. At this
point the dependence of technology on theoretical science
becomes apparent. In a social problem, in the sense defined,
the full explanation can never be given by any one special
science, and the explanation must be through a process of socio-
logical thinking.

The fourth step is the study or presentation of methods
actually in use to attain the proposed end, of their failures and
success, and of the regulative principles involved in the most
favorable cases.

The fifth step is a mental construction of the most rational
plan for the next step. This is based on all the preceding stages
of experience and is suggested by them. This new proposition
corresponds to the hypothesis in theory.

The sixth step is trial, and the Anglo-Saxon conservative
plan of gradual approach is found to be thoroughly scientific.
We have here an analogy with experiment and unification in
biology, even to vivisection. For this very reason, since the
experiment must be tried on large groups of sentient persons,
both prudence and humanity require caution.

The fifth and the sixth steps can be taken only by men who
are actually dealing with some field of administration, or who are
in very close and confidential relations with the men of tech-
nique. For it cannot too often be reiterated and emphasized
that regulative principles are in life, are discovered by purposeful
effort, and must remain unknown to those who are ignorant of
actual experience.

The working hypothesis is constantly improved through the
“dialectic” of experience, imagination, reasoning, and more
experience.

We may consider the familiar ‘temperance problem” in order
to illustrate the application of the method proposed. It will be
understood that the facts are summarized, without the support of
statistical material or statements of authorities.*

We have in the temperance question a true social problem, a
community interest. The evils of intemperance affect all citi-
zens. Not one individual can escape the burden of taxation,
the dangers to life, property, and morals, incident to the liquor
traffic. All interests of all citizens are affected. Health is
involved, directly and indirectly. Inebriates-transmit and com-
municate disease ; frighten the weak and timid ; drive their wives
to misery. Economically the effects are seen in the destruction
of food materials to manufacture alcohol, in the reduction of
industrial efficiency of workmen, in the increase of loss by fire
and fraud, in the cost for pauperism and crime. Aésthetic life
suffers in many and most obvious ways. Educational progress
is checked, and teachers are ill paid, while brewers roll in wealth
at cost of the laborers. The impulses of fellowship are per-
verted and debased. The man of truth and honor becomes a
liar and a beggar, his moral nature falling fatally with the
organic changes in his brain caused by alcohol.

1 Many of the recent statistics are given in C. D. WRIGHT, Practical Sociology,
with references to sources.
The complete mastery of this subject cannot be compassed
without deriving data from the fields of many specialists in
the fields of biology, economics, jurisprudence, administration,
ethics, psychiatry. The statistical investigation alone is an
enormous task.

The end.—No progress can be expected unless the commu-
nity foresees with clearness what it wants to accomplish. Nor
is it sufficient to agree that we desire to promote the virtue of
temperance. Ancient systems of ethics have admitted self-
control among the cardinal qualities of good character, and
there is no controversy over this vague claim. But the moment
we attempt to define the conduct of the temperate man in society
we are compelled to collect evidence, for we are met with radi-
cal differences of opinion, and many communities are divided.
This controversy among the people is mainly due to conflict of
medical authority. There can be no final agreement as to social
aims until the physicians find common ground, until the experts
can tell us how much alcohol can be imbibed without danger,
and with advantage to health, under the various conditions of
age, sex, financial ability, climate, occupation. An unsettled
problem in medicine and physiology is unsettled in social
ethics.

We can count on sufficient agreement for a basis of commu-
nity action in respect to excess and certain manifestly improper
and injurious uses of alcoholic beverages; and we can make
plans with hope of success so far as authority has reached a
conclusion. Individuals may have for themselves a more austere,
perhaps a higher ideal, but they cannot hope to make this a
social aim in the present conflict of expert opinion.

Causal conditions.—Intemperance, defined as an excessive
and improper use of alcoholic drinks by large classes of the
community, is the phenomenon to be explained. We have to do
with a social custom and its effects.

The procedure of the Committee of Fifty is an illustration of
the influence of sociology in modern methods of attacking a
social problem, and its investigations are both theoretical and
practical, in the sense of the words used in this paper. They
attempt to consider (1) the physiological questions involved ;
(2) the economic aspects; (3) the ethical aspects; (4) legisla-
tion. Perhaps other sides will be studied. It is certain that at
the conclusion of the special investigations a survey of the
entire evidence will be necessary in order to show the bearing
of each particle of evidence in relation to every other, and to
bring out the cumulative force of the facts. To marshal the
most instructive and convincing facts which explain the appetite
for stimulants and the social customs which grow out of it
would be to repeat a large part of the contents of such vol-
umes.

The fourth step is the study of past and present social meth-
ods of dealing with the problem of intemperance, and especially
with the liquor traffic.

By an inductive process we may array all the conscious
efforts of communities to secure customary conformity to the
ideal of self-control, moderation in the use of alcoholic stimu-
lants. This investigation would present an impartial survey
of (1) the hortative method, or “moral suasion” movement, of
moderates and total abstainers, represented by Father Matthew
and John B. Gough; (2) the various methods of legal control —
license, high tax, mulct, and prohibitive laws, the dispensary
and Norwegian systems, and others; (3) the educational method —
teaching in schools, lectures, publications; (4) the influence of
modern machinery and organization of industry —the discharge
of employés of railroads for drinking or resorting to saloons ;
(5) the discipline of social criticism and example; (6) the influ-
ence of the church and ministry ; (7) the labors of associations,
temperance societies; (8) the indirect influence of general
improvements, as better housing, sanitation, recreations, athletics,
baths, public comfort stations.

From this investigation of actual methods and their results
we may derive regulative principles. The study of causes reveals
the motives which induce men to drink and drink to excess:
weariness, exhaustion, discomfort at home, sociability of saloons,
fashion, idleness, narrow range of interests.

The survey of all the means which have actually succeeded,
in some measure, in mitigating, and, in some cases, removing,
the evils of intemperance brings up into clear consciousness
this law: that the temperance reform is simply a part of the
whole process of social pedagogics; that it cannot be promoted
apart from the other movements toward the whole good of all
society. We are thus forced to the conclusion that the funda-
mental regulative principle is: ‘‘ Elevate the race at once.” The
effective means for mitigating the evils of drink are precisely
those which are involved in a wise charity, a wise prison reform,
a wise housing movement, a wise educational system for all
classes, a wise economic movement.

The construction of a program of temperance reform.—According
to the conclusion just stated—assuming that it would be
reached by investigation—a rational program of temperance
reform is nothing more nor less than a system of social peda-
gogics, which embraces all the ends of education, all the means
of moral training and discipline, all the community means of
control and direction ; but which also assigns to different persons
and associations a definite task in the program, as each man in
an orchestra must play the instrument he knows, but with rela-
tion to what others are doing at the same time and in the ren-
dering of the same complex composition.

The program of temperance reform, to use an analogy drawn
from medical practice, may include a general tonic treatment
for the constitution and also specific medication for particular
symptoms. Among specific measures those mentioned above
are all applicable, each in adaptation to needs and surround-
ings.

The experiment—The trial of our hypothesis of practice is
going forward in all European countries and in all the states of
the United States. The function of social technology is to give
intellectual organization to this experiment; to make it part of
a rational system ; to distinguish between special local conditions
and general laws of conduct, and thus give the wisest direction
to the application of the regulative rules.

The temperance question may be studied on any scale, and
very modest ability may become useful if it applies a large and
comprehensive method within a narrow territory. On a state or
national scale great financial resources are required; but the
study of a village, a ward, a district, may be done thoroughly
well by a private student, and the results will be valuable to
check or verify the results reached by the larger scheme.”

C. R. HENDERSON.
