What are Principles of Sociology?

Author(s): I. W. Howerth

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Tan., 1926), pp. 474-484
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2764745

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:30 UTC
A principle, in one way of looking at it, is anything which, ac-
cording to accepted usage, we have agreed to call by that name.
From this point of view it should be easy to ascertain just what a
principle is; we have only to consult the dictionary.

Turning, then, to the Century Dictionary, I find seven distinct
and more or less independent definitions of the word “principle.”
It is (1) a beginning or commencement; (2) a cause, in the widest
sense; (3) an original faculty or endowment; (4) a truth which is
evident and general; (5) that which is professed or accepted as a
law of conduct or a rule of action; (6) a component part; and (7)
a law of nature, or a general property of matter.

Now which, if any, of these definitions is, or are, or should be,
applicable in the field of sociology? Hardly the first, second, third,
fifth, or sixth. These may define certain things properly regarded
as principles, but a principle of sociology, in any significant sense,
could hardly be regarded as adequately described by any of them.
According to the fourth definition, a principle is a general truth,
and the word is often so used, but a law is also a general truth. Is
there, then, no difference between a principle and a law? It would
appear that the dictionary does not recognize any difference, for
in the seventh definition, “principle” is defined as a law of nature.
But surely in sociology the terms are not synonymous, and if they
were so in common usage, it would be desirable to create a dis-
tinction for sociological and for general scientific purposes. In our
quest, then, for the essential nature of a sociological principle we
do not get much help from the dictionary.

Perhaps we shall have better luck if we lay aside the diction-
ary and examine the use of the word “principle” among sociologists
themselves. What, then, is a sociological principle according to the
present usage of the expression in the science of sociology? Natur-
ally, our first resort for an answer is to the books on sociology
carrying the word “principles” in their titles.

On casually glancing over my library I observe four treatises
entitled Principles of Sociology. They are those of Spencer, Ross,
Giddings, and Bushee. There may be others. I note one bearing
the title Principles of Educational Sociology, and another entitled
An Introduction to the Principles of Sociology. Here, then, it
would seem, we should be able to find just what we are after. Let
us glance at some of these works to see if we can ascertain from
them what a principle is.

Well, I turn first to Spencer’s three volumes on the Principles
of Sociology. Somewhat to my surprise, the word “principle” is
not in the index. In Giddings’ and Bushee’s texts, ditto. Giddings,
however, says in his Preface, “There are principles of sociology,
and they admit of logical organization,” and describes his own
book as “an attempt to combine the principles of sociology in a
coherent theory.” But he nowhere tells us what a sociological
principle is. Ross, I observe, has not included the word “principle”
in his index either, but this is evidently in the nature of an over-
sight, for, as most of my readers will know, Ross devotes sixty-
three of his seven hundred pages, less than one-tenth, to a presen-
tation and discussion of sociological principles. Sociological Prin-
ciples is, indeed, the title of the fifth division of his book. He
names four such principles—the principles of anticipation, simu-
lation, individualization, and balance; but he nowhere defines a
principle. We are assumed to know, or we are left to infer, what
principles are from the samples he lays before us. Fishing in these
waters turns out to be almost as discouraging, so far as our pur-
pose is concerned, as was our angling in the dictionary. In both
cases we get practically “a dry haul.”

My own view is that the concept “principle,” and the prin-
ciples of sociology are altogether too important to be thus neg-
lected or taken for granted in sociological exposition. From the
viewpoint of the possible modification of human behavior and the
consequent future direction of social evolution social or sociologi-
cal principles are, I think, just the most important things with
which sociology may be and should be concerned. I propose, there-
fore, to present another conception of a principle in the socio-
logical sense. Whether it is the correct conception, or the most
helpful, the reader himself may determine.

I begin by asking the reader, What would you understand by
“principle” if I should address you in regard to the principle of a
given mechanism, say, a steam engine? Would you not think at
once of the expansion of steam in the cylinder, that is to say, of
the particular mode or manner in which a steam engine operates?
You would understand, I think, that I was talking about how it
moves.

Again, if I should declare that I had succeeded in moving a
heavy weight, heavier than a man could lift, would you not ask, if
you were curious about the matter, What principle did you employ
in moving the weight? And you would expect to hear that I had
employed the principle of the lever or the pulley, or the inclined
plane, or some other well-known “mechanical principle.” A me-
chanical principle is generally understood, I think, as the modus
operandi of a mechanical operation. It is an explanation of how
the movement takes place.

Now, I believe that biological, psychological, and sociological
principles are exactly of the same nature—they explain the move-
ments and operations of nature in the realms of the corresponding
natural phenomena. In biology, for instance, natural selection is a
true principle; it explains, in part, the process of organic evolu-
tion. When we discover, if we ever do, the “principle” of varia-
tion, that is, when we find out how natural variations in living
things are produced, the explanation of the whole process of or-
ganic evolution will practically be complete.

Now, as I see it, the prime objective of the science of sociology
is the discovery of the principles operative in the social mechan-
ism. It is to find out just how social movements are initiated and
carried on by nature. That is really the great sociological question,
for if we can ascertain just how nature produces, or induces, social
change, we shall then have the secret of producing desirable
changes in social phenomena through artificial effort. That is to
say, we shall be able to control and direct social evolution.

If I have correctly suggested the nature of a principle, we
should now be able to see clearly that it is not the same as a law,
and to perceive the respect in which a law and a principle differ
from each other. A law is a mere formula expressing the observed
constancy or uniformity in action in a special field of phenomena,
the mere sequence or coexistence of certain events as observed by
man. It is supposed to express a general truth, as it does if it is a
correct formula; but it explains nothing. When we have dis-
covered a social law, for instance, expressing a uniformity of co-
existences or sequences in a given area of social phenomena, we
have achieved an important object, but our task is not yet com-
plete. We must go a step farther; we must endeavor to find out
how the change takes place. That is, we must find out the operat-
ing principle. We are then, and not until then, ready to exert the
most effective artificial control over the given change. In efforts
to control we must observe the law, if we would be effective; that
is, we must act within the limitations imposed by it, but the secret
of control in a given case is not a knowledge of the law, but a
knowledge of the corresponding natural principle.

To be specific, then, a scientific principle is a modus operandi
of nature in the production of phenomenal change, and a socio-
logical principle is the modus operandi of nature in the produc-
tion of any particular natural change in the realm of social phe-
nomena.

If we regard nature as objective, we may say, then, that so-
ciological principles exist and are operating in nature independ-
ently of any conscious interference or direction by man. They are
there as a natural coefficient, so to speak, of every social move-
ment. The function of sociological science, viewing that science
from the standpoint of social betterment, is to reveal these prin-
ciples. First of all, it may concern itself with the laws of social
change, but, having discovered these, it should go on, as I said
before, to ascertain the principles involved. The importance of
these principles, from the standpoint of intelligence, lies in the
fact that a knowledge of them is essential to the most effective
social control; and social control, that is, social self-direction, I
think we must agree, is the ultimate purpose of sociology.

Now, let us turn back to the four sociological principles an-
nounced by Professor Ross, and see whether, or to what extent,
they conform to our definition. His first principle he calls the
“principle of anticipation.” It is stated as follows:

Any established and known policy, whether of government, of a corporate
body, or of an individual, which affects people favorably or unfavorably ac-
cording to their present conduct, will come to be anticipated and will result in
modifying behavior. Favorable action will call forth more of the conduct,
condition, or type of character favored, while adverse action will tend to re-
press it.

Now it will be observed that Professor Ross here expresses a
general truth relative to human beings, through the observance of
which we may modify human behavior. That is a helpful idea,
and there is no objection, as I see it, to calling it a principle,
although he does not go quite deeply enough to expose a prin-
ciple in the exact sense of the word; he does not explain how
anticipations are effected. If he had gone deeper he would have
struck, I think, upon a psychological principle, but in sociology it
is perhaps only necessary to “hook up” with the principles of the
underlying sciences. If this principle is only a law, there should
be nothing surprising in the admission of its practical value, for
laws are also helps to action. The helpfulness of a law without a
knowledge of the underlying principle is exemplified in the case of
gravitation. We know the law, approximately, at least, but we
have not as yet ascertained the principle. We profit from the law
by its observation, we take it into account. But from a knowledge
of the principle we should profit by control. In the case of forced
observance of a law it is ourselves, rather than the phenomena,
that is the subject of control.

The second principle mentioned by Professor Ross is merely
named; it is not formulated. He calls it the “principle of simula-
tion.” Perhaps it might be fairly stated as “the native disposition
of all men to simulate individual traits and types of action of a
particular kind.” So stated it also is a law. If it were a true prin-
ciple it would show Aow simulation is effected in natural social
phenomena. The fundamental principle here is also psychological.
But, for the reasons suggested, I raise no objection to calling
simulation, or imitation, a principle of sociology.

The third principle Professor Ross calls “individualization.”
It is not expressly formulated, but it appears to be nothing more
than the assertion that the common practice of lumping should be
discarded, and more play should be given to individuality. This
is undoubtedly a truth, and a valuable one. It is an injunction
that should be heeded by all who are seeking to promote the ad-
vancement of society or to eliminate evil conditions, but it should
hardly be called a principle. At least, it is not a principle in the
sense we have ascribed to the term.

The last of the principles announced by Professor Ross is
“the principle of balance.” It is formulated as follows: “In the
guidance of society, each social element should share according to
the intelligence and public spirit of its members, and none should
dominate.”

This, to be sure, is a practical observation, but I do not see
that this statement of a more or less obvious fact is a sociological
principle in any specifically significant or fundamental sense. If,
for instance, I should say that the load or strain of an engine
should be proportionately distributed among its parts with due re-
gard to their strength, I doubt whether anyone would be disposed
to identify the statement with the disclosure of a true mechanical
principle. Professor Ross’s “principles” then, are, to say the least,
somewhat confused and confusing. They are not all turned out of
the same lathe.

On submitting the foregoing to Professor Ross for his com-
ment, he wrote me, and on request granted me permission to pub-
lish, the following statement:

As regards the manuscript which I return herewith I will say that it ex-
emplifies Ward’s conception of “sociological principle,” and that I have never
been able to work that conception, although I was perfectly familiar with it
from his books and from our conversations. His conception of principle is
valid in the field of mechanics certainly, but I have yet to see it happily illus-
trated in the field of sociology. Accordingly, I had to arrive at my own notion
of a sociological principle. With me the term came to mean (1) a truth of a
general character susceptible of being verified in many social fields; (2) it is
not self-evident, but recondite, arrived at only by extensive observation and
reflection—a key to locked doors; (3) the application of the principle in par-
ticular situations makes a great difference in the line of action men will take.
My principle of anticipation is a perfect specimen of what I think a true so-
ciological principle is, but it does not square with the Wardian conception.

Let us now see what the Wardian conception of a principle is.
Turning to his Pure Sociology (pp. 169-70), I find,

A law is the general expression of the natural sequence of uniform phe-
nomena. It states the fact that certain phenomena uniformly take place in a
certain way. It takes no account of cause, but only of the order of events. A
principle, on the contrary, deals wholly with the cause, or, perhaps more cor-
rectly, with the manner. It is the modus operandi. It has to do with the
means or instrument by which the effects are produced. It is essentially an
ablative conception. As principles deal with causes they must deal with
forces. Gravitation, for example, is a force, but it operates in a regular way
which we call the law of gravitation. Its various applications are principles or
utilize principles. Thus, the weight of water is a force, but the different kinds
of water wheels act on so many different principles—overshot, undershot, flut-
ter, turbine, etc. The turbine wheel, for example, acts on the principle of re-
action according to Newton’s third law of motion, that action and reaction are
equal and opposite. Other applications of the law of gravitation are those of
weights, the balance, the pendulum, etc., all of which involve different princi-
ples. Water and steam expand by heat according to a certain law. This ex-
pansion of steam is a force which has been utilized by means of a number of
mechanical principles—the piston, the cut-off, the governor, etc.
Again, evolution is a law, or takes place according to a law, the phenom-
ena succeeding each other in a definite order of sequence. We observe the
successive phenomena, and from them deduce or formulate the law. But nat-
ural selection is a principle. It teaches how the effects thus observed are pro-
duced. Malthus’ great book, the Principles of Population, was correctly
named, and the principle is there fully explained. So the expression which I
prefer to others of the same import, viz., the “principle of advantage,” con-
forms to this definition and applies wherever there can be an advantage, i.e.,
to all sentient things. Creative synthesis is a principle of far-reaching appli-
cation in both the inorganic and organic worlds, and each of the synthetic cre-
ations of nature passed in review in chapter v was brought about under the
operation of this principle. All the products of natural genesis involve appro-
priate principles.

A law cannot explain anything, but must itself be explained. Principles
alone explain. The law of gravitation is as yet unexplained. No principle has
been found that explains it to the satisfaction of physicists. The world is
therefore never satisfied with laws. It demands principles. The positivists
may affect to dispense with causes and be content with mere observed suc-
cession, but the mind will never be at rest until the principle according to
which that succession goes on is discovered and the phenomena are thereby
really explained.

From the foregoing it is clear that Ward regarded a soci-
ological principle as exactly the same in character as a mechanical
principle—both explain processes and facilitate control. Both are
in a sense general truths, but truths of a particular kind, namely,
truths that are applicable not merely in discovering other truths,
but in directing change.

In a letter to his translator, Mrs. I. O. Unger, of Chicago,
dated December 9, 1907, and which I am permitted to quote, Pro-
fessor Ward threw further light on his conception of a sociological
principle. In this letter he says:

You must not expect that everybody will make the sharp distinction be-
tween a law and a principle that I do in Applied Sociology. Your quotation
from my address on “Neo-Darwinism” shows that I have not done so myself.
Both words are used in a very loose way as practically synonymous and ex-
pressing either of the two ideas. But you see the difference, of course. A
law does not explain, but must be explained. A principle always explains. It
tells how.

And then, going on to speak of Gumplowicz’ principle of race
struggle, he says,
He showed what it was. I sometimes call it “social evolution through the
struggles of races,” and compare it to organic evolution through the struggle
for existence. But it is to be compared to natural selection, which explains
how social evolution takes place. It comes much nearer to the principle of
recompounding in chemistry. The groups come together by force. A struggle
follows. One is subjugated. The two remain in a desperate grapple. But time
converts this forced propinquity into a state of toleration, a modus vivendi.
Then, by a long series of steps, the two races are “amalgamated,” then “assimi-
lated,” and out of it comes the state, the nation, and a new people, different
from either of the original conflicting groups, raised on a high plane, and so-
cially evolved. The only name I have ever given to it is social synergy, but it
then falls clearly under the broader principle of cosmic synergy, which is a
principle of the universe. The new people is a creation, and thus creative syn-
thesis is an essential part of it. That may be called a principle, too, but it is
rather a process.

You can now see how perfectly Gumplowicz’ principle conforms to my
definition of a principle in Applied Sociology. It shows just how society
evolves. The principle you quote from him, of the subjection and utilization
by one race of another, is only the first step in the race struggle. It is hardly
a principle. The principle applies after the conquest. It is intensive and causes
the blending of the two groups. Of course, the conquest is the essential con-
dition to its operation.

The organic struggle for existence is entirely different from the race
struggle. The biological and the sociological principles and processes are en-
tirely different. They only agree in their function: organic and social evolu-
tion, respectively.

Sociologists are in wild confusion over the whole subject.

Professor Ward, then, it is obvious, at least believed himself
quite clear in his conception of a sociological principle. He thought
it explained a social process, and the explanation being provided,
the process could be socially controlled. He illustrates it, par-
ticularly in the field of sociology, in the case of the principle of the
conflict of races.

Now, in the conflict of races it appears to me that at least two
principles are, or may be, displayed. They are the principles of
natural selection and the principle of cross-fertilization. If the
conflict results in the complete extinction of one of the conflicting
groups, which of course rarely happens, then natural selection is
the predominant principle. If, on the other hand, the outcome is
conquest and subjugation, then the principle of cross-fertilization
becomes the prevailing one.
This latter principle of cross-fertilization of cultures is, in my
judgment, a fine example of a sociological principle as illustrative
both of the nature of such principles and their significance in so-
ciology, and in the social art of social self-direction. First we
study natural social evolution to see how it takes place, how nature
brings about social change. That is pure sociology. We discover
that nature brings it about, in one way, through the conflict of
social groups and the survival of the fittest. Now we know how it
is done, and we can do it ourselves. But, obviously, if we should
utilize this principle, it would mean enormous waste. We should
kill off an entire group for perhaps a small increment of superiority
represented by the surviving group. But when we find that nature
brings about social progress also by the intermingling of cultures,
and that this intermingling is achieved in many ways, we may
then bring the same thing to pass by that way which to us seems
most economical. In either case a knowledge of the principle is
equivalent to the power to control. As Comte said, Science, d’ou
prévoyance; prévoyance, d’o action.

Without insistence on overpreciseness, may we not say that
there are really two kinds of principles that may not improperly
be called principles of sociology? (Sometimes they may be two
aspects of the same principle.) First, there are the fundamental
truths about society that serve the sociologist primarily in the dis-
covery of additional social truths, and so in building up the body
of knowledge that has come to be known as the science of so-
ciety—“keys to unlock doors,” as Professor Ross has said. These
are primarily of scientific concern. They may be “organized and
combined into a coherent whole.” Science, from one point of view,
is itself an art. It is the art of discovering truth. As such it is in-
terested in the formulation of laws and the statement of funda-
mental truths (principles) that enable it to penetrate farther into
regions of the unknown. Such principles are used by the scientist
in laying down the foundations and constructing the framework
of his scientific structure. Sociological principles from this view-
point are of primary importance to the sociologist as such. They
enable him to practice with increasing success the art of ascertain-
ing sociological truth. They may properly be called principles of
the science of sociology, the aim being scientific discovery through
scientific organization and synthesis.

Secondly, there are fundamental truths about society that def-
initely explain social processes. These are important, not so much,
perhaps, from the viewpoint of sociological science—although they
may be that, too—as from that of possible social control or direc-
tion. They are for the service of the social art, for which so-
ciological science exists. They are in a sense the ultima Thule of
sociological exploration. Their discovery finishes the task of the
sociologist as providing explanations of the social process and
modes of intelligent social action for the use of those who would
undertake to modify social evolution in the interest of social bet-
terment, that is, in social direction and social self-direction, which,
again, is the final object of sociology, though it lies outside of the
science itself. It is this identity of those truths with the finalities
of sociological investigation, and their character as prerequisites
of successful social control, that make this class of sociological
principles of supreme importance. They are principles of soci-
ology and, at the same time, principles of social change.

We see, then, in conclusion, that there is confusion among
sociologists in the use of the term “principle”; that sociological
principles, in a comprehensive sense, are general and fundamental
truths applicable (1) in scientific procedure, and (2) in social
procedure. But in the final and most meaningful and helpful sig-
nificance of the expression, particularly from the viewpoint of
action, they are the modes of operation employed by nature in
the initiation and continuance of the various changes observable
in the realm of natural social phenomena. Such changes may al-
ways be expressed in terms of law. A knowledge of the laws of
social change is of practical value, since in successful social direc-
tion we must act in conformity with them. But behind each law,
and explaining it, is a corresponding principle. This principle,
when discovered, may be effectively employed in the great art of
social direction, which may, in time, become social self-direction.
Such being the case, the discovery of this kind of sociological
principles is the fundamental and ultimate object of the scientific
study of society.
