The Social Psychology of Children's Reading

Author(s): Katherine Niles Lind

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 41, No. 4 (Tan., 1936), pp. 454-469
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2768956

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:55 UTC
ABSTRACT

Forty-four documents were secured from interviews and life histories dealing with
the effects of reading in childhood. Four types appeared, ranging from an extreme
degree of isolation to a complete socialization, with two intermediate groups. The effect
of the reading of stories was closely related to a prior condition of adjustment or
frustration. While reading provided no new imagery there was evidence of a marked
effect in the integration of existing images into new forms of organization through
reading. Whether reading is interesting or not depends on active or suppressed desires
and cannot be otherwise created. Attitudes are formed through reading but depend
on a social world where they can function if they are to continue. The causes of the
isolating influence of reading as well as of the socializing effects are to be sought in the
social background of the reader, the type of literature, and the conditions under which
the reading is done. Reading is, for children, a highly important social experience.

The study here discussed originated in an effort to obtain some
adequate criteria for directing the reading of children. The problem
was to determine what effects reading in childhood has on the de-
velopment of personality. Little guidance was afforded by litera-
ture on the subject. The lack of adequate studies is pointed out in
the report of the subcommittee on reading of the White House
Conference on Child Health and Protection, published in 1932.

Some work has been done in hospitals and other institutions, and by li-
brarians, in planning courses of remedial reading in individual instances, and it
is reasonable to expect that in the near future many diagnostic and remedial
studies of reading will be made. Such studies may help to answer the question,
as yet impossible of definite answer, of the effects of children’s reading. What
influence has childhood reading on the character of the mature individual? In
order to answer this question the evidence afforded in biographies and auto-
biographies, by notebooks, diaries, library records, and observation, will need
to be studied exhaustively. The correlation of reading habits with mental char-
acteristics and with achievements will need to be worked out. As yet the subject
is almost untouched, and the findings of significant studies may revolutionize
the reading guidance in homes, schools, and libraries. At present all that we
know is that one of the most important effects of children’s reading is a habit of
reading which they may carry on through life.?

t This article is based on a master’s thesis in sociology, entitled “A Study in the
Sociology of Reading,” written under the supervision of Professor Ellsworth Faris.

? White House Conference on Child Health and Protection, Children’s Reading: A

454
I

The material on which the following discussion is based consists
of autobiographical statements of childhood experiences of reading
secured from adults through written documents and personal inter-
views. Twenty-five cases were obtained through directly written
documents, sixteen of these as term papers for classes through the
co-operation of Professors Herbert Blumer and Leonard S. Cottrell.
Nineteen more were obtained entirely through interviews. The most
valuable data were those obtained from these interviews, lasting in
each case for several hours and sometimes requiring as many as five
or six sessions. The subject, prompted by questions and suggestions,
gave a full account of early experiences in reading, the account being
recorded verbatim in shorthand. The longest of these documents
reached 42 typewritten pages. The total amount of material con-
sisted of 44 documents, something over 450 pages, of which 30 were
finally selected for analysis and classification.

The data thus consist of recorded memories, and while there is no
check on the accuracy, there appeared no motive for deception. The
limitation involved in basing conclusions on recalled memories of
events ten to twenty years past is obvious. The compensating ad-
vantage appears to lie in the superior ability of an adult to evaluate
the experience and to define its function. As a partial control, one
account was secured from a boy of fourteen whose statements could
be checked by the parents. The material thus obtained appeared to
be inferior in value to the adult statements, for the interest of the
moment overshadowed previous experiences and limited both recall
and evaluation.

It would be desirable to make an extensive study covering several
hundred cases, statistically analyzed and correlated. The present
study was designed as exploratory and was restricted to the case-
study method. The autobiographical accounts were collected until
they began to repeat themselves. It presently appeared that they
fell quite clearly into four classes, and when a total of forty-four
documents were secured with no new types appearing, the number
was considered sufficient for the present purpose.

Study of Voluntary Reading of Boys and Girls in the United States, report of the Sub-
committee on Reading, Carl H. Milam, chairman (New York, 1932), p. 12.
The data were put into usable form by condensing the material in
each case to form a “digest,” including only information bearing on
the problem, and assembling from the several records of the reader
those relating to the various points. This gave a concise, compre-
hensible account of the individual’s experience and sacrificed nothing
as to pertinent content. For convenient classification the records
were still further condensed to “abstracts” of 150 to 200 words each,
containing only brief synopses of the essential points. This double
condensation greatly facilitated the task of classification.

The subjects were mature adults, most of them students in social
science, with some insight into their own experience and the ability
to reconstruct the past with a fair degree of accuracy. They all
entered with genuine interest into the purpose of the study.

When the thirty cases (numbering approximately 450 typewritten
pages of data, reduced in the digests to 64 pages) were abstracted
and assembled, it was possible to define more specifically the four
distinctive groups of reading experience and to classify the cases
more accurately within them. Thirteen of the cases were included
in Group I, six in Group II, six in Group III, and five in Group IV.
In several instances the cases quite clearly might have been included
in two of the groups, or even in a third, and where the pertinence of
one case for two or more groups was marked cross references were
made. Often within one person’s life the experience varied at differ-
ent times and under different circumstances. After careful study of
the cases it appeared that the many variations of experience could
all be classified into the four groups, these four adequately covering
all the ranges of experience found. The four groups may be briefly
characterized as: (1) serving the function of “escape,” (2) affording
temporary diversion, (3) defining the reader’s conception of his réle,
(4) relating to objective interests and activities.

Group I.—In the first group of cases reading served mainly the
function of escape, with the construction of an imaginary world not
defined by objective conditions. The following ‘‘abstract” of a case
fairly typifies the nature of the experience that occurred:

The mother of D. G. X. kept a list of ninety-four books which she read to him

before he could read. Until latter high-school days he preferred reading to any
other activity; he preferred it to companionship. The type of literature was
stimulating to reverie; it did not call for thought. “I was not thinking; if any-
thing I dreamed..... I was not considering life. I had no responsibilities.”
Literature that fictionized animals produced vivid fantasy; he spent “hours
upon hours” in his grandmother’s chickenyard “dreaming away of animal per-
sonalities, talking to the chickens, imagining replies . . . . there was no room
for real people in the games I played.” Peter Pan and other stories made him
“fairy conscious.” ‘Momentarily I expected a fairy or so to pop up out of
nothing.” He began school “with a feeling of unreality.”” He had the habit of
gazing out of the window. Mechanical interests developed with some reading,
but this was a solitary pursuit. More “serious” reading with less imaginative
appeal made him feel intellectually superior; he talked of the books and few
others had read them. “People accused me of being snooty.” He began high
school with a “despondent feeling of hopelessness.” Gradually he developed
“more interest in things and life in general.”” With increasing participation in
social activities reading declined.

It appears from this and other cases in this group that reading
may afford release. Such people shun society and live within a
dream world of their own, defined by reading. One of them said
that reading had really the effect of a drug—it was for the time a
complete release, building up an entirely different mood, an atmos-
phere foreign to his normal experience. Reading was an essential
part of his whole existence, a compensation for what he lacked. ‘‘It
could not be considered like some pleasure as going to a picture
show. It was necessary.’”’ The factors appearing most frequently in
these cases as related to this experience were loneliness, disappoint-
ment, idleness, and restlessness. The person dissatisfied with the
world about him readily built a dream world in which, in fantasy, he
achieved what he desired, ignoring the conditions of time and cir-
cumstance and seeking fulfilment in imagination. His fantasies con-
structed what could not be true, but the imagery was so appealing
that he abandoned all regard for limiting conditions. Fairy stories,
adventure stories, and myths were especially effective, but almost
any story would suffice if the imagery was remote from the world
about and satisfying to the desires. Though impossible of duplica-
tion in real experience, the imagery was not so strange that the indi-
vidual could not apply it to himself. His desires carried him beyond
surrounding conditions, and the stories were means of realizing those
desires. If his world about him was unpleasant he would respond
more quickly to fictitious depictions.
Such stories often gave normal children temporary escape. As
they read, and often for some time afterward, they participated in
unnatural and delightful situations. Only as they later diverted
their attention and found satisfaction in other interests and activities
did the images fade. When such diversion did not take place, and
the fantasies persisted or were re-enforced by others similar, the in-
dividuals came characteristically to live in a world of dreams. They
created fantasies of their own, patterned after those produced by
reading. More and more they shut themselves from human as-
sociations, shunned companions, avoided disturbing activities. It
was as if they walked in their sleep. Then, when the rude awakening
came, as it usually did at last, they found the world about them
“strange and unfamiliar.” They went through a period of finding
themselves, of learning to live and associate with people. Sometimes
a persistent habit of wishful thinking was formed. One of them
stated:

I do not think that I shall ever get over the effects of fairy stories. Because
of them I have learned to build myself at will a thousand dream worlds with
cloud-high spires of wishful thinking. Riding in the street car, falling asleep at
night, walking to campus, I have come to construct extravagant air castles with
sturdy foundations in the dirt of realism, but with towers high in the realms of
romance. I have developed a little private (and sometimes pernicious) habit of
preceding each new venture, regardless of its nature, with an elaborate blueprint
of wishful thinking. .... In most matters I am pretty consistently an extro-
vert. But this propensity for living within myself, for taking refuge, at times,
from unpleasant actuality, is an outstandingly introvert feature directly trace-
able to my fairy tale world.

Fantasies sometimes found overt expression, and the reader lived
his dream. Sometimes this led to associations causing the disruption
of the fantasies; but sometimes the fantasies continued with perhaps
even more intensity. The children lived out the réle they conceived
for themselves in imagination. One of them cultivated the pace of
the Indian, insisted that he had blood relationship to Pocahontas,
and changed his middle name to that of an idealized character. He
led his playmates on imaginary exploits, with himself in the leading
réle, the world about him and such associates as he had assuming
the characters present in his dreams. His conception of his rdéle
came from his reading and according to his desires, without reference
to his social situation or regard for limiting conditions, for he ignored
the conditions or reconstructed them in imagination for the realiza-
tion of his fantasies.

Among the cases presented, the “escape” effect appeared most
often during childhood and adolescence. As they approached adult-
hood the individuals were normally forced into some kind of social
adjustment. The reading, too, tended in time to follow a different
type, sometimes diminishing greatly so that fiction was almost
eliminated. The fairy tale and myth appear to be characteristically
children’s literature and were seldom read seriously beyond child-
hood years.

The significance of such reading seems to be its ineffectiveness in
producing adjustment. There was no real solution of a problem,
only a fleeing from it which made more difficult any adequate ap-
proach later. The lonely, unhappy, self-conscious children among
these cases would lose themselves in books because they were already
unadjusted and isolated. The reading, in turn, increased the mal-
adjustment. The fantasies had no direct bearing on the real situa-
tion but led away from rather than to real problems, and the social
world became increasingly strange.

It was a vicious circle. The more I read the less at ease I was with com-
panions. And the less at ease I was in company the more I tended to shun it
and seek solace in books, where one could lose himself completely without any
restraints.

The distinguishing characteristic of this type of reading experience
is the tendency to isolation. The experience arose in a degree of un-
adjustment and tended to accentuation of such unadjustment.
Whether or not the individuals were enriched by a new store of
imagery, such enrichment could hardly be estimated until they be-
came more at home in the world, and toward this such reading had
little to offer.

Group II—For the second group of cases reading was in the
nature of a temporary diversion, with a heightening of the emotional
tone, a release of tensions which might even add to joy in normal
living. The case abstracted as follows is typical:

For F. C. very little time was spent in reading; outdoor activities were more
appealing. Reading was not in the family tradition; her parents did not en-
courage it. The children read some on long winter evenings when other activities
were precluded. Joining the Girl Reserves increased reading through competi-
tive interests. She read only what was required during the first two years of
high school. Her interest revived somewhat during the third year, but dim-
inished the last. She has lost a taste for novels now. She would read sociological
material but still lacks genuine interest in reading. As a child her special interest
was in fairy tales; she mainly liked to see justice done. She also enjoyed boys’
adventure stories. There was only temporary identification with a fiction char-
acter. “I lived the life of the character who most called forth my sympathy in
the book I was reading, but when it was finished I returned to my own life.”
During junior year in high school her aversion to poetry was overcome.

The readers in this group, as illustrated by the case above, did not
actually participate, or at least only temporarily, in the story. They
were more characteristically sympathetic observers. There was a
degree of identification—sympathy always demands this—and as
they read they experienced in themselves the emotions portrayed,
sharing in the excitements and pleasures and sorrows of those of
whom they read. But while the identification was sometimes close,
and they followed the events and circumstances very much as though
the experience was their own, they did not lose their orientation.
The focus of attention was only temporarily narrowed. And when
the story was finished there was a return to other interests and
activities, with lingering memories of the experience, it might be,
but with no delusions. They were alive to conditions around them.

Nor did reading of this type impinge greatly on the readers’ own
world. There was little relation between the events of the story and
everyday experiences. Hence, there was little reinterpretation of
such experiences or modification of attitudes. They had been mo-
mentarily thrilled, excited, frightened, saddened, entertained. The
experience was unrelated and not possible of integration with their
more active, customary interests; it was merely passing enjoyment.
The literature was generally of the reverie type, which frequently
arouses daydreaming and escape. That it did not produce escape or
vivid reverie seemed due to factors precluding isolation. The reader
was well adjusted socially, with close friends, a congenial family
group, and a diversity of interests and activities. Social relationships
kept his orientation in the surrounding world; or a critical attitude
prevented the story from being taken seriously. Discussion or shar-
ing the reading introduced reinterpretations, making it a social
experience and preventing the isolating effects.

Group III —The experience of reading for the third group of cases
had an organizing influence in the reader’s personality, defining his
réle and conception of himself and relating to his personal problems.
The case abstracted as follows is representative:

B. K. was reared in poverty. Through strong influence from his family tradi-
tion he aspired to vocational success. Early Bible and folk stories told by his
mother had a strong emotional effect. He constantly pored over historical and
biographical works, eager for clues to his own vocational attainments. He was
greatly influenced by biographies of great men; they aided in defining his own
conception of his réle. Such books as the Alcott books, Pepper books, etc., did
not impress him much. Black Beauty influenced his attitude toward his own
horse. In social groups he always sought to assume a réle of dominance and
leadership, as suggested by his reading. Through a strenuous working period
reading was discontinued. He did not value fiction in high school—it was just
entertaining. Reading was mainly directed according to his interests. He did
little daydreaming.

From analysis of the cases in this group, reading seems most char-
acteristically to have become effective in habits and attitudes when
the literary depictions were simple and direct crystallizations of the
mores. A child is presented with a clear-cut, well-told narrative com-
mending a type of behavior acceptable in his own group of associ-
ates, and the story clarifies and emphasizes what is suggested in the
world about him. It defines the meanings given in the world, and
the effect on his attitudes is inevitable. The story of a boy who found
a coin and awaited the return of the owner called forth similar be-
havior in one young reader because such behavior was what his
group would approve. The story served merely to define how he
might become a more socialized being.

Some in this class made a conscious effort to obtain through litera-
ture a better definition of the meaning of life and a better personal
and social integration. The person in conflict would seek through
literature some solution to his problem. By more or less unconscious
identification with characters in those respects where similarities
were evident he obtained clues to action and came to redefine his
réle. He projected himself into the story, took the réle, and experi-
enced a transformation in his conception of himself—retaining, how-
ever, his orientation in his group, his new conceptions and attributes
having reference to his own concrete experiences. He redefined his
relations to other people, became chivalrous like the southern gentle-
man he read about, or threw a shovel at his enemies as did the char-
acter in the story. He took over not the whole personality of the
fiction character, but such aspects as had implications in his own
social experiences. If the problem was persistent—an ambition given
in childhood, to be fulfilled in maturity—the attention to defining
literature often became characteristic and enduring. As a child, and
throughout his development, his interest in his attainments led him
to literature that helped.

Group IV .—In the fourth group of cases reading pertained direct-
ly to objective interests.

F. L.’s early reading was subject to supervision. He was surrounded by good
literature. His father was a Methodist minister. As a boy he belonged to a liter-
ary club organized by his mother. He read factual, current literature, not al-
ways from preference but because there was no other available. He had an early
interest in buildings and geography—from his father’s vocation, from his own
trips to a large city, and from a book of 600 pictures of buildings and places.
He achieved status in school for his knowledge of history and geography, due
largely to his early reading. He learned to prefer factual reading. Civil War
stories, Henty books also directed his interest to geographical facts. Fanciful
literature did not make much impression. There was little or no daydreaming;
reading was not taken as “escape.” He had dissatisfactions and problems
through the necessity of making frequent adjustments to new communities, but
he had to face the situations. He was interested in the newspaper at an early
age—news, not the comic sections. Deaconess stories of poverty-stricken
city families which he read as a child moved him; he thinks it influences his
interest in the city.

The function of reading here may be called instrumental, serving
to answer questions and to enhance enthusiasms. Usually the reader
was well adjusted, with a diversity of activities and contacts, and his
interests were well defined. Fiction and non-fiction seemed to have
comparable appeal. With the influences from the environment di-
recting the person to active, extroverted interests, literature con-
tributing to such interests was found readily appealing. When atten-
tion was directed to radios, books on radios advanced knowledge and
skill. They were not distasteful or “dry” because they were tech-
nical; the fact that they were technical rather enhanced their value,
providing what was needed to further and to satisfy the interest.
The boy interested in ship modeling or in airplanes glowed with
pleasure over plain, ungarnished diagrams—pages of lines and
figures. He consulted encyclopedias and subscribed to yearbooks,
searching eagerly for any literature available on the subject. Along
with technical reading went also a quantity of fiction reading on the
subject of the interest, and while the appeal of the two types might
be comparable, their functions must be differentiated. The tech-
nical had appeal as contributing to an end. As distinguished from
stories interesting in themselves, their function was instrumental.
The story about ships might be interesting also, for it enhanced the
interest and perhaps provided some knowledge, but its primary ap-
peal was in the immediate enjoyment and existed independent of the
interest. For the technical reference literature, the value and ap-
peal were inseparably related to the interest. Reading often serves
to initiate interests and to define them when only incipient. An un-
adjusted child through such reading has sometimes found his prob-
lems minimized and his attention objectified. Reading has thus di-
rected him to a subject about which he can carry on activities which
raise his status in his group.

It is evident from the foregoing discussion that the range of in-
fluence in the four types of experience is from extreme isolation in
the first group to a high degree of socialization in the third and
fourth. The differentiation of the functions of reading has been the
most conclusive result of this exploratory study.

II

In addition to the classification into four types on the basis of
isolation-socialization, an intensive analysis of the forty-four docu-
ments was made with a view to formulating useful generalizations
as a guide to further research. The most important results may be
summarized under four heads, dealing with: (z) the psychological
aspects of children’s reading in relation to imagination, interest, and
the formation of attitudes; (2) the aesthetic aspect of literature; (3)
the conditions under which reading becomes socializing; and (4) the
causes and conditions under which isolation results.

1. In its psychological aspects reading appears to stimulate and
direct a child’s imaginative, intellectual, and emotional activity.
Reading does not introduce new images but it does expand, through
reassociations, those already existing. A description of a cathedral
calls up comparable images associated, perhaps, with a variety of
past perceptions. Impressions of height, awe, or grandeur are pro-
duced, in consequence of the reading, only to the extent to which
they have existed before, in connection with direct perception. The
associations may have been very different from those given in the
literature and may remain only as very vague and indistinct, and
perhaps may never have recurred in consciousness at all but for the
suggestion from the literature. Reading enlarges and more sharply
defines images through reassociations in the mind of the reader. It
affects conceptions, judgments, and abstract aspects of experience,
and directs the combination of images in filling out an act. When a
person reads of an excursion, what he does is to undertake the
excursion himself, in imagination, going through in his mind the
successive stages. The reading directs the organization of the images
to compose these stages, but the images come from past experiences.
These exist in memory and compose his occasional reveries. What
reading does is to give organization to his reveries, to guide and
combine them in terms of some ordered whole—a complete act.

When the situations presented are complex or in disagreement
with the reader’s preconceptions, or when a problem exists for which
a person seeks solution, reading directs reflection and planning, en-
abling conclusions to be reached in imagination.

Reading has influence only as it pertains to interests. It cannot
be made interesting, but must be recognized by the person as im-
portant for himself. Whether child or adult, one reads with atten-
tion only that literature which answers to some need or accords with
one’s own self-expressive activities. For by the very nature of inter-
est, as John Dewey has defined it, attention is directed only to that
which is in line with the expansion of the self. An interest is an ob-
ject of outgoing activity, toward which energies and impulses are
directed, to which one therefore attends, about which he is doing
something. Therefore literature which is not interesting is generally

3 “Interest as Related to Will,” in second supplement to the Herbart Yearbook for
1895 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1903), p. 9.
irrelevant; that it is not interesting means that the reader does not
attend to it, or attends only partially, and that it does not enter into
his own expansion. Nor can such literature be made interesting ex-
cept as the person comes to accept it as important for himself, as
something desirable in his own development and activity.
Whatever the type of the literature, even though regarded by
others as undesirable, if it is interesting it is so because it is in line
with the reader’s outgoing activity and answers to some inner need.
Prohibitions or restrictions are ineffective. What is necessary is to
understand the child and his needs, to find other outlets for his
activities, to change his scheme of values, to give new direction to
his interests, and to direct his reading in accord with these.
Reading influences attitudes if the reader is able to make personal
identifications and only if he can sustain his new attitudes in some
group. During the reading the identification is wholly in imagina-
tion. A boy reading of a cowboy imagines himself in the same réle;
and afterward may seek to realize this rdle. He may persuade his
parents to buy him a cowboy costume, he may adopt the swagger
and the language of a cowboy, but there are limitations to the extent
to which the réle can be enacted. If he lives in a large city he has
none of the appropriate surroundings, for his activities are quite
different from those of a cowboy on the plains. If he is given no
costume the limitations are greater, and if his swagger and language
achieve him no status in any group, but rather occasion disregard,
he discards the réle and eventually the influence is lost. He has
learned something about cowboys and has some memories of as-
sociated experiences, but in attitudes and habits there are no simi-
larities. If he continues to live the réle imaginatively, ignoring the
concrete expressions, it is in answer to strong desires and needs whose
normal fulfilment is thwarted by external conditions. Fulfilment can
be attained only in fancy and so he entertains these delusions of him-
self while behaving overtly according to the demands of his group.
Where the similarities remain and the influences become real,
there are always situations in which the individual can express the
attitudes. This is only to say that external conditions permit them
to exist. They may, however, appear in one situation but not in
another. If the disapproved stories have undesirable influences, the
child must be able to find satisfaction in the expression of these new
attitudes and make the imaginary identification. Having the im-
aginary identification he seeks to express it, to release the activity
as he has conceived it in imagination. If this release does not gain
the satisfactions anticipated, there is redefinition, reconsideration
of means, and reconstruction of attitudes.

Reading that is objective, in which there is no personal identifica-
tion, affects attitudes by defining objects and situations. This is a
wholly rational process by which issues or situations are discussed
and conclusions derived. Much of the literature in school readers is
of this type—also newspapers, magazines, and non-fiction generally.

2. Reading that is aesthetic presents imagery enjoyed in and for
itself; it is spontaneously pleasurable. The appreciation exists be-
cause of the wealth of meanings crystallized into the object of the
moment. Thus, reading that is aesthetic is expansive, extending the
meaning and significance of life. It is instrumental only in the sense
that the effect is not mere passing enjoyment, but is a general en-
hancement of living. It is aesthetic, also, if it affords release or
catharsis.

3. The socializing influences of reading exist by virtue of its
nature as communication. It transmits meanings, these depending
both upon the content of the literature and on the background of
the reader. Reading itself, however, involves no interaction, the
process being one-sided, since the characters do not respond to the
reader. In social participation the process is bilateral or multilateral,
and each individual undergoes modification according to the mutual
responses of the others. As a solitary pursuit, therefore, reading
affords ready possibilities for isolation.

Evidences of socialization exist in increasing objectivity and
better integration of the reader in his world. By expanding, through
reading, his understanding and knowledge of people and situations,
he becomes better able to participate effectively in social life. In
clarifying his problems, in affording solutions to his difficulties, and
in providing a more adequate conception of his réle, his adjustment
to the world about him becomes more adequate. In the definition of
the self through reading it is important, for the result to be socializ-
ing, that the characters and events of fiction be comparable to those
of the reader’s world. The self is defined by others; in reading it is
defined by those whom the reader never sees or hears. But if these
others are like those whom he sees or hears or refer to them, the
definition is acceptable in his environment.

The person whose reading is socializing is usually better adjusted
in the beginning, with no desires that appear as impossible of ful-
filment in his environment, since his problems and conflicts can
await a normal solution. There is also greater diversity of social
experience and contacts, through which reading has wider interpre-
tation, and the fantasies aroused are only temporary.

The type of literature is also significant for the socializing influ-
ence. The imagery must be relevant to the social milieu, and it must
pertain to the reader’s incipient interests. If the reader is unad-
justed, the quality of the literature alone may be sufficient to have
a socializing influence. By directing him to reflection on his prob-
lems or by initiating and expanding his interests, it will serve to aid
his social orientation. When the activity of reading itself becomes a
completely social experience, through sharing the reading or dis-
cussing it with others, referring the depictions to concrete situations
and experiences, it loses its isolating influence.

4. Evidences of isolation exist in the deprivation, through reading,
of normal social contacts and activities and in the creation of a world
of fantasy with escape from the world of objective social experience.
If undertaken to excess, certain kinds of reading may lead to definite
rejection of social participation. The range of practical experience
becomes restricted, with consequent limitations to the meanings
which may be given to reading. Satisfactions come to center in-
creasingly about the reading as an experience in itself, with less
interest in active social life.

Through the creation of a dream world, the reader becomes a sort
of “marginal personality.” While the imaginary world can never
wholly occupy him, it detracts from full participation in the world
about. Thus he is on the edge of both, not a complete participant
in normal social life. The objects of his reveries have no relevance
to surrounding objects, since there is no planning, nor consideration
of means. The person so reading loses in personal integration; he is
prevented from full integration in terms of objective interests and
real people; and by seriously entertaining fantasies he is risking dis-
appointment and disillusion. Reverie experiences like this involve a
disjunction between thought and action; fantasies find no expression
in normal activity. As the reader comes gradually to find satisfac-
tion in reverie it may more and more occupy him. Increasing par-
ticipation makes it more difficult to live normally with other people,
and this adds to his absorption in his fantasies.

The causes of the isolating influences of reading, as for the socializ-
ing, are to be sought in the social backgrounds of the reader, in the
type of the literature, and in the conditions under which reading is
pursued. The person whose contacts and experiences are restricted
finds more ready interest in reading and is more apt to substitute
imaginary pursuits and companions. This reduces his background
of meanings and consequently also the objective significance of his
reading. Frustrations, conflicts, and disappointments also increase
the tendencies to seek satisfaction in reading as a means of escaping
from difficulties.

If the literature refers to a remote, strange world, and if it accords
with the reader’s insistent desires, immediately providing imaginary
fulfilment, the effect is to take the reader out of his objective environ-
ment into a world of fantasy. He comes to disregard surrounding
conditions. If he has a diversity of normal contacts and experiences,
the identification and escape will be only temporary. If the litera-
ture refers to objective reality, it may serve in large measure to re-
duce isolating influences from the environment.

Isolating influences are produced or increased by pursuing reading
in solitude, by failure to compare objects in the literature with ob-
jects in the environment, and by devoting undue proportion of time

to reading.
TTT
sample here is largely limited to those of college level and from
middle-class American life. Cases from other levels of experience
could profitably be studied. Distinctive personalities—those noted
for achievements and those for their failures and disorganization—
should throw much light on the relation of reading to the develop-
ment of traits of personality. The isolating influences of reading can
best be analyzed and checked by reference to those whose isolation
is extreme, such as the psychopathic and disorganized. Studies of
delinquent cases should also be revealing.

Comparative studies of people in communities where there is no
reading should prove of value. What differences in personalities ap-
pear as a result of lack of reading in the culture? Ellsworth Faris
gives it as his opinion that the comparative absence of insanities
among the Bantus of the Belgian Congo may, perhaps, be largely
owing to the absence of literature. The social life is more integrated,
there being no means of escape from the problems and frustrations
that occur. Such questions, however, can be answered only after
careful study.

The method here has been autobiographical, and it has been
limited to studies of contemporaries. Historical records should prove
revealing, biographies and autobiographies giving analyses of the
development of distinctive traits and characteristics. Diaries should
prove valuable.

Experimental studies offer fruitful sources of information and
understanding. To be of value in determining the consequences of
reading in the adult personality they would need to be continued
over extensive periods of time. Some insight, however, could be ob-
tained through careful observation of the responses of children in
different situations to different types of literature and in varying
circumstances.

In modern life it is through the printed page that many of the
most important social influences are exerted. A child’s books may
be as important as his playmates. An adequate understanding of the
effects of children’s reading would form a valuable contribution to
social psychology.

Honovtv, T.H.
