Studies in the Sociology of Religion. VI. The Consciousness of Kind of a Fundamentalist
Group

Author(s): Heinrich Herman Maurer

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Tan., 1926), pp. 485-506
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2764746

Accessed: 03-06-2016 19:32 UTC
STUDIES IN THE SOCIOLOGY OF RELIGION

VI. THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF KIND OF A FUNDAMENTALIST
GROUP

HEINRICH HERMAN MAURER
Lewis Institute

ABSTRACT

The categories of the spiritual man serve to define the social situation between
the group and the outgroup. The evaluative emphasis of theology upon “rational-
ism,” the rational medium of out-groups, neutralizes the drift toward a new social
synthesis. The process is illustrated in a set of attitudes of a group toward Calvin-
ists, Methodists, Masons, which groups, by presenting new social objects, gave rise in
American society to a new self-consciousness, a new consciousness of kind.

“Something there is that does not love a wall,” but the farmer
is apt to suspect behind that something “just varmint.” Where he
meets it as a social attitude, he is prone to rationalize the thing as
coming from the “natural man.” Because, for the farmer, good
fences make good neighbors; the good neighbor minds his fences,
and the good Christian prompts him with the bowlders of his the-
ology.

The present writer has attempted to describe the individual-
ism, the socialism of a particular type of American in terms of his
fences, so to speak. Before proceeding to relate those fences to the
pattern of a historical religion, he would now stop to consider some
of the elements in the social situation which religion was here called
to define, to rationalize and endow with feeling; the social attitudes
which it was called upon to sanction. A want for fencing must be
related to the moving of so much barren rock."

+The author has felt encouraged in his mode of procedure by reading Willey
and Willey, “The Conditioned Response and the Consciousness of Kind,” in Amer.
Jour. Sociol., XXX, 1; C. F. Bartlett, “Group Organization and Social Behavior,”
in Int. Jour. Ethics, XXXV, 4, see esp. p. 356; also G. H. Mead, “The Genesis of
Self and Social Control,” ibid., Vol. XX XV, esp. pp. 254-61, 276. His general hy-
pothesis is still Simmel, Philosophie des Geldes (1907), p. viii; his specific starting-
point, Simmel, Soziologie (1922), p. 318: “Die Structur der objectiven gesellschaft-
lichen Gebilde gibt . . . . die Méglichkeit die Singularitat des Subjects zu consta-
tieren oder auszudriicken.”
The dominating element in the situation of our immigrant cul-
ture group is on the objective side, the element of change. The old-
est rational medium for meeting change in its most startling form
is religion. The valuation of change, then, any new situation and
every new element therein, can hardly escape the implications of
the hypothesis concerning change upon which the categories of the-
ology are based. If it is granted that the particular creed under ob-
servation entails still the sublimation of a static universe and con-
ceives the process of soul conservation in terms of identity and con-
tinuity, it stands to reason that the situation must be dominated, on
the subjective side, by the element of fear. We shall relate the ele-
ments of change on the objective side of the situation to the element
of fear on the other, and then proceed to show how this fear, ration-
alized into social fear, affected the social process in America. We
continue to assume that thus we are analyzing the function of reli-
gion in conditioning an ego, a socius, a “consciousness of kind.’

Nothing would be easier than an account of the causes for fear
in the situation of our immigrant group; from the dangers of water
and wilderness to the risks of a functional type in an environment
to which he was not adjusted. Problematic indeed must seem the
survival of a products-economy mind confronted with a money-
economy system of valuation. Desperate the case of a group with
what must seem to be essentially the technique of a noncompetitive
society in a world where to the victor belonged the spoils; with a
mind set for continuous performance facing suddenly a dynamic
situation. The relative rationalism of aping, adapted to a static sit-
uation, faced suddenly conditions where tinkering was in order.

The German Lutheran, we may indeed say, found much con-
spiring against his survival. Not only was the spirit of his time

? Absolutely no conclusions are warranted from this as to the function of reli-
gion elsewhere and in general. The decisive element is the social situation, and reli-
gion is just as resourceful in sanctions for the putting on of “the new man.” The
history of the category “regeneration” is a case in point: the logic of baptism, re-
generatio, renascimento, has shaped the attitude toward the Renaissance. It de-
scribes an entirely different evaluative emphasis of religion on the “natural man” and
on “natural law” and a different relation of the same to the “spiritual man” and

to the law of God. It also accounts in American history for the attitudes attached to
the category “progress” by other religious and culture groups.
against him, his way of thinking, his group life, but in his creed and
church he found here powerful rivals. He was, indeed, in the dis-
persion, in a minority everywhere, even in his church. His very
language turned against him, for if it preserved him, it also stifled
and mummified. In his American offspring he faced daily the prob-
lem of identity and continuity; with every child that he reared he
brought on his own oblivion, for it must only swell the growing
majority of those that understood him not. If anywhere, the soci-
ological effectiveness of the question, “What must I do to be
saved?” will be observable here.

The implication of change to the group is its assimilation; as-
similation of a type to which its own hypothesis denies survival fit-
ness in religion, and one which it dislikes in life. The conflict situ-
ation is thus necessarily endowed with much fear for body and soul,
and the result is startling. For the sociology of conflict and the
logic of religion combined to produce much momentum. Because
the majority was identified with change, and with the relative ra-
tionalism of the Calvinistic creeds, our minority became tradition-
alism personified. But it did not merely stand pat. It went back to
seventeenth-century ground to choose a foothold, it leaned strongly
toward the sixteenth century, and sometimes fell over backward
into the fifteenth and beyond. The demand for assimilation was
met with alienation and estrangement.

Since the rational medium in the conflict is also a medium of so-
cial choices, the polarity of its categories entails of necessity the
proposition that “he who is not for me is against me.” Regardless,
then, of the priority of the fear of—or the fear for—or even the
actual objective ground for either, once the one or the other is
aroused, the whole new situation is automatically defined. It is de-
fined in terms of an earlier situation of which our categories are but
symbols, and from which they have their meaning. In other words,
granted that something within our group or without has mobilized
the behavior mechanism, touched off the alarm system entailed in
religion and theology for warding off fear, the whole scenery is il-
luminated as by magic. Whatever his real intentions or merit, he
who by that light is banned beyond the charmed circle of the be-
loved community will find himself at the wrong end of the terrific
ordnance of those categories, and get caught in its barrage. We
shall look closer at the hapless stranger and find—Americanism
itself.

That the theology of the group gives no quarter we know: in
the presence of the world and the devil there can be only eternal
watchfulness for the one and unconditional surrender for the other.
But the whole evaluative emphasis of the sixteenth century need
not have been carried over into the nineteenth if it had not been for
some elements of danger in the situation itself.

On the ocean and in the wilderness the steeple which had
marked the ancestral burial ground had given way to strange
sights. In the village back home there had been “a time for every-
thing,” but here life itself knew no appointed order, and the awful
judgment seemed ever present. Death, as it lost the decorum of the
customary village funeral, was shocking; so were people who were’
as callous in meeting it as it had been casual in coming. For if it
seemed less familiar it did come not less often. Some vessels never
reached their destination, and were never heard of again. The yel-
low fever was at home in New Orleans and the cholera well known
at St. Louis. As it was, the natural mortality among the pioneers
was still enormous in the forties. Thus the stern law of nature
which the immigrant came to know at the outset was not so very
different from Luther’s law of nature, according to which suffering
is the privilege of man. The very realism of the peasant made
Luther’s terrific hypothesis seem a more rational proposition than
the pleasing mythology of nature’s God and his law, about which
the rationalists had so much to say. For a more cheerful religion
there was no immediate need.

Nor was the new theory of the saving grace of reason, the hy-
pothesis of a universal common sense, convincing, for it was still
a far cry to the brotherhood of man. Instead there were Neuldnder
and Seelenverkéufer, immigrant runners and landsharks and
shrewd traders; there were sometimes Indians, and always lawyers
and politicians. It certainly was not safe to extend the Trew und
Glauben of the neighborhood to strangers, even if they were Chris-
tians, and as to “going to law before the unjust,” their law was not
Recht.

The world destroyed even as it tempted with compromise, for
what was, then, right and wrong, and what was sin? “Moderate
interest,” it whispered, “is not sin.” “Nor is moderate adultery,
then,” said the Lutherans.

In the eyes of these pious immigrants, the world was a great
harlot indeed. It dissolved the charmed old permanent unions, it
broke up the closed social circles with their neighborhood ethics.
As a Reigen of opportunity it presented itself instead, a rapid suc-
cession of situations, of deals between strangers matching wits.
The old mutualism of interest gave way to the reward of smartness
on the one hand and to Schaden und Spott on the other. For even
the public, looking on, crowned now “success” with honor where it
had cried down pride with Schande. It was the dance of death of
the old Sitilichkeit.

Our immigrant looked on in bewilderment and fear. Born in
most stable wedlock, the venerable medieval principle of union,
cradled in a fellowship, apprenticed in a neighborhood, he had
worked for neighbors and with neighbors ail his life. Confirmed
into the commonalty and fellowship (Gemeinschaft) by his creed,
and blessed in its faith by his church—what good could he see in
this new principle of Gesellschaft, this new “society” with its idea
of limited liability? How could he trust its offspring, this new
Geselle who was but a mode of all the partnerships he knew?

East and West are not supposed to meet, but the Middle Ages
and the New Age certainly met in the Mississippi Valley in the
fifties. For this is the crux of the matter of assimilation at that
time in church and state; this the cause of alienation, not only be-
tween native American and foreigner, but also between North and
South. What made for irrepressible conflict was that different qual-
ifications of terms of union were conditioned by different group
types.

This is the meaning of the conflict in our church in the fifties,
as described, and it complicates the conflict between modernism
and fundamentalism today: the ybris between a tribal law and
the technique of a society with the majority principle of consensus.
It is the meaning of the slogan, “no union without unity,” which
has resounded in our fundamentalist group from 1840 to this day;
a compromise threatened the integrity of the older and weaker
group type. Because they consistently applied the ‘““He who is not
for me is against me,” our Feste Burgers felt the tragedy of com-
promise as such in everything, from the attempt to apply the ma-
jority principle to matters of faith to the attempt to legalize for the
group a moderate interest. Obviously, if in either case they substi-
tuted the convenience or will of a majority for faith and law,
neither would henceforth be the same. The one would lose the ele-
ment of law and the other that of good faith. But if they felt the
tragedy they did not so see it. It was, and is, to them what Mr.
Walther called it with Luther’s own relentless logic: moderate
adultery. They knew, and know today, that their church would
cease to be an institution and become a society, while they are not
so sure whether the state might not also cease to be a state and be-
come a theocracy, a church of a sort with a new synthetic “higher
law.”

But the mere existence of the societal type of individualism en-
tailed for our own a disturbed equilibrium and a conflict which
would stimulate an ego into readjustment between the within and
without, and into a heightened activation of its elements of self-
hood.* The very case logic of heterogeneous situations threatened
old behavior patterns with temptation; their sanctions, with tinker-
ing. They indicated at least the search for a new pragma of self-
preservation. The old type ideal, hitherto an absolute, found itself
cursed with the implications of social relativity. As an absolute, it
could survive only if the within and the without remained related
to the transcendental interest as before.

Sociologically speaking, the change we have spoken of pre-
sented itself objectively as a challenge not only to a hypothesis, but
to a technique; not only to a function, but to an organism. A type
form in the social organization of thinking itself was threatened
with extinction. The real crux of the matter is not that anybody

* Simmel, Soziologie, pp. 312 ff., 318-19.
wished our group ill, for nobody did; that anybody denied its hy-
pothesis, for everybody asserted it as well in some form or other.
It is that in a heterogeneous situation our group ego could not exist
because the social substance of which it was a mode, its mind a
function, was gone.

That substance then, the homogeneous ideal group, would have
to be restored so that the absolutism of its way of thinking might
gain within what it had lost outside. It is thus that our theology be-
comes identified with the social logic of our culture group.

There were other elements in the situation in the nineteenth
century in America, to be compounded with those of the sixteenth
to arouse the dogs of fear, to recondition ancient habit-responses
into new social attitudes, and to activate a new group will. For if
it has been suggested that ruts of habit, as they trailed across the
frontier, met divergent grooves, it might also be said that all
grooves, all ruts of habit, tended to disappear. In a labyrinth of
faint tracks they left a much-bewildered ego. Sometimes the call of
the wild entailed a drunken reeling through the dismal prairie of
human performance, uncharted as it was by the social vision, the
telism of any culture group. Some people it threatened with a cer-
tain degeneracy and reversion to type, with all its attendant dan-
gers, terrors, and fears. Instead of becoming a “society,” our Ge-
meinschaft might also stampede hither and thither as a bellowing
“herd.”

Some elements of danger are obvious. The ancient devils of
“accidie and sloth” reappeared; so did the terror of doubt, the
Zweifel of yore which Luther had barely banned, and also the
lowly but ubiquitous Saufteufel, who, according to Luther himself,
when among Germans, does not love a fence. Much “organic sym-
pathy” did indeed go to waste at the wilderness bar, but for the
family farm the result was often temperamental instability, domes-
tic maladjustment, economic backsliding: a neglected home and a
wretched homestead. Others, with their women and children,
might also “get religion” in a fit of emotional despondency, with
results but little less inadequate for the domestic methodism of the
family farm. However well the performance was rationalized in
either case, it was functionally unequal to the demands of the eco-
nomic situation. As a social technique for the behavioristic equili-
bration to the job on hand of the boss, the mate, the father, the fel-
low-servant, the neighborhood group, the parish, the Lutheran sys-
tem was eminently effective. It was the indicated rational means to
conserve the substance of our culture group. The situation required
a technique of correction and guidance endowed with the strongest
possible premiums on suggestibility and continuous performance.
Otherwise the transition period would mean a degeneration of re-
sponsibility and responsiveness: the emergence of a type which
could neither lead nor be led.*

The situation indicated a most positive religion and ethical ab-
solutes. It helped to socialize the idea of fundamental law in its
most elementary form, namely, that you cannot do what you please.
The law of God became group law again here as elsewhere, in a
very literal sense; upon a narrower circle it would bestow its ter-
rors and its blessings.

This, then, is the situation into which German Protestantism
enters. But German Protestantism also pointed to the primary
group as the indicated organ of survival when it socialized the re-
sponsibility for salvation. For in the name of the “general priest-
hood” Luther’s theology had canonized the old heathen Genossen-
schaftsrecht. After this, faith means nothing if not group loyalty
to a common law, whatever it may be. It may be bad policy, the
law may be none too wise, but the minding thereof in terms of per-

* Adequate documentation of the above observations cannot here be attempted.
They are based not only on the religious literature of the group and of many other
related groups, which are naturally biased, but also on that of others which are not,
such as the Atlantische Studien, the Deutscher Pionier, and a number of newspapers
of the whole German-American group. They are also documented in the pedagogical
periodicals of the group. The process of degeneration of the Radicals, Liberals, and
Latin farmers deserves special descriptive and analytical treatment. Compare the
mores of the Germans in Ireland, with and without religious organization, in Wesley,
Diary, IV, 168, 397; and Lecky, sth ed., II, 343-46; also German local communities
in Missouri and elsewhere. In Perry County, for years no German went to gaol or
was fined, with the result that some agencies of local government became superfluous
or could not be continued for lack of funds. It should be remembered that this group
is a church in the medieval sense, id est, more like a government than like a modern
church.
sonal conduct between neighbors will be the essence of the spiritual
man. Thus, Protestantism, by stripping the Pope of his qualifica-
tion as the spiritual man par excellence, by endowing instead the
community therewith, has socialized the essence of soul salvation.
The element of infallibility was also inadvertently atomized with
the saving grace of the corpus-church. With German-American
Christians, as we have seen, it falls to the whole group within the
limitations of a stewardship of the saving charism of the gospel as
its organic law. With others it seems to be the privilege of ma-
jorities.®

Returning, then, to the special case under observation, we will
recall that while Mr. Stefan did the unprecedented thing and broke
the law of the group, Rev. Walther, by overworking the principle
of precedent, found it.°

So completely synonymous was salvation with continuity and
identity for the group that the we-interest transcended time and
space. With Luther our Feste Burghers identified themselves. The
group rallied the closer around that leader, the farther it was geo-
graphically from its population center.

Some elements of Luther’s theology with which they identified
themselves we have seen at work. Its decisive categories in this
case are as follows: The kingdom of God to be related to, though
not to be materialized in, “this world,” hence, Sitélichkeit, the es-

*For Luther’s concept of the general priesthood see K. Holl, Gesammelte
Aufsitze, 1 (1921), 247, 269-70, 273-75; for Luther’s church concept, ibéd., pp. 250,
254-70, 293, 450; for Luther’s idea of justification, ébid., pp. 247-48; Luther's idea
of the spiritualis homo, ibid., p. 261. Luther did not constitute the social absolutism
of the individual in the name of the general priesthood or the spiritualis homo; the
function of either is contingent on the group weal and on its consent. See Luther,
W. A., VILL, 248, 2 ff., 253, 343 also De Bab. Capt.: “Non licere quendam hac ipsa
uti nisi consensu communitatis aut vocatione majoris.” With the Missouri group the
relationship of the faithful and their gospel became equated to the legal form of the
Treuhand which had such a large influence on the liquidation of the proprietary es-
tate of, and usufructuary rights under, the old church. See A. Schulze, Stadtgemeinde
und Kirche im Mittelalter, pp. 140, 142, in Festgabe fiir Rudolf Sohm, 1914. On
Luther’s influence upon the crucial corpus concept in relation to society see Luther
Meinecke, “Christliches Gemeinwesen und Christlicher Staat,” Hist. Zeitschrift,
CXXI, 1, 7, 14, 21.

® Ibid., pp. 425-26.
sence of Christliche Freiheit, and not law proper, a condition of its
approximation. The idea of soul salvation was understood in terms
of identity and continuity; the salvation concept itself, in terms of
the functions of justification and atonement through its indicated
organs. Those organs were a saving charism, namely, the Bible
faith in its most literal sense, and also the corpus of the saving
Christ, God objectified in an element of corporateness, a commu-
nity united in his spirit; furthermore, the category general priest-
hood thoroughly rationalized in relation to the group corpus as its
organ. This entailed, as we have shown, the conception of salvation
as a group-organic conditioning process. It meant the coarticula-
tion of the individual into this collective salvation process through
the categories of Amt and Beruf: the joint liability of the Christian
calling. The sublimation, finally, of the process in an immanent
sense as a group-mindedness, and of its organ as the spiritual man.

It has been suggested that this process describes the making
of the German-American as a Christian and as a citizen. For the
group of German Protestantism in America at large his technique
has set a standard, his mind been a pivot, he himself, an Idealtypus
in Max Weber’s sense. But our interest has been at the outset in
the structure rather than the content of a consciousness of kind.
Not social attitudes per se, but their conditioning process, the
growth of organs, has attracted our attention. In a creed we have
seen here a group organ. Relating its growth to its function of serv-
ing the inherent interest of the group with relation to a situation,
we observe that the situation has made for creed formalism, for a
fundamentalism of the sternest sort. The creed fundamentalism of
the group has presented itself as the homologue of the formalism of
that same type of group at law.’ What has been said of the latter—
that the form is the barrier which breaks the impact of wilfulness
(Willkiir) in law—is also true of creed fundamentalism in religion
here. It serves as a corral, a fence; it is the wall of the Feste Burg;
its purpose is integration within and integrity over and against the
without.

* The author has in preparation a parallel study of the conditioning process of a
specific individualism (behavior complex) in terms of group situations at law.
The connection between the growth of this particular creed and
the situation is obvious. In its forms, the elements of German self-
hood, as we have seen, first rallied. It gave our German backbone,
and as the situation called for more backbone, it ossified. The
whole organism so ossified; but if we grant the premises in the
case: group salvation in terms of continuity and identity, even that
process is eminently rational in the situation. In terms of a creed,
the group consensus was assured: that fence meant good neighbors
within and without; it meant a stable social medium. In its terms
the group mind, the group-peace, might “pass all understanding” —
for “the others,” but what of that? So much the worse for them.
German Protestant theology, as well as the sociology of Gemein-
schaft, entailed an irrational proposition, the one in relation to Cal-
vinism and the other in relation to Gesellschaft. After Luther had
defined the Erkenninisgrund of the true faith, had taken issue on
the qualification of the element of its effectiveness; after Calvinists
had identified’ themselves with the “effective faith” in terms of
what to the Lutherans was “good works,” the latter would qualify
their consciousness of difference and of kind as well as their salva-
tion pragma, their saving grace in terms of sheer faith. But the
Calvinists were not only Christians; they were also a church. With
the societal type of unification they had developed its new tech-
nique of give and take, or compromise. As Christians, they also,
of course, strove for the “peace which passeth all understanding,”
but as incorporators they had to rationalize that peace within their
mutual understanding. Their faith need not, their creed must—in
a society—become a matter of rational agreement. But then, said
the Lutherans, their creed has ceased to be a creed and has become
a contract and an agreement, their faith a convenience, a human
makeshift. Where is the element of mystery in an agreement? It is
but Menschenwerk, and cannot save us.

But then it must be damned by the group in proportion as the
other element, the element of mystery, saved the group. It did so
save it as we have seen. With a creed, a Muehlenberg and a Wal-
ther domesticated the masses; with a creed, the masses broke the
will of a too-selfwilled personality; neither members nor leaders
could run away the one with the other, nor both with the group
ideal. A mystic creed spelled integrity.

Thus a most irrational creedal proposition can become an emi-
nently rational medium for the inherent interest of a group. The
struggle sketched in article ITI of this series is a case in point. Here
a German and an American, a fundamentalist and a modernist
group, were pitted against each other within the church. Americans
resorted to a quickening, a compromise. In the interest of union it
was a compromise between the Lutheran and the Calvinistic ver-
sion of Protestantism; in the interest of the new federalism it was
a concession to the new societal technique of partnerships and of
Gesellschaft. For German Christians there was no mystery in the
thing at all: it was a coup d’état of.a self-willed personality against
the integrity of their selfhood, their group, their church. Creed fa-
naticism need not be an essential of the integrity of religious per-
sonality among Germans any more than elsewhere. But here, in
America, the situation as described made it conspicuous as an ele-
ment thereof. What was wanted was a principle of exclusion and
inclusion, an elementary standard of articulateness and of identifi-
cation, .an admission test, a fence which certain religious virtuosi
could not possibly jump—certainly not if they had been educated
at Princeton. With all its endowment of religious righteousness, its
theological sublimation, its historical rationalization, the contested
element in the Augsburg Confession® was a form of group circum-
cision pure and simple. It was indicated by group rationalism in
the situation and conveniently rediscovered by theology. In other
words, fundamentalism has as much to do with social crises and the
struggle for power as with religion.

Thus, to the German in America his stirb und werde came
through the sociological form, that institution of grace par excel-
lence. Its Eigenleben asserted itself.° It bid the German to die, the

°The elements which the Americans wanted modified or dropped from the
Augsburg Confession before its incorporation into the “Definite Platform” of the
American Lutheran church concerned the mass, the private confessional, absolution,
denial of the divine Sabbath, baptismal regeneration, and the Real Presence (A. T.S.,
XXXV, 542).

° Simmel, pp. 312 ff.
German-American, the American, arise. For the identity so much
coveted, so dearly cherished, would turn out after all to be the slow
variation of social organisms in adaptation to the social situation.
Meanwhile, Germans in America proceeded to break their
backs with fencing. The technique thereof and its effects within
their group has been described. In its terms we have suggested, the
son of the glebe became a proud citizen of a real commune in
America. But upon what terms does that commune enter the Amer-
ican city of God, that citizen the American commonwealth? Speak-
ing in terms of sociology: what has this conditioning process of the
“we” in store for the others, and what sort of a “socius” will that
ego be? Obviously, the inherent interest of the group did not only
give; it also took away. With the blessings of its theology for the
cheerful giver, it trimmed an originally pietistic Christianity of its
eudaemonism, of much of its mysticism, of much of its potential
emotional appeal. The intrasocial as well as the intersocial .situa-
tion accounts for a fear of emotional religion. It menaced the con-
sensus in proportion as it tended to upset the individual. Nor was
there room in the functional structure of our organism for “pneu-
matic” religion; no social calling for the subjectivism of a call. A
noncompetitive group did not take kindly to the athletes of faith.
Its aversion against the vagaries of the religion of the inner light,
with its attendant “stirrings,” it easily sanctioned with what Paul
told Corinthians and other disorderly people. The thing was not
orderly. Their faith did not mean law, but it did mean order. It
was the essence of a traditional Sitilichkeit. The interest of the
church in the competitive situation with other churches also assert-
ed itself. The quickening process might make more and better
Methodists, but neither more Lutherans nor better Christians. To
the mind of our group, as now definitely formed by Walther, the
thing comes from the desire to bring on the Kingdom of God on
earth. The inner light either leads to Werkheiligkeit, namely phar-
isaism, which is as bad as popery, or it tapers down to rationalism,
which is abomination. Meanwhile the ministry of our group, with
Baier’s Dogmatics, Walther’s Practical Theology, as their original
professional equipment, with the consciousness of eminent calling
in the vineyard ofthe Lord, and the jealousy of a ministry in the
parish—they have opinions of their own of the spellbinder next
door. He is a humbug and busybody: he does not know his busi-
ness and he would control the state. The daughter churches of Cal-
vinism only confirm the Lutheran in his conception of the manifest
destiny of Lutheranism in America: to preach a truly Pauline
Christianity and preserve the separation of church and state.”
Thus, the group, in more senses than one, laced our German with
its own ego into the strait-jacket of an ancient-calling concept. As
the primary group was wont to tell the cobbler to stick to his last,
so it told the minister, he Christian himself, to mind his business.
That business, ministry, and calling of the ego, Christian or other-
wise, the group rationalizes and canonizes through its eminent or-
gan, theology; whereupon it leaves it, together with the power of
the keys, with the community. The community, we may say, loses
keys, calling, ministry, church, ego, “socius,” and all—in the parish.
For the church also, where it had given, it could take away.
Afraid to lose both identity and numbers in the English language,
it preserved the German language of the group as its own medium
of indoctrination. But what it really uses is the topographical
terminology of a dogmatic scholasticism of the seventeenth cen-
tury. Its social philosophy is pre-Copernican “social geometry”:
it is the pre-Thomistic world-order of concentric circles as indi-
cated by the medieval system of socialization." In its parochial
schools it will continue to use the German language and Luther’s
Catechism to teach its children to stay put, unless those children
have ceased to understand that language, or unless the state, for
reasons best known to itself, tells them to stop. But the conserva-
tion of German-language nationalism has never been its aim. As
soon as more English and Norwegian converts were to be had, and
the days of the German were numbered, as soon as God came to be
with the stronger battalions of the English language, it bethought
® Synodalberichte Michigan (1924), N 0. 4, p. 69; Theolog. Quartalsschrift, XV,
153-74; Schaller, Biblical Christology, 1919; Theolog. Quartalsschrift, XVI, 299-300.
The evidence of a uniform reaction in the above sense is overwhelming. I Peter
4:15 is still applied.
* Simmel, p. 317.
itself of its identity as an American church. Having begun by
claiming to know only Christians and speaking only German, it
ended by becoming so characteristically American that it came
near forgetting its own traditional Christianity.”

On the whole, the church sublimated its own sociological form,
the Gemeinschaft, and abhorred the rational technique of a part-
nership and Gesellschaft for itself and for its members. For its own
corporation law it has learned to use the latter to build up a system
of federated congregations and synods on the plan of co-ordination
but not sub- or super-ordination. But all partnership it makes con-
tingent on creed fellowship and Gemeinschaft.*

Thus the church is withholding from the Christian and from
the natural man the right to enter partnerships where they preju-
dice its own existence or its catholic monopoly of the means of
grace: the correct understanding of the gospel. As a result, the ego,
which is its noblest function, cannot grow as a “socius” through a
wider Gemeinschaft and fellowship, nor as an ego through a nar-
rower Gesellschaft and partnership.** No trial-and-error method

* This according to some criticism of its Christianity in the organ of the affil-
iated Wisconsin Synod, see Theolog. Quartalsschrift, XIX, 58, 113; KX, 254, 262.
See also ibid., XV, XVI, 43 ff., 121 f., 179 f., 257 ff., an excellent sociological analysis
by Professor August Pieper.

* For its early fellowship law see A. J. S., Vol. XXX, No. 6, pp. 677, 682, notes
and ibid., Vol. XXXI, No. 1, pp. 41, 44, 49; also Theolog. Quartalsschrift, VIII,
08 ff., 110 ff., 131 ff., 152; IX, 24 ff., 65, 83; also “Gedanken iiber kirchliche Vereini-
gung,” ibid., Jahrg., XI, 10, 31, 79 ff., 99: “Vereinigung ist unevangelisch ... . ist
Indifferentismus . . . . fiihrt zur Calvinistischen Theocratie mit seiner . . . . falschen
Auffassung von den Aufgaben der Kirche. .... Streben ein sichtbares Gottesreich
auf Erden aufzurichten ... . Riicksichtslosigkeit gegen die Gewissensiiberzeugung
anderer.... . ”? See also the clear distinction between Vereinigung und Einigung,
ibid., p. 21. Why no partnerships without creed agreement, Romans 10, 9; Galatians
1, 9; and II John ro. Fellowship with reformed and Calvinistic churches is impossi-
ble: “Alle die zu reformierten Gemeinschaften gehéren stehen uns wie Personen aus
einer anderen Familie gegeniiber. . . . . Kirchliche Einigung ist wesentlich Einigung
im Bekenntnis,” ibid., pp. 81-88. For a recent controversy within the church con-
cerning the sources of the power of the keys and the implications thereof for the cor-
poration law of the church (a clear-cut differentiation of the elements of fellowship
and partnership therein) see Theolog. Quartalsschrift, IX, 102, and XVIII, 9g ff. But
here also “Gottes Wort ist es was die Kirche macht.” See also on confessionalism
and modernism, Synodalberichte (North Dakota, 1922), Synod. Conferenz, 1898.

See again Simmel, pp. 319-28.
may net him a new technique. He can do no other because his
group, his institution, knows none. He may not respond to, he may
not even recognize, a situation, except in terms of his group. It
stands to reason, then, that whatever partnerships our type will
enter for social or political purposes, such as a party, will rarely
attain the intimacy of a fellowship. It may attain the duration and
stability of a fellowship through tradition, but not its intimacy and
loyalty through identification. The traditionalism of the parish
will, its socialism of thinking and of feeling will not, bless a wider
circle of social relationships. For in its theory of the state our
church denied that the state may make Christians what they ought
to be, and then handicapped its Christians from making the state
what it might be. For while the state should be governed by nat-
ural reason, the Christian may not so do it. It keeps away from all
the social Christianity and from the Christian endeavor of the oth-
ers because it is a Calvinistic and sectarian idea to try to bring in
the Kingdom of God on earth. It thus saves its breath trying to re-
form the world at large, and then blows everlastingly the hot pud-
ding of Sodom and Gomorrah. It puts the strongest possible pre-
mium on the “freedom of the Christian man,” but where it sees
others make use thereof, it will recommend doing the opposite.** It
will everlastingly decry the wicked world, but when that world be-
gins to join in prayer, our Lutheran will stay away, for “there is no
such thing as a non-denominational prayer.’*° It is convinced that
a storm is threatening the church from the state, but when that
storm breaks, it demands Christian obedience and preaches non-
resistance.’’ The literature of the church reads like a scathing sat-
ire on the bankruptcy of American Christianity. It is also a faith-

** As in matters of the adiaphora, see some of the Synodalberichte which recom-
mend: when in doubt, watch the others and do the opposite.

* Theolog. Quartalsschrift, XVI, 202.

Its theory of church and state will be treated later, in the social process at
large, see Michigan, 1909, Illinois, 1901, Theolog. Quartalsschrift, III, 434; IV, 149.
Kansas, 1889, Syn. Conf., 1890; Wisconsin, 1892; Iowa, 1901. Thus Luther: “Gott
will lieber leiden die Obrigkeit so Unrecht thut denn den Poepel so rechte Sache hat,”
Michigan, 1909, p. 35.
ful record of the limitations of that of the Germans, including its
own.**

On the whole, we may say that our Lutheran is still a German
in this, that he abhors the Sabbath, and prohibition, and all the so-
cial meliorism of the sectarians. He is an American in this, that he
is much more provincial, much narrower in his attitude toward
amusements, than the continental German, even where such amuse-
ments do not come under the category “sin.” He is a Puritan all by
himself.

If his idea of a good ‘neighbor and Christian is this, that he
should stay on his own side of the fence, the final and most potent
reason is his fear of “rationalism.” For rationalism is the very de-
nial of his selfhood. The individual as an economic being and as a
Christian, the group as the family, the neighborhood, the church,
the group as an aggregate, and the group as a type form are there-
with doomed. It hurts their feelings and it corrodes their minds.
Between the Missouri Lutheran and rationalism, the social process
is dramatized as a mystery play: the devil is rationalism, the soul
is group tradition, the deus ex machina is the sola fides.

It has been suggested previously in what sense the group is
threatened objectively in its psychological elements, its behavior
mechanism, its social reason, and its social faith, We have said that
the very logic of the heterogeneous situation threatened the Ge-
meinschaft, undermined its social reason, and shook its faith.
Whatever its modes, from the eighteenth to the nineteenth cen-
tury, that logic is the substance of “rationalism.” It is the thing
which does not love a fence.

How the danger from that situation was translated into terms
of soul fear and how our organism was made impregnable against
that danger, if not against that fear, might be worth showing in de-
tail. Only enough can be suggested here to satisfy our double
curiosity, namely, in what part of their capitol these Romans keep
their geese, and the social process as a conditioning of an ego.

For sheer moral and intellectual honesty in criticizing the limitations of his

own church, as well as that of the others, the articles of Professor Kéhler in the
Theolog. Quartalsschrift of the affiliated Wisconsin Synod have no rival.
The forms in which the primary group meets rationalism are
well-known enough. With reasoning the German farmer gets no-
where; he must carry on. Once the wife, the oldest boy, the man
servant and the maid servant rationalize, they will soon be talking
back, and cease to know their place. Rationalizing in the com-
munity is dangerous to the consensus, for it disturbs the peace.
That sort of individualism soon causes Argernis. The rationalizing
of the new theology is dangerous in the extreme; it is not in keep-
ing with tradition; it only benefits “the others,” and then, es steht
geschrieben. The so-called “higher criticism” is folly in the name
of reason, and in the name of religion it is blasphemy.’® As a mat-
ter of course, the modern evolutionary theory is impossible. But
Professor Graebner, of the seminary of the group at St. Louis, the
largest theological college in the country, has made a careful inves-
tigation of it and written a criticism. The result is gratifying: “Ev-
olution is in its last mortal throes. .... Darwin is dead... .
all that is left are some lesser disciples dancing about the remains
and frantically shouting make-believes that the thing is still alive.
Obsequies are in order.””°

We easily see that whether the thing presents itself as the mild
rationalism of the eighteenth century or the evolutionary rational-
ism of the nineteenth, the rational synthesis of pietism or that of
science does not matter. The rationalism of Thomas Paine, and
Jefferson, and Heinzen, and Marx, and all those people have one
thing in common: they have forgotten to reckon with original sin.
Hence they know neither creation nor salvation.

With all this some American Christians may heartily agree.
But what about the idea that Calvinism itself is rationalism? Dr.
Hodge’s assertion, for instance, that “the Bible never requires us
to receive as true anything which the constitution of our nature,
given to us by God himself, forces us to believe to be false or impos-

® Allg. Delegatenconferenz, 1893.

* Th. Graebner, Evolution: An Investigation and a Criticism, 1920. The book,
as usual in that quarter, shows great industry and much learning, and is one of the
best treatises on the subject that has come from the fundamentalist camp. See also
Theolog. Quartalsschrift (1921), p. 208.
sible.” That shows to our group the degree of the rationalistic
aberration of Calvinism from the revealed word.

As we have seen, the application of the majority principle to
matters of faith is considered rank rationalism. It is the essence of
the hybris between church and state. The result will ultimately be
the application of the principle of vox populi, vox dei to religion
itself. The Lutheran can do no other than ask: ‘What will a man’s
faith be worth to him or to his associates if he is willing to base it
on the vote of others like himself?””? Of course it will ultimately
mean, as the Lutheran sees it, that the Calvinists will capture the
state, and then turn upon the churches of the minorities and assim-
ilate them, via vox populi, for the greater glory of God. They have
reason to believe that the state will ultimately, if the Calvinists
and sectarians continue their nefarious work, force them, Luther-
ans, Calvinists, and others, to base their faith upon the vote of
others quite unlike themselves.”*

They are very much afraid of the state. They scan anxiously
the signs for a sympathetic response to this attitude from the other
American churches. They quote The Gospel Message on “Shall
the Government Control Our Religion,” and rejoice in what the
southern Baptists have to say: “The government has deliberately

See Theolog. Quartalsschrift, Jahrg., XVI, 299-301. Also J. Schaller, Biblical
Christology: A Study in Lutheran Dogmatics, 1919, pp. 299-301: “Calvinistic ra-
tionalism and English materialism have shorn . . . . the Gospel of its saving power.
. ... The main object of the Protestant churches of this country has become moral,
social, and political work, aiming to materialize the Kingdom of God in the perish-
able institution of the state... . ”” See the remarkable criticism of American Chris-
tianity during the war, ibid., Theolog. Quartalsschrift (1918), pp. 172-73. The “rec-
toral theory of atonement” is no less heretically rationalistic. See Hodge, III, 100 ff.;
for the Lutherans see in Romans 1:16 the ground which definitely arraigns them
“against the Calvinistic error, that the spirit does not work in and through the word,

but produces all spiritual effects by an influence superadded to the word, and that
this is the testimony of the spirit” (Theolog. Quartalsschrift, XVII, 149-50).

* Theolog. Quartalsschrift (1920), Jahrg., XVII, 89-90; in review of Gilkey,
Seth Gorham, “A Plea for Greater Unity,” 1919, see p. 92.

% As early as the fifties, Walther, in the Lutheraner and Lehre und Wehre, ex-
pressed his surprise at how guilelessly American sectarian Christians accepted the fel-
lowship in arms of the Rationalists and Forty-eighters against the divine institution
of slavery. He seems to have seen the implication of the Revolution of 1848 and of
1860 for property, as well as other “divine institutions.”
cracked the military whip over the various Protestant denomina-
tions. . 2. . When did the American people tear up their Bill of
Rights, grind to dust their Constitution, and establish a depart-
ment of war and religion?’ They, of course, know exactly when
and how that happened. It is due to the nefarious zeal of the sec-
tarians and the Calvinistic theocratic ideal of the Kingdom of God
on earth. They record with disgust how the executive department
has given them the “themes” of recommending the buying of war
bonds, of explaining the justice of the war, of working toward a
smooth reconstruction. It has even suggested sermon texts, and if
the sects continue as before, we can get ready for a Kirchenstaat,
“as the Roman church would not make it any more ruthless.” But
what will then become of the church? It will become what it has
always been for others and elsewhere in America: a society, a
verein. But the last straw is a letter from the Internal Revenue
Office appealing to the clergy—their clergy—to give clear, strong,
public support for the enforcement of prohibition, and suggesting
that “a committee be appointed to receive all complaints of viola-
tions of the law and lodge such complaints with the proper authori-
ties.” This is the caustic comment of the Lutherans: “In other
words, we are to become a sort of American Legion.””*

The Methodists are rank rationalists. For do they not open the
gates of hell with an eye for results? Is not their whole technique
of “drumming up trade,” of “putting the church on the map,” and
of “putting the gospel across” borrowed from “the others”? That
is the rationalism of the “ybris and the natural man in disguise.
The spiritual man professes his faith and trusts God for results.
The Methodists may talk more or less rationally on any subject
under the sun. It may be good social philosophy at that, but reli-
gion it is not. It may be plausible; the method may be good sales-
manship, but pastoral theology it is neither.

Thus the inherent interest of the church precludes that it tol-

* Assistant Secretary of War Keppel had written them that “the whole desire of
the government is to break down denominational distinctions” (Theolog. Quartals-
schrift, XV, XVI, 153).

*® Theolog. Quartalsschrift, XVII (1920), 66.
erate rationalism in any form. It must be kept out. But it also
raises its brazen face in the group itself. Mere rationalizing about
the effectiveness of the organs of the church may cause Argernis.
Where that rationalizing entails a challenge, a demand for a change
not sufficiently documented by group theology, there is a taint of
rationalism in the air. Where a minority sets itself over against the
group, there it is a stench in the nostrils of the Gemeinde, who call
it Selbstiiberhebung. It is the ancient superbia, it is heresy. In the
presence of heresy, Lutheran theology remembers Luther’s own
estimate of reason, other people’s reason: Die Vernunft ist eine
Bestie, sie muss geschdndet werden.”®

Rationalism, then, for the group, is dissent from the group con-
sensus sociologically, and theologically from the group creed. It is
within the group der Geist der stets verneint; it is the spirit which
prevails outside, the spirit of the others. The spiritual man it is not.

But thrice damned are the Masons and all fraternal orders. In
the roaring forties, when the parochial organization of charity be-
gan to be inadequate, they tried to reorganize and rearticulate it.
They grafted the principle of fellowship and mutual aid upon an
adventitious and somewhat godless “‘society.” They thus borrowed
from the fellowship what they gave to the society, and also coaxed
godly Germans from their Gemeinschaft into a bad Gesellschaft.
That was bad enough; it threatened the Gemeinde in its integrity,
its sole stewardship of the trust of caritas. But did they not also,
for their nondescript crowd, adopt some continental American God
and Supreme Being as their protector, some secret hocus-pocus as
their symbol? That supreme being is not Christ, that mystery is
not baptism, and their faith is no faith, for “cursed he who puts his
faith in man.” They have been, as our Lutherans see it, the real
enemies of the Christian religion in America, and they have de-
bauched the church. They are responsible for the adultery of
American Christianity with the deistic rationalism of the eighteenth

°° Cf. Luther on the “Superbi Hospites, Non Cives,” W. A., III, 83, 7; cit. Holl,

pp. 250-51; and Theolog. Quartalsschrift, passim; also 1910, pp. §2 ff., 61. John 10,
35 “gilt uns tausend mal mehr als alle Wissenschaft.”
century; the religion of the brotherhood of man is their nefarious
work. Their religion is deism and their church is the state.*”

No German Lutheran of the Missouri Synod may call brother
a Mason or any member of a fraternal order. He who dies in that
brotherhood must go unshriven by his church. The minister has no
calling to go with his body, and to speak at his grave is dangerous
in the extreme. For is not a non-denominational prayer construc-
tive blasphemy?

Thus, from the relative rationalism of the others the Gemeinde
and its church protects its members to the very grave. Our Luther-
an may not have remained a good German in saeculo; his soul may
not go to heaven at that. But neither has he been an Elk or an Odd
Fellow, a Shriner or a Mason. He was not a joiner, he has kept
himself unspotted from the world, and the gospel of the new Amer-
icanism has touched him not.

7 (Masons.) The outlawry of consociation with the Masons was the work of
Rev. Walther, and one of the most decisive steps taken to conserve the sectionalism
of the Lutheran mind. For the fraternal orders must be considered one of the most
potent solvents of creed sectionalism, their group also the integrator of a new Ameri-
can lay religion in the above-characterized sense. For the modern attitude of the
group toward lodges, see Theolog. Quartalsschrift, VIII, Fg., 60 ff.; XV-XVI, Jahrg.,
43 ff., 121 ff.; XVIII, Fg., 731 ff. Also Paul Pieper, Die Christusfeindschaft der Lo-
gen, N. W. Pub. House, 1923.
