Anti-Monopoly Legislation in the United States

Author(s): J. D. Forrest

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Jan., 1896), pp. 411-425
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2761872

Accessed: 08-05-2016 22:57 UTC
Recent legislation against trusts, monopolistic corporations,
and railway consolidations is the modern expression of a senti-
ment which finds its roots far back in English history. Modern
monopolies bear little resemblance to those which existed prior
to the middle of this century; yet the opposition to the latter,
taking shape in constitutions and statutes, has largely influenced
public opinion against modern capitalistic combinations. Modern
monopolies are the outgrowth of industrial and economic condi-
tions, The older ones were arbitrarily created by kings for the
benefit of favorites or for purposes of revenue. It was but natural,
therefore, that such monopolies should be vigorously attacked
during the long struggles for liberty.

Monopolies, as being opposed to the natural freedom of
Englishmen, have been held to be contrary to the famous clauses
of the Great Charter which guarantee in essence the rights of
habeas corpus and trial by jury—the “essential clauses,” as
Hallam terms them, which “protect the personal liberty and
property of all freemen, by giving security from arbitrary impris-
onment and arbitrary spoliation.” It was not, however, until
the enormous abuses of monopolies arose in the time of Eliza-
beth, that a definite attack was made upon them. Under the
patents which the queen had so .lavishly bestowed upon her
favorites, the prices of a multitude of articles, most of which
were common necessaries of life, became ruinously high. The
opposition, after smoldering for many years, burst forth in 1601
with such violence that Elizabeth yielded her cherished preroga-
tive. The evil flourished again under James I., and his last
parliament passed an act declaring monopolies and certain

"For a description of this conflict, see Hallam, Taswell-Langmead, and other

writers on English constitutional history.
411
other privileges opposed to the ancient liberties of Englishmen,
and void.* The abuses were again revived by Charles I., and
almost every article consumed by the common people was
placed under control of irresponsible monopolies.

Thus the struggle went on until the people finally succeeded
in setting aside the royal prerogative by the Revolution of 1688.
The bill of rights contained no express declaration against
monopolies; but it was made impossible for the king to grant them,
and the act passed in the latter part of the reign of James I. was
thus again made operative.

The English bill of rights was the model for the sections of
American constitutions bearing the same title. The gist of these
declarations was that the people had a right to security in their
persons, property, and privileges. All else was but elaboration of
this. In some form or other declarations of rights were made
by all the colonies long before the Revolution, some even pre-
ceding the English declaration. In 1765 delegates from nine
colonies met in New York and published a declaration of the
rights of the people to inherent privileges of Englishmen.3
Again, in 1774, delegates from all the colonies except Georgia
met in the first Continental Congress and issued a declaration
based. upon the English model and explicitly claiming the bene-
fits of the common law of England, and of such English statutes
as existed at the time of their colonization and which had been
found applicable to local circumstances. The Declaration of
Independence soon followed this with similar claims; and most
of the states then and thereafter organized incorporated bills of
rights in their constitutions, though several of the earliest con-
stitutions omit such formal declarations altogether.

Formal declarations of fundamental principles of government
have doubtless served an important purpose and are still far
from valueless. But there is much truth in the statement made
by Mr. Kent in his “Commentaries,” that ““we weaken greatly

121 Jac. I. c. 3—‘Act concerning Monopolies, and Dispensations with Penal
Laws and the Forfeitures thereof.”

? As that made by Virginia in 1624, and that by Maryland in 1638.
3Marshall’s Life of Washington, II., go.
the force of them if we incumber the constitution, and perhaps
embarrass the future operations and more enlarged experience
of the legislature, with a catalogue of ethical and political apho-
risms which, in some instances, may reasonably be questioned,
and in others justly condemned.”*

Among the maxims thus condemned are those found in the
constitutions of several states declaring monopolies to be odious
and contrary to the genius of a free government. Such a dec-
laration was made by Maryland in its first constitution in 1776,
and has been repeated in every constitution since adopted by
that state, namely, those of 1851, 1864, and 1867. North Caro-
lina also incorporated this declaration in the constitution of
1776, and repeated it in the present constitution which was
adopted in 1868. Tennessee declared against monopolies in the
first constitution of 1796, and repeated the clause in the two
constitutions since adopted in 1834 and 1870. Arkansas incor-
porated the same declaration in the first constitution, adopted in
1836, repeated it in the reconstruction constitution of 1864,
omitted it from that adopted in 1868, but replaced it in that of
1874, which still stands. The Republic of Texas incorporated
this clause in the constitution of 1836, and it has been retained
in every constitution adopted by the state, namely, those of
1845, 1866, 1868, and 1876. Florida made this declaration in
the constitution of 1838, seven years before admission to the
Union, repeated it in the reconstruction constitution of 1865, but
omitted it from the present constitution, which was adopted in
1868. The pro-slavery constitution of Kansas in 1857 contained
this clause, but it has not been repeated in the later constitutions.
New Mexico has recently made the-same declaration, and it will
doubtless stand in the constitution when that territory is admitted
to the Union.?

It is noticeable that only southern states have made this dec-

* Lecture XXIV., 13th edition, Vol. IL, p. 9.

2In addition to these the Massachusetts declaration of rights, adopted in 1780,
states: “No man or corporation or association of men have any other title to obtain

advantage or particular and exclusive privileges distinct from those of the community
than what rises from the consideration of services rendered to the public.”
laration, except that Kansas did so in one instance; but this
was under southern influence. It is also noticeable that the
clauses in the later constitutions are copied almost word for
word from the first constitution of either Maryland or North
Carolina. It is perhaps not far from correct to say that the con-
ventions which framed the later constitutions were simply
anxious to get the finest phrases they could find, and adopted
what struck their fancy, just as committees on resolutions of
thanks or respect are likely to use the words of any similar
reports with which they are familiar; and that any of the dec-
larations made since the beginning of this century mean no more
to those making them than is meant by the declaration fre-
quently found in bills of rights, that the state is formed by “social
compact.”

The first declarations doubtless had real meaning, and were
made perhaps because tobacco or some other staple had been
monopolized, or because favors had been granted to individuals
under the proprietary governments, and it was feared they might
be repeated by the states. In confirmation of this latter sup-
position it may be stated that a/ways immediately following the
denunciation of monopolies is found the prohibition of hereditary
emoluments, honors, and privileges.

Whatever the cause of these declarations, it is very evident
that “monopoly” now means something vastly different from
that which the commons so vigorously opposed in the times of
Elizabeth and James, and against which the founders of our
nation had such deep-rooted antipathy. Then it meant an insti-
tution founded and kept in existence by royal favoritism ; now it
means an institution which may have come into existence with-
out direct governmental assistance, and which may have main-
tained itself in spite of administrative and legislative opposition.

In spite of this difference, the old opposition, perpetuated in
our constitutions and handed down in tradition, has had a potent
influence in shaping the popular hostility to the modern monop-
oly. This influence has been most powerful in the political
sphere. Monopolies are opposed because they are supposed to
be inimical to our free institutions. It is felt that they should
not be tolerated, both because the few are supposed to get undue
advantage of the many, and because of the ability of powerful
corporations to corrupt legislatures.

Monopolies are further antagonized because they are opposed
to the prevailing economic philosophy of the American people.
The doctrine of aissez faire has probably been more completely
engrafted upon the political and industrial institutions of this
country, and more thoroughly absorbed into the consciousness
of the people, than anywhere else in the world. The individ-
ualistic theories in philosophy, politics, and economics were most
widely accepted at the time the colonies achieved their inde-
pendence and formed their state and national governments.
The doctrines of the French philosophers were especially
influential. It is not to be expected, however, that the early con-
stitutions and statutes will show any effort to prevent commer-
cial combinations and restrictions of competition. The country
was largely agricultural, and the vast unoccupied territory ren-
dered impossible monopolies in that branch of industry which
was generally pursued. Moreover, when manufactures began
to develop, the more rapid development of the country and
its growth in population made it impossible for the evils of
competition to bear heavily upon any industry. This condition
of affairs continued until the close of the Civil War. No
attempts were made to restrict monopolies, because monopolies
did not exist; and since constant progress was seen to be pos-
sible under the reign of free competition, it was very generally
supposed that free competition was the necessary condition of
all material prosperity.

Thus it has resulted that on account of political tradition
and political and economic philosophy, as well as because of the
good results credited to free competition, monopolistic com-
binations have been almost universally regarded as “odious,
contrary to the spirit of a free government, and the principles of
commerce.”

* The tariff legislation is the only evidence of inconsistence with this theory.
As the development of industries proceeded, the evils of
unlimited competition began to be felt, and managers of indus-
tries which suffered most began to devise methods by which
those evils could be mitigated. Before the war some efforts at
combination had been made in the anthracite coal business and in
the telegraph and railroad service in some sections.‘ After the
crisis of 1873, renewed efforts were made to avoid the evils of
unrestricted competition. As a consequence a dread of monop-
olies began to be felt, and manifested itself in the legal restric-
tions which were embodied in constitutions and laws.

The first combinations to be attacked were the railroads and
telegraph lines, because these were more apparent than the capital-
istic monopolies that were being formed. Railroad and telegraph
companies were always corporations, and always acquired privi-
leges under the public right of eminent domain. Trade com-
binations were frequently not corporations, and were so little the
creatures of the state that the right of state interference was not
so clearly perceived. There has never been any doubt as to the
right of the state to keep corporations, which are its creatures,
under strict surveillance. It is a principle of law that corpora-
tions can engage only in the activities and enjoy the privileges
expressly defined in their charters,’ and cannot consolidate with-
out the express sanction of the state. This sanction may be
granted by a general law, by the charters of the corporations
combining, by a special law authorizing consolidation, or by a
special law ratifying an unauthorized consolidation, The states
of Maine, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut,
Delaware, Maryland, North Carolina, Virginia, Mississippi, Ten-
nessee, Kentucky and Oregon have no general laws authorizing
consolidation. In these states, at least, nearly all consolidations
of corporations, since public opinion would prevent special per-
mission, would be illegal.

The right of the state to regulate, under its police powers, all
matters that affect public policy is also recognized. Several of

Spelling: ‘On Trusts and Monopolies.”

2See “American and English Encyclopedia of Law,” Vol. IV., Art. Corpora-
tions.
the states have reserved this right in their constitutions. Ala-
bama, Colorado, Illinois, Missouri, Nebraska, Pennsylvania, and
West Virginia provide that the right of eminent domain shall
never be abridged. Colorado, Missouri, and Pennsylvania provide
that the police power shall never be abridged. Delaware, Kan-
sas, and Pennsylvania reserve the right to alter or revoke any
charter granted to corporations.

In harmony with these principles — some of which, however,
have been but recently expressed —the states began to take steps
to prevent the consolidation of these quasi-public corporations.

In 1868, a provision was made by the constitution’ of South
Carolina for the regulation of ‘the public use of all franchises
which have heretofore been, or hereafter may be created or
granted by or under the authority of the state; and for limita-
tion by law of tolls, imposts, and other charges. In 1870, IIli-
nois prohibited by constitutional enactment? the consolidation
of competing railroads. West Virginia? (1872), Pennsylvania‘
(1873), Nebraskas and Missouri® (1875), and Colorado? (1876),
incorporated like prohibitions into their constitutions. Pennsylva-
nia® (1873), Nebraska? and Alabama (1875), and Colorado™
(1876), took the same steps with regard to telegraph companies.
Constitutional declarations of the right of the state to regulate
the rates of transportation were made by Illinois (1870), Penn-
sylvania*3 (1873), Missouri**and Nebraska"s (1875), and Texas”
(1876).

In addition to these constitutional changes, many of the
states established railroad commissions, and enacted laws having
much the same purpose as these clauses in the constitutions.
After two years of discussion, the United States Congress passed
the Inter-state Commerce Act, January 14,1887. The work of the

t Art. XIL, Sec. 5. 9 Art. XI, Sec. 3.

2 Art. XI, Sec. 11. 2 Art, XIII, Sec. 11.
3 Art. XI., Sec. 9. Art. XV., Sec. 5, 14.
4 Art. XVIL, Sec. 4. ™ Art. XI, Sec. 12.

5 Art. XL, Sec. 3. 3 Art, XVIL, Sec. 3.
6 Art. XIL., Sec. 17. ™% Art. XIL, Sec 12.

7 Art. XV., Sec. 5, 14. 15 Art. XI., Sec. 4.

8 Art. XVL,, Sec. 12. 6 Art. XII. Sec. 3, 5.
national and state commissions has been too fully discussed to
require extended mention here. It is sufficient for our purpose
to remember that all such legislation was directed principally
against pools and combinations, though the prevention of dis
crimination in rates is no small part of the work of the commis
sions. Combinations and pools have not been effectually stopped,
and many thoughtful men are now seriously questioning the
wisdom of the attempts to do so. Mr. Reagan, who was chiefly
instrumental in inserting the anti-pooling clause in the Interstate
Commerce Law, has recently expressed the opinion that pools
and combinations under governmental supervision are desirable.*

The activity in the various states against railroad consolida-
tion did much to stimulate public opinion against ordinary com-
mercial combinations which, during all this time, were develop-
ing. Legislation against them could not take shape, because it was
impossible to foresee the conditions which it was desirable to avoid.
From the time of the crisis of 1873, the modern trust had been
gradually maturing; but it did not take definite shape until the
Standard Oil Trust was formed in 1882. This is not saying that
capitalistic monopolies did not exist before that date; for the
petroleum market was practically monopolized before the trust
was formed. But there were no combinations which could be
regarded as “conspiracies in restraint of trade” until the date
named. From this time, there were numerous legislative inquiries
into the monopoly question, always prosecuted with a desire to
preserve freedom of competition. These inquiries were always
endorsed by popular opinion, and were pushed with new vigor
when instances of actual crookedness and corruption were
revealed.

The first definite constitutional enactment with reference to
this question is found in Georgia in 1877. This was in reality
directed against the consolidation of competing railroads; but
after the rise of capitalistic monopolies, it was found that it
could be employed against them also.? This provided that ;—

* Report of Interstate Commerce Commission, 1892, p. 51.
2Von HALLE, 7rusts, p. 17.
“The General Assembly shall have no power to authorize any
corporation to make any contract or agreement whatever with
any (other) corporation, which may have the effect, or be
intended to have the effect to defeat or lessen competition in
their respective business, or to encourage monopoly; and all
such contracts or agreements shall be illegal or void.”

No specific anti-trust laws were enacted until 1889. At that
time laws were placed upon the statute books of the states of Kan-
sas, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska, North Carolina, Tennes-
see,and Texas. The new states of Montana, North Dakota, Wash-
ington, and Wyoming introduced similar provisions into their con-
stitutions. In 1890 anti-trust laws were passed by Iowa, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Mississippi, South Dakota, and by the territory of
Oklahoma. Kentucky and Missouri introduced similar clauses
into their constitutions in 1891. In the latter year anti-trust
laws were passed by the states of Alabama, Illinois, Minnesota,
and the territory of New Mexico; and amendments to the former
laws were passed by Missouri and Tennessee. In 1892 a short
anti-combination clause was inserted in a general law concerning
corporations passed by New York; and an amendment to the
former law was passed by Louisiana. Amendments were passed
in 1893 by Illinois, Minnesota, and South Dakota; and the same
year California prohibited monopolies in live stock, and Nebraska
in coal and lumber. North Dakota passed a law in 1895, to
take effect January 1, 1896, prohibiting combinations in grain
and live stock, but having some general anti-trust features; and
Missouri passed another amendment to the law of that state.

The United States law was approved by the President, July 2,
1890; and the Tariff Law of 1894 contains a section bearing upon
the same subject, but having special reference to importations.

The most complete definition of a trust is given in the Illinois
amendment of 1893, though the Texas law of 1889 covers
nearly the same ground. The Illinois definition is as follows:

Von HALLE, Trusts, pp. 17, 18, states that Wisconsin passed an anti-trust law
in 1892, The Secretary of State writes that Wisconsin has no such law. Iam unable

to reconcile the two statements. VoN HALLE also omits Mississippi and Oklahoma
from his list, and has several minor divergencies from the statement above given.
A trust is a combination of capital, skill, or acts by two or more
persons, firms, corporations, or associations of persons, or of two or
more of them, for either, any, or all of the following purposes: First,
to create or carry out restrictions in trade. Second, to limit or reduce
the production, or increase or reduce the price of merchandise or
commodities. Third, to prevent competition in manufacture, making,
transportation, sale, or purchase of merchandise, produce, or com-
modities. Fourth, to fix at any standard or figure whereby its price to
the public shall be in any manner controlled or established upon any
article or commodity of merchandise, produce, or manufacture
intended for sale, use, or consumption in this state; or to establish
any pretended agency whereby the sale of any such article or com-
modity shall be covered up and made to appear to be for the original
vendor, for like purpose or purposes, and to enable such original
vendor or manufacturer to control the wholesale or retail price of any
such article or commodity after the title to such article or commodity
shall have passed from such vendor or manufacturer. Fifth, to make
or enter into, or examine or carry out any contract, obligation, or
agreement of any kind or description by which they shall bind or
have bound themselves not to sell, dispose of, or transport any article
or commodity, or article of trade, use, merchandise, commerce, or
consumption below a common standard figure, or card or list price;
or by which they shall agree in any manner to keep the price of such
article, commodity, or transportation at a fixed or graduated figure ; or
by which they shall in any manner establish or settle the price of any
article or commodity or transportation between them or themselves
and others, to preclude a free and unrestricted competition among
themselves or others in the sale or transportation of any such article
or commodity; or by which they shall agree to pool, combine, or
unite any interest they may have in connection with the sale or
transportation of any such article or commodity that its price might in
any manner be affected.

The various laws differ from one another in no important
particulars. They agree in declaring all combinations in restraint
of free competition illegal. The United States law differs from
the state laws only in its application to interstate commerce and
combinations in the territories and the District of Columbia.
Most of the laws are directed against monopolies in ordinary
merchandise; but Kansas includes combinations which control
the loan or use of money, fix attorneys’ and physicians’ fees,
control the cost or rate of insurance, or which tend to advance
the rate of interest for the borrower, and South Dakota declares
that it is against public policy and illegal to form a combination
to prevent a fair competition for a low rate of interest.

The provisions of the laws do not apply to agricultural pro-
ducts, and live stock while in the hands of the producer, in Michi-
gan, Mississippi, Nebraska and Texas, and, with exceptions, in
Alabama. Most of the acts provide that foreign trusts operating
in violation of them shall be prohibited from doing business in
the states enacting the laws. Some of the laws prohibit corpora-
tions from holding trust certificates or stock.

The penalties for violation of the laws are most severe. The
United States law fixes the penalty at not exceeding $5000 fine,
or not exceeding one year’s imprisonment, or both punishments.
In addition to this, property in transit shall be forfeited,
and any person who may be injured by a trust may recover
threefold the damages sustained, cost of suit, and attorney’s fee.
The penalties in the various states are as follows: Oklahoma,
fine of $50 to $500; Alabama, $500 to $2000; Kentucky and
Louisiana, $500 to $5000; Illinois, $500 to $15,000; Maine, $5
to $10,000; Minnesota, $100 to $5000, and imprisonment for
one to ten years; Missouri, $100 per day; Nebraska, not exceed-
ing $1000, or imprisonment not exceeding six months; Tennes-
see, $250 for first offense, $500 for the second; Texas and Mis-
sissippi, $50 to $5000, and imprisonment for one to ten years,
and $50 for each additional day’s offense. Officers and agents
are liable to the same penalty in Alabama, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Missouri and North Dakota, and to fines of $200 to $1000 and
imprisonment, in Illinois and New Mexico. If assent to the
illegal agreement is not withdrawn within thirty days in Illinois,
Iowa, Michigan, Missouri, North Dakota and Nebraska, the cor-
poration shall forfeit its charter and all rights and franchises.
It is also provided in many cases that obligations to such com-
binations need not be regarded.
The laws in question have been uniformly upheld; but they
have, as a rule, simply harassed trade without accomplishing the
real end which they had in view. The very evident evils result-
ing from the concentration of power in the hands of a few
irresponsible trust managers, and the questionable methods by
which combinations have frequently been formed, have aroused
the public to action. Naturally then, with the prejudice against
monopolies deep-seated in the public consciousness, legislation
has been directed against the trust as such. It is easy to see
that the popular prejudice is, in part, unjustifiable; for, without
apologizing for many unscrupulous acts done by trusts, and
recognizing the danger from irresponsible power, it may still be
claimed that very great benefits arise from the economy of
management, and the adjustment of production to the needs of
consumption, made possible by wise and honorable trust manage-
ment. Add to this the fact that prohibitory efforts have thus
far proved abortive, and it becomes apparent that this, like a
great deal of other social legislation, has been based upon a very
imperfect knowledge of the facts involved.

Aside from this, the laws would fail of complete success in
destroying monoplies, because none of them would prevent a
single person from gaining control of an industry. With the
prevailing view of the liberty of the individual, it is necessary to
find a combination or conspiracy, or a corporation created by the
state, to attack. It is not that individual monopolists are not
regarded with suspicion; for the opposition to department stores
and similar enterprises is frequently pronounced. But these
have not yet been declared opposed to public policy; and a
single powerful manufacturer or merchant may freeze out all
competitors, yet without violating these anti-monopoly laws;
while an individual or a corporation that might try to buy out or
codperate with competitors would be guilty of conspiracy. In
this respect we have fallen below the anti-monoply law of the
last parliament of James I.; for the old monopolists were indi-
viduals or individual companies, as the word itself indicates
(»6vos-+wwAtouor) ; and were in no sense trusts or codperative asso-
ciations. It was admitted by the supreme court in the sugar
refineries case* that congress did not confine itself to the com-
mon law sense of the term ‘(as implying an exclusive control, by
authority, of one branch of industry without legal right of any
other person to interfere therewith by competition or otherwise,
but it includes engrossing as well, and covers controlling the
market by contracts securing the advantage of selling alone or
exclusively all, or some considerable portion, of a particular kind of
merchandise or commodity to the detriment of the public; and
that such contracts amount to that restraint of trade or com-
merce declared to be illegal.” Evidently, then, if the laws aim
not at the contract, but at the fact of irresponsible power,
they need some expansion.

The generally unserviceable character of the anti-trust legis-
lation must convince us that the question is no more settled than
it was before the legislators began to grapple with it—at least
existing laws do not settle it. As Von Halle says, ‘More may
be expected finally from the decisions of the courts. Legal
judgments depend upon the conception of public policy; and as
this conception is subject to change, the law-creating action of
the courts is likely to change also. That this is possible, and
indeed is done by a process of quiet and natural progress, is the
very thing that constitutes the strength of the English common
law.’’?

It may be that these anti-monopoly laws, futile although
most of them are, will serve a purpose in bringing into the
courts a problem that needs solution. A victory has undoubtedly
been gained in compelling the trusts to become incorporated,
and in making so much of their business public. Then, too, the
general recognition of the right of the state to prohibit that
which is opposed to public policy is likely to have most salutary
results. While, in the case under consideration, the exercise of
authority has been directed to the maintenance of conditions of
free competition, the policy itself is the reverse of laissez faire,

7U.S. vs. Knight, 156 U. S., 10.
2“ Trusts,” p. 109.
That old doctrine has worked out its own destruction, On the
one hand, powerful business interests will not let the weaker
ones alone; on the other, the state dares not let the powerful
combinations alone.

The right and duty of the state to preserve conditions con-
ducive to the general welfare being recognized, it may be
expected that mistakes and blunders made because of ignorance
of the real meaning of new industrial forces will be rectified as
those forces are better understood. The element due to dema-
gogism will also doubtless be sifted out. While it is assumed
that monopolies “cannot be granted in such ordinary vocations
as can be left open to all to the common benefit,” it has always
been recognized that they ‘“‘may be given as a matter of regula-
tion, where the business is such that the public interest can be
best subserved and protected by confiding it to one person, or
association of persons, who shall manage it exclusively.
This obligation to serve the public impartially would seem to be
an essential incident to any grant of a monopoly, since without
it, it would be impossible to justify the grant on public
grounds,”*

Presumably, then, if it is found that a trust can best sub-
serve the interests of the public, and can be made to serve it
impartially, there is nothing in the spirit of our laws to prevent
a change of attitude toward such combinations. The right of a
state to pass laws of this sort is based upon its general right of
police regulation. This right is abridged somewhat by the con-
stitutional provision that a state cannot interfere with interstate
commerce; but a decision of the Supreme Court, rendered
January 21, 1895, in the case above referred to against the con-
solidated Philadelphia and New Jersey sugar refineries, reserves
to the United States the right to regulate trade and com-
merce only, and leaves the regulation of the acquisition and
control of property to the states. Under these circumstances
the responsibility is thrown upon the states, With the further
progress of the codperative movement, which is sure to come,

* Cooley, “ Constitutional Law,” p. 247.
we may expect further legislation becoming more and more
rational; but the decision of the individual cases, with due
allowance for time and place and in harmony with the principles
of common law— which means that abandonment by a privileged
party of its duty to the public will not be tolerated — will do
more to solve the problem than legislation of the kind we have
been considering.

The solution will probably be something like that suggested
by Von Halle in his conclusion: “It is my belief that the
future belongs neither to the prophets of individualism, nor to
the ideals of the social-democrats. Its next phases belong to social
reorganization. And the probability is that this will show a cor-
porate character, and will be sustained and controlled by public

supervision.
T TNR Basnorem
