The Transition to an Objective Standard of Social Control

Author(s): Luther Lee Bernard

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 16, No. 4 (Tan., 1911), pp. 519-537
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2763008

Accessed: 09-05-2016 05:32 UTC
THE TRANSITION TO AN OBJECTIVE STANDARD OF
SOCIAL CONTROL

LUTHER LEE BERNARD
The University of Chicago

VI. THE ORGANIC OR UNITARY VIEW OF SOCIETY
DEMAND OF SOCIAL PRACTICE FOR A NEW SOCIAL THEORY.—
DEVELOPMENT OF THE THEORY OF THE SOCIAL ORGANISM.—
THEORY OF THE SOCIAL ORGANISM AND INDIVIDUAL LIB-
ERTY.—DEMAND FOR OBJECTIVE SOCIAL ANALYSIS AS A
MEANS TO SOCIAL CONTROL.—THE FUNCTION OF THE
ORGANIC OR UNITARY VIEW OF SOCIETY
The old subjectivistic and highly intellectualistic classifica-
tions of the social forces with their attendant implications of
individualistic reference and the practical negation of objective
social control have proved highly unsatisfactory. The ideal of
democratic satisfaction as a sufficient criterion for social action
is gradually being repudiated and another ideal of democratic
conservation is steadily growing. We have seen the trend away
from the purely individual and hedonic reference of the socio-
logical classifications of Spencer and Ward, to classifications
with a mainly objective reference, as in the cases of Small,
Ratzenhofer, and De Greef, where chiefly the wording and
minor applications betray the subjectivistic origins. But the
present trend is to avoid all classifications whatever from the
purely psychical or independently volitional side, and to launch
out into an objective analysis of social facts as they operate in
people and in groups, in order to bring these facts under control.
This is a clear sign that sociology is becoming a science of
definite and reasonably dependable social facts, i.e., of society,
instead of an introspective mental discipline based on the solip-
sistic assumption of independent psychical causation. Social
See, by way of contrast, Ward, Psychic Factors of Civilization, 55, 1293;
Small, op. cit., 435; Ross, op. cit., 160-61; Judd, op. cit., Psy. Rev., March, 1910.
519
practice has been, in the main, objective in its application and
reference, and is becoming more so—a fact which has called for
a social philosophy which can explain and justify current social
practice. The demand for such an explanatory and communi-
catory social theory has become imperative and is being acceded
to, though somewhat reluctantly. This reluctance is due both to
the deterring influence of contrary traditions and to the insuffi-
cient and poorly co-ordinated data on which to base methods
of procedure.

The line of development in sociological theory which has
done much toward laying an objective foundation for a theory
of social control or activity has been the one commonly known,
at least in its later development, as the theory of the social
organism. This theory has had its main development in France.
Hobbes, however, speaks of the state (society) as an immense
man.? He had a conception of compulsory or organic social
unity, though it was determined by his theory of political abso-
lutism. But Comte appears to have been the first writer to have
a really functional conception of the fundamental nature of the
social unity. He was strongly impressed with the necessity of
some means of co-ordinating or controlling social action in
order to bring it to the greatest efficiency. Out of this appre-
ciation grew his mystical and autocratic, and not at all scien-
tific, view of humanity as an ever-growing and perfecting whole,
in which the individual merges and becomes a factor in the
eternal human and social process, thus, and thus only, achieving
immortality. This view was the center of his doctrine of the
religion of humanity, and aside from its mystical and emotional
setting may be said to presage an important later scientific
conception.*

Herbert Spencer, under the influence of the biological dis-
coveries of his time, took up Comte’s idea of the unity of the

? Leviathan, Introduction.

*C£. “Theory of the Future of Man,” System of Positive Polity, IV (transl.
Congreve), chap. i.

*Saint-Simon, like Plato, had earlier put forward a social program which

involved this idea of the essential or organic unity of society, but in his mind
it was primarily a political unity (cf. L’organisateur and Systéme industriel).
group or society and clothed it in a biological analogy, thus
rendering it concrete if not conclusive.* The French and Rus-
sian writers in particular were impressed by Spencer’s analogy
and, under the enthusiasm for its concreteness, for a while lost
sight of its value as a symbol in attempting to establish the
biological nature of society in detail.

Paul von Lilienfeld took as his thesis the view that society
is a living organic natural product.6 De Greef takes a similar
position, introducing, however, the idea of the “superorgan-
ism.” " This modifying concept of the superorganism was later
somewhat more extensively developed at the expense of the
biological analogy.’ Worms limits the term social organism
much more closely than the older writers® did, applying it only
to nationalities, which have permanence of functioning.’®
Pioger drops the analogy between man and the cell, in the
organism, and compares the former in his activities, rather, to
a drop of blood circulating in the body.** He does not find
human society so fundamentally different from insect and ani-
mal societies, as most writers had; a much exaggerated and
over-estimated intelligence being the sole distinguishing factor.”

3Cf£. “The Social Organism,” Essays Scientific, Political, and Speculative,
I, 265 ff.

®“Die menschliche Gesellschaft ist, gleich den Naturorganismen, ein reales
Wesen, ist nichts mehr, als eine Fortsetzung der Natur, ist nur ein hdherer
Ausdruck derselben Krafte, die allen Naturerscheinungen zu Grunde liegen.”—
“Die Menschliche Gesellschaft als realer Organismus,” in Gedanken iiber die
Socialwissenschaften der Lukiinft, I Vorwort.

™Cf£. Introduction 4 la Sociologie, II, 12 ff.

® Cf. Pioger, La vie sociale, chap. ii.

°E.g., Novicov.

Cf. Organisme et société, 31 ff. 4 Op. cit., 38.

2«En réalité ’homme suit sa voie dans la société dont il fait partie absolu-
ment comme la fourmi remplit son réle dans sa fourmiliére, comme I’abeille

dans sa ruche: la seule différence, c’est que dans la société humaine il y a
des individus qui présentent une merveilleuse adaptivité que nous appelons

Vintelligence et 4 laquelle nous nous obstinons a4 attribuer exclusivement la
marche de l’humanité, comme si, en réalité, nous pouvions vraiment prétendre
que c’est la raison qui nous méne..... Il est temps d’abandonner nos
illusions 4 ce sujet: le déterminisme ne perd pas plus ses droits en évolution
sociale qu’en évolution organique ou physique. .... Nous comprendrons ainsi

combien sont illusoires nos prétentions 4 croire que nous faisons ou pouvons
The present tendency among French sociologists seems to be to
base the theory of the compulsory or essential unity of society
upon the principle of the division of labor or of social functions,
an explanation destined to be of the greatest value in the future
development of social science and practice.”

Novicov was one of the first among sociologists to see the
necessity of applying the theory of evolution to social facts in
the interest of a science of sociology.* He pointed out in 1897
that the prevailing classifications based upon sex, economic,
juridical, ethnic, etc., phenomena are discrete, non-exclusive, and
anarchistic. At the same time he urged the organic view of
society as the only substitute capable of securing unity of activity
in social matters.* He sees no hope for a science of sociology
until the subjectivistic criteria can be eliminated.** Pioger also
argues against the prevailing disunity of the object of attention
in sociology and social practice."
refaire la société. Pas plus que nous ne pouvons prétendre pouvoir refaire
nos organes, pas plus nous ne pouvons changer la structure sociale.”—Ibid.,
39-40.

Durkheim, De la division du travail social; and Pioger, op. cit., 42 ff.

“Ta théorie de Vévolution est d’abord formulée par les naturalistes,
puis généralisée par les philosophes.... . Dés lors la sociologie devient pos-
sible, et, en peu d’années, elle va acquérir une importance de primier ordre.”—La
politique internationale (Paris, 1886), 11.

15Cf. Conscience et volonté sociales, 2-3. Also: “Ainsi quelle est l’utilité de
Yorganicisme? Elle peut se résumer ainsi: la théorie organique créera un mode
de penser particulier dans la sociologie: un mode réaliste, positif. Elle nous
débarrassera, une fois pour toutes, des méthodes abstraites. Au lieu de cette
affirmation générale, on peut dire aussi que la théorie organique nous délivera
de Yamorphisme, de la métaphysique et du conservatisme.”—“La théorie orga-
nique des sociétés,” Annales de l'Institut international de sociologie (1898), 188.

% “Elle [sociologie] ne pourra se constituer en science exacte que si sa
généralisation derniére cesse d’étre une affaire d’appréciation personnelle.
Elle se constituera quand elle aura une généralisation rationelle..... La
porte est ouverte 4 l’arbitraire, A la fantaisie et 4 l’empirisme. Chacun arrive
avec son petit systéme personnel et on ne voit pas pourquoi celui de Jean
doit étre plus mauvais que celui de Paul.”’—Conscience et volonté sociales, 9-10.

™«Cest, en effet, une grande illusion de s’imaginer qu’on peut avoir des
idées justes sur la morale, la politique, la propriété, le droit ou la justice,
sans avoir besoin d’approfondir la notion méme de ce qu’est une société. C’est
A peu prés comme les ‘gens du monde’ qui s’imaginent naivement avoir des
idées précises sur leur santé et leurs maladies sans avoir appris la biologie, sans
se douter de leur ignorance.”—Op. cit., 30.
The critics of the organic view of society, in pointing out
the absurdities of the biological homologies, which even the
earlier writers did not generally regard as primary and which
have long been practically abandoned, have neglected the essen-
tial idea and purpose of this theory. This purpose was not ever
—except in certain aberrations—to prove that society is a living
animal, but to prove that society is necessarily a living unity.
The real contribution of the theory is that it gave an objective
basis for the analysis and correlation of social phenomena in
the service of social control or functioning. The subjectivistic
and individualistic sociologists have objected that this view
destroys freedom and individual initiative. Sociology as a
science of social control, as a functional science, must doubtless
work toward limiting irresponsible activity or freedom in
pointing out and preventing the deleterious social effects of
such activities. Lilienfeld, however, maintains that the more
efficiently man is developed socially the greater his capacity for
freedom becomes.** True freedom of activity cannot be realized
in irresponsibility of action or under presumably purely sub-
jective or personal initiative, but only where all the conditions
of activity are uniform and thoroughly controlled,?® where the
individual is not subjected constantly to unexpected stimuli and
impulsions which he cannot guard against. Where there is true
freedom there must be foresight of the results of the activity,
and the individual must be able to guide himself according to
the laws and principles of control which a science of social phe-
nomena makes clear to him. The essential motive of the organic
theory of society, at least in its later development, has not been
to reduce the freedom of individuals, except where that freedom

“Der Mensch kann frei, nach seiner Willkiir, so oder anders handeln,
aber nicht unbedingt, sondern mehr oder weniger abhangig von den physi-
schen, durch die Umgebung gesetzten Bedingungen. Je héher der Mensch aus-
gebildet ist, desto mehr erweitert sich das Gebiet der Freiheit, und desto
zweckmassiger und verniinftiger werden gleichzeitig seine Handlungen.”—
Op. cit., 348-49.

zw... As a certain atmospheric pressure is essential to the proper aéra-
tion and circulation of the blood, so a certain weight of social opinion is
necessary to the complete expression of the nature of the individual, that is,
to the freest volitional action.”—Meakin, op. cit., 208.
is anti-social. At its best it has been to present a conception
of society, or of group life, as the necessary and compelling
unity of functions. This conception, it was expected, would
replace the old unscientific and subjectivistic criteria of activity
with a scientific and objective criterion and would supply the
individual with the necessary facts for guiding his consciously
chosen activities, as well as select his activities for him when he
is incapable of choosing them in a social way himself, because
of either defectiveness or delinquency.

The strictly biological theory of society failed because from
its very nature it could never get beyond the stage of analogy in
analyzing situations. It served to illustrate the essential unity
of society, but it could not describe the functionings of the
social processes with sufficient accuracy to bring those activities
under effective social control. This necessity for a completer
analysis of social phenomena has been emphasized strongly by a
number of writers and especially in this country by Lester F.
Ward and Albion W. Small. To Ward belongs the honor of
having emphasized first in an adequate manner the necessity for
discovering the facts of human society and of making them
generally known through a system of elaborate instruction.”
This emphasis has justly given Professor Ward a chief place
among the leading sociologists. The great defects of his work,
however, are that it, like all the sociological output contemporary
with it, was done from an individualistic standpoint, and that
the importance and necessity for an objective criterion of social
control was not appreciated. Moralists of all times have dis-
cussed the question whether knowledge of the right necessarily
leads to doing the right, and the protagonists of this theme
have never been able to convince the doubters. Nor can they
ever do so. Activity is the result of the set of the whole nervous
system (merely including the immediate stimulus)” and not of
the mere ideational processes alone. Consequently there is always
likely to be more or less dissimilarity between knowledge and

® Cf. Dynamic Sociology, Il, chaps. xiii-xiv.

"Cf. Plato, Republic, book iv.

Cf. chap. iii, and Woodworth, op. cit.
conduct. It is at this point that Ward’s theory of the sufficiency
of research and instruction breaks down, as any theory of sub-
jective control must break down. Education, though it involves
a certain amount of objective social control is not alone effect-
ive. It is, however, one of the most powerful adjuncts to social
control if it is of a functional and social nature.

Professor Small, likewise, has insisted strongly upon the
analysis of social phenomena as well as upon closer co-operation
among the social sciences in this work. In speaking of the
conditions of society, he says, “Life is an affair of adjusting
ourselves to material, matter-of-fact, inexorable nature.” * But
his conception of what constitutes social analysis is not in the
last analysis, seemingly, so much the discovery of the concrete
facts of the working of the social processes as a kind of subjec-
tive analysis and co-ordination of real or imagined psychical
processes in the individual.* He conceives of social problems
as entanglements of persons with certain interests or conscious
processes to be satisfied.* “Sociology accordingly involves first
of all a technique for detecting, classifying, criticizing, measur-
ing, and correlating human interests.” *° Professor Small’s
actual analysis of situations, however, is usually of the objective
kind.
The more fruitful tendency among sociologists, the line of
activity which is making good the failure or omission of the
organic analogists, has been in connection with the concrete
analysis of social conditions. For a long while the ethnologists
and anthropologists had a predominating influence in the de-
velopment of sociology. Both Spencer and Letourneau wrote
their sociologies from this standpoint, and the more recent works
of Westermarck and Hobhouse in the field of social ethics have
largely followed this lead. But, besides the relative simplicity
and non-cultural nature of primitive society, there are numerous
other limitations to this method which have prevented it from
being generally adopted. Of more importance is the actual
analysis of present-day social conditions, such as has been under-
taken by the host of writers on the structure and functioning of
particular contemporary groups and institutions. And most
important of all are the various more or less technical studies
in social psychology, anthropogeography, immigration, of the
labor question, of housing conditions and reform, in vital statis-
tics, in public education, in criminology, philanthropy, etc. It is
from the direct and co-ordinated application of these facts to
human conditions, and not from logical classifications of real or
pseudo-mental processes or “social forces,” nor from working
over the solipsistic categories of a subjectivistic psychology and
ethics, that a valid sociology and social practice must be built up.

Much, however, of this objective analysis of social phe-
nomena has been unsatisfactory. The findings of the investi-
gator with a bias are always open to suspicion, and time is
always necessary to the verification and testing of facts. An
intelligible analysis and scientific evaluation of social phenomena
cannot be made without constantly keeping in mind two things,
(1) the perspective of social development, and (2) the unitary
nature of society. Most errors in the analysis of social con-
ditions, as well as in prescriptions for social ills, are due to dis-
regard for one or both of these principles. The two principles
are themselves closely related, the idea of the unitary nature of
society depending upon a perspective of social development, just
as the idea of the unity of species comes only with the idea of
evolution.

While we must reject the theory of the biological nature of
society, it is necessary, however, to recognize its fundamental
contribution—the emphasis upon the unitary character of society
and its sanction of objective analysis and control. Man’s bio-
logical evolution, notably in connection with prolonged infancy,
makes a social organization necessary to his existence. All insti-
tutional and cultural life is essentially based upon such organi-
zation and often upon the strictest social control. The plea to
live according to nature or to conform our social institutions to
“natural” laws has no meaning, unless we wish not only to
undertake a difficult or impossible return to a non-cultural ani-
mal existence, but also to undergo reversion in our individual
physiological and organic constitutions. The social problem is
not the elimination of the artificial from social life, but its con-
trol, its subordination to the service of social ends and activities.
Such a control can be obtained only on the basis of a scientific
analysis of social phenomena. The analysis of the individual is
only one of the phases of such analysis, while the analysis of
conscious processes and wants or interests as “social forces’ is
only a still further subdivision of the analysis of the individual,
and is co-ordinate with the analysis of his habits, instincts,
physiological structures, digestive capacity, etc.27 The problem
of social analysis and of the determination of the “social forces”
is a much more complex, and also a much more fruitful, task
than the subjectivistic sociologists have appreciated. Only by
replacing and supplementing analogy and subjective classifica-
tion with concrete social facts can we hope to have a true science
of society, or sociology.

2™ Subjective factors, however, cannot be disregarded; for the character
of the social process depends in large measure upon the mental attitudes of
individuals and, with the development of a more adequate and scientific social
control, will depend in an increasing degree upon these attitudes. Therefore
the psychic factors must be analyzed—not as independent phenomena but
always with reference to the fact that they are relatively modifiable incidents

of the general objective social process and with the purpose of utilizing them
in the service of a broader social control.
The farther such an analysis proceeds, that is, the more we
are able to go beyond the naive conception of mere states of
consciousness as the sole or only worthy content of social life
and to abstract away from this consciousness social facts and
processes with objective reference and connection, just so much
the more we have a science of society. The less the reference
is to persons conceived as mental processes, as organisms exist-
ing for hedonic or egoistic satisfactions, and the more the refer-
ence is to the society as a functioning group of persons in
activity, the more the measure of social values ceases to be the
individual and becomes the satisfactory functioning of the most
efficient group of which he is a member. The more such a view
grows the less is the attention upon self-satisfaction, i.e., upon
the production of adjustments guided by relative feeling values,
and the more it is upon providing a controlled and relatively
constant environment for social life and activity. Under such
a condition the emphasis necessarily ceases to be upon democratic
gratification and falls upon democratic conservation. Likewise
the social organization becomes in a sense compulsory, for only
where there is relatively complete co-ordination of activities
based upon scientific analysis of social phenomena can an
effectively constant environment be maintained. But the basis
of this control, which is coercive where necessary upon certain
refractory members of the group, is not merely custom, individual
whim, or the “tyranny of public opinion,” but the findings of
science, i.e., the analysis of social phenomena.” The rapidity
with which such a compulsory social control can be established
depends upon the rapidity with which an objective social analy-
sis proceeds. The conception of the unitary and organic nature
of society can be of great service in furthering such an analysis,
because it provides a new and effective standard for co-
ordinating facts and for directing research.
It appears that the prevailing type of sociology, especially
that which has developed in America and England, is a part of
the general movement for democratic gratification which had its
greatest vogue in the nineteenth and the second half of the
eighteenth centuries. It, however, is the particular outgrowth
of the less radical wing of that movement, known as utilitarian-
ism, and it developed under the influence of a growing analysis
of social phenomena, especially in the field of ethnology. This
sociology, like the preceding and contemporary utilitarianism
and neo-utilitarianism in ethics, has been and is prevailingly
subjectivistic and individualistic both in content and in form.
The other wings of the general democratic movement are those
of anarchism and hedonistic socialism, which have in various
ways affected sociology but which, under the influence of an
increasing objective analysis of social phenomena, are now
passing out of vogue in their extreme forms. The other types
of sociology of importance are those represented by the biologi-
cal and organic views of society and by the “practical” sociolo-
gists—those who aim at a concrete and objective analysis of
social phenomena for the sake of social control in some par-
ticular field of social activity.

Through the whole range of the development of social theory
so far there appears to have been a more or less constant move-
ment toward an objective statement of social problems.
Hobbes’s philosophy was a protest against the subjective and
noumenal character of Scholasticism. Locke pointed out, in his
own terminology, the relativity of subjective presentations or
criteria. Bentham’s professed and real purpose was to obtain
a constant and scientific experimental basis for regulating morals
and legislation, under which regulation every one should be
equal in privileges. At his time whatever unitary nature was
attributed to society was thought of as imposed from without,
by divinity, sovereign, or popular institution, and not as spring-
ing from the internal conditions of human social life. Conse-
quently, he did not undertake an objective social analysis, but
attempted a subjective analysis of feeling consciousness, and
upon this analysis he based his social theory and policy. That
his classification was not adequate to the purpose is, in the light
of what has been said above, to be expected. His followers,
Mill, Spencer, the social or neo-utilitarian ethicists, and the
early sociologists have constantly extended the analysis and have
modified the criterion, till at last its hedonistic character is
largely destroyed or disguised, though its subjectivism remains.

It has been extremely difficult for even the later ethicists
and sociologists, with their subjectivistic philosophic bias, to
arrive at the idea that society is a self-existent, an organic and
self-perpetuating unity," that it is not the creature of deities,
sovereigns, parliaments, public opinion, acting as genuine or
quasi-independent entities, but that it as a unity creates these
as incidents and forms of its existence. Likewise they have not
readily grasped the fact that an adequate social analysis must
be primarily an analysis of this social unity, rather than of the
variable and indefinite phenomena “mind” and “feeling,” which
are merely phenomena and forms of the greater social whole.

Human society is not merely isolated psychical phenomena,
as the subjectivistic and solipsistic sociologists appear to have
thought. It is not primarily interaction of mind with mind,
but co-ordinated adjustment or coadaptation of men to physical,
biological, and social environment, in which mental phenomena
play their part and no more. The analysis of mental phenomena
in isolation cannot serve as a practical working basis for social
practice and control.

Objective social analysis is being made in some fields more
rapidly than it is being incorporated in a general theory of
social action and control.

The theorists of the social organism gave form to the
organic or unitary view of society—basing the theory finally
upon the necessity of a division and specialization of functions
among the members of the group in order to meet the increas-
ing demands of population upon food supply—and they sanc-
tioned in theory the demand of social practice for objective
analysis. They provided a social criterion based upon the rela-

1Sumner has come closest to this idea in America, although he has been
hindered by certain individualistic preconceptions. Cf. Folkways.
tively permanent needs of society instead of upon the change-
able wants, interests, or feelings of the individual.

Only a unitary or organic view of society—devoid, of
course, of the biological homologies and analogies, which have
previously been merely incidental to it in a naive stage of
development—can furnish an adequate basis for analysis of
social phenomena and for the communication and application of
the findings of this social analysis. So long as the individual is
regarded as the measure of social values or is regarded as one
of two poles, of which society is considered the other antago-
nistic pole, there can be no effective and convincing argument
for social conformity and co-operation.

Subjectivistic sociology, ethics, and psychology have con-
trived to perpetuate the pre-evolutionary conception of man as a
being of a different order from the animal world. A functional
sociology must drop this fiction and study man as essentially a
product of the physical, biological, and social conditions in
which he functions. Man’s superior mental equipment must
undoubtedly be regarded as a superior means of adjustment, on
the basis of varied co-ordinated functioning, but not as a legiti-
mate means to anarchistic self-gratification.

It appears that the possession of knowledge is not a sufficient
preparation for adequate social functioning. The idea is not
compulsory, because it is not representative of the total equip-
ment for action. Hence, social control cannot be individually
determined, but must proceed from a controlled environment
which provides the individual with a uniform and constant
source of stimuli.

Social control, moreover, cannot be based upon a subjectivis-
tic criterion, because the individual cannot know the whole social
process, i.e., foresee all possible stimuli; also because feeling is
wholly relative to the objective circumstance producing it and is
not efficient individually or socially as a criterion of choice.
Feeling can easily be regulated socially through the control of
habit formations, and thus pleasant feeling may be made to cor-
respond to any useful social activity which is supported by public
opinion and organized society.
Society regarded as an organism or essential unity must be
considered as in some degree compulsory and coercive,” but only
in the sense in which the social organization controls the physi-
cal, biological, and social environment in which the individual
functions. This control, to be adequate, must be on the basis of
the completest possible scientific analysis of social phenomena,
and must be exercised by a democratic or by some other flexible
control. The compulsion or coercion which the group normally
employs is justified on the ground that the social organization
selects the better activity, socially considered, when the indi-
vidual will not or cannot. If the social analysis is unreliable or
if the administration of control is open to question, there will be
a constant reference back from the group to the individual, as
the center of social values, which will result in a more adequate
analysis and control socially.

As a matter of fact, group control with coercion has always
been the prevailing form of social control. Such controls have
variously been based upon mythological, theological, and meta-
physical categories, and sooner or later they have always broken
down, because they were not based on an adequate social analysis.

A complete scientific social control cannot be expected to
become operative at once, of course, but where a social fact is
established it should become as obligatory as the laws of astron-

?The terms compulsion or coercion are made to refer, in this study, to
any method or means by which society, as the greater functioning unity,
secures conformity and co-operation, either of a conscious or unconscious sort,
in carrying on the organic or unified social process. If a highly conscious
system of social education is found feasible and if it operates more effect-
ively than the harsh and milder forms of autocratic and traditional control—
as doubtless it would under a system of scientific social control—it will gradu-
ally supplant the other forms. In fact, it is not conceivable that efficient and
permanent social control or adjustment can be attained through education,
except on the basis of a scientific and objective analysis of social phenomena
or processes. The primary purpose of education, even, is to provide for the
developing socius those stimuli to thought and action which are deemed most
valuable in shaping his character. Education becomes thereby a method of
social control which is always in some degree compulsory and coercive. The
important thing, in this as in other forms of control, is to preserve, by what-
ever means necessary, the unity and apportionment of social functions and thus
to preserve the cultural gains of civilization. The contention here is that the
method will be more effective if scientifically determined.
omy or physics. The wilful disregard of the laws of health, of
social hygiene, of public morality, should have as little tolerance
as a wilful disregard of the law of falling bodies when the opera-
tion of this law has social consequences of equal importance.

The social organization, or the group, is the social object of
primary importance, while the individual is secondary, constitu-
tive, and contributory. Society is relatively constant, while the
individual is relatively modifiable.* In fact, man with his intelli-
gence, language, arts, isthe product of group life, of the neces-
sity for co-ordinate adjustment to environment to a much greater
extent than the group is the product of inherent psychic charac-
teristics of people. Even animal life is largely group life.

With such an objective and scientific basis of social control
replacing the old subjective criteria of activity, we may look for
a policy of democratic conservation instead of one of democratic
gratification, for an ideal of social service in the place of a reign
of hedonism.

II. Some of the more important implications of this organic
or unitary view of society need to be mentioned briefly.

Such a view does not imply the rule of an élite in any objec-
tionable sense. So far, all groups which have survived have
been controlled either by an autocrat or by an élite. The medi-
cine men, the patriarchs, the old men, chiefs, tyrants, kings, oli-
garchies, popular assemblies composed of demagogues and poli-
ticians, at different stages of development and in different places,
have always ruled. There has never been, and it is not conceiv-
able that there ever will be, a pure democracy of very consider-
able proportions, in which every man is equally free and capable
in forming his opinions and in expressing his activities. Experi-
ence is leading us in the United States toward the adoption of the

Robert Owen expressed this idea, possibly in somewhat extreme form,
a century ago: “The character of man is, without a single exception, always
formed for him; .. . . it may be, and is chiefly, created by his predecessors ; Preere
they give him, or may give him, his ideas and habits, which are the powers that
govern and direct his conduct. Man, therefore, never did, nor is it possible he
ever can, form his own character."—A New View of Society (3d ed.), 91-92.

See also, Spencer, Social Statics, 35. This idea is coming to be basic in scientific
social technology.
policy of centralized administration by experts, who are made
directly responsible to the people. Every social organization must
be coercive to the extent necessary for efficiency or it must break
down. A social organization based upon a scientific analysis
and control of social phenomena in the broadest sense involves
the rule of an élite in no greater degree than is implied in the
responsible direction of administrative details by experts, instead
of more or less irresponsible control and exploitation by pro-
fessional politicians. If we could conceive of a-society in which
all the individuals were equally informed on all social matters
and all absolutely sincere, all traces of an élite composed of
experts, of aristocrats, or of professional politicians would dis-
appear. But that is an impossibility.

Nor does such a view of society deny the necessity for social
change or fail to make provision for it. On the contrary, it
prescribes the condition for such change, demanding that all
adjustments of individuals to the group shall be made on the
basis of a scientific analysis and evaluation of social phenomena,
so far as such knowledge is available; and it further makes it
obligatory upon the individual to discover such knowledge where
it is possible for him to do so. But since the individual cannot
discover all the needed facts for himself, it recognizes the neces-
sity for having these facts brought to the attention of the
individual by the social organization, which must also demand
social conformity. Those activities not under a scientific social
control and which need adjustment, should be readjusted so far
as possible on the basis of scientifically determined knowledge
of social facts, which it is the business of the social organization
to supply and enforce through whatever agencies are most
effective—education, investigation, expert service, etc. The
main emphasis of this view of society is upon the abolition of
whimsical, subjectivistic, hedonistic, and thus predominantly
anti-social, adjustments and maladjustments, through insistence
upon scientific social adjustments so far as a science of society
can provide the facts.

Thus the social organism or organization, intelligently
considered, establishes its importance, first, as a means for
stimulating analysis and co-ordination of social phenomena for
guidance in social control, and, second, as the means to the dis-
semination and enforcement of the findings of such investiga-
tions. At the present time we have no adequate machinery for
the investigation of such facts on a large scale and our sociology,
because of its largely subjectivistic reference and emphasis, is
almost entirely impotent to direct such investigation.

Any compulsory organization not supplied with all the facts
necessary to a scientific social control must necessarily make
mistakes, as all social organizations so far have. Useful activi-
ties are liable to be interdicted and harmful ones to be
encouraged. The difficulty, however, rests not with control itself
when conscientiously administered but with an inadequate
social science. The ever-present problem of social science is
to discover what adjustments will be most effective in securing
social development and the survival of the group and of the
individual.*

Perhaps the chief advantage of the frank recognition of
the inherently compulsory nature of the social unity as here
explained, is that it assists in centering the attention upon the
organic nature or connectedness of social problems, ie., of
cases of maladjustment. It promotes analysis and leads to
the relating of problems to one another, in that it demands
a co-ordination of knowledge about the problem with a view
to group survival. Under such a grouping, sociology and
social policy cease to be confusions of apparently more or
less unrelated problems, many of which conflict in their solu-
tions. With all minor social or personal problems thus under-
stood as converging in one large and conclusive problem of
group survival and growth, each particular problem becomes
an attempt to co-ordinate all the activities, thus working toward
the abolition of social waste.

*To guard against a possible misunderstanding, it seems necessary to say
that group or social survival must also include the survival of all those indi-
viduals who are capable of social service. It is almost axiomatic that the
group must be so constituted as to provide the utmost possible opportunity

for the ttaining of individuals in social functions and to utilize their capaci-
ties when so trained.
The group which is regarded as the object of attention
will always be the most inclusive group which can be made
to function as a unity. Hitherto it has been the ambition of
most great religions, and of many empires, to treat the world
as a whole as such a unity. All have failed. With the breaking
down of magical, mythological, theological, and metaphysical
controls, and with the gradual substitution of an adequate
scientific social control, with adequate provision for necessary
and scientific change, an adequate world control may be ex-
pected.

A truly scientific control, however, of any group, large or
small, cannot be attained till all science and sciences recognize
the fundamental problem of social growth and survival. The
problems of all the sciences must converge about this one pri-
mary pragmatic and functional problem, and their energies must
be directed, not by individual whim and interest, but by the
demands of the social organism. When such co-ordination of
scientific investigation is attained all science from astronomy
to sociology will be, for the first time, truly functional and
social in its application.

The final and supreme implication of this view of society
is that when a fact is discovered it shall be applied and
enforced. The counter plea of “interference with individual lib-
erty” should have no weight in court, for individuals have no
liberties in opposition to a scientifically controlled society but
find all their legitimate freedom in conformity to and further-
ance of such social functioning. Society is not yet regarded as a
compulsory unity for much more than the suppression of re-
bellion, the repulsion of foreign invasion, the punishment
of personal (not political) robbery, and the discouragement of
personal violence. Proper scientific analysis of social phe-
nomena will disclose other less obvious but even more press-
ing problems, as indeed it has already disclosed them. As
these are abstracted from the incoherent mass of social phe-
nomena the compulsory or functional unity of society also
comes into view and means must be found for the coercion
of individuals who stand in the way of efficient social function-
ing. The chief opposition to such effective social control comes
from the old subjectivistic, individualistic, and hedonic dogma
of personal liberty and the co-ordinate term self-realization
which are mainly pleas for personal license in more attractive
forms.

Thus the advancement of civilization appears to be marked
by the growth of the conception of the compulsory and inherent
functional unity of society, both for the purpose of furthering a
scientific analysis of social phenomena and for enforcing the find-
ings of that analysis. The working-out of such a theory in
its details, as a means of communicating ideas and informa-
tion concerning the character of social activities and as a means
of correlating and controlling these activities, is largely yet to
be accomplished. In fact, it can be consummated only as the
actual concrete social processes are analyzed and evaluated.
