Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
It may be contended that aesthetic
phenomena are an individual and subjective
experience and not subject to social control
and therefore are not properly classified as
folkways. But upon further reflection it will
be evident that aesthetic tastes do display a
certain consensus and that they are codified
and culturally transmitted, just as are ethi-
cal or economic folkways. Like other codes,
they are fortified by ethnocentric rationali-
zations and by an aesthetic “conscience”
which labels discrepant forms as decadent
or ugly. They assume even an institutional
character in their elaborate organization.
They manifest a constellation of patterns in
public performances, in economic support,
in educational policy, in the organization of
vested interests, in the theories and laws of
harmonic construction—all of which is sup-
ported by a vast corpus of literature and
criticism. Far from being, therefore, a pri-
vate experience, taste can be treated, like
any other form of social behavior, as an em-
pirical phenomenon and may be defined as
the more or less consistent range of aesthetic
preference by a given group, of which the
concert programs are samples. It would be
very tempting to develop the sociopsycho-
SOURCE OF DATA

The original data for the following stud-
ies are contained in a monograph’ on history
of repertoires of the eight oldest symphony
orchestras in the United States.” This is a
history of music not in terms of biographies
and schools but in terms of the end and pur-
pose of all music, namely, actual perform-
ance—‘“behavior”—under discernible social
conditions. It is obviously advantageous to
select the data with an eye to their homo-
geneity, hence the subscription and popular
concert repertoires are segregated, and the
data for each orchestra are tabulated sepa-
rately.
tions; (2) selection of a criterion of weight-
ing the compositions if they are not to be
weighted equally; (3) determination of
trends; (4) the measurement of the differ-
ences and similarities in taste as between
cities or periods in the same city; and (5)
the isolation of the variables in the very
complex phenomena of public concerts.

The problem of classification was solved,
as it should be, according to the purposes of
the study. In order to facilitate identifica-
tion of the conditioning factors, composers
were in many cases individually studied or
grouped in terms of their nationality or the
New York Philharmonic and the Philadel-
phia orchestras for the five-year period
1931-35. It is evident that variations as be-
tween cities are quite striking. The New
York Philharmonic, a rather conservative
orchestra under Toscanini, gives Beethoven
first place with 15 per cent, while Philadel-
phia under Stokowski is satisfied with half
that percentage. The New York audience
heard twice as much Mozart (7:3) and
about half as much Wagner (5:9).

To measure the relative dispersion among
all these seven’ orchestras, or the degree
SPECIFIED COMPOSERS: IN ORDER OF CON-
SENSUS ON RANK IN REPERTOIRES AS MEAS-
URED BY THE COEFFICIENT OF VARIATION,*

1931-35

 

 

 

   
 
  

   
   

Per- Per-
Composer cent Composer cent-
age age
Brahms 12 36
Haydn. . 22 38
Schubert . 22
Beethoven. 26 4r
Strauss. 27 47
Ravel 27 48
Mozart. +f 28 49
Tchaikovsky....] 28 49
Wagner 28 53
Handel 30 55
Respighi 31 60
Debussy 32 62
Schumann 32 62
Berlioz. .. 35 MacDowell. go

  

 

*V= T ‘The greater the consensus in taste, the smaller

the index of variation. This index has, of course, no reference to
the original rank of a composer. Thus, although Haydn ranks
low in amount of his music played, there is good agreement on
his low status. He therefore shows a low coefficient of variation.
To conserve space the original percentage representation of each
composer in the seven repertoires (1931-35), the mean, and the
sigmas are not tabulated here.
York and the Philadelphia orchestras (1931-
35), as shown in Table 2.

Having five degrees of freedom, this
table yields a chi square of 136,68, which
indicates that the probability is infinitesi-
mally small that disparities as large as
those illustrated in this table could have
occurred by chance. With P as small as that,
we may suppose that these are not samples
from the same universe, that there is an as-
sociation between the respective cities and
the distribution of composers, and that there
are certain forces operating to produce the
differences in the repertoires of these two
orchestras. Our next step is to attempt to
uncover some of those factors.
One of the several factors which, by our
hypothesis, influence the fluctuations in the
taste of the community is the conductor,
who not only enjoys great prestige but also
occupies a strategic position for implement-
ing this prestige in the building of the pro-
grams. In order to test this hypothesis, the
repertoire of the Philadelphia orchestra was
analyzed during the last five years of the
tenure of Stokowski and the first five years
of his successor, Ormandy. These two dis-
tributions were then subjected to the chi-
square test to determine whether their dif-
ferences could have occurred by chance.
Table 3 yields a chi square of 16.98 (x? =
15.086, P = .o1), which makes it apparent
that there is less than 1 chance in 100 that
these two distributions stem from the same
universe. One has reason to conclude that
the change in conductors contributed heavi-
ly to this shift in repertoire.

A similar analysis, but by a different
method, was made of the shift in repertoire
of the Cincinnati orchestra which engaged
the British-born Goossens in 1931 to suc-
ceed the German, Fritz Reiner. By deter-
A difference of this magnitude “in favor of”
Goossens could occur only about 14 times in
1,000 if chance alone were operating—a
very unlikely event. There exists, therefore,
a true difference presumably assignable to
the change in conductors in so far as the as-
sumption of the constancy of the other
variables is defensible.

Less apparent was the influence of Kous-
sevitzky on the repertoire of the Boston
orchestra (Table 5). With his known Rus-
sian background, Koussevitzky might be ex-
pected to lend an added impetus to the Rus-
sian repertoire in a city which has been
favorably known for its hospitality to mod-
ern works. However, with a critical ratio of
only .94, the change in the Russian reper-
toire could not be called significant and in-
dicates that, if these ratios represent the
same universe, this discrepancy, or larger,
could occur in about 33 per cent of the
cases. It is not proved, therefore, that, un-
like the other conductors here studied,
Koussevitzky did exert a significant new
TABLE 6

PROPORTION OF GERMAN MUSIC: CHICAGO, NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC,
NEW YORK SYMPHONY ORCHESTRAS

 

 

 

 

    

    

   

 

 

 

 

 

German IreMs German ITEMs
a Teas |, | per | oF a Tas | yy | Ber | CR
° 1 Cent | Cent
Chicago Chicago
wormage] 08 | Ba | S58b | 48 Bases EY Bg} | 7°
New York Philharmonic New York Philharmonic
Ig06-10.... 1,206 599 | 49.6) 2.4 IQTI-I5.. 1,960 | 1,060 4a} 1.77
IQII-I5.... 1,960 | 1,060 | 54.1f 1916-20. . 1,746 894 | 51.2.
New York Symphony New York Symphony
a "OSs | BE | Soh] 46 | soreas:: x90 | far [ 43:8} | 2-8
during 1916-20, as distinguished from the
preceding and subsequent five-year periods.
Table 6 is designed to discover to what ex-
tent, if at all, this influence manifested itself.
Again, one variable (in this case, the war)
is considered the differential factor, while
the others are kept as constant as possible
by selecting for comparison the periods im-
mediately adjacent to the period under ob-
servation. Three orchestras in Chicago and
New York are selected to illustrate this ap-
proach.

The Chicago orchestra had been under
the direction of Frederick Stock, the pro-
tégé and successor to Theodore Thomas.
Stock, of German extraction, tactfully re-
tired for the duration of World War I and
thereby avoided the chauvinistic outburst
which disturbed the Boston orchestra and
caused the replacement of Karl Muck, a
friend of the Kaiser, by Raubaud, a French
musician. The accompanying effect of the
war on the Chicago repertoire is evident in
the C.R. of 7. It appears still more conspicu-
ously if one compares the C.R. between two
There has been speculation as to whether
the taste of the American public is as “ad-
vanced”’ as that of Europe. Any retardation
(or advance) in taste would vary with com-
posers and orchestras but could be measured
as indicated in the illustration cited below.

The trend line of composers generally de-
picts a life-cycle consisting of a rise to a peak
of popularity followed by a period of de-
cline, which every composer experiences
sooner or later. However, this peak and de-
cline need not occur simultaneously in any
two cities. In such a case we may speak of a
lag (or lead) between those cities. Thus, as
between London and New York orchestras,
there appears a characteristic delay in the
appearance of the “peak,” so that the taste
of New York for certain composers may be
said to “lag” behind that of London.

This lag can be measured by determin-
ing the distance between any two identifi-
able and corresponding points in the two
trend lines. One logical point at which to
measure this lag is the peak in the trend lines
of the given composers in the two countries.
These peaks are the points of satiety at
which the patronage, or taste, for the com-
poser begins to decline. Because of the
fluctuating trends, they are not always im-
mediately discernible. It is sometimes nec-
essary, therefore, to resort to mathematical
calculation in which the best “fit” corre-
sponds to the highest coefficient of correla-
tion between the two series paired experi-
mentally at various intervals or lags.°

The lag varies, of course, with different
composers. In the case of Beethoven, the
consensus between New York and London
is amazingly close (Chart III). The best fit,
as measured by the Pearsonian coefficient,
indicates a lag of only five years (r = .51).
The comparison of the trends in the regu-
lar™ and popular concerts in the United
States begets similar conclusions. There is a
diffusion of taste from the upper classes to
the popular audiences, and the rapidity with
which these tastes trickle down from the
“€lite” subscriber to the popular concert
patron—or at least reappear there—may be
illustrated in the trend line of Tchaikovsky
in the regular and popular concerts in Min-
sented and that each one cited could pro-
voke further interpretation. Since these il-
lustrations were selective rather than com-
prehensive, no generalizations on the over-
all phenomenon of aesthetic folkways in the
United States are offered, but it is expected
that the complete analysis of the history of
symphonic repertoires in the United States
will yield such generalizations and that the
analysis of aesthetic culture will perhaps add
an increment to the development of social
science itself.
