Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
Women doctors are a minority group
within a profession. The layman’s prejudice
against them is one of their status problems.
By “minority group” with respect to a pro-
fessional role is meant any group of persons
who, although technically qualified for the
role, deviate from a pattern of “auxiliary
characteristics” expected in that role.?
These characteristics may be in the sex, age
range, race, nationality, or faith considered
proper for the role.

It is in the selection of a professional and
in the initial contact with him that these
auxiliary characteristics are important to
the client. The layman is predisposed to
have confidence in the professional who con-
forms to the familiar pattern and to dis-
trust one who deviates from it. Two situa-
tions may be distinguished: (1) that in
which the layman chooses a professional
and (2) that in which he exercises no deliber-
ate choice but retains some veto power.
This study deals with the attitudes of
middle-class American women toward wom-
en physicians. Two questions corresponding
to these two situations were used in the
study. For lack of an absolute status scale,
data on the status of women, relative to that
of other minorities in medicine, were se-
cured by a rank-order procedure. Because
the study was exploratory, these statistical
data were supplemented by case materials
on medical experiences in general and on at-
titudes toward women physicians in particu-
lar.4 A sample of urban, middle-class women
was selected for intensive study, since ac-
ceptance by this group is crucial for the
career of the woman doctor, by current
standards of professional success.

In the first question the respondent se-
lected from among ten doctors, differenti-
ated by sex, age, faith, nationality, race,
and whether or not they had been recom-
mended, the doctor she would call “first,”
“second,” and so forth.5 In the second ques-
© Question II was worded as follows: “Suppose
you volunteered to do some work for a large clinic
and they asked you to be a sort of trouble shooter.
They had a large staff of doctors, men and women,
white and Negro. Each patient pays a standard fee
and is assigned to a doctor, but sometimes the pa-
tients object and want to change doctors. When pa-
tients change doctors, it makes more work for an
overworked staff. The decision is left up to you. If
the objection seems natural to you, you can arrange
to have the patient tranferred to another doctor. If
the objection seems ridiculous to you, your job is to
tell him that he is lucky to have any doctor in war-
time. I’m asking you to arrange the objections in
order from the most natural to the most ridiculous.
The ten objections were:

“A man objects to a woman doctor.

“(The same for a woman patient, and for pa-
tients of both sexes with a male doctor.)

“A. white man (woman) objects to a male Negro
doctor.

“A Negro man (woman) objects to a white male
doctor.

“A Negro man objects to a white woman doctor.

“A Negro objects to a Negro doctor.”
respondent could sort.’ After ranking the
items, she was asked to sort them into three
categories.’ In this way any serious careless
errors in ranking were discovered. The cards
were shuffled before each interview to elimi-
nate bias due to the order of presentation.
Respondents were encouraged, but not un-
duly urged, to make decisions. Two or more
items were recorded as of equal rank if the
respondent could not differentiate between
them. And, finally, a number of cases of
doubtful reliability were eliminated from the
sample.

The validity of the data cannot be rigor-
ously determined. However, very few of the
respondents suspected, when they were an-
swering the first question, that the study
was primarily concerned with women doc-
tors. The apparent emphasis on religious
prejudices served as a red herring. The in-
ternal consistency of the case materials also
indicates that most persons were frank
about their attitudes toward women.’

The sample of roo native-born white
women was secured by making house calls
in a residential neighborhood of Chicago.
The median monthly rental for the homes
visited was approximately $75. Half the re-
spondents had had some college training; 81
had completed high school. Approximately
one-quarter were employed; almost three-
quarters had been employed at one time.
Just over half were Protestant; 31 were
Catholic; and 7 were Jewish. The median
age was forty-one. Sixteen were single.
Fifty-seven had never consulted a woman
50:

 

5:

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.
RIK 2345678901234 5678901279845678901273456789012345618910

(a) Exp Male, own Faith —(b) Exp Male, opposite Geitile () Exp Male, oposite Group’ (4) Exp Woman, own Faith (Young Male,own Groupt
Recommended Faith, Recommended Recommended Recommended Recomme
N=89 Ne62 N= l0l N=99 N= 94
the last resort of any considerable number of
persons (Chart I, &).

Although faith is the least important of
these auxiliary characteristics, with the pos-
sible exception of sex, its significance to the
respondents is attested by the preference
for a doctor of their own denomination over
the doctor noticed in the telephone directory
(Chart I, 4,k). These two doctors were the
only ones who were not personally recom-
mended. If the church member had been
preferred merely as the lesser of two evils,
the frequency polygons would have been ap-
proximately congruent and centered at
adjacent points of the scale, as in the case of
50

 

 

0.
RANKI234 5678 0101234567890123 45678910
@) White Woman Patient (b) White Male Patient (¢) Male Patient

1234567891012345678910
(d) Negro Male Patient (e) ba Woman Patient

 

Negro Male Dr Negro Male Dr Weman Dr. White Woman Dre te Male Dr
$ Nt OT N= 26 N= OT N96 N=96
———

 

ol il

 

 

 

 

°

RAKE 23 4567689101234567689D123456789OI23 4567891734567 890
() NegroMale Patient (q) Woman Patient (h) Woman Patient (j) Negro Pationt (k) Male Patienk

White Male Dr. Woman On Male Or
Ne NOs Ne 98

leqro Dr. ale Dr
N=98 N98

# Rank of I= Most natural objection, Rank of 10+ Most ridiculous objection
that it is ridiculous for patients of either sex
to object to a male doctor and ridiculous for
a Negro to object to a doctor of his own race
(Chart II, ’, j, and &). In general, it was
the persons who had had least contact with
Negroes who considered it most ridiculous
for a Negro to prefer a white physician.
Comparison of diagrams c, d, and f of
Chart II suggests that the male Negro pa-
tient is thought of primarily as a man, who
may legitimately object to a woman doctor,
rather than being thought of as a Negro. Di-
agrams e and f of Chart II are more nearly
congruent than is the case when the races
are reversed, as in diagrams @ and 8. This
suggests that the Negro woman was thought
of not primarily as a woman in the hands of
aman of a different race but as a Negro who
might prefer a doctor of her own race but
would probably not insist on it. This analy-
sis is offered only as a hypothesis.

The objection about which there was the
greatest difference of opinion was the wom-
an patient’s objection to a woman doctor
(Chart II, g). It was not considered the most
ridiculous nor one of the three most natural
objections, but beyond that there was little
agreement.

In summary, the woman physician’s
status among her own kind is comparable
to the male physician’s status among per-
sons of a different faith. An experienced
woman is preferred to very young male doc-
tors and to an experienced male Negro doc-
tor. Respondents sympathized with men
who protest against a woman doctor, were
divided on a woman’s right to protest, and
agreed that no one should insist on a woman
doctor—at least in the stipulated situation.

These statements, based on the central
tendency of opinion, are an oversimplifica-
tion, of course. Various cultural traditions
are represented in the neighborhood. Fur-
thermore, for psychogenic reasons, some
persons feel more secure with a doctor of a
given sex, regardless of cultural expecta-
tions.™ In short, almost everyone assumed
that there were sex differences in the quality
of medical service, but there was little agree-
ment on what the differences were.” On the
basis of the case materials the following
hypotheses are suggested: (1) that the re-
luctance to consult a woman physician is,
in general, due to a vague sense of the
strangeness of such a relationship, not sup-
ported by clearly formulated rationaliza-
tions, whereas the reluctance to consult a
doctor of certain ethnic and racial minorities
is supported by rationalization in common
circulation, often rooted in economic inse-
curities; (2) that this difference is mani-
fested in the kinds of apology offered in the
two cases—admission that prejudice against
women is “silly” and that prejudice against
other minorities conflicts with religious and
democratic values; and (3) that a single
contact with a woman physician, whether
satisfactory or not, is likely to lead to a gen-
eralization about women doctors, based on
the single case, whereas a single contact
with a member of ethnic or racial minorities
is more likely to be dismissed as the ‘“‘excep-
tion that proves the rule” when it does not
conform to expectations.

This type of analysis could be applied,
with suitable modifications, to various socio-
economic strata of the lay public and to
various professional minority groups. In a
more extensive study the differential status
of a given minority in the various special
fields of a profession could also be deter-
mined. Systematic studies of this sort would
add significantly to our knowledge of the
process by which minority group members
are assimilated into some of the roles which
command high status in our society.
