Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

 

EVR LeU
Antipathy and Social Behavior

Author(s): Chester Alexander

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 51, N
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2770495
Accessed: 06-06-2016 18:17 UTC
Interaction, the basic trait of human so-
cial life, is a complex of interrelationships.
It is considered to be divisible into two ma-
jor parts, namely, that which is closely re-
lated to the biological nature of man and
that which concerns the multiplicity of ac-
tivities which constitute cultural patterns.
It is, of course, recognized that these have
not yet been clearly delineated. While one
might use either of them as an approach to
a study of society, one might also start by
observing human behavior and thus build
up classes of acts according to their similari-
ties. This is not necessarily in disharmony
with the traditional methods; it could be
used to clarify some of their concepts.

Proceeding in this direction, we note that
many acts are performed to avoid objects
which are unpleasant to the individual. One
may call them “negative,” since their most
obvious trait is the evasion of the stimulus.
This group may be further reduced by in-
cluding only those which are neither so
simple as reflexes nor interpreted by ration-
alizations.

The nearest approach to a name befitting
this group is “antipathy.” The definitions
which are given in dictionaries and in the
social science literature vary considerably,
but there is one point of agreement among
them, that is, it indicates a “feeling against”
an object. Beyond this there is little unanim-
ity regarding the nature of these acts, the
range of their intensity, or their social con-
sequences. Therefore, it appeared to be nec-
essary to start the analysis from the initial
observation that the primary response to
the “feeling” is an avoidance of the object.
In an extended study (1,200 cases) it was
found that the antipathetic reaction to ob-
jects was not followed by any effort to
avoid future encounters. The negative re-
action apparently takes place without the
intervention of reasoning, for the individual
responds almost immediately upon being
confronted by the stimulus, while the feeling
of aversion vanishes when the act has been
completed. It was also quite evident that
the reaction is not violent, since one may
experience an antipathy while in the pres-
ence of other people without giving any
conspicuous clues regarding one’s feelings.*

From comments gathered during two
hundred interviews, the writer concludes
that a person is seldom asked to describe his
antipathies or to explain related conduct.
He does not seek to defend himself or to
appeal to socially accepted values. For in-
stance, some of those interviewed stated
their antipathy to foods which are of a
dark-green color, giving no reasons beyond
the dislike of the color and adding that the
taste has taken on the same negative tone.

A considerable amount of our data in-
dicates that antipathies are related to pri-
mary sense areas. The weight of the evi-
dence favors the single area, although there
are cases where individuals were found to
be antipathetic through two senses to a
single object. The explanation is that these
should be regarded as separate antipathies
which are set off by the same stimulus.

There is a fairly strong fixation about an-
tipathies, for many people who aided in this
study declared that they would not like to
experiment with their “dislikes.”? The mat-
ter is settled as far as they are concerned,
but it was not found that such sensory ex-
periences are permanently attached to those
who hold them. They were not disturbed by
the fact that they did not know the origin
of their antipathies. Many were not inter-
ested in learning whether their feelings of
aversion were rare or common, nor did they
express any anxiety about getting rid of
them.

Another important characteristic of an-
tipathies is that they are marginal to re-
flective consciousness. This was shown re-
peatedly by the remarks made by our sub-
jects that they had never thought much
about their antipathies, never had tried to
analyze them or to discuss them with other
people. This might notbe significant if antip-
athies were exceptional phenomena, but
this study disclosed an average of 21 per
person for the 1,200 cases. We identified
1,256 different antipathies, of which 37.9
per cent were human physical traits and
were related to parts of clothing or to man-
nerisms. Since these were attached to in-
dividuals, they appear to be capable of
affecting social interaction in proportion to
the degree of their intensity. These facts
make one realize that antipathies are com-
moner than we had assumed.

There is a striking similarity between
antipathies and allergies. But the differences
are even greater.

1. We note that allergies are physiologi-
cal (or chemical) in nature, while antip-
athies appear to be psychological, perhaps
emotional in some cases.
2. Antipathies are “feelings against” ob-
jects but allergies act much too slowly to
produce any quick avoidance. In many al-
lergies the negative reaction does not take
place at all.

3. A person may be allergic to an object
to which he is not antipathetic or vice versa.
An individual may, in fact, show a decided
liking for the object to which he is allergic.
This trait bears no similarity to antipathetic
behavior.

4. Often one does not know what causes
his allergy, and it must be discovered by
medical observation. In contrast to this, one
has no difficulty in finding his antipathetic
objects, for his senses make them known to
him. One may have hay fever and not know
what a ragweed looks like, but if he dislikes
the odor of fish glue he has no difficulty in
locating the object.

5. Allergies often so affect the organism
that there is a prolonged and even incapaci-
tating aftereffect. The writer has never
found this in the case of antipathies.

6. Some antipathies are picked up from
other persons. It is exceedingly doubtful if
allergies are learned.

7. Antipathies are directly related to the
primary sense areas, but allergies may op-
erate in the organism without irritating any
major nerve center.

We tend to underestimate the social role
of antipathies because, for one thing, they
seldom force us to deal with them on an in-
tellectual level. It is difficult for people to
analyze their own antipathies because sen-
sory experiences are nearly always hard, to
describe; an effort to do so usually results in
likening them to something similar. This
would fail, however, where two people have
not had the same experience. We can also
imagine how one who feels our antipathy
would simply withdraw, even when it meant
avoiding people, and yet fail to realize how
they feel about his behavior.

Another factor in our failure to appreci-
ate the social importance of antipathies is
that the objects which serve as stimuli are
treated by the individual as nonresponding.
In consequence, the individual does not see
any necessity of setting barriers against the
object of antipathy or of making plans to
control it.

The individual, furthermore, does not
feel that his experiences are subject to ethi-
cal evaluation, for he sees neither good nor
evil in them. His behavior appears to be
without fault, of no social consequence,
and of no interest to others. We cannot quite
agree with him.

One may wish to ask whether antipathies
have any use and, if so, what it is. The an-
swer is in the affirmative: they fit into a set
of protective devices. Their particular func-
tion is to protect the organism by produc-
ing defensive behavior on the sensory level
without absorbing attention or calling upon
the intellect. A person withdraws from cer-
tain objects because they feel, look, taste, or
smell unpleasant, or, stated otherwise, the
organism moves to shield itself from irritat-
ing contacts.3

The mind does not enter into the experi-
ence in order to analyze the meaning of the
contact or to govern the organism and there-
by to decide whether danger is actually
present or not. Scores of cases could be
presented to show that withdrawals are
often from objects which would do the or-
ganism no harm; but that would be a logical
deduction, and logic does not operate in
antipathetic behavior. Through many in-
terviews it became evident that reasoning
does not penetrate to the sensory level of
antipathies; therefore their voluntary elim-
ination does not appear very probable.

A study of the geographical distribution
of antipathetic objects shows that they
have a loose but constant relationship to
culture areas. This becomes evident when
one recalls that people cannot be antipa-
thetic to objects with which they have had
no experience. Thus antipathies which are
found among pre-literates might vary con-

3 The odor of burning rubber, “whiskey breath,”
cigar stubs or halitosis; the sight of sharp or pointed
objects, bowlegged persons, or hands with very
stubby fingers; the touch of anything slimy, a crip-
ple, or another’s soiled linen; the sound of chalk

squeaking on a blackboard or people who sniff
nervously when talking.
siderably from those known to people in ur-
ban areas; some held in the South might not
be found in the North. This seems to refute
the idea that some antipathies are innate or
due to organic peculiarities.4

We have abundant evidence to show that
people are able to take up antipathies from
their cultural environment. For instance,
antipathies to foods refer to those which are
found in a given vicinity, some of which,
like garlic, may have been introduced from
other cultures.

If one were to judge by the origin of the
words “sympathy” and “antipathy,” one
might say that one is the antithesis of the
other. Whether we use the popular under-
standing of “sympathy” or the more precise
sociological meaning, we can readily see that
the two are not opposed.

1. Sympathy means a “feeling with”
objects; and that distinguishes it from antip-
athy. Moreover, sympathy involves some
reasoning and is thus on a level with social
values and above antipathy.

2. Sympathy usually indicates a sharing
of the joy or sorrow that another feels. At
the least, it leads to an understanding of the
other and consequently tends to bring per-
sonalities into closer social interaction. One
doubts if it could be reduced to the level of
“consciousness of kind” or “gregarious-
ness,” since they descend too deeply to be
called sympathetic relationships. For two
organisms to be in sympathetic contact,
they must have similar sensory equipment.
This neurological likeness may exist only in
imagination, as in the case of the little girl
who is sad when her doll is ill. This identifi-
cation of feeling may also be seen in the
story of a woman who sympathizes with her
cat when it bears kittens or of the master
who sat sadly by his dog as it licked its
wounds.

3. In antipathy there is usually no in-
dication that the individual recognizes any
sensory equipment at all in the object. This
means that an individual is unable to sense
the experiences of the object. It holds just
as true for the individual bearing a repellent
mark as for an inanimate object, and it is
one of the chief barriers to the alleviation of
prejudice.

4. Sympathy and antipathy both rep-
resent an identification with objects, and the
attraction or repulsion may be equally
strong, but the attitudes béhind them differ
both in kind and in polarity. An antipathy
is not toward a whole person, for it does not
invade the realm of personality, even when
it appears to do so. It is always directed to-
ward some particular mark. That is why one
person can withdraw from another, when
the latter bears some disliked trait. This
introduces the problem of interpersonal re-
lationships: antipathy may be extended to
many people when antipathy is felt to one
characteristic. Numerous interviews dem-
onstrate that people may be thus avoided;
they may still have likable traits; yet there
is no way of avoiding the disliked object
without also keeping away from the indi-
vidual.s

5. Of the two feelings, sympathy is
awakened much more slowly, for one may
avoid a person who bears an antipathetic
trait, then recall later that one should have
been sympathetic. It is possible, for in-
stance, to be antipathetic to crossed eyes
and yet sympathetic with the individual.
However desirable such an awakening may
be, it does not happen often: antipathies
usually do not arouse sympathetic senti-
ments. Indeed, they often preclude the de-
velopment of sympathetic social interaction,
as in those cases where race prejudice is sup-
ported by antipathies. We would be very
close to reality if we spoke of “response” in
matters arousing sympathy and of “reac-
tion” where antipathy operates.

5 Examples: persons who are very fat; who have
a nasal laugh; who have very oily hair; who chew
food audibly; who have a deformed face, crooked
teeth, very pale blue eyes, or coal-black eyes; who

stutter; “who have a steady fixed gaze when look-
ing at me.”
6. Sympathy is almost always directed
toward human beings, occasionally to pets,
rarely to plants, and only in extreme cases
to inanimate objects, whereas antipathy is
frequently directed to nonliving things or to
parts of human beings. Sympathy is ordi-
narily saturated with sentiment, at least in
the popular use of the term, while antipa-
thy clings to sensory experiences. Since they
function on different perceptual levels, there
is little chance of their meeting. Thus ef-
forts made to reduce prejudices to sym-
pathetic relationships will encounter an-
tipathies which are not readily susceptible
to sentimental appeals. For these reasons
sympathy and antipathy are not antitheses.

Such marks as shade of pigmentation,
prognathism, ulotrichous hair, the epican-
tric fold, ultra-brachycephalic craniums,
or any others which distinguish one group
from another may be antipathetically re-
garded. The sensory effect tends to accentu-
ate group consciousness, but not on an in-
tellectual level. Although people may not
openly discuss their own antipathies or
those which they hold to given marks of an-
other group, nevertheless their attitudes
may be effectively passed from one person
to another through gestures, grimaces, puns,
intimations, veiled references, and in similar
ways. All these act as suggestions, and none
of them calls for conversation. Understand-
ing is possible on this lowly level, and be-
havior on the basis of this accord is also
possible, even collective action.

Our data do not as yet show that a par-
ticular antipathy may become a prejudice.
Both are found in association with human
behavior. Antipathies can and do exist
separately from prejudice, but it is doubtful
whether aprejudice can exist without antipa-
thy. Prejudices are compounds of antipa-
thies, which provide the physiological stimu-
lus, and the “reasons” which make it seem
necessary and logical to “keep him in his
place.” People can talk about these “rea-
sons” but not about antipathies. The latter
only reveal their role when a prejudice is
dismembered, part by part, reason by rea-
son, and every defense exposed for examina-
tion. When the owner of the prejudice has
exhausted pseudo-logic, he falls back on the
repulsiveness of those to whose traits he is
antipathetic. His defenses are designed to
protect whatever social value the prejudice
shields, and antipathies supply the “feel-
ings against” the prejudicial objects.

Prejudices cannot be permanently re-
moved as long as the roots remain from
which new rationalizations may spring.
They cannot be touched by reason, argu-
ment, logic, sympathy, religion, or threats.

A group that finds it bears cultural traits
which are disagreeable to other groups may
succeed in time in getting rid of them. Cer-
tain food, peculiar articles of clothing or
adornment, odd forms of speech, have been
known to retard the process of assimilation.
Where antipathies are pronounced, they
prevent the intimacies which are essential
to the fusion of cultures.

Hereditary physical marks can be elimi-
nated only by commixture of the chromo-
somes. They do not readily vanish during
the period of accommodation. Consequent-
ly, it is much more difficult for a minority
group which is marked by disliked physical
traits to become absorbed in a large popula-
tion than it is for those groups which are
distinguished only by cultural differences.

It is of importance to consider the origins
of antipathies. We do not have the evidence
to call them all innate. We know that some
people are exceptionally sensitive in such
matters as tone discrimination, and it may
be that they would easily take to likes and
dislikes.

A second source appears in learning.
Parents are not always able to convince
their children through persuasion that cer-
tain objects are unclean so they transmit
sense experiences by wry faces, gestures of
disgust, hawking, spitting, vomiting, shiver-
ing, shaking off. It is, perhaps, all in mimic-
ry, but it is impressive to a child too young
to take words seriously. The same process
goes on between adults, but this time by
slightly more sophisticated gestures, such as
raising the eyebrows, holding the nostrils,
jeering, blowing, mimic expectoration,
scowling, shrugging—each of which is un-
derstood without words. Phrases and scenes
in literature and films may have a similar
effect.

A third source is in unpleasant or shock-
ing experiences which become associated
with some object, whether this be a trait
of some conceptualized individual or an
inanimate object.

There may be additional sources of antip-
athies. These three are evident now, and
others may make their appearance as the
study continues.

Never before have the peoples, the cul-
tures, the races of the earth been thrown in-
to such abrupt and intimate contacts as
during the present decade. Cultural areas
which for centuries have grown up in their
own manner now find that they are ex-
posed to many others, some familiar and
similar, others strange and very different.
As people contemplate odd folkways, for-
eign food, different mannerisms, peculiar
dress, unfamiliar speech, novel beliefs, and
startling mores, they may be tempted to
make ethnocentric comparisons, biased in
favor of the familiar, the traditional, the
“right.” Where prejudices arise, these nega-
tive sensory experiences play an important
part.

WESTMINSTER COLLEGE
Fuiton, Missouri
