Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
Sociologists have a right to define socio-
logical terms in any way they see fit, or at
least in any way sanctioned by the usage of
competent sociologists. But if sociologists
take it upon themselves to attempt defini-
tions of terms drawn from other social sci-
ences, like economics, they should be at
pains to define the terms as they are used by
economists or others; or if, for some special
sociological purpose, a definition at variance
with accepted usage is advanced, the fact of
such variance should be clearly stated.

The editor of the Dictionary of Sociology*
put the responsibility of defining eco-
nomic terms on sociologists, not on econo-
mists. Out of idle curiosity, I have culled out
some twenty definitions of such terms. Of
these, all but four were prepared by sociolo-
gists. The exceptional four were contributed
by a single economist, and he was not al-
ways discriminating.

According to the Preface, “a good defini-
tion... . has two main aspects. It should
give the uninformed person a clear and ade-
quate notion of the character of the object,
even though he may never encounter it in
his experience, and it should enable a person
to identify the object the first time he does
meet it in his experience.”

How well does the definition given of
“business,” for example, conform to these
specifications? Everybody knows, in a gen-
eral way, what business is. But suppose an
“qninformed person” or a curious student
wishes to know the difference, if any, be-
tween “business” and “enterprise,” or the
relation of business to production, on one
hand, and acquisition, on the other. He con-
sults this “authoritative” Dictionary and is
told, by an anonymous informant, that
business is “a situation-process devoted to
the conduct of self-maintenance activities”
—a beautiful illustration of the old gag that
sociology is what everybody knows in terms
which nobody understands! If the student is
majoring in general sociology, such a defini-
tion may have some meaning, since it puts
business in an abstract category—but in one
so inclusive that it is meaningless. To an
economist it means nothing; but this may
mean that the economist is uneducated.
Turning to Eliot’s definition of “situation-
process,” we get a little light amid much
verbiage. We learn that “situation-process”’
is “a phrase which, by hyphenation, draws
attention to the inseparability .... of the
momentarily observed aspects of experience

... and the changes . . . . which are occur-
ring even as observation is made.” Is one,
then, to take “situation-process” as a socio-
logical appropriation of Heisenberg’s “priti-
ciple of uncertainty”? But what is “self-
maintenance”? Keller defines it as “mores
which promote, or are believed to promote,
societal survival within given life-condi-
tions.” Eliot tells us that “practically every
‘social process’ may be considered as a situa-
tion-process.”’ Putting two and two togeth-
er, we must conclude that “business,” or
“a business,” is a social process devoted to
societal survival within given life-condi-
tions!

Since every business firm, like every poli-
tician in office, tries to survive, the defini-
tion may be abstractly true, but it does not
distinguish business from other “survival”
processes; it could apply to any group or in-
stitution. The primary function of a defini-
tion is to define—to set the boundaries of a
concept. To define business as a situation-
process devoted to self-maintenance is like
defining man as a vertebrate—and stopping
there.

Realizing the need to be “more specific,”
Eliot goes on to say that “a business is a
productive unit, organized according to
whatever pattern is characteristic of any
particular culture.” Here, in the word “pro-
ductive,” there is at least some attempt at
differentiation, but it is inadequate, since
a family or a subsistence farm may be re-
garded as productive, but neither one is a
business. Furthermore, there are some busi-
nesses which are “productive” only in an ex-
tremely formalistic sense of the term—a
fact which one might expect a sociologist to
recognize.

The Dictionary contains no definition of
“enterprise,” “private enterprise,” or “free
enterprise,” though it is reasonable to sup-
pose that, at a time when “free enterprise”
(equivalent to private business) is a world-
wide issue, the sociologist, to whom nothing
human or social is alien, is interested in its
distinguishing characteristics. Whether, for
reasons of favorable publicity and propa-
ganda, we now call business “free enter-
prise,” or keep on calling it “business,” the
fact remains that the motive and immediate
objective of all business is profit, and profit-
seeking is the one characteristic which dis-
tinguishes business from other institutions
and processes. Any economist called upon to
define business would start from this patent
and pivotal fact. Why does not the sociolo-
gist?

In the definition of “corporation” we
meet with refreshing common sense and di-
rectness, although Ennis’ definition does not
adequately distinguish a corporation from
any other “socioeconomic” (why stick in
this useless term?) interest group,“born of
legal sanction,” like a partnership. Inciden-
tally, there is no definition of “community
trust.”

“Economy” is defined by Eliot as (rz)
“keeping a budget or balancing accounts or
being thrifty” (‘‘thrift” is nowhere defined)
and (2) “the structure of resources, intake
and outgo, and distribution [nowhere de-
fined] in any given group situation.” Intake
and outgo of what, by whom, for what? We
are left in the dark whether they mean
physical input of labor and other factors and
output of physical product, or outgo (cost)
and income in money terms. The term “re-
sources” perhaps does not need definition,
but resources for what? Resources are
means or instrumental values, and means
are meaningless in the absence of ends or
objectives. Here again, as in the definition of
“business,” the distinguishing feature of the
thing is completely missed, perhaps because
the definition is in terms of structure rather
than of function. Any good definition of
economy would be in terms of means and
ends, of scarce resources, on the one hand,
and utility, value, satisfaction, or welfare,
on the other. Not only the etymology of the
word but a little observation of any econom-
ic situation or process reveals the essential
fact that “economy” is the management of
scarce resources to the end of securing from
them a flow of income. Eliot comes nearer
to this conception in his treatment of “social
economy.”’ Though the point is of no great
importance, his inclusion of a “group situa-
tion’’ in his definition of économy unduly re-
stricts the term: economy may be individ-
ual, without reference to any social group or
situation.

Muntz, an economist, in his definition of
“economics,” comes nearer to recognizing
the means-end relation inherent in econ-
omy. “Men organize [i.e., manage] natural
resources, cultural achievements [capital?],
and their own labor, to sustain and promote
their material welfare.” But why limit it to
“material” welfare? The definition in terms
of welfare would be rejected, as Muntz must
know, by many economists, who perceive
that resources can be and often are man-
aged for ends which have nothing to do with
welfare or are patently detrimental to it.
It is regrettable that he was not given
enough space to point out this variant con-
cept.

Isee no evidence that the contributors to
the Dictionary have made use, or, indeed,
been aware, of the nature and function of
operational definition, namely, that a prop-
er, or expedient, definition of a term is de-
termined by the use of the term in a given
frame of reference or context of discussion.
This means that a term may be defined in a
certain way for the purposes of a given
problem and in an entirely different way for
those of another problem.

This idea is glaringly absent from the
article on “capital,” according to which
capital is “material objects used in the pro-
duction of wealth,” a definition formulated
by John Stuart Mill in 1848. The anony-
mous definer proceeds to remark that “the
term capital is subject to many loose and
vague usages, such as applying it to all forms
of invested wealth,” and to assert that “in
strict analysis it should be confined to tan-
gible instruments, apart from land, used in
the productive process.” It seems clear that
the definer has read no economics since
Marshall or that for some reason he prefers
to ignore twentieth-century economic the-
ory; otherwise he would not imply that John
Stuart Mill’s concept of capital is the only
concept not “loose and vague.” This old
technological conception of “real” capital
is still acceptable and proper for certain pur-
poses, but it is now far less important and
far less frequently met with than the finan-
cial or monetary concept. The whole theory
of saving, capital accumulation, investment,
and so of continuous “full employment,”
now pivots on the monetary or credit con-
cept of capital as investment funds rather
than on capital as tools, machines, and
stocks in trade. Complete omission of the
term “capital” would have been preferable
to a definition—and that only—framed a
hundred years ago to fit the economic con-
ditions of the England of that time. Further-
more, even if the financial concept of capital
be ignored, it is surprising that the sociolo-
gist, much given to “cultural” interpreta-
tions, should fail to mention Thorstein
Veblen’s idea of capital as the race’s accum-
ulation of technological knowledge—a con-
cept, surely, of some sociological, if not eco-
nomic, import.

Two definitions of “monopoly” are given
by Neumann. The first defines it as “non-
competitive possession of, or access to, any
object.” This makes monopoly virtually
synonymous with property. I know of no
economist who uses the term in this broad,
not to say loose, sense. The second defini-
tion is: “An enterprise in which the element
of competition is wholly or partially elimi-
nated.” There follows reference to “exclu-
sive control or possession of a commodity or
service, involving command over its price or
the extent of its use.’’ An economist would
say briefly that the essence of monopoly is
unified control over supply.

There is no definition of “imperfect com-
petition” or of “noncompeting groups,” de-
spite the fact that both are modal features
of all modern economies.

In the item on “profit” one finds the mis-
leading statement that “the actual owners
of the business are the common stockhold-
ers and true profits are common stock divi-
dends.” Preferred stockholders are just as
much owners of the business, of course, as
are holders of common stock; and a great
deal of “true” (=net?) profit is put back into
the business as surplus, not paid out as divi-
dends.

“Marginal” is defined as “lying on the
borderland of any recognized and relatively
stable area, either territorial or cultural.”
For most sociological purposes this defini-
tion is doubtless adequate, though it is ques-
tionable whether, as the article goes on to
state, “marginal” necessarily carries impli-
cations of “unadjustment” or abnormality.
Be that as it may, the definition completely
ignores the economic connotations of the
term. “Marginal utility” is defined by
Muntz, as well as it can be in four lines, as
“the importance or value attached to the
marginal or last unit acquired in a stock of
like goods.” Here is a use of the term “mar-
ginal” to which the above definition does
not apply. There are items on “marginal
area,” “marginal group,” and “marginal
man,” but none on “marginal cost,” “mar-
ginal firm,” or, more surprisingly, “marginal
farm.” In economics, “marginal” has noth-
ing to do with area, except when we speak
of the “extensive margin of cultivation.”
An economic margin is a situation in which
the result of further extension or intensifica-
tion of the utilization of given resources
would not cover the cost, in terms either of
money or of “sacrifice.” A marginal farm is
marginal because, for whatever reason, it
does not “pay” to cultivate it. Surely, this
concept of marginalism cannot be without
significance to rural sociology or to sociology
in any of its applied aspects.

“Medium of exchange” is defined by
Murdock as “an article or commodity freely
accepted in exchange for other goods,” etc.
Since go per cent of commercial transactions
in this country are effected by transfer of
bank deposits, through the use of checks and
drafts, one may reasonably query whether
a medium of exchange need be “an article or
commodity.” If a check is a commodity, the
definition stands; if it is not, it needs re-
vision.

The article on “money,” by Himes, is
much better than some others, partly, per-
haps, because the editor gave him a whole
column. Himes makes essential distinctions.
In particular, he recognizes the function of
credit instruments (checks, etc.) as medi-
ums of exchange. He says that in modern
societies they “substitute for money.” It
would have been well to note that many
monetary theorists regard checks as money.

Under “want” we are told by Muntz that
‘Gn. economics, wants are goods or services
beyond the absolute needs of life or effi-
ciency, sought by man.” The statement may
be merely a careless use of the English lan-
guage, but in any case wants certainly are
not goods and services but desire for them.
Furthermore, desires for the requisites of
survival and of efficiency are just as truly
wants as are desires for conventional values
and luxuries.

There are acceptable definitions of “con-
sumption goods” and “production goods,”
but none of “a good” or of “economic
goods.” The Dictionary does not define
“income.” Its definition of “wealth” is:
“In relation to self-maintenance, material
objects owned by human beings and ex-
ternal to the bodies of their owners.” No
hint here of either utility or scarcity, but
the definer might answer that they are
obviously implied in ownership, since no
one would bother to own an object that
did not have utility and was not at the same
time scarce. For the “uninformed,” how-
ever, definition by implication is hardly
satisfactory.

Whether wealth be defined as an aggre-
gate of economic goods or as material ob-
jects owned “in relation to self-mainte-
nance,” the definition is purely formal.
There is nothing in either to indicate that
what is wealth to one individual or group
may be “‘illth” to another. All wealth,
whether consumption or production goods,
is means to ends, but some “ends” are clear-
ly antisocial. It is a little surprising that the
term social utility does not appear in the
Dictionary. It is entirely proper to give a
purely formal definition of wealth, if for no
other reason than that a formal definition of
it is indigenous to the logic of a political
economy which nominally—never actually,
except in sheer mathematical economics—
dissociates itself from ethics and value-judg-
ments. But a dictionary, and most of all one
that aspires to being “authoritative,” should
recognize diverse frames of reference and
provide alternative definitions accordingly.
Why does this Dictionary make no move
toward defining wealth in terms of welfare—
definition from the social point of view?
Definition in this frame of reference would
at least distinguish between burglar’s jim-
mies or marijuana cigarettes and rubber
tires or penicillin. Are sociologists, like the
“objective” price economists, so bent on be-
ing “scientific,” coute que coute, and so afraid
of value-judgments, that they shy away
from the most basic of all social problems—
that of value and values?

For light, we turn to the definition of
“welfare,” but we meet with some disap-
pointment, for Nels Anderson defines it as
“an interest” directed to the “well-being” of
persons or groups. It is not particularly en-
lightening to be told that welfare is well-
being, nor does it help when we find “public
welfare” defined as “that part of the activ-
ities of a community which deal with social
problems of individuals and families, includ-
ing social planning.” So’ we turn to “social
welfare,” only to find that Nels Anderson,
again, sticks to the social-service frame of
reference and defines social welfare as “pri-
vate or public services to ameliorate condi-
tions of need or social pathology in a com-
munity.” Were we to stop here, it would
necessarily be with the inference that “social
work” is the only frame of reference for wel-
fare and that welfare is a condition, or a
problem, pertaining only to defectives, de-
linquents, and the poor. But, persistent, we
turn to Eliot’s definition of “organic wel-
fare.” Here, at last, we find another frame of
reference. To be sure, Eliot does not define
‘welfare’ when he says that organic wel-
fare is “welfare which is neither individual-
istic nor socialistic, but mutually constitut-
ed,” but when he goes on to say that “as a
goal for social-economic community organi-
zation it is also a criterion by which the
value and results of economic, social, and
political processes and programs may be
tested,” we begin to see. There is no article
on “social value,” but the one, also by Eliot,
on “social values” goes a step further to-
ward the broad welfare concept. Social val-
ues are “objects, inanimate or animate, hu-
man, artificial, or non-material, to which
some value for the group (collectively or
distributively) has been imputed by group
consensus.”

Starting from this idea of social values,
we might define “welfare” as the aggregate
of positive human values recognized by con-
sensus of competent opinion. But this leaves
the question, “Who are the competent
judges?” Probably no brief definition of
“welfare” can be satisfactory, primarily be-
cause of the cultural relativity of value-
judgments. This would hold true, also, of
any list of the constituents of welfare, at
least in the present state of knowledge and
conflicting sentiments. We need not con-
clude, however, that an “objective” constit-
uent list is impossible, especially if the list
be limited to the basic physiological needs
and the fundamental “wishes” (whether
four, according to W. I. Thomas, or thirty-
odd, according to the Harvard Psychologi-
cal Clinic’). In the last analysis, the com-
petent judges will be the physiologists and
the psychologists, as they expand and re-
fine their knowledge of the normal function-
ing of the human psychophysical organism,
living in the only way it can—in social
groups.

Incidentally, there should be a distinction
between “social values,” or “welfare” in the
general sense, and “economic welfare,”
which is that phase of welfare directly de-
pendent on economic conditions and proc-
esses.

“Waste” is defined as “the use of any ob-
ject in such a way as to derive less than the
maximum satisfaction from it.” I do not
wish to criticize this definition, although it
would probably be better to substitute “wel-
fare” for “satisfaction,” but it does raise
some interesting questions. For example:
“Whose satisfaction?” If someone gave me
a bottle of fine wine, I could figure out what
times for drinking it would maximize my
satisfaction. But it is probable (at least if
the labels were removed) that I would get
just as much satisfaction from a bottle of
cheap wine. If, then, I live up to the prin-
ciple of (social) economy which is to put
things where they will do the most good, I
should give the bottle of good wine to some-
one who appreciates good wine. For me to
drink it would be a differential waste, which
is the antithesis of economy. So it makes
some difference whether we take “satisfac-
tion” in the individual or the social sense.
Again, is “eating only the heart of a lamb
chop and letting the rest go into the garbage
can” necessarily waste? It depends on the
scarcity of lamb chops. Waste, in the eco-
nomic sense, should be defined in terms of
cost as well as satisfaction.

“Production” is defined, anonymously, as
“the sum total of the processes involved in
the creative phase of the self-maintanence
[Is there no escaping this ubiquitous, con-
cretely meaningless term?] of society.”” Why
not, in heaven’s name, say simply that pro-
duction is the making and delivering of
goods and the furnishing of services?

In the article on “division of labor,” J.
Harold Ennis states that “the term ‘geo-
graphical division of labor’ is frequently
used to indicate international adjustments
whereby different areas supply the products
for which they are peculiarly fitted.” There
is no ground whatever for limiting geo-
graphical division of labor to the interna-
tional field. The term is also generally ap-
plied to the location of industry within a
country.

“Population movement”’ is defined as “a
transfer of human groups from one geo-
graphical setting to another,” although the
author of the definition must know that in
demography the term is also applied to the
trend of vital phenomena as revealed in
birth and death rates, etc.

“Depopulation” ought, for one thing, to
mean the complete disappearance, in what-
ever way, of the population of a given area;
but the term is rarely if ever used in this
sense. The Dictionary defines “depopula-
tion” as “an extensive reduction of popula-
tion by death through disease or war, by ex-
pulsion, or by voluntary migration.” But
in population literature, as well as in popular
usage, depopulation may result from fertil-
ity rates too low to maintain a stationary
population. Outside war-torn areas, this is
now, as everyone knows, the cause of pros-
pective declining population, which, when
that stage is reached, will be equivalent to
depopulation in the relative sense. There are
some Cassandras, indeed, who regard any
slackening in the birth rate as a sign of “de-
population.”

“Tndustrial organization,” according to
an anonymous contributor, is “a cultural
pattern characterized by extensive use of
machinery, large-scale operation, mass pro-
duction, and non-human power.” Not con-
tent with the useless cliché “cultural pat-
tern,” the contributor has to bring in “‘self-
maintenance,” and industrial organization
is accordingly “the self-maintenance. type
characteristic of capitalism.” So there is no
industrial organization in Soviet Russia?
The term is, of course, properly applicable
to any form of the organization of produc-
tion, including the old domestic and com-
mission systems. There is no warrant what-
ever for limiting it to large-scale, mechan-
ized mass production or to capitalism.

We now come to certain terms not strictly
economic but of interest to both economists
and sociologists. These are ‘‘desire,” “inter-
est,” “utility,” “value,” and “valuation.”
We have already criticized the definition of
“want,” which in economics is generally
used interchangeably with “desire.” Nat-
urally, no definition of desire is attempted.
“Value,” “utility,” and “interest” are de-
fined anonymously but apparently by the
same contributor, judging by an internal
consistency—a consistency we have failed
to find in the definition of some other re-
lated terms.

“Utility” is defined as “the inherent and
real capacity of an object to satisfy a hu-
man desire.” Further, “it is intrinsic to the
object itself, and may or may not be appre-
hended by the human observer. Belief in
utility is the basis of value, but the utility
may be spurious or entirely lacking.” Two
definitions of “value” are given: (1) “the
believed capacity of any object to satisfy a
human desire” and (2) “the quality of any
object which causes it to be of interest to an
individual or a group.” We are told, further,
that “value is strictly a psychological real-
ity ....to be sharply distinguished from
utility, because its reality is in the human
mind, not in the external object itself.”
(Yet, in the second definition, value is ex-
plicitly stated to be a quality of the object.)
Further, “value is strictly a matter of be-
lief; an object, the utility of which is strict-
ly spurious, will have the same value as if
it were genuine, until the deception is
discovered.’

If we for the moment ignore the second
definition of “value,” the distinction be-
tween “value” and “utility” is consistently
held to. “Value” is belief that the object has
the capacity to satisfy a given desire; “util-
ity” is the object’s capacity to satisfy that
desire. “Value” is in the mind; “utility” in
the object. John, normally a teetotaller, is
bitten by a rattlesnake and wants a pint of
whiskey in a hurry, in the belief that
whiskey cures snake bite, though actually it
will not. According to the above authorita-
tive distinction, the whiskey (under the cir-
cumstances) has value for John but no util-
ity for him. If we do not demand precision,
discrimination between value and utility on
the ground that one is in the mind, the other
in the object, is logical. But the question re-
mains whether it is consistent either with
current philosophical conceptions of value or
with the popular use of the term.

But suppose we do demand the “preci-
sion and exactitude” which the Preface em-
phasizes as essential to good definition? Will
we be charged with pedantic hair-splitting
if we point out that both person and object
are essential to the existence of either value
or utility (whatever distinction we may in
the end find it advisable and expedient to
make between them) and that both value
and utility subsist in the relation between per-
son and object? To say that utility is “in-
trinsic to the object itself” is certainly not
an example of “precision and exactitude.”

One thing seems clear. Desire is not es-
sential to value or to utility. An object may
be of great importance to me without my
knowing it. Vitamins were important to the
organism (“had utility” or “were valuable,”
whichever way you put it) before anyone
knew of their existence. The Dictionary's
two definitions of “value” escape inconsist-
ency only because “interest” is defined as
“the relation between a person and any-
thing which he believes will satisfy one of
his desires.”” Now interest is essential to
“valuation,” but desire is not essential to
interest. Whatever the correct definition of
“interest” may be, it assuredly is not the
one just quoted. I may be interested in my
neighbor’s dog without wanting it. The sec-
ond definition of value is equivalent to
Ralph Barton Perry’s criterion of value:
“any object of any interest.” The error in
both definitions is that “value” is confused
with “valuation.”

How does the Dictionary define “valua-
tion”? We should expect a definition cor-
relative to that of value. But we get nothing
of the kind. “Valuation” is defined, by
Muntz, in reference to economic, or ex-
change, value (which is not value at all but
a ratio between two values), as “the rela-
tive importance of two or more goods or
services, generally expressed in terms of
money.” This is a definition of exchange
value but not of valuation, although it has
the merit of relating valuation or value to
“<mportance.” Correctly apprehended, val-
uation is a subjective mental process of
estimating the importance or significance
of a cognized object. Interest (which we may
relate to sustained attention) is essential to
valuation, just as cognition of the object’s
existence is, but neither is essential to value.
Valuation is a psychological process, but to
say that “value is strictly a psychological
reality” and thus identify value with valua-
tion would compel us to say that there are
no unrecognized values. That would mean
that nothing which we do not already know
and evaluate is of importance to us or that
“what we don’t know won’t hurt us”—a
palpably unfounded sentiment.

To be sure, we could say, if we accepted
the Dictionary’s distinction between value
and utility, that there are unrecognized util-
ities, or we could exhort youth to be aware
of our fundamental utilities, liberty and de-
mocracy; but it strikes me that this would
be flying squarely in the face of both popular
and philosophical usage.

Perry, because he confuses value with
eye.

“Conflict” is said to arise “out of the
principle of limitation inherent in a finite
universe.” Why not say simply that con-
flict is due to scarcity?

“The essence of education is the inculca-
tion of one individual with the mental ac-
cumulations of another.” It is best to pass
this by without comment.

Weare told that “social engineering”’ dif-
fers from other engineering in that the
forces it utilizes are “social forces.”’ I had
supposed that sociology had discarded the
idea of social forces. At any rate, the Dic-
tionary gives us no definition of the term.

“Democracy” is defined as “a philosophy,
or a social system, that stresses participa-
tion in, and proportional control of, the af-
fairs of the community by the individual
member, on the basis of his personal self-
hood,” etc. Here democracy is defined as an
instrumental, essentially political, process.
But democracy should also be defined from
the ethical and economic points of view.
Ethically, democracy is an attitude of re-
spect for the individual human person, re-
gardless of sex, race, or previous condition
of servitude. This is in more fundamental
contrast with naziism or fascism than is po-
litical democracy, because the individual is
regarded as an end, and no one, even the
state, can be permitted to regard him exclu-
sively, or even primarily, as means or sheer
instrument. Economically, democracy also
rests on the premise that the individual is
an end, and accordingly economic democ-
racy means the distribution of opportunity
in proportion to the individual's capacity to
use it.
“Institution”: “an enduring, complex,
integrated, organized behavior pattern
through which social control is exerted and
by means of which the fundamental social
desires or needs are met.” The only essen-
tial truth in this definition is that the func-
tion of an institution is social control. I see
no reason to say that an institution must
meet only the “fundamental!” social desires
and needs, unless all desires and needs are
regarded as “fundamental.’’ Furthermore,
an institution need not be enduring, com-
plex, integrated, and/or organized. It may
be very simple and non-enduring. The con-
cept “institution” seems to give sociologists
a lot of trouble. They could avoid this by
accepting Commons’ definition “collective
action in control of individual action.’’

Finally, at random, I note the absence of
definitions of “isolationism,” “utilitarian-
ism,” “authoritarianism,” ‘“Geisteswissen-
schaft,” “youth movement,” and “tribal-
ism.” Since these are omitted, one would
like to know why such barbarous atrocities
as “rurban” and “rurbanization” are in-
cluded. One would hardly expect definition
of the “yin and yang’? idea, but omission of
such terms as these others, as well as the
sloppy definitions we have cited, indicates
that the Dictionary was prepared and pub-
lished in too great haste and with too little
care.

According to the Preface, “the usefulness
of such a dictionary....must depend
largely upon the extent to which sociologists
are content to accept the definitions given
....and to use them consistently and
scrupulously in accordance with the mean-
ings indicated.” I am compelled to doubt
whether many sociologists will be content
to accept the duty thus imposed upon them.
TABLE 1
UNEMPLOYMENT RATES OF EXPERIENCED WAGE-SALARY WORKERS, BY AGE, APRIL, 1940

 

 

 

 

  

 

Male FEMALE
AGE
Unemployed Labor Force | gn ccveg| Unemployed Labor Force | yore

I4-I5... 12,120 82,680 14.7 6,660 31,980 20.8
16-17. 129,940 404,580 32.1 68,180 233,780 29.2
18-19. 359,880 I, 190,380 30. 2 183,940 852,060 23.6
20-24. 846,540 4,148, 680 20.4 323,780 2,511,120 12.9
25-29. 654,900 4,292,980 15.3 169,900 1,869,220 9.1
30-34. 5395520 3,889,800 13-9 127,740 1,455,600 8.8
35-44. 953,020 6,576,940 14.5 231,540 2,153,340 10.8
45-54- 895 , 780 5,088, 580 17.6 177,400 1,360,860 13.0
55-59- 370,520 1,721,960 21.5 60,020 399,380 I5.0
60-64. 269,140 1,164,180 23.1 38,640 258,240 15.0
65-74. 156,580 817,820 19.1 17,080 167,820 10. 2
1+... 8,860 83,160 10.7 1,320 19,720 6.7

Allages.. 5,197,400 29,401,740 17.6 1,406, 200 II, 313,120 12.4
3 One of the reasons adduced by Mr. Pollak is
that unemployment rates of younger workers are so
high. But the fact that younger workers are only
tenuously attached to jobs is not germane to the
question which has exercised the interest of a nation.
That question is whether discrimination exists
against the employment of workers passing from
their thirties into their forties and thence into the
upper-age groups.

4 The width of the various bars is in proportion
to the number of persons employed in each group.
Industries with similar unemployment patterns from
age to age are combined, the data being from Indus-
trial Characteristics. The average unemployment rate
for each grouping is taken as 100.
INDEXES OF MALE UNEMPLOYMENT RATES

BY MAJOR INDUSTRY GROUPS

 

 
     
   

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
   
   

 

 

 

APRIL 1940
INCEX AVERAGE RATE FOR ALL AGES *100 INDEX
200 T 200
180 22a fnmrontaiion a oitines r 180
160 160
140 140
CONSTRUCTION, MANUFACTURING & TRADE TF
120 120
AGRICULTURE , FINANCE , BUSINESS
& PERSONAL SERVICE
100r —100
8 0| arrears oneee 80
‘TRANSPORTATION & UTILITIES

60) | 60
20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 — 65 ano over
INDEXES OF FEMALE UNEMPLOYMENT RATES
BY MAJOR INDUSTRY GROUPS

 

 

 

    
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

APRIL 1940
invex AVERAGE RATE FOR ALL AGES = 100 INoEX
200 T T 200
‘nonsroravion, MOE, FINAN, PERSONAL SERVICE, & GOVERMENT
O23 nanurserune

180) POF Aemaucrone 180
160 160
140 140
120 120

4— AGRICULTURE MANUFACTURING
100 oo too

2=—NTRANSPORTATION, TRADE, FINANCE,
Cy PERSONAL SERVICE AND GOVERNMENT 80
|

 

60 60
20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55°59 60-64 65 ANo over
ciple, and workers, within limits, grow more
valuable with age.s Chart II points to a
roughly similar pattern for women in manu-
facturing and to a much more stable pattern
for women in other industries. Aside from
the smaller numerical importance of the fe-
male labor force, it must be realized that
unemployment rates for women character-
istically differ from those of men. Women
are more able to withdraw from the labor
force altogether when they cannot find em-
ployment than are men. The snapshot pic-
ture given by the 1940 data is confirmed by
follow-up studies of workers in special
groups and by the various state censuses
taken during the thirties.

A further point of interest is the relative
size of the group of employees over forty-
five, the group potentially exposed to dis-
crimination in hiring and firing. Census data
indicate that 22 per cent of the male labor
force and 17 per cent of the female labor
force were included in that group as of
March, 1940.7 Apparently, therefore, it is no
unimportant one.’ Given the aging of our
labor force, the long-term drop in farm em-
ployment, and the retarded growth of self-
employment, we must look forward to a still
greater number of older employees, abso-
lutely and relatively, than we have had up
to now. The problem, if anything, will grow.’
Apart from statistical measurements,
however, is the spirit in which the problem
is approached. Granted that the work life
does not abruptly finish at forty or forty-
five, granted further that, even at its worst,
unemployment left “836 persons out of 1,000
employed” in the upper-age group with the
highest unemployment rate.?° The situation
still may call for serious thought and con-
sidered action. It is the mark of intelligent
social action not to scoff at problems until
chaos supervenes. We cannot allow the old
age problem to become increasingly serious
or permit discontent to tunnel itself into the
Townsend movement or its many suc-
cessors. In part the need has already been
met by the adoption of old age benefit and
insurance provisions. In part it will have to
be met by expanding social security cover-
age, by increasing benefits, and by taking
such other steps as national policy may rec-
ommend. But we shall get nowhere in seri-
ous study of the issues if the basic data are
not put into proper perspective, compre-
hensively evaluated and suitably weighed.
however, will disclose that no such view was
presented. The stated purpose of the paper
was to investigate the justification of the
popular belief that industry scraps the
worker at the age of forty and that all dif-
ferential treatment of older workers repre-
sents discrimination, i.e., unequal treatment
of equals and therefore unfairness.

On the basis of census material for the
years 1930 and 1940 the writer came to the
conclusion that the notion of the industrial
scrap-heap at forty represents an over-
statement of the problem. This was based
on the finding that even the most unfavor-
able unemployment ratio in the whole ma-
terial—the 1930 figure of unemployed work-
ers in the age group of sixty-five and over—
left 836 persons out of every 1,000 gainful
workers employed. With this figure Mr.
Lebergott seems to have no argument be-
cause he expresses willingness to “grant” it.
Since he also grants “that the work life does
not abruptly finish at forty or forty-five,”
the writer does not quite understand how
Mr. Lebergott can disagree with the con-
clusion that the widespread belief that in-
dustry scraps its workers at forty is exag-
gerated.

On another point, also, there is disagree-
ment between Mr. Lebergott and the writ-
er. According to Mr. Lebergott, the fact
that unemployment ratios ‘move steadily
upward as established workers reach and
then pass the forties” indicates that dis-
crimination exists. In other words, he takes
the position that an unfavorable employ-
ment differential between various age
groups by itself represents discrimination.
The usage of the term “discrimination” in
the social sciences, however, has a different
connotation. The writer refers again to
Frank H. Hankins’ definition in the Ency-
clopaedia of the Social Sciences, XIV, 131
and 132, according to which discrimination
means unequal treatment of equals or a dif-
ference in treatment accorded various cate-
gories of persons which are disproportionate
to the importance of the marks of differen-
tiation between these categories. Since ad-
vancing age must at some point lead to a de-
cline of physical fitness for the job and there-
On the basis of a historical analysis of
claimed occasions of discrimination, the
writer came to the further conclusion that
the overstatement of the problem was to be
explained by the zeal of reformers who
painted the situation darker than reality
justifies. And here we come to the discovery
of a misunderstanding. Mr. Lebergott puts
great value on the “spirit” of social concern
in which the problem is approached. He
seems to be apprehensive of a lack of such
spirit in the paper under discussion and will
probably be surprised to learn that the
plight of the aged in our society is one of
the guiding professional and social concerns
of the writer. Only the latter does not be-
lieve that it is conducive to constructive
social action to overstate the facts which we
want to remedy, because by so doing we
forge weapons for our opponents. Age dis-
crimination where it exists should certainly
be discovered and remedied, but remedial
action should be based on a scientific ap-
praisal of facts and not on acceptance of
imagery and popular myths.

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
