Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
In the course of their development, com-
munities have been confronted with the
problem of spatial expansion. They might,
at the cost of military efficiency, retain
simple popular institutions in small areas,
or, alternatively, they might organize a
large unit in which the individual’s voice
must necessarily be overwhelmed. Democ-
racy could either, as it did in Athens, limit
itself to a small state and face defeat, or it
could, as in the Roman Empire, expand to a
size which would provide sufficient man-
power for its armies but in which political
organization would become increasingly bu-
reaucratic and finally tyrannical.

The development of modern communica-
tion seemed a great advance for popular gov-
ernment; but the people were ill prepared
for it. By some malevolent paradox, the new
technical developments of the industrial age
seemed to threaten democracy with destruc-
tion. Modern means of communication have
brought people nearer to one another but
have hardly increased neighborliness. The
circles of control are widened so quickly that
the circles of group co-operation cannot keep
pace. Not only communications but many
other branches of modern technology in-
crease the opportunities of those who are in
positions of power by decreasing the control
exercised over them by those who are ruled.
Large-scale industrial organization, for ex-
ample, needs swift decision on the part of
the management, and inventions in the field
of military technique have powerfully
strengthened state control. Contacts be-
tween individuals and groups have become
considerably modified by improvements in
communication. The frequency and dura-
tion of such contacts no longer change grad-
ually, as in former times.

The development of communications has
simultaneously enlarged the integration of
local and national life. There has been a
marked tendency for the state to control
more and more aspects of the individual’s
life. Hand in hand with the increasing stand-
ardization and regulation of life there has
developed a leveling-down of intellectual
and moral standards.

Although the Russian Revolution should
have been a warning, people brought up in
the spirit of utilitarianism and Spencerian
optimism were inclined to ignore the danger
in modern society of an all-embracing tyr-
anny which might set itself up with the help
of modern social mechanisms and_tech-
niques. German national socialism brought
home to us the true facts of the situation. It
was the first thoroughgoing attempt at a
modern totalitarian tyranny and, although
it was carried out by an elite of dilettanti, it
illuminated like a searchlight some of the
most pressing social and political problems
of the contemporary world.

General interest in the structure and
method of totalitarian government has been
rapidly decreasing since the end of World
War II. Yet the overwhelming superiority in
men and materials which was required to
defeat national socialism by a rather narrow
margin invites further deliberation; nor does
the recrudescence of totalitarianism in the
shape of Stalinist communism allay our ap-
prehensions. Among problems of vital inter-
est to modern political sociology are the fol-
lowing: How far is this clear modern tend-
ency toward totalitarianism due to inherent
structural elements, and how far is it due to
social techniques? How far have existing so-
cial mechanisms been affected by modern
technological developments? And under
what circumstances are these mechanisms
and techniques likely to be modified?

Those who endeavor to answer these
questions are likely to appreciate the in-
genuity and farsightedness of Georg Sim-
mel, who, since he died in 1918, never lived
to see his analysis of domination in relation
to group constellations put to the test. The
general principles and character of his writ-
ings are well known on the European Con-
tinent and the United States, where they so
greatly stimulated later sociological re-
search; yet the startling insight into contem-
porary political problems of this analytical
genius has so far been less realized. Among
his numerous contributions, his allusion to
the integration of individuals and groups
within a tyrannical society is essential for a
real understanding of totalitarian structure
and techniques.

Let us recall his statement that under a
tyranny the individual gives only a frag-
ment of his individuality to the state-person
relationship, whereas the tyrant gives his
whole individuality. It would appear, at first
sight, that Simmel assumed in the individual
a division between his individuality proper
and that part of him which is capable of in-
tegration into the “group mind.”

From the general character of his writings
it seems rather unlikely that Simmel would
have believed in a “group mind” which as-
sumes an independent existence, apart from
the individual minds composing it, but more
probably thought that there are aspects—
Simmel calls them “fragments’”—of the
working of the human mind which more eas-
ily relate themselves to social problems. At
the time when he wrote, it was inevitable
that he should have been vague in respect to
the frontiers between the “individual” and
the “social” man.
Simmel understood that the Athenian
concept of citizenship, which integrated all
aspects of the individual’s life, was totali-
tarian. There was no escape for the individ-
ual personality. There is an inherent tend-
ency (though not a law in Spencer’s sense) in
any given society toward an equilibrium of
liberty and constraint.* In Great Britain, for
example, the considerable political freedom
has always been correlated with a propor-
tionally greater degree of constraint in so-
ciety. The latter is expressed by stringent
conventions, moral obligations which are
generally accepted and enforced by public
opinion. Political tyrannies, on the other
hand, often find that they have to permit a
great deal of liberty in the less political re-
gions of social life. It appears that Simmel’s
hypothesis has, to some extent, adapted to
moder conditions Aristotle’s request for
balance and moderation in government.

According to Simmel there are two im-
portant limitations to tyranny: (a) the size
of the dominated group and (8) the variety
of the personalities included in it. He
thought that the wider the circle of domina-
tion, the smaller will be, ceteris paribus, the
sphere of thought, emotion, interests, and
attributes which individuals have in com-
mon and which form them into a mass. In so
far as domination is concerned with what
the individuals have in common, the indi-
vidual’s submission to domination is directly
related to the size of the dominated circles.
According to the author, the following prin-
ciple is hereby demonstrated: “The larger
the number of individuals ruled by the one
[the tyrant], the smaller the part of the in-
dividual which he dominates.”?

Simmel’s hypothesis can be said to have
applied to most tyrannies in history. If we
think of ancient Egypt, Babylonia-Assyria,
Persia, and the Roman Empire, the most
atrocious tyranny at the center of power did
not (apart from spasmodic punitive expedi-
tions) make life uncomfortable on the pe-
riphery. In the tyrannies of the Italian states
of the Renaissance and even in the absolute
monarchies which ruled Europe from the
sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries, the
subject who did not come into touch with
the princely court did not experience the di-
rect impact of tyrannical government, pro-
vided that he did not meddle in politics. In
czarist Russia and Hohenzollern Prussia a
comparatively small part of the individual’s
life was subject to domination.

Even modern dictatorship exemplified
this rule at the beginning. Italian fascism
did not, at first, interfere greatly with the
life of the nonpolitical person; nor did Pol-
ish, Yugoslav, or Hungarian authoritarian-
ism between the two world wars. Austria’s
semidictatorship followed the rule. No state,
except Germany, achieved a full totalitari-
anism. This failure did not, however, gen-
erally rest in a lack of desire, except perhaps
in the case of Austria, but in the incapacity
of the dictatorial rulers to recognize the so-
cial requirements of modern tyranny and in
a lack of courage to go to the full length of
the consequent conclusions.

How far did German national socialism
follow the rule? Admittedly, there was, right
from the beginning, a great deal of super-
ficial ostentation. There were flags, drums,
parades, and speeches. Interferences with
life, liberty, and property of political op-
ponents and the Jews were far-reaching from
the start. But even naziism found that the
process of killing and uprooting democracy
in a modern community has to be slow and
systematic. At first, there was still a consid-
erable neutral or hesitant public opinion to
be considered. Naziism, however, was able
to profit from new and old conflicts of loyal-
ties, which led the public to accept measures
which in normal times would have been con-
sidered entirely illegal or unjustifiable, pro-
vided that they did not go too far at any one
time. One of the reasons for the acquiescence
of the people in the deprivation of their lib-
erties was the disproportion between the
actual technique of government and the
ideas of the masses with regard to the sym-
bols of government. This disproportion was
the breach in the democratic fortress into
which authoritarian propaganda could in-
filtrate, to the destruction of popular loyal-
ties to democratic institutions.

To give an exhaustive survey of political
techniques applied by naziism in the stage of
transition would go beyond the scope of
this essay. But, to give an example, the mili-
tary form of procedure suggested to the
average German that parliament was a kind
of military unit. The Reichstag was ad-
dressed by Nazi ministers as if they were its
commanding officers reading the order of the
day. They could draw on a natural procliv-
ity for discipline and soldierly display. Many
Germans fell into the trap so easily that
after 1933 it was quite common to hear them
maintain that theirs was merely an im-
proved and democratized version of the
former Hohenzollern regime. Thus in its
first years of power naziism merely played
at the tradition of “constitutional dictator-
ship” which the Prussian monarchy had cre-
ated. It was pretended that the dictatorship
was but a temporary expedient, adopted for
a phase in the national development. Nazi-
ism was hiding, so to speak, behind the tra-
ditional forms of tyranny, while it estab-
lished a regime quite unprecedented in his-
tory.

The mechanism sketched by Simmel
would have run counter to all totalitarian
purposes; the regime, always anxious to
draw on expert advice, labored ceaselessly to
overcome that social mechanism; with all
the knowledge of modern social and political
organization at its disposal, controlling all
technological inventions of the industrial
age, it was temporarily successful, but only
to some extent. Channels of various types
were prepared to catch all those parts of the
individual personality that might wish to
escape domination. There was the Arbeits-
Jront for trade-unionists; children had to en-
rol in the Hitler Youth Movement, and
father had to do military exercises several
days a week; “strength through joy” looked
after leisure, all of which was rather like a
travesty of Plato’s Republic.

Yet the results of totalitarian integration
under Hitler, although they do not disprove
the tendency toward a social equilibrium
between liberty and authority, derogated
Herbert Spencer’s assumption that this
tendency is a permanent law. National so-
cialism was able to prove that a government
that controls the principal means of power
and communication can dominate not only
the citizen’s external but also his private life
and, what is more, can control his very
thoughts. A metaphysical and quasi-reli-
gious background of such ideologies facili-
tates these techniques and tends to make
their effect cumulative. This has been no-
ticed by several writers.4 For, once such
propaganda can affect the upper strata of
the human hierarchy of values,’ processes of
imitation, emulation, domination, and ad-
justment are likely to help beliefs which are
quasi-religious in character. Thus it is pos-
sible to exceed the natural limits of domina-
tion over large numbers of individuals.

There can be little doubt that Stalinist
communism has, since World War II,
adopted several of the Nazi techniques of
totalitarian domination; just as naziism had
originally learned from Soviet communism.
The coup d’état in Czechoslovakia of 1948
and the subsequent integration of all social
and political life into the Communist system
bear witness to that.

On the other hand, the social limits to
domination still present difficulties to dicta-
torship. Marshal Tito’s apostasy from Com-
munist orthodoxy has amply proved the
danger to a dictatorship that sets out to
dominate too extensive a geographical area.
Whether this limit to tyranny within the
large-scale community can be overcome will,
in my view, depend on three main condi-
tions: (a) the proportion of opportunists to
loyal partisans, (6) the number of overseers
available, and (c) the efficiency of the social
techniques applied.

During the later stages of World War II
the second condition presented an ever in-
creasing problem to the Hitler regime. Un-
der any authoritarian rule the number of
overseers whose loyalty can be relied upon
under all circumstances will be small in rela-
tion to the number of those whose loyalties
will be conditioned by material advantages
derived from the regime. Thus, once totali-
tarianism is opposed from the outside, be it
war or peace, the majority of overseers will
be inclined to strike a balance between mo-
mentary actual advantages and their fear of
prospective dangers.

One of the totalitarian techniques which

through the intermediate services of Hegel, ex-
tensively “borrowed” from Augustine’s theo-
logical interpretation of history. Whereas Augustine
spoke of a struggle between the Heavenly Kingdom
and the Kingdom of Satan, Marx spoke of the
perpetual class struggle between exploiters and
exploited. The classless society represents heaven,
and in both cases the outcome is predetermined.
Whereas in Augustine the struggle between good
and evil has entered a new decisive stage with the
advent of the Christian church, in Karl Marx it is
the proletariat organized in its party which brings
salvation,
satisfies the need of a balance between free-
dom and authority and thus facilitates to-
talitarian integration is, as Simmel knew
well, the technique of pseudo-toleration.
The relatively considerable degree of criti-
cism permitted to German citizens often as-
tonished visitors from Western countries.
Similarly, Communist-dominated countries
are not too sensitive about the convenient
safety valve which they call “constructive
criticism.’”’ But, once criticism hardens into
opposition, no minor punishments are ap-
plied but rather a policy of liquidation.
After a modern authoritarian group has
assumed power, the former democratic par-
ties become completely submerged. Their
energy is destroyed, and, after the demo-
cratic leaders are eliminated or rendered
harmless, their partisans become docile fol-
lowers of authoritarianism. This was the
case as much in prewar Germany, Italy,
Austria, Hungary, and, to a lesser extent,
Poland and Yugoslavia as is the case in
present-day Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Ru-
mania, and the Eastern zone of Germany.
What has Simmel got to say on this point?
mon suppression by national socialism
would divide the German opposition to such
an extent that the Communists sometimes
denounced their democratic comrades-in-
arms to the Gestapo; nor could he have fore-
seen how easily former Fascists were en-
rolled by the Communist regimes in some of
the countries of eastern Europe. Here is an-
other social mechanism of domination, the
efficiency of which is likely to be intensified
by modern methods of technology and
propaganda. As the means of communica-
tion make distance shrink, so totalitarian-
ism is able to press against the other pat-
terns of conflict in an entire state or even
continent, once these conflicts have been
artificially stereotyped by propaganda.

Once the former constituent group ele-
ments of democratic society have been ef-
fectively disrupted and paralyzed, totali-
tarian tyranny can proceed toward the con-
structive process of integration. Simmel
says:

By the submission of many divergent groups
to a single master, the latter facilitates domina-
tion by taking on the position of a referee.
Conflicts and divergencies between the an-
tagonistic suppressed groups can be exploited,
and new wide common interests can be created
for groups varying from children’s play-groups
to religious and political parties if a common
denominator can be found.7
in the realm of international relations after
1939, when the Nazis alternated in favor
shown to the various nations integrated
within the New Order.

There have been some tendencies in post-
war Soviet policy which indicate that it is
not entirely averse to this technique. In a so-
ciological analysis of Soviet techniques one
must bear in mind the undisputed fact that
the teachings of Marx and Lenin still serve
as a supreme authority and orthodox sol-
vent, whatever the temporary strategy and
tactics may be: “The task of a truly revolu-
tionary party is not to declare the impos-
sible renunciation of all compromises, but to
be able through all compromises, as far as
they are unavoidable, to remain true to its
principles, to its class, to its revolutionary
task.’’8

These permissible compromises permit
the application of techniques as they are
outlined by Simmel. They have allowed in-
ternational communism to come to a tem-
porary agreement with German national so-
cialism in 1939 and with Western democracy
in 1941. International communism has al-
ways disliked “reactionary nationalism” in
thesmall statesof eastern, central, and south-
eastern Europe. And yet it has, since the dis-
solution of the Comintern, given it every
encouragement. It is admittedly not easy to
pose as the champion of several conflicting
rival nationalisms, e.g., to support at the

8 Lenin, Collected Works, XXI, Book I, 152.
same time the cause of German unity and
Polish territorial integrity; or to support
simultaneously Czech and Hungarian na-
tionalism; or, as the case of Tito proves so
clearly, Yugoslav and Italian patriotism.
But the Soviets have so far successfully
played the role of referee, just as Simmel
foreshadowed it (in this task they have been
more successful even than the National So-
cialists, e.g., the German attempt to keep
the peace between Hungary and Rumania in
World War II). In some countries, such as
Italy and Poland, communism has even at-
tempted to come to a working agreement
with Roman Catholicism. It has certainly
tried hard to find common denominators in
Poland and eastern Germany, not only on
the left but also on the right side of the party
alignment.

These few examples may help to assist
those who are seriously interested in the dis-
covery of the hidden forces which help the
very real tendency toward autocratic rule.
That which outwardly represents itself as a
complicated social process is often merely a
simple but ingenious social technique. As
with every technique, much depends on the
ethical end to which it is applied. Simmel’s
treatment of the social process of domina-
tion in relation to formal-sociological group
constellations deserves, therefore, our clos-
est attention.
