Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

 

EVR LeU
The Extra-Professional Role of the Lawyer
Author(s): Walter I. Wardwell and Arthur L. Wood
Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 61, No.
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2773531
Accessed: 06-06-2016 18:40 UTC
Little attention has been paid in sociolog-
ical literature to the way in which occupa-
tion affects one’s other social obligations.
Some of the correlates of occupation, such as
socioeconomic level or style of life, have been
studied; but not much attention has been
devoted to the expectations and obligations
based on occupational role which determine
a person’s other behavior.

The lawyer (and the same thing appears
to be true of some other professional groups)
is expected to do certain things not part of
his technical work but demanded of him
simply because he is a lawyer. For example,
political activity has long been almost an at-
tribute of the lawyer’s role even though it is
clearly not part of his specific function. To
what extent is there an extra-professional, or
citizenship, role peculiar to lawyers, and
what theoretical and practical significance
has it? That is the topic of this paper.

We discuss the lawyer’s professional role
only to exclude it from our inquiry. Whether
the lawyer be functioning as advocate
(pleader in court), attorney (agent or rep-
resentative in negotiations), or legal coun-
selor (adviser), he is subject to three general
sets of obligations laid down in the canons of
legal ethics—obligations to clients, to col-
leagues, and to society at large, the latter
most specifically as an officer of the court.
Although there are potential conflicts be-
tween these different role-obligations, as
Carl Taeusch has adequately shown,’ the
obligations themselves are usually clearly
stated, generally known to lawyers, and to a
substantial degree observed by them.

The lawyer’s citizenship role is by no
means so clear cut. It is in the penumbra of
the professional role, so to speak. We may
define it residually as those behavior expecta-
tions pertaining to the lawyer in relation to his
community and society which are not those of
every citizen and which are not part of the
technical function of the lawyer. It excludes
such things as the lawyer’s general obliga-
tion as an officer of the court to see that the
administration of justice is properly carried
out. It is also intended to exclude behavior
expectations common to broad segments of
the community which may happen to in-
clude lawyers among them, such as upper
socioeconomic groups, professional people in
general, etc.; for there are obviously special
citizenship obligations (noblesse oblige)
common to such groups which are hence not
peculiar to lawyers. The lawyer’s citizenship
role thus excludes behavior expected of any
citizen, qua citizen, and includes only those
special community role-expectations per-
taining to the lawyer, qua lawyer.

2 Professional and Business Ethics (New York:
Henry Holt & Co., 1926), chaps. ii and iii.
One other general area of extra-profes-
sional role-expectations, tangential, as it
happens, to the subject of this paper, is the
lawyers’ social relationships with persons
with whom they interact professionally.
There are three such groups. First, “extra-
technical” relationships with colleagues ap-
pear not only within a firm but among most
members of the bar. Friendly association on
a first-name basis is expected of lawyers out-
side the courtroom.

Clients comprise the second group. A
most interesting phenomenon is the indefi-
nite line between what constitutes legal and
extra-legal problems of clients. By the latter
we mean such things as problems of personal
adjustment, purely business decisions, labor
relations policy, etc. A few lawyers particu-
larly enjoy the opportunity to be amateur
psychologists and become quite adept at
counseling. Others become expert in refer-
ring clients to specialized community agen-
cies and individuals. And still others say
that they just “get rid of” such clients.

A somewhat different aspect of lawyer-
client relations is the problem of keeping
professional relations separate from friend-
ship, for friendship is precisely what a pro-
fessional relationship is not. The lawyer is
interested primarily in his client’s case, not
in his client as a person. If he should let him-
self become involved in his client’s emo-
tional problems or should himself develop an
affective relationship with his client (either
positive or negative), he might not be able
to provide him with efficient legal service.
However, pressures for the professional rela-
tionship of lawyer and client to break down
into something more personal are inherent
in the situation because of the client’s fear
and anxiety and his psychological depend-
ence on the professional expert.

The third group of people with whom the
lawyer deals professionally and develops
extra-technical relationships is made up of
court and law-enforcement personnel. To
the extent that the lawyer cultivates these
relationships as necessary to the conduct of
his practice, as in the case of such unethical
devices as client solicitation through the
police or connivance in the matter of court
dockets, they would, of course, not be con-
sidered “‘extra-technical.” However, per-
sonal friendships do arise and may modify
the structure of law practice by the appear-
ance of what can be called the informal or-
ganization of courts and the administration
of justice. Naturally, the incidence of such
informal contact varies considerably as be-
tween lawyers, depending on their type and
field of practice. This subject has been more
fully analyzed by Arthur L. Wood in a re-
port prepared for the Survey of the Legal
Profession.?

In the “lawyer’s citizenship role,” what is
the positive content?* We suggest the fol-
lowing: First, it is generally expected that a
lawyer will be available as a public servant.
While the connotation of this term is differ-
ent from that of “politician,” the denotation
in general seems to be the same. Although
many lawyers in large cities do not enter
politics, our data suggest that in smaller
communities practically all lawyers are at
some time political officeholders or are
otherwise active in politics and that even in
large cities there are social pressures, al-
though somewhat attenuated, encouraging
lawyers to be active in politics.

Second, it is generally assumed that law-
yers will be available for various kinds of
non-political leadership, particularly where
a community service or philanthropic pur-
pose is involved. And related to such or-
ganizations are the fund-raising drives
which maintain them. There seem to be
strong sentiments that lawyers should and
will serve on such committees—as, indeed,
they do.

Third, there are law-related activities,
such as legal-aid societies and lawyer-refer-
ence plans, for which the legal profession as
a whole feels a collective responsibility. Al-
though not all lawyers may be active par-
ticipants, some feel a personal or perhaps a
professional obligation to work on such
problems.

To what extent are there social pressures
on the lawyer to fulfil this extra-professional
role? Interviews with lawyers reveal a wide
range of attitudes. At one extreme is the
lawyer who says: “A lawyer is naturally in-
terested in the government of his commu-
nity. It’s almost a part of his profession. He
knows more about it than the layman.” At
the other extreme is the man who is in poli-
tics solely to build up his practice: “You
can’t afford to ignore politics. ... Other
things being equal, I would like not to be in
politics. I suffer the torture of the damned
when I have to speak....It’s not the
money in politics, it’s the contacts. As a
lawyer it’s nice to know people... . You
won’t make a nickel unless people know you
are there.” The following account lies some-
where in between these two types of social
pressures: “I was brought up that way.
My father was [active in politics]. Soaked it
up with my pablum.... After a while it
gets to bea habit. When election time comes
around you begin to run a temperature.” In
the case of non-political activity there are
similar pressures to be active:

Whether he likes it or not a lawyer has to be
active in some civic affairs.

I wish now that I haa taken an active part
{in community affairs]. It is something that
could have been done that wasn’t done.

Lawyers are fairly well qualified. Others
won’t or can’t get up to speak. If a town is good
enough to bring your kids up in, it’s good
enough to help out.
than in a smaller New England community,
56 per cent of the solo practitioners had been
active in politics, as compared with 40 per
cent of the partners and 28 per cent of the
associates in firms. In the case of participa-
tion in non-political organizations the rela-
tionship was reversed—48 per cent of the
partners being in the more active group, as
compared with 36 per cent of the solo prac-
titioners and 23 per cent of the associates in
firms.

The key to this difference lies in the rela-
tion of political and non-political activity to
career advancement. An associate in an es-
tablished firm does not need to attract cli-
ents to himself personally but merely to do a
good technical job on the cases to which he
is assigned. There is little reason for him to
seek political office. In fact, many firms pre-
fer that their members not become involved
in politics at all, for fear of alienating clients.
As the associate advances within his firm,
however, he seeks wider contacts within the
community. These enhance the “public rela-
tions” of the firm and are important in at-
tracting and retaining important clients.
Thus we can understand why firm members
are more active than other lawyers in non-
political organizations. Since they feel
obliged as lawyers to be active in community
affairs and since politics is often distasteful
or closed to them, they participate more fre-
quently in non-political organizations than
do solo practitioners.

Solo practitioners have a difficult time
getting established in law practice. They
need to become known in the community
not merely as public-minded individuals but
as lawyers, because only in this way will they
attract clients. A young lawyer can estab-
lish this kind of reputation most easily if he
goes into politics, a field that is formally
open to all citizens who desire to enter, in
contrast with some non-political organiza-
tions which demand high social qualifica-
tions. Politics also provides lawyers with a
natural outlet for their talents and brings
them more into the public eye than most
other kinds of community service. Although
they usually have to accept very minor po-
litical offices at first, young lawyers or-
dinarily have sufficient time to devote to
them and to the party tasks which can lead
to more important political offices. Hence
solo practitioners are more likely to adopt
the political route to prominence in civic
affairs. Nevertheless, it is not uncommon for
lawyers to abandon politics as soon as they
get established in practice.

The lawyer’s extra-professional role is
thus not independent of his professional role
but is, in fact, closely related to it. However,
we cannot escape the fact that he has “‘extra-
curricular” obligations of a special kind
simply because he is a lawyer. While the
same may be true of certain other occupa-
tional groups, such as physicians, the law-
yer’s extra-professional obligations are dis-
tinguished by being related closely to the
organized political unit and to formally or-
ganized groups serving community pur-
poses. This brings the lawyer’s extra-profes-
sional activities to public attention more
than is true of other groups and gives them
special significance. There results a sense of
urgency about the lawyer’s citizenship role
which does not exist in the case of other oc-
cupational groups. This is revealed both in
the internalized feelings of lawyers and in
the expectations and demands by others
that lawyers should be active in community
affairs. From this point of view it makes
little difference whether lawyers perceive
community activity principally as a means
to getting a reputation as a lawyer and
building a practice or as an end in itself.
There is no doubt that at least some seg-
ments of the public view the man who is
active in community affairs as behaving as a
lawyer should. Other things being equal, this
man will be recognized professionally as a
lawyer more quickly than one who is not
active. These attitudes and expectations
constitute the social pressure on the lawyer
to fulfil his role as a citizen.
