Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

 

EVR LeU
REFERENCES

Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2773530?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
This paper is a report on the use of a
cumulative scale with three response cate-
gories as a technique for detecting and
measuring felt role conflict. The study on
which it is based began as an attempt to
explore role conflict among leaders of labor-
union locals. In the beginning the research
followed such typical techniques as inter-
viewing, observing meetings, and talking
informally with union officers over drinks.
Attention was focused on one local union of
950 members and 6 officers; however, sup-
plementary research was conducted with
officers of the international union and of
two other locals within the same company.

“Role” is used here to mean the way in
which a person carries into action the con-
figuration of rights and obligations of a
status or structured position he occupies
within a group. It includes the way he de-
fines himself and the behavior appropriate
to his position and also the way others de-
fine him and what his behavior ought to be.
“Role conflicts” refers to the situation in
which incompatible demands are placed
upon an actor (either an individual or a
group) because of his role relationships with
two or more groups. Generally the person(s)
involved feel internally the obligation to
meet the competing demands, face the

1The author wishes to express appreciation to
the Laboratory of Social Relations and the Jacob
Wertheim Committee, Harvard University, for
financial support of the research on which this
paper is based; to Professors Samuel A. Stouffer
and Andrew F. Henry, of Harvard, for helpful
criticism; and especially to Robert Potter for tech-
nical assistance and suggestions.
threat of possible sanctions if they fail to
fulfil either demand, and yet find it impos-
sible to comply fully with opposing obliga-
tions.

One major area of role conflict in the
union locals studied occurred between the
family and the union. An illustration is
found in the problem faced by an officer
whose wife was rushed to the hospital for an
emergency operation on an evening when he
felt his presence at a union meeting would
mean the difference between victory and
defeat for himself and his group in an elec-
tion. Unable to resolve the dilemma, he
tried to fulfil both obligations: he spent the
evening rushing between the hospital and
the meeting, concentrating on neither.

The other groups whose interests were
opposed most frequently to those of the
local union were the company, the commu-
nity, subgroups within the local, and the
national union. It seemed impossible, how-
ever, to rank reference groups according to
their relative power to influence decision-
making by using only traditional techniques.
In the complexity of actual situations it was
sometimes uncertain just what groups were
placing the union officer in conflict, and the
force exerted by any one group usually re-
mained positive or negative within the con-
text of any single problem, so that its power
in the reverse direction could not be tested.

An attempt was made in the present
study to overcome these difficulties by de-
vising a questionnaire which posed situa-
tions that required making decisions impor-
tant to union members. Each situation was
each. Then moral and practical sanctions
are brought into the situation and system-
atically varied by the qualifying pressures.
The respondent is invited to make an
either-or choise, withdrawing from one role
or the other. However, he is offered an alter-
native: “Retain both positions.” This third
course is plainly labeled a decision of des-
peration, for he is told, “You really haven’t
time to do both jobs well ” Responses in the
middle column are thus a rough index of
unresolved and felt role conflict.

The format adopted seems to have sever-
al advantages. First, by utilization of the

2 Frequencies for each response category are as
shown in the sample page from the questionnaire.
Effective V was 149. Reproducibility is .969. Two
triplets and a doublet use 7 of 8 items. Class scale
frequencies are 12, 40, 63, 34. The distribution of
marginals was made less satisfactory by having
only two cutting points for each item available for
use in contrived items. For a description of the H-
technique see S. A. Stouffer e¢ al., “A Technique for
Improving Cumulative Scales,” Public Opinion
Quarterly, XVI, No. 2 (September, 1952), 273-91.
“H-technique,” it forms a satisfactory scale.
Scalability serves notice that the manufac-
tured conflict sits astride a single dimension.
It is also evidence that, in the situation used,
the qualifying pressures bear a pattern of
cumulative force toward one goal or the
other. Since the cumulative patterns of pres-
sure belong to 4 common dimension, it is
justifiable to average over the eight pressure
combinations the percentage adopting one
role to the exclusion of the other, this to be
compared with the corresponding average
percentage adopting the opposite choice and
act of exclusion. The results offer a rough
estimate of the relative pull of one commit-
ment over the other. In this situation the
picture is given in Table 1.

The greater reluctance to resign from the
chief stewardship indicates a stronger com-
mitment to the union (the union as a whole,
the executive committee, and those one rep-
resents), and a relatively weaker commit-
ment to the Employees Club (management,
the group of employees who strongly favor
the club, and those who participate actively
in club programs). Of equal importance is
the indication given by the respondents’
choices of relative sensitivity to the welfare
and desires of the groups represented by the
roles which are in conflict. It is largely this
sensitivity which lends the power of influ-
ence to a reference group.

A second advantage of the format is that
it makes possible the ranking of the influ-
ence of the three reference groups used as
qualifying pressures and that, while ranking
each group’s power, the pressure of the other
two can be held constant.

All three pressures were effective in intro-
ducing consistent differences in responses.
The greatest shift in the decision of the role-
playing respondents came from yielding to
those they represented as chief stewards.
The results are presented in Table 2. In de-
termining the effectiveness of each reference
group, the pressures of the other two groups
are held constant.

The primacy of “the people you repre-
sent” is clear. As a reference group it exerts
greater influence on behavior than the other
two groups combined. Second in amount of
change it can effect in behavior in the situa-
tion posed is the executive committee, with
management close behind. Because of the
small difference between the latter two
groups, their relative influence as shown in
the table should be viewed with caution.
There are supporting data for the rank-
ing given, if we shift our attention to the
opposite response column, “Resign from
position of chief steward.” All three refer-
ence groups exert detectable pressure upon
the answers of the respondents. And again
the rank of effectiveness in working a shift
in response shows “people you represent” at
the top. Management pressure, however,
exerts a slightly greater force in this situa-
tion than does the executive committee.
Further evidence is found to validate the
ranking of pressures. Several questions on
background data are included on the final
page of the questionnaire. Twelve sub-
samples were selected on the basis of these
items. Four combined the categories of sex
and union responsibility: male—union mem-
bership plus some responsible union duty;
male—union membership only; female—
union membership plus; female—union
membership only. Four subsamples were de-
rived from combinations of sex and length
of service (over 15 years or 15 years and
under). The third group of four subsamples
came from combining length of service and
union responsibility. Comparisons of the ef-
ficacy of each of the three qualifying pres-
sures were then made for each subsample.
In 11 out of 12 cases the pressure of ‘people
you represent as chief steward” proved
strongest. The exception was a tie. Eight
out of 12 times the executive committee
took second place. All three pressures
showed weight in influencing responses.
Reference-group pressures proved in this
scale (as throughout most of the question-
naire) to be roughly additive. But an inter-
esting variation occurs when the two strong-
er pressures, “people you represent” and
“executive committee” are set to discourage
one from retaining the Employees Club
office. When these pressures are combined,
sures which support retaining the club office
increase, felt role conflict should also rise in
intensity. One possible characteristic of un-
resolved role conflict is an increasing tend-
ency to view the situation unrealistically—
to attempt more than one can accomplish.
It is possible to test whether this is so, for
the alternatives offered the respondents are
rejection of one of the roles or retaining
both under the condition that they “really
haven’t time to do both jobs well.” The hy-
pothesis will be supported if, as pressures
mount in favor of the Employees Club, a
higher percentage of answers fall in the
“Retain both positions” category.

With the ranking of pressures which has
been established (persons represented being
greatest, executive committee second, and
management lowest), the pattern of decreas-
ing frequencies of response in the “Retain
both positions” category, as shown in Table
Predicted Rank Order
of Questions by Fre-
quency of Response
in Middle Column Pressures Favoring Employees Club

All three

Persons represented and execu-
tive committee

Persons represented and manage-
ment

Persons represented

Executive committee and man-
agement

Executive committee

Management

None

Predicted order. 1>5>3>7>2>6>4>8
ence is only one point, however. On the
whole, the results substantiate what was
anticipated. Wherever there is a clear-cut
difference in the frequency, it is in the direc-
tion predicted. Since the range is only 33
(from 32 to 65), the results are encouraging.

The present paper grew out of a research
project designed to explore role conflict
among union leaders. It discusses a cumula-
tive-scale questionnaire which offers a tech-
nique for measuring sensitivity to positive
and negative reference-group pressures, and
at the same time for detecting and estimat-
ing the extent of felt role conflict which the
respondents are unable to resolve. Support
is presented for the hypothesis that one
characteristic of such role conflict is an in-
creasing tendency to view the dilemma un-
realistically.
Assume you are an officer of the Employees Club, which is largely supported by the company.

 

 

You believe strongly in the union and attend meetings regularly. Your fellow workers have chosen
you to be their Chief Steward, and you wonder whether you should resign from the club office so
you can devote your time to the job of Chief Steward. You really haven’t time to do both jobs well.
You feel responsible for the continued success of a program which you have started for the club,
and at the same time you feel obligated to do a good job as Chief Steward.
I would be most likely to do the
following
In each of the following situations, please check the ap-
propriate space to indicate the action you would be most| Resign from
likely to take. Resign from|Retain both| position of
club office | positions chief
steward
An officer of the company tells you that if you continue
your good work in the Employees Club it may lead to a
management position. What if—
1. Both the union Executive Committee and the people
you represent as chief steward want you to keep the
club office 28 65 55
2. The executive committee wants you to keep the club)
office—the people you represent want you to serve as|
steward 63 53 32
3. The executive committee wants you to serve as steward—|
the people you represent want you to keep the club office 43 57 48
4, Both the executive committee and the people you repre-
sent want you to serve as steward 90 36 22
Your work as Chief Steward will give you more chance to
make a favorable showing before management than will
the club office. What if—
5. Both the executive committee and the people you repre-
sent want you to keep the club office 45 59 44
6. The executive committee wants you to keep the club|
office—the people you represent want you to serve as|
steward gl 48 19
7. The executive committee wants you to serve as steward]
—the people you represent want you to keep the club
office 57 58 33
8. Both the executive committee and the people you repre-
sent want you to serve as steward 105 32 11
Your work as Chief Steward will give you more chance to
make a favorable showing before management than will
the club office. What if—
