Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
Much of the current work on family dis-
solution has emphasized social-psychological
factors. The present paper will address itself
to a complementary, but different, question:
How might aspects of group structure acti-
vate some of these social-psychological fac-
tors leading to breakup?? If it can be as-
sumed that family stability is one of the
norms of Western culture, the latter ques-
tion then becomes a problem in social con-
trol. The following kinds of questions will
therefore be raised:

1. Will a group which has homogeneous
values enforce its norms as well as a group
which has heterogeneous values?

2. Will a group which is structured so as
to allow its members easy ingress and egress
be able to enforce its norms as well as a
group which is not?

3. Under what conditions will formal or-
ganization act as a mode of enforcing norms
as opposed to informal organization?

4. Will a group which is structured to
utilize external modes of control be able to
enforce its norms better than a group which
uses internal modes of control?

Questions such as these differ consider-
The religious tenet that marriage is a
good per se has played a great role in keep-
ing the rates of family breakup low in West-
ern society as compared to many primitive
non-Westernized cultures. Within the
Western world the Catholic church has gen-
erally put more organized effort into main-
taining marriage as a good per se than have
the Protestant churches. The Roman Catho-
lic church does allow separations, but sepa-
ration permits no remarriage and thus may
be harsher than the Protestants’ divorce.
The Catholic church, therefore, more than
the Protestant churches, officially discour-
ages de facto family breakup. If this is
granted, then the relation between family
breakup‘ and one of the simplest concepts of
population per 100 of the total married population.
The second is the total who (for marital reasons)
are living separately from their spouses per 100 total
married population. People were considered to be
living separately from their spouses for marital
reasons if they gave as their reason for separate
residence something besides (2) occupational rea-
sons, (b) housing shortage, and (c) husband a
prisoner of war or missing. The assumption is that
if any systematic error occurs (such as under-
reporting of separations), it will be randomly dis-
tributed among the population.

This index of marital breakup has several po-
tential weaknesses. A serious one is that it is sub-
ject to effects of migration. People might have
obtained a divorce in one area and come to live in
another. To associate the characteristics of the
area they now live in with factors of breakup
might therefore be fallacious. In the present dis-
cussion this error will be minimized, since we are
able to some extent to provide separate figures for
old residents and new ones (refugees). Perhaps
another serious error might be the reliability of such
classifications as religion, refugee status, etc. It will
be generally assumed that where the census lists
more Catholics in an area, there will actually be
more than in another area where it lists fewer
Catholics.
group structure can be tested. Those who
advocate an “additive” theory of group
structure would state that the group is a
sum of the individuals in it.5 Translated into
terms of the present subject matter, this
would mean that the more Catholics living
in an area, the less likely is family breakup.

To test this hypothesis, a sample of areas
from the German census of 1950 was
grouped in terms of the proportion of Catho-
lics living in them.® If breakup rates de-
crease as the proportion of Catholics in-
creases, it would support the summation
theory of group structure.

The figures in Table 1 indicate that the
data do not support an additive theory of
group structure. In fact, in several instances
the opposite appears. Areas which contain
a minority or a majority member of a group
might lead to enforcement of the norm all
out of proportion to the sum of the people in
the group holding the norm. To test this
formulation, each area was classified into
those with populations of 100-90 per cent
Catholics or Protestants, 90-75 per cent,
75-55 per cent, and those with a bare ma-
jority of less than 55 per cent.

An examination of Table 2 reveals a curi-
ous pattern. Those structures containing
100-90 per cent majority and those having a
bare majority of less than 55 per cent had
the lowest breakup rates. This fact holds re-
gardless of whether they are Catholic or
Protestant.

Assuming for the moment that these find-
ings are not spurious, we might ask what role
is played by majority structure in the en-
forcement of group norms. One type of ex-
planation was given by Durkheim—i.e., the
more homogeneous a group is, the more
strictly its norms are enforced. Durkheim
postulated a circular effect: public enforce-
ment leads to stricter adherence, which leads
to greater enforcement, etc. Many other
theories, such as differential association,
which some criminologists postulate, might
also account for the low rate of breakup or
high enforcement of norms in a majority
structure of 100-90 per cent. The strict en-
forcement of norms by homogeneous Puri-
tan groups would illustrate Durkheim’s the-
sis.

However, his thesis would not explain the
low rates in areas which have a bare major-
ity of 55 per cent or less. Theories such as
those advocated by Sorokin are necessary.
Sorokin points out that an explicit threat to

8£mile Durkheim, The Division of Labor in
Society (Glencoe: Free Press, 1947), Book I, chaps.
ii and vii. It is interesting to note that many years
later Kurt Lewin in his “Group Decision and
Social Change” in Readings in Social Psychology
(New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1947), pp. 330-45,
pointed out in a series of experiments the importance
of public commitment for enforcement of group
norms. In order to study more fully the social-
psychological mechanism by which control takes
place, data on individual Catholics and Protestants
would have to be gathered and contrasted with the
group data. Unfortunately, this information was
not available.
the power position of a group leads to
greater enforcement of its norms.° This the-
ory, properly detailed, might explain why
religious structures with majorities of 55 per
cent or less have low breakup rates. Perhaps
groups containing only bare majorities
(other things being equal) are more likely to
feel threatened. If the simultaneous opera-
tion of both conformity based on similarity
of values and conformity based on threat to
values could be postulated, then the curvi-
linear relation between religious majority
structure and family breakup might be ex-
plained. Rather than an additive theory, our
data suggest that group structures in which
there exists either extreme homogeneity or a
12 The most recent statement of this point is made
by Helmut Schelsky, ‘‘The Family in Germany,”
Marriage and Family Living, XVI, No. 4 (Novem-
ber, 1954), 331 ff. The pros and cons of the general
point as to what happens to families in isolation
and under stress have been discussed by studies of
the family in the depression and more recently
during wars. It might also be noted that students of
mass cultures (Huizinga, Erich Fromm, Ortega y
Gasset, and David Riesman) have argued that the
isolation of the individual in a mass society leads
to an outward conformity rather than to a primary
group cohesion. This might well mean low breakup
rates if family stability is a norm of the mass
society.

33 Georg Simmel, “‘Stranger,’’ The Sociology of
Georg Simmel, ed. Kurt Wolff (Glencoe: Free Press,
1950), pp. 402-9. This gives a catalogue of ways in
which a stranger can relate himself to the group.

4 Though this point has not been elaborated,
some aspects of it have been discussed by R. K.
Merton and Alice Kitt. They point out that one
factor which leads to an acceptance by large
minorities of new members into a group is the
extent to which the group is organized (see Continui-
ties in Social Research: Studies in the Scope and Meth-
od of ‘The American Soldier,” ed. Robert K. Merton
and Paul F. Lazarsfeld [Glencoe: Free Press,
1950], pp. 88 ff. and 96 ff.).
hypotheses might hold; the real question is
the strength of each.

Our data seem to indicate that the refu-
gee in Germany is a nonconformist. Table 3
shows that refugees have a much higher
breakup rate than non-refugees. A further
look at the ratio of separation to divorce
(Table 3) indicates that the refugees make
much greater use of separation. This may be
an index of several things: for instance, that
as aliens they do not feel impelled to use the
institutional forms of breakup, that they are
poorer and cannot afford a divorce, or that
they are seen as a threat to group norms and
therefore laws are more strictly enforced
against them. Again it may be that the index
is weak and that people who seek an excuse
to separate from their spouses are more
prone to become refugees willingly. Like-
wise, many refugees who flee for political
reasons may have difficulty in escaping with
their entire families. However, if the index is
sound, the figures definitely do not support
the hypothesis that the refugee family is
“stable,” as some recent writers on the Ger-
The Kreisen were further categorized ac-
cording to the proportion of resident refu-
gees. This not only allowed contrast of the
refugee majority structures with the reli-
gious majority structures but permitted
other questions like the following: How will
the presence of other refugees affect the indi-
vidual refugee? Since the refugee has a
higher rate of breakup and uses separation
as the mode of breakup, will the presence of
other refugees reinforce this behavior, or
will it weaken it? How will the presence of
refugees affect the non-refugee: will he feel
threatened and enforce his own norms, or
will he use the refugee as a model in order to
escape his own norms? The analogy with the
religious majority-minority structure is not
complete, for there are no areas which con-
tain a majority of refugees. However, we
can examine the non-refugee majority/refu-
gee minority situation. The data indicate
that refugee structure affects the behavior
of neither refugees nor non-refugees.

So the question might be asked, Why does
minority structure affect religious but not
refugee groups? This fact might be ac-
counted for by two facets of group structure.
First, the refugee group, unlike religious
groups, does not represent a positive refer-
ence group. The status of refugee is thrust
upon the refugee, and he would not willingly
choose it. Therefore, he remains relatively
unaffected by fellow-refugees. Second, nei-
ther refugees nor non-refugees have a sizable
formal social organization through which
they act as a social unit. Though it is true
that refugees have a political party, it can-
“Urbanism” is a concept which refers
simultaneously to many aspects of group
structure—the size of the group, the open
structuring of it, a highly developed division
of labor, etc. Many writers on the family
consider that urbanization and industrializa-
tion are two of the major factors affecting
western family breakup. Three divergent
views are held: (a) urbanization is leading to
the breakdown of the family; (b) urbanism
is leading to a different type of family, which
is just as strong as the old; and (c) urbanism
is leading to a different type of family, which
has a greater tendency toward breakup than
the old one. It is important to see how this
general structural complex called “urban-
ism” relates to family dissolutions, since all
our previous considerations may be ac-
counted for by it.

If urban structure is related to family
breakup, then the rates should go down as
the size of the city goes down, while the
reverse should occur if it is a factor in family
integration. An inspection of Table 4 indi-
cates surprisingly enough that neither trend
emerges. Though it is true that rural areas
have lower rates than urban areas, it is also
true that small towns have larger rates than
big cities. Further analysis indicates that it
is an increase in separation rather than di-
vorce which brings the rates of the small
towns up. That divorce and separation re-
late to urbanism in quite different ways can
be seen from the ratio of separation to di-
vorce given in Table 4. The ratio is higher in
rural areas than in urban areas. This means
that even though marriages in rural areas do
not break up as much as those in urban
areas, when the couples finally decide to
break up, they are more likely to select sepa-
ration as the mode of parting.

This finding would indeed be paradoxical
if by “separation” were meant desertion, for
a large city would seem to be a far more logi-
cal environment for desertion. However,
sider Tables 5A, 5B, 5C, and 5D. One of the
first things that strikes the eye is that there
are virtually no cities contining 90 per cent
or more Protestants or Catholics. The state-
ment that areas with overwhelming religious
majorities and those having less than 55 per
cent majorities are most ideal for keeping
down family breakup must be modified. The
data allow the statement to be tested only in
rural areas and in one size of city. One can
argue either that an abbreviated form of the
curve appears, or he can advance a new
hypothesis—that the more evenly divided a
group structure is, the more its norms tend
to be enforced. Either hypothesis can be
tested by looking at each row of Tables 5A,
5B, 5C, and 5D. Sixteen such rows have
three or more figures in them. Of these 16
rows, 15 have their highest breakup figure in
either of the central two categories (89-55
per cent). This is significantly better than
chance at the .05 level and would therefore
support the old hypothesis that extreme ma-
jorities and evenly balanced groups reduce
breakup rates!” (This assumes that the
curves appear in abbreviated form.) This
finding holds in cities of all sizes (where data
are available) for refugees and non-refugees
and in both Protestant and Catholic areas.

To see how rural factors operate inde-
pendently of other variables, examine the 16
columns of Tables 5A, 5B, 5C, and 5D. In
each column a comparison can be made be-
tween a rural and an urban area. Of 46 pos-
sible comparisons which can be made, in 45
cases the rural environment has a lower
breakup rate than the urban area, This is
significantly better than chance at the .01
level and thus supports the hypothesis that
rural-urban differences operate independ-
ently of other factors. Though the figures are
not presented in this paper, in 41 out of 46
cases the ratio of separation to divorce is
larger for rural than for urban areas. This is
significant at the .01 level and supports the
hypothesis that rural-urban influences on

17 The test of significance used, unless otherwise
specified, is that of ‘‘Confidence Belts for Propor-
tions” taken from Wilfrid J. Dixon and Frank J.
Massey, Jr., Introduction to Statistical Analysis

(New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 1951),
pp. 320-23.
RELATION BETWEEN CATHOLIC MAJORITY STRUCTURES, CITY SIZE,
AND MARITAL BREAKUP OF NON-REFUGEES
Caruozic Majority Structures (PER CENT)

Crry Size 100-90 89-75 74-55 54-50
100,000 plus....... 00 wee seee (538,7)* 87,3) (192,2)
99,000-50,000.... 0 ..... dif, dit "6 (30,3)

4.33 3.39
49,000-20,000.... (19,250) ass, ') (68,450) (13,687)
5.58 6.63 4.72
19,000 orless..... 9... Qt, 112) a 4) cesses
6.44 9.77
Rural areas........ (283 ,6) q oe 7) is. 7) 80.7)
2.73 3.26 2.78

* The figures in parentheses are the total popu’ in each box of the table. It is given to the
nearest hundred persons.
RELATION BETWEEN PROTESTANT MAJORITY STRUCTURES, CITY SIZE,
AND MARITAL BREAKUP OF NON-REFUGEES
Protestant Majorrty Structures (Per Cent)

Crry SizE 100-90 89-75 74-55 54-50
00,000 plus....... bees (343 ,0) (2,855, 1) (83,1)
6.70 7.59 5.56

99,000-50,000..... 0.2... 191, 5) (at, 0) (137, 4)
6.11 5.46 4.88

49,000-20,000....  ...... ol, 2) aig, 3.00 ee

5.75

19,000 orless...... . 2... 6. 8 @, 653) (5,9)
5°46 5.13

tural areas....... . (382, 0) (1,397,4) «or, 7) (599, 7)

3.84 4.06 3.25
18 The use of ‘external’ and ‘‘nternal’’ means
of control is not to be confused with the concepts
of the other- and inner-directedness (see David
Riesman, Nathan Glazer, and Reuel Denney, The
Lonely Crowd [Garden City: Doubleday Anchor
Books, 1953], pp. 28 ff., 34).

19 Intuitively, this index indicates the average
error a person is likely to make if he is studying
family breakup and neglects to consider the differ-
ence between rural and urban areas. The larger such
an error is, the more important it is to consider
the rural-urban distinction and the more weight
should be given to the theoretical variables in-
dexed by urbanism. Peter Blau pointed out in a
private conversation that the actual magnitude of
this difference would depend on the number of peo-
ple in each area and whether the investigator took
a random sample or selected areas on another basis.
In the present instance the index of difference was
computed by assuming equal weight to each box.
This was done because the interest in this paper is
in the theoretical weight of each variable, free of
any particular population distribution.
another, it says nothing about the magni-
tude of their contribution or about certain
types of interaction. An index was con-
structed for each variable which would re-
flect its independent contribution. This will
allow the examination of two other aspects
of group structure: the first is modes of con-
trol, both externalized and internalized. By
“externalized modes of control” is meant
that the group relies on other members of
the group to enforce the norms, while “‘inter-
nalized modes of control” means that the
individual himself is responsible for enforc-
ing the group norms.!® The second factor of
group structure which is of interest is the
communication channels—are they rela-
tively clear or shut?

Let us turn, first, to the index which
measures the magnitude of each variable.
The index will be illustrated in terms of
urbanism. For each of the 16 columns in
Tables 5A, 5B, 5C, and 5D, the average dif-
ferences (disregarding sign) between rural
and urban areas are computed. These dif-
ferences are averaged.!® Table 6 gives the
four variables and their index values. It
shows that refugee status and urbanism are
the major contributors to breakup, while re-
ligious differences seem to play the least role
(within Western culture).
20Some writers have argued that modern urban
areas have been especially susceptible to the ex-
ternal mechanism of control. This would be true
of the “‘other-oriented individual’”’ in Riesman ef al.,
op. cit. This extreme sensitivity to outward con-
formity has been noted by many other students of
mass culture. The fact that the Catholic religion
tends to stress the church and the organized group
as a mechanism of control, while the Protestants
tend to stress individual conscience and responsi-
bility, has been suggesed by Durkheim as well as
by many others. Emile Durkheim (Suicide (Glencoe:
Free Press, 1951]) says: ‘“‘The Catholic accepts his
faith ready made, without scrutiny....A whole
hierarchical system of authority is devised, with
marvelous ingenuity, to render tradition invariable.
... The Protestant is far more the author of his
faith. ... The very structure of the reformed cult
stresses this state of religious individualism’
(p. 158). This view of religion is especially pertinent
with regard to the problem of family breakup. For
the Catholic, marriage is a sacrament and therefore
subject to group (church) control, while for the
Protestant it is an individual matter. This factor,
of course, operates independently of the majority-
minority structure, so that where one has a homo-
geneous Protestant community, one would expect
great enforcement of norms, even though it was
considered an individual matter. Though we have
distinguished between external and internal modes
of control, it should be understood that these are
polar types. It is not suggested that internal modes
of control are completely devoid of group influence
but only relatively so.
would then expect them to be more sensitive
to variations in group structure.

For instance, variation in religious major-
ity structure results in an index of 1.70 in
Catholic areas but only 0.79 in Protestant
areas (significant at 0.10).2! In urban areas
where externalized means of social control
are also dominant, the effect of religious
structure is to bring about an average varia-
tion of 1.82 as compared to 0.65 in rural
areas.

However, another factor is probably more
important in regard to this latter finding.
The ability to communicate norms, to be
sensitive to violations of the norms, and to
employ procedures for control of deviance is
partly a function of the clearness of the com-
munication channels. Possibly in rural areas,
because of the smaller numbers, the com-
munity is more completely controlled.

Thus, though the rural communities
might not stress externalized modes of con-
trol, their better channels of communica-
tion allow them to use community pressure
more effectively. The clearness of channels
of communication and the extent of the ex-
ternalization of the modes of social control
might account for the fact that variations in
majority structure affect Catholic urban
areas most (2.70), Protestant urban areas
second (0.98), rural Catholic areas third
(0.70), and rural Protestant areas least
(0.60). (The difference between 0.70 and
0.60 is not statistically significant.)

Thus far we have spoken only about the
size of the variation, without indicating its
direction. If non-refugees are compared in
Catholic and Protestant areas, in 10 out of
14 cases the Catholic areas have a lower fig-
ure. The opposite occurs for the refugees—in
10 out of 14 cases the Catholic areas have a
higher rate. Why is it that it is more difficult
to control strangers in Catholic than Protes-
tant areas, while, conversely, it is much
simpler to control indigenous members?

If it is assumed that Catholics use ex-
ternal modes of control while Protestants
use internal ones, it might well be that ex-
ternal modes of control, with their stress on
group identity, might act as barriers to the
incorporation of strangers. A vicious circle
could ensue—the stranger refusing to con-
form because of his exclusion, which, in
turn, leads to further exclusion. On the other
hand, the figures indicate that for the non-
alien the external mode of control tends to
be more effective than the internal one.
These considerations suggest that external
modes of control might be more efficacious
in closed structures, while internal ones
might be more efficacious in open struc-
tures.?2
mechanism of control might differ where one
group contained an overwhelming majority
which adhered to the norm and another
group was equally divided between opposing
norms. At the same time, it was suggested
that both these structures were more propi-
tious for social control than that which con-
tained a moderate majority. Furthermore,
the extent to which the group was an open
or closed structure would affect the type of
control that was most efficacious: external
modes of control are better for closed struc-
tures, while internal ones are better for open
structures. In this connection it was also
pointed out that the enforcement of norms
on strangers would vary to the extent that
strangers had a formal organization and
whether they viewed their group as a posi-
tive reference group.

In all these considerations the data were
used in an illustrative manner rather than to
provide conclusive proof. Until further data
can be gathered, many of the empirical find-
ings reported will have a somewhat para-
doxical character. The major purpose of the
present paper is to suggest a more sociologi-
cal approach to the study of family dissolu-
tion as a supplement to some of the psycho-
logical and social-psychological works of the
past.
