Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
The wealth of nations has been the sub-
ject of much distinguished writing. Nowa-
days we speak of “income” rather than
“wealth.” And, more recently, in an age of
the ‘welfare’ state, much reference is made
to the “standard of living’—a less exact
term—which usually refers to an economic
plane of living in actual existence and not to
a moral or spiritual standard.

In this paper four factors that affect dif-
ferences in the standard of living of peoples
will be considered: population, natural re-
sources, organization, and technology. Ac-
tually, these factors are interrelated and not
independent.

The term “population” refers to quanti-
ty, which has meaning only as it is related to
the size of an area. The theory is that, if all
other factors are constant, generally the
greater the population, the lower the stand-
ard of living, particularly in agricultural
areas; though it is probably true that in
some sparsely settled countries an increasing
population for a time would have meant an
increasing standard of living if other factors
had remained the same.

Natural resources vary in quality of soil
and variety and extent of minerals as well as
in sun, moisture, and temperature. A people
with meager natural resources will have a
lower standard of living than a people with
the same technology and more abundant
natural resources.

“Organization” in this context refers to
economic organization, though it is tied in
with political and social organization. The
concept of economic organization is sepa-
rate from the concept of technology, though
actually they are very closely related.

The economic organization of a state may
be one in which productive industry belongs
to private owners or is owned by govern-
ment or owned by both in various combina-
tions. It is customary to contrast today
these types under the names “communism”
and “capitalism.” From the organizational
point of view, communism and socialism are
much alike. ‘Private capitalism” is not a
very satisfactory term, for it implies not
only private ownership but also capital
goods which are the subject matter of tech-
nology. So private capitalism is really a
combination of technology and private own-
ership. These types of organizations, even
with the same technology, may affect the
standard of living of the people. The eco-
nomic organization in other cultures than
our modern ones, as of hunting peoples, of
herders, or of those with a hoe culture, have
varying standards of living in the order
named, but in these cases the technology
differs. It is difficult to separate organization
from technology.

By “technology” we mean the knowledge
of the production of material goods, and by
extension it includes applied physical sci-
ence. The standard of living is obviously re-
lated to the tools of production, that is,
technology. For instance, the standard of
living of the Stone Age American Indian,
two hundred years ago at the foot of Lake
Michigan, was lower than that of the pres-
ent-day Chicagoan, with his advanced ma-
chines.

Probably all will admit the validity of the
claims for the influence of these variables on
the standard of living. But what we should
like to know is the degree of influence of
each. This question has arisen particularly in
a comparison of the effects of communism
and of private ownership or free enterprise
on the standard of living. In the discussion
of this topic it seems to be assumed that
communism and private ownership are the
main determinants of the standard of living.
For instance, in Time magazine’ in an ar-
ticle showing that for seven items of con-
sumption about ten times as many hours of
labor were required to earn enough money to
purchase them in the Soviet Union as in the
United States, the following comment is
made: “They... prove... that 30 years
after the Revolution, Russia was still giving
its workers 10 percent of what an ‘exploited’
worker under capitalism got for his labor”
(see Table 1). Similar figures have been
quoted in newspapers and by speakers, with
the suggestion or implication that the reason
a Russian worker can buy so much less for
an hour’s labor than a worker in the United
States can is somehow due to a difference be-
tween communism and private ownership.
Thus a leaflet distributed by the American
Telephone and Telegraph Company at the
Chicago Fair of 1950 contains the following
statement:

America has only 1/16 of the world’s popu-
lation, and about the same proportion of land
and natural resources. But America has more
than 1/2 of the world’s telephone, telegraph,
radio networks; more than 1/3 of the railways,
and about 3/4 of the automobiles and almost
1/2 of the radios. Just what is it that has given
Americans the highest income, the most goods,
the best quality, and the lowest prices on
earth? It is free enterprise.
what more advanced technology, though
one not highly developed. The United King-
dom has about 80 per cent private owner-
ship and is the most densely populated of
the five countries, with a highly developed
technology, though not so extensive or so ef-
ficient as that of the United States, and with
rather good natural resources. The U.S.S.R.
has extensive socialism, is not a very densely
populated country, has excellent natural re-
sources, with a technology somewhat more
developed than that of China and India but
not so advanced as that of the United King-
dom and the United States. The latter is
favored by a small population for the size of
its territory, a very advanced technology,
abundant natural resources, and private
ownership.

Let us see how much an hour’s labor will
buy of a common list of articles in each of
these countries with varied technology,
TABLE 2

MINUTES OF LABOR REQUIRED TO EARN ENOUGH Money To Buy
ARTICLES OF CONSUMPTION

 

 

United United

 

 

Article States Kingdom | USSR. India China
Cotton cloth, yard. 23 45 (276) 96 180
Bread, pound. . 6 5 30 force cece a feee eee eee
Flour, | pound. 4 Cn 26 (144)
Fish, pound. . 19 23 170 216 300
Peas, pound. 7 17 212 156 170
Sugar, pound 4 9 (x40) (x90) (204)
Rice, pound. 8 7 eee Cee 84. 58
Beef, pound. 29 26 (254) {a4e (280)
Eggs, dozen. 27 55 (382) (348, (360)

Tea, pound. . 56 72 (1,506) (408) (370)
the Soviet Union, not densely populated like
Britain, India, and China, has prices some-
what comparable to those of China and In-
dia. Indeed, the density of the Soviet Union
is not greatly different from that of the

The United States data, except for cloth, are
from the Monthly Labor Review, November, 1949.
For the United Kingdom the prices are from the
official quotations except for items not controlled
as to prices, for which information was obtained in
England from stores or from the British Informa-
tion Services in Chicago. Wages were £6 a week.
The wages in Russia were 590 rubles for a month
of 204 hours. Prices came from the American Russian
Institute and from the State Department and from
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Prices from
China in 1937 are from the Bureau of Social Affairs
and were supplied by Professor Ta Chen. The wages
were 5 cents an hour in Chinese money. The wages
in India were 5 anas per hour, an estimate from the
textile, railroad, mining, and government workers.
The prices are from the Indian Ministry of Labor,
the Calcutta Municipal Gazette, and the India In-
formation Services in the District of Columbia.
United States, yet her prices are so much
higher that it is hard to explain the differ-
ence in terms of war effort. If population
density were the determining factor, then
the prices in the United States and the
U.S.S.R. should be more nearly the same.

Since Russia has low population density
and high prices, it might be thought that the
high prices are due to the politico-economic
organization of the Soviet Union. There are
no other countries with a long experience
in communism or socialism with which to
check. Britain has had some socialism for five
years, but only about 20 per cent of her in-
dustries are governmentally owned. Even
so, the prices in Britain are quite low rela-
tive to Russia’s. But, before drawing conclu-
sions about the influence of state-owned in-
dustry in the U.S.S.R. as being a cause of her
high prices, we should examine the factor of
technology, which is much less developed in
the Soviet Union than in the United States
and in Britain but somewhat more devel-
oped than in India and in China. So the low
state of technology in the U.S.S.R. may ex-
plain her high cost of living.

The analysis so far fails to indicate that
population density is a large factor in ex-
plaining the low standard of living; for
Britain has a high density and a high stand-
ard of living, while Russia and the United
States have a low density of population,
with Russia having a low standard of living
and the United States a high one.

Also organization does not appear to ex-
plain the divergencies in the table. For the
U.S.S.R. and India, one with communism
and the other with private ownership of pro-
ductive property, have standards of living
that are not widely divergent, and the pri-
vate ownership in the United States and in
China has produced very unequal stand-
ards of living. So the variation in organiza-
tion from governmental ownership to pri-
vate ownership does not vary concomitantly
with the standard of living and hardly ap-
pears as a controlling factor.

The natural resources are large in all the
countries in the table and hence are a con-
stant, approximately.
There remains the factor of technology.
When it is found highly advanced with a
monetary economy, the products of tech-
nology become the capital goods of capital-
ism. The two countries with advanced tech-
nology, the United States and Britain, have
high standards of living, even though popu-
lation pressure and organization differ. And
in the three countries where technology is
not very advanced—the U.S.S.R., China,
and India—there are low standards of living
even though population pressure and or-
ganization vary.

This analysis which has been somewhat
winding may be seen in summary in Table 3,
which presents numerical measures of the
cost of living in these five countries and also
measures of two of the factors—population
density and technological development. The
figures for the cost of living are the sums of
the minutes of labor required to buy a pound
of bread, flour, or rice, a pound of fish, and a
pound of peas. Density is the total popula-
tion divided by the total area in square
miles, and the technological development is
the per capita annual consumption of energy
of all kinds in hundreds of kilowatt hours.
We see from Table 3 that the first and sec-
ond lines of data, namely, cost of living and
density, do not synchronize in the case of
Britain and the U.S.S.R. On the other hand,
the first and third lines—cost of living and
technological development—move up and
down together, but in reverse.

The foregoing analysis, then, of the data
of prices in terms of labor for five countries
indicates that technology is much the most
important of the four factors in explaining
the variations in the standard of living,
though no doubt population density and or-
ganization are also factors. Five countries
are a small sample, though the extreme vari-
ations make them more significant than
might be thought from the small number.
However, the sample is too small to hold
two variables constant while measuring the
influence of the third on the dependent vari-
able. That the data indicate the greater in-
fluence of technology is probably due to its
real importance as a factor. If all three vari-
States, Australia, Austria, Canada, Chile,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and
the U.S.S.R. The data were for 1948-49. For
these same countries it is possible to get an
index of the degree of development of tech-
nology that seems to be reasonably satisfac-
tory. The ones selected were annual per cap-
ita use of energy as measured or translated
into kilowatt hours of electricity. This ener-
gy may be that used for productive purposes
or for all purposes. The data are for 1946.
They show that the countries with the
greatest use of energy and hence of machines
have the highest standard of living, that is,
lowest prices as measured in terms of labor.

The coefficient of correlation between the
per capita use of energy and the high stand-
ard of living, as measured in what an hour
of labor will buy, is +.7 for the eighteen
states. For comparison, the correlation of
the high standard of living with population
ficients derived from the same data, grouped
into only two categories, are approximately
the same.

The two sets of data discussed in this pa-
per indicate the great bearing of technology,
as compared with population density, on the
wealth of peoples, natural resources being
approximately constant.

This conclusion of the relatively great im-
portance of technology for the standard of
living and hence for the wealth of nations
should not be surprising, for productivity
may be greatly increased by machines. It
would take an American Indian a long time
to dig the foundations for a building with his
Stone Age tools. Our forefathers with a pick,
shovel, and wheelbarrow could dig it much
more quickly. But with a steam shovel and
a truck, a twentieth-century man could dig
it even faster. We have a way of failing to
uncover the impersonal technological factor.
Thus we often speak of the increased pro-
ductivity of labor, which is, however, due
not to the fact that a laborer works any
harder but that he has better tools to work
with. The productivity of the American In-
dian is much less than that of a modern con-
struction worker. Such is the implication of
some figures presented by Mills, where he
shows that the total annual income in the
United States for the forty-seven years from
1899 to 1945 in 1929 dollars was $3,151 bil-
lion.3 But the labor input for each year oper-
ating at the 1889-98 level in productivity in
1929 dollars would have created a total of
only $1,669 billion, a little more than half.
The workers hardly worked any longer or
any harder, though the organization may
have improved.

While little credit has been given by so-
cial science analysts to technological change
as a cause of the rise in the standard of liv-
ing, much has been said about population
density as a factor, owing to the remarkable
and well-known claims of Malthus.
Then lately we have been attributing
much virtue in explaining production, which
is the basis of the standard of living, to capi-
talism and much evil to communism. But
capitalism is not wholly private ownership
and free enterprise; it means also capital
goods, which means technology. Further-
more, communism uses capital goods as well
as private capitalism. Again, the technology
factor is obscured in favor of human achieve-
ment and morals, which are usually quite
adequately appreciated.

It is obvious that natural resources are a
necessity for a high standard of living, but
the question concerns their variability from
country to country, not their existence as a
factor. Furthermore, technology is needed
to use natural resources.

Organization is also closely related to
technology. One wonders, indeed, how much
difference in economic organization there
can be with the same technology, given a
sufficiently long time to make adjustments
and remove cultural lags.
