Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
This paper presents a study of the func-
tions of the Readjustment Allowance? (RA)
in veterans’ job-seeking. It also affords in-
sights on the effectiveness of public policy
with respect to the jobless ex-serviceman, on
the question of how the job market is de-
fined by the expectations of job-seekers, and
on the relationship of the level of job aspira-
tion to job-taking. The importance of these
insights extends beyond the veteran and
nonveteran unemployed to the questions of
job satisfaction and motivation to work.

One hundred unemployed veterans were
interviewed between August, 1946, and
February, 1947, in intensive home inter-
views with respect to their adjustment fol-
lowing discharge? This sample of jobless
veterans was selected’ by a door-to-door
canvass of distributed election districts
within a large section of New York City.
While not demonstrably representative of
all urban unemployed veterans, their re-
sponses and reported experiences at least
constitute characteristic patterns among
jobless ex-servicemen—patterns which prob-
ably exist among unemployed veterans else-
where and perhaps among metropolitan un-
employed generally.

The specific problem to which the present
article is addressed—the function of the RA
in veterans’ job-seeking—is but one part of
the larger question of why some veterans
were unemployed when jobs were available.
It is a significant part, because in the lives
of the veteran recipients the RA had many
functions.

Receipt of the benefit imposed minimum
job-seeking activities in order for the veter-
an to become and remain eligible. The com-
pensation of $20 a week for 52 weeks fixed
a monetary income against which to meas-
ure the earnings possible in prospective jobs
and constituted, in fact, a definition of mini-
mum wage. In short, despite the hetero-
geneity of the population of unemployed
veterans, all who accepted the RA were sub-
jected to at least one common objective ex-
perience.

Although the RA provided a minimum
monetary level for job-taking, positions pay-
ing more than $20 a week were not thereby
automatically accepted. All members of the
sample who reported weekly salaries offered
to them had turned down jobs which paid
more than $20 a week, and the postwar jobs
which they had accepted provided an aver-
age of $44 a week. The rejection of employ-
ment is explained only in part by the fact
that the $20 benefit was “free and clear,”
whereas wages were reduced by tax and so-
cial security deductions to the cash in the
pay envelope.

Clear indication that jobs were not re-
jected simply because the RA provided a
weekly income may be seen in the reasons
which veterans gave for their joblessness.
“Poor pay” was the explanation of but 12
per cent of those who had left jobs and 24
per cent of the reasons for unemployment.
All but three of the sample had actually re-
fused jobs which paid more than the $20
provided by the RA.4 Yet 77 per cent said
that the RA was not enough to live on. This
contradiction between the attitude that the
benefit was insufficient to live on and the re-
jection of jobs which provided greater in-
come further points up the limitations of
any exclusively economic interpretation of
motivation to take jobs.

In its direct economic sense, then, the RA
functioned in two ways. First, it represented
a minimum wage in that it was a measure of
the monetary acceptability of jobs. Second,
it provided a margin of tolerance to the eco-
nomic pressure of unemployment, some pro-
tection against the necessity of taking a job.s
In its first function it permitted the rejection
of jobs; in its second, it provided “waiting
time.” The relief of pressure to “take any
job” meant that the veteran could postpone
the adjustment which must finally be made
to the available job opportunities.

What did “waiting time” mean for the
unemployed veteran? What was he waiting
for? What effect did the availability of the
RA have on his definition of an “acceptable”
job?

Preliminary study of the case histories dis-
closed five major factors which were impor-
tant aids in differentiating these unemployed
veteran types. These five variables were (1)
job-seeking intensity, (2) socioeconomic sta-
tus, (3) occupational preference, (4) age, and
(5) the individual’s hanging-out proclivity.7
Indexes for these items were created, or ex-
isting indexes used, which would measure
the above factors. The factors were then
cross-tabulated in all possible ways, and
various combinations of correlations were
statistically observable among different
items; that is, by combining the results of
the cross-tabulations, patterns of meaning-
ful correlations were found. For instance, it
was observed that young men who continu-
ously hung out also had low job-seeking in-
tensity. When these men were separated
from the rest of the sample, it was made ob-
vious that they also had in common poor
socioeconomic backgrounds and lacked de-
fined occupational preference. In this same
manner, three other patterns were distin-
guished. While each of these patterns has
factors common to more than one category,
each has certain major distinguishing char-
acteristics which are absent in the other
patterns.

The four patterns which emerged, then,
were differentiated in terms of situations, at-
titudes, and behavior, and reflect differences
in socioeconomic background, pre-induction
experiences of work and education, and the
type of postwar adjustments made. For each
pattern the RA functioned in a different
way.

One unemployed veteran type is called
the “‘Candy-Store Pattern” because it was
characteristic of their total adjustment that
TABLE 1

COMPOSITION OF UNEMPLOYED VETERAN PATTERNS IN NEW YoRK CITY,* 1946-47

 

 

 

 

 

Patrernt
Inpex
Candy-Store Time a Promiset
Per cent of sample§.......... 26 34 14 12
1. Job-seeking intensity...... Low|| High# High Low
2. Socioeconomic status...... Lowest— Middle— Low— High—
38.5% —C 26.4%—B 7.1%—B 83.3% —B
61.5%—D 58.9%—C 57.2% —C 16.7% —C
. 14.7% —D 35-7%—D .
3. Occupational preference....}| Undefined— Defined—100% | Undefined— Defined—s8%
: 100% 100% Undefined—42%
4. Average age... .........05 21 28 22
5. Hanging-out proclivity..... 100% hang out | 47% hang out 79% hang out 67% bane out
long and often occasionally when not look- sporadically
53% do not hang} ing for work 33% do not hang
out 21%do not hang} out.
out

 

 

¥* It is not claimed that the typology has been exhausted.

+ Of the sample, 14 per cent were not classified into patterns. These cases each have some idiosyncratic factor of a personal char-

acter. They have therefore been omitted from this discussion.

t One additional major factor distinguished the men of the Promise Pattern from the rest of the sample—all had a bona fide prom-

ise of a good job.
§ Number in sample = 100.

| Perfunctory job-seekers; followed USES regulations and sometimes (no more than twice a week) looked for work on their own

initiative.

# Hard and earnest job-seekers; followed USES regulations and looked for work over four times a week on their own initiative;
did everything they could think of to find work.
ally looking for work. The men of this pat-
tern were young (under twenty-five), came
from the lowest socioeconomic levels, did
not know the kind of job they wanted, and
were no longer actively looking for one
(Table 1).

These veterans needed the income from
jobs more than any of the other unem-
ployed, yet they were the least inclined to go
to work. The income from the RA was also
more important because their families were
less able to support them without it. Yet
these men felt that the RA impeded their
active job-seeking. More than two-thirds
they had to offer prospective employers.
Their job expectations had been raised by
wartime visions of high pay and by their
service experiences, and they were reluctant
to face the realistic and irreconcilable differ-
ences between their desires and opportuni-
ties. Instead they claimed, “There ain’t no
good jobs around . . . nobody’s paying out
good money these days.” Jimmy Kelly’s
story is typical of the men of this pattern:

Jimmy is nineteen and a half years old, has
completed two years of high school. When he
quit school, he took a job with the New York
Central Mail and Baggage Carriers which he
held for nine months, until he was called into the
service. Discharged two years later, he immedi-
ately found a job. “When I got out, I worked for
the Tri-Borough Bridge Authority for thirty-
two bucks a week. I was supposed to collect the
toll fares as the cars crossed the bridge. But
after two weeks I was damn bored. So I quit.
Then I went to the USES and told them I was
an airplane mechanic’s helper. Sure, it was a lie.
But I knew they never have anything like that
on the job lists, and I thought I’d like to take a
vacation. As I figured they told me, ‘No helper
jobs—come back in three months.’ Well, I hung
around then for about two months, until I got
bored again. So I decided to go out‘on my own
hook—to a couple of employment offices. But
all they had were $30-a-week jobs with no fu-
ture. Then I followed the ads. But when I got
there some other guy always got the job. So I
almost stopped looking. Now I go to the USES
to get my check [RA]. But they don’t ever get
anybody a job. All they can offer are the laborer
jobs with the worst pay and no future. But if
they ever find me a good one, by some accident,
well, I’ll take it.”

More than one-third of these men stated
that they do not expect to find jobs while
still eligible for the RA. The difference be-
tween the wages they could earn and the
benefit obtainable “from the government”
was insufficient to supply the incentive to
seek work in more than a casual fashion.
“They offered me twenty bucks a week to
be a sweeper” was one comment.

At the candy store the veterans of this
pattern mixed almost exclusively with other
unemployed ex-servicemen and were able to
say, ‘Nobody else around here is working.”
By this selective association, the candy store
protected the men psychologically at the
same time that the RA protected them eco-
nomically. They substituted talking about
jobs for active job-seeking. They did not
take jobs even to quit them and thereby de-
prived themselves of the chance to define
their work aspirations in the hard experi-
ences of the job market. The RA functioned
for the Candy-Store Pattern to sustain the
unrealistic gap between their levels of job
aspiration and the levels of jobs available to
them.

In sharp contrast to the Candy-Store Pat-
tern, a second type consists of men who were
older (over twenty-five), had more educa-
tion, and came from higher socioeconomic
levels. Two additional factors distinguished
these men from the members of the other
patterns: (1) a clear and definite conception
of their job goals and (2) a persistent, urgent
pursuit of the type of work they knew they
wanted. This veteran type had been desig-
nated the “Time Pattern,” emphasizing
their own conviction that getting the “right
job” is merely a matter of time.

Knowing specifically what they wanted,
these men used a great variety of techniques
in their energetic search for work. The job-
seeking activities of one of the Time Pattern
veterans is illustrative:
Some of their job objectives were not re-
alistic; nevertheless, the clear-cut concep-
tions which these men had of the type of
work they wanted gave them a focus for job-
seeking efforts. Most of them had held post-
war positions, which they left because they
were “not the type I want,” coupled with
reasons they expressed as “bad working con-
ditions” or “no future.” Said one man: “I
don’t want to take just any job, because I’m
afraid I might get stuck with it for the rest
of my life. I need a job that leads on.”

This is the only pattern of unemployed
veterans for whom a list of specific job ob-
jectives would be meaningful. Their job
aims were fashioned by their prewar work
experiences, which acted for many as the
trial-and-error work period, and by their
service life, which opened new employment
vistas and helped crystallize job goals.’
Their job-seeking was energetically directed
toward specific work that was generally
within their capabilities and related to their
experiences. While looking for a specific job,
they used the income from the RA to live
on. For the men of the Time Pattern,
“waiting time” was the opportunity to find
the particular jobs they wanted, and their
job-seeking efforts provided experiences
which tended to bring together their job as-
pirations and the realistic possibilities they
faced.

A third grouping of unemployed ex-serv-
icemen was characterized by the intensity of
the members’ search for work and their
vagueness of employment goals. At the same
time they were younger (under twenty-five),
unmarried, had less work experience, and
came from a slightly lower socioeconomic
level than the Time Pattern men. This
cluster is called the “Young and Ambitious
Pattern.’ Furthermore, the men of this pat-
tern had taken and left more postwar jobs
than those of any other pattern.

More than any other type, the veterans
of the Young and Ambitious Pattern exhib-
ited polarity in their attitudes toward the
RA. About half said that the compensation
was of help in their job-seeking, while the
other half thought it a hindrance. Contrast-
ing responses, such as the following, were
typical:
He doesn’t know what he wants to do. “I’d
like to have a sum of money and be independ-
ent. I’d like not to have to work if I didn’t feel
like it.” However, quickly becoming realistic, he
adds, “I’d like a job paying $30 a week, or even
$25 if it offered a future.” Harry worked in pho-
tography before the war, a field he had lost in-
terest in at the time of his discharge. As soon as
he was separated from the service, he took a job
as a vacuum assembly man. Though he was
earning $40 a week, it was little compensation
for the monotony of the work, and he quit after
three months. He then stayed with a jeweler for
a week, but that too was not what he wanted.
Laid off his next job as a stock clerk in a clothing
store, he immediately followed it with one he
liked. This one was as a messenger for a Belgian
Economic Mission, traveling between New
York and Washington. He lost it when girls
were substituted for the men holding these jobs.
However, he recognized that the job held no fu-
ture for him and states that he would have left
it before very long anyhow. At the time of inter-
view he claimed to have “one or two prospects
lined up.”
unemployed veterans from a comparatively
high socioeconomic status. Their fathers’ oc-
cupational level was relatively high—largely
small business or skilled work. Their educa-
tional level was also relatively high—two-
thirds had completed high school or college.
But more important is the fact that these
young men had bona fide promises of jobs
with high pay and assured futures, provided
through the business and job contacts of
their families. Because of this sharply dis-
tinguishing characteristic, this type has been
called the “Promise Pattern.”

The Promise Pattern men showed in their
attitudes toward the RA and job-seeking
that they were secure in their work futures
and that they expected eventually to take
the promised jobs. Yet they continued to ac-
cept the subsidy and used it as “waiting
time” while they looked in a desultory way
for types and levels of jobs which they could
neither get nor hold. In spite of the inade-
quacy of their training, they wanted posi-
tions paying more than the promised job
and work having greater interest and glam-
our. For instance:
more than any of the others, considered the
RA sufficient to live on. Over two-thirds
claimed that the RA was simply ready cash
rather than support while they found a job.
It provided a sense of independence from
their parents by supporting the belief that
they were trying to make their own way, to
find their own jobs. They said, “It gives me
the chance to look for the kind of work I
want.” However, many did not know the
kind of job they wanted, and all did not look
for it very actively. Like the Candy-Store
Pattern men, the veterans of the Promise
Pattern pretended to themselves that they
were looking for work, but for the most part
their search was casual and indifferent—
confined to the legal requirements to remain
eligible for the RA.

There is little chance that they could,
through their own efforts, find a job to
match the promised position in pay and fu-
ture. Their recognition of this was indicated
by the deterioration of their job-hunting and
by their statements that they expected to
get jobs while still eligible for the RA. Many
went as far as to say, “I’ll probably wind up
taking my father’s offer.” The RA func-
tioned for the Promise Pattern men, as it did
for the Candy-Store Pattern, to postpone
the inevitable acceptance of a job which
they knew they would have to take but
could not admit that they wanted. But un-
like the Candy-Store men, who needed to
reconcile a high level of job aspiration and
the reality of poor job opportunities, the
Promise Pattern men had to reconcile the
acceptance of a family-sponsored but better
job than they could get on their own with
their desire to be independent of their par-
ents.
selective association built up an in-group
which protected them against the inevitable
necessity of accepting jobs at lower pay and
status levels than they would admit they
must take. The Time Pattern men used the
needed support of the RA to implement
their job-seeking, which was directed toward
desired and generally attainable objectives.
The Young and Ambitious Pattern found in
the RA the means to justify the refusal of an
unwanted job and the abandonment of po-
sitions obtained. Their intensive job-seeking
and trial-and-error job-taking were part of
the process by which they were defining
their job objectives. For the Promise Pat-
tern the RA served a protective function
similar to that which it performed for the
Candy-Store Pattern, but for this type the
protection offered was against a known and
inevitable job which carried with it implica-
tions of dependence and, eventually, the re-
alization that they could not secure so good
a job on their own.

Except for the Promise Pattern veterans,
the income which the RA offered also served
as an economic reference for judging jobs.
And for all veterans the RA constituted a
psychological support for rejecting employ-
ment which might yield greater income but
which did not conform to their aspirations.

The implications of these findings are
twofold: (1) Uniform readjustment benefits
did not have a uniform effect upon the job-
seeking activities of those receiving it. The
effects were variable, depending upon the
relationship between the economic level of
benefits and the economic and other charac-
teristics of jobs which the veteran job-seek-
ers considered important in making their oc-
cupational decisions. (2) The meaning of
“work available” in a job market is deter-
mined not only by wages and working con-
ditions offered but by the definitions which
each job-seeker makes of the employment he
would find acceptable.
