Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
ABSTRACT

One important source of role strain is the requirement to maintain working relationships with persons
in a wide variety of complementary roles. It is shown that in a national sample of wage and salary
workers high job-related tension is associated with frequency of interaction with each of five classes of
role senders and even more strongly with the total number of different role relationships required by the
respondent’s job. Role-set diversity is more common in supervisory than in non-supervisory jobs, but
the association between tension and supervisory responsibility is not wholly accounted for by the influ-
ence of role-set diversity. Differences in role-set diversity and number of supervisory jobs account for
a good deal of the differential prevalence of high tension in large as compared to small organizations.
There is also some support for the hypothesis that high diversity is more tension-producing in large
organizations than in smaller ones. Finally, the results show that the relationships between tension and
sex, age, or education are substantially reduced once the influence of role diversity and supervisory re-
sponsibility has been taken into account.
food from kitchen runners or supply men. Simi-
larly, the pantry worker is under the pantry
supervisor and responds to orders for food from
waitresses. For the waitress the problem is a
good deal more complex. She must adjust her-
self to supervisor and to other waitresses, and
in addition she has to deal with between 50
and 100 customers a day, many of them com-
plete strangers; and she has to adjust to serv-
ice pantry workers or cooks to get the food out,
and to bartenders to get her drinks, if the
restaurant serves liquor. Clearly it requires a
high degree of social adaptability to handle this
assignment successfully.?
tensions occur with noticeable frequency in
many kinds of industrial organizations.
This paper represents an attempt to relate
the experience of tension in the work role
to one structural feature of all such roles,
namely, the diversity of interests and loy-
alties represented in the role set.

The term “role set” was introduced by
Merton to designate the total complement
of role relationships in which a person be-
comes involved by virtue of occupying a
particular social position.? Following Rom-
metveit, we shall call all those persons who
complement a given person’s role in this
sense his “role senders,” to designate their
function of communicating and enforcing
the relevant role expectations.* In a formal
organization the role senders to a given
office need not be under the same admin-
istrative authority; indeed, from the man-
agement’s point of view, some role senders
may have no discernible (or legitimate)
relationship with the office at all. But from
the point of view of role analysis, any per-
son who is actively concerned with the of-
ficeholder’s performance presumably holds
expectations regarding his role. To illus-
trate from Whyte’s example, the cook, the
supervisor, the barman, the pantry helper,
the customer, and the other waitresses, all
have expectations about how the waitress
should behave, and they will communicate
these expectations in their behavior toward
her.

Both Merton and Goode have pointed
out that any role set possesses a potential
for conflict to the extent that members of
the set occupy different social positions.®
The key to the waitress’ problems lies in
the fact that her role requires her to relate
to people in an unusually large variety of
complementary roles. In the simplest case,
one’s job requires contact with only one
complementary role, that of the supervisor.
In the more usual case, role relationships
have to be maintained with several others,
including especially co-workers as well as
a supervisor and perhaps subordinates. The
waitress’ role fits well up on the scale of
diversification, inasmuch as it calls for a
complex balancing of relationships with at
least five classes of role senders: supervisor,
customers, fellow waitresses, pantry per-
sonnel, and the barman. We can character-
ize a role set as more or less diversified to
the extent that it involves the maintenance
of a variety of role relationships. It should
be possible to arrive at a measure of role-
set diversity by counting the number of
different classes of role senders with whom
relationships must be maintained. The con-
cept of a class of role senders is introduced
here to take account of the equivalence
of all role relationships involving subor-
dinates, for example. The dimension of
diversity, therefore, refers to the number of
different relationships that must be main-
tained, not to the number of persons with
whom the officeholder must interact.

The greater the diversification of a role
set, the greater the possibility of intrarole
conflicts, because each class of role senders
is apt to develop expectations that are more
attuned to its own organizational goals,
norms, and values than to the total re-
quirements of the officeholder’s role. Gross,
Mason, and McEachern have demonstrated
such conflicts in their study of school su-
perintendents.® Kahn, Wolfe, Quinn, and
Snoek also pointed to this source of diffi-
culty in their study of role conflicts in
industry, arguing that conflict is especially
likely to occur in so-called boundary po-
sitions, that is, positions for which some
of the role senders are located in a different
role system, whether this be another unit
in the same organization or another organ-

® Neal Gross, Ward Mason, and Alexander Mc-
Eachern, Explorations in Role Analysis (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1958),
ization entirely.” Accordingly, the first hy-
pothesis to be examined is that role strain,
in the sense of felt difficulty in job per-
formance, will be more common in jobs
requiring the individual to maintain a
highly diversified set of role relationships.

A second factor of interest is the size
of the organization in which the individual
is employed. Organizational size bears upon
the rationale just presented in that we
would expect the typical phenomena of
bureaucratization to be maximally present
in large-scale organizations.2 One of the
major unintended consequences of bureauc-
ratization is the increase in rule-bound,
inflexible behavior on the part of the or-
ganization’s members, resulting in difficul-
ty in meeting the needs of the organiza-
tion’s clients. This result should increase
the conflict potential for relations with
extra-organizational role senders as well as
for relations among different units of the
organization which were intended to serve
each other. A second and related feature
of bureaucratization is what Selznick has
called the “bifurcation of interests” among
departments of the organization, produced
by each department’s commitment to its
own goals and maintenance.® Again, where
departments develop to some extent their
own goals for the organization and their
The data for this study are drawn from
a series of questions included in a national
sample survey conducted by the University
of Michigan’s Survey Research Center
during 1961. In this study respondents
were chosen to represent all adults over
eighteen years of age living in private
households. Interviews were conducted with
1,300 such persons. For purposes of the
present analysis, however, we selected only
those people in the sample who reported
that they were wage and salary workers
and who were working more than twenty
hours per week at the time of the survey—
a total of 596 persons altogether. Compar-
ison of the present sample with figures re-
ported by the U.S. Census Bureau for the
year 1960 revealed no significant differences
in terms of age, sex, education, or occupa-
tional distribution.

The variable used as an indicator of
role strain in this study was the Job Re-
lated Tension Index (JRT), developed at
the Survey Research Center. Scores on
this index are derived from a list of fifteen
common problems on the job. The inter-
viewer introduced the items by telling re-
spondents:
. Feeling that you have too little authority

to carry out the responsibilities assigned
to you

. Being unclear on just what the scope and

responsibilities of your job are

. Not knowing what opportunities for ad-

vancement or promotion exist for you

. Feeling that you have too heavy a work-

load, one that you can’t possibly finish dur-
ing an ordinary workday

. Thinking that you'll not be able to satisfy

the conflicting demands of various people
over you

. Feeling that you’re not fully qualified to

handle your job

. Not knowing what your supervisor thinks

of you, how he evaluates your performance

. The fact that you can’t get information

needed to carry out your job

. Having to decide things that affect the lives

of individuals, people that you know

. Feeling that you may not be liked and ac-

cepted by the people you work with

. Feeling unable to influence your immediate

superior’s decisions and actions that affect
you

. Not knowing just what the people you work

with expect of you

. Thinking that the amount of work you have

to do may interfere with how well it gets
done

. Feeling that you have to do things on the

job that are against your better judgment

. Feeling that your job tends to interfere

with your family life
variety of mild neurotic symptoms.1!
Getzels and Guba used a very similar
measure, labeled “intensity of felt con-
flict,” in a study of role conflict among
military instructors, and reported it to be
significantly associated with ratings of in-
effective teaching performance.? In short,
JRT seems to measure a variety of difficul-
ties in job performance, close to the con-
ceptual meaning of role strain as discussed
by Goode.?8

The classification of diversity of role-
sender contacts was based upon the ques-
tion: “How often do you have something
to do as part of your job with each of the
following groups of people?” Five classes
of role senders were defined for the re-
spondent: (1) Your boss or other people
over you; (2) People you supervise, direct-
ly or indirectly; (3) Others who work in
the same department as you do; (4) Others
who work in the same company, but not in
the same department; (5) Outsiders who
have business with your company. In addi-
tion, the respondent was asked about any
other class of contacts he could mention,
and this was counted as a sixth class if the
contacts he named could not be reclassi-
fied into any of the earlier categories. Fre-
quency of contact was reported on the
five-point scale reported earlier.

Two questions were asked to obtain in-
formation about the size of the organization
where the respondent was employed. The
first of these was intended to establish the
size of the plant where respondent worked
(“About how many people work at the
same place where you work?”). The second
question obtained the respondent’s best
estimate of the total number of persons
employed by his company (“Does the
company [organization] you work for em-
ploy other people besides the ones that
work at the same place as you do?” IF
YES: “To the best of your knowledge,
about how many people work for your
company [organization] altogether?”). For
all companies of more than 100 persons,
interviewers also ascertained the name of
the organization. The figures reported by
the respondents for these organizations
were later checked against standard busi-
ness references.1* Figures for roughly two-
thirds of the companies named could be
verified in this way. Few corrections of
respondents’ estimates proved necessary.
In this analysis we shall be concerned with
company size rather than plant size, on
the assumption that many of the distinctive
features and processes of a large-scale or-
ganization probably make themselves felt
even in smaller plants belonging to it.
Nevertheless, company size is only a very
crude operational index of the intended
conceptual variable, bureaucratization.

A series of questions attempting to lo-
cate each respondent in his organization’s
chain of command did not yield useful
data, because it classified all but a few
respondents at the fourth level from the top
or lower. This failure is further testimony
to the growing importance of the large-
scale organization as the most common
working environment for Americans today.
Instead we shall classify respondents in
terms of an implied rank ordering of level
of supervisory responsibility, according to
whether they have no such responsibility,
have some subordinates but all of them
under their direct supervision, or have both
direct subordinates and indirect responsi-
bility for others.
16.4 per cent of the sample obtaining the
lowest score of 1.0 and an additional 36.9
per cent scoring between 1.1 and 1.5. Since
the greatest interest pertains to the high
scorers, “high tension” has been defined
arbitrarily as a score of 1.6 or higher for
purposes of the present analysis.2®

Table 1 shows the relations between job-
related tension and frequency of inter-
action with each of the five predefined
classes of role senders. For four out of
five classes of role senders, there is a
marked but not necessarily linear rela-
tionship between frequency of contact and
the prevalence of high tension. In all cases,
the greatest increment in high-tension cases
occurs in the comparison of those who have
no contacts with those who have some
contact or more with each class of role
senders. This is true even for the case of
interaction with superiors, although the
number of respondents who report a total
absence of daily contacts with their supe-
riors is so small that the difference between
them and the remaining respondents might
easily have arisen by chance alone.

In the case of contact with subordinate
role senders (line B), the more frequently
the respondent interacts with subordinates,
the greater the likelihood that he will have
a high tension score. But interaction with
other kinds of role senders—those not hier-
archically related to the respondent—is
most tension-producing when it occurs with
a frequency less than the maximum pos-
sible on our scale. When the five classes
are compared in terms of the over-all levels
of tension associated with them, no single
class of contacts stands out as significantly
more tension-producing than any other.
We may summarize the data in Table 1 by
concluding that, with the exception of con-
tact with superiors, jobs that require any
kind of daily contact with subordinates,
with other organization members—whether
PERCENTAGE OF HIGH-TENSION CASES IN RELATION TO FREQUENCY
OF INTERACTION WITH FIVE CLASSES OF ROLE SENDERS*

 

 

“How OFTEN puRING THE Day Do You Have Sometuinc To Do As
Part or Your Jos wira EAcu oF THE FoLtowinc Groups oF PEOPLE?”

Crass or Rozz SENDERS
Nearly

 

Never Some- Rather
Rarely F All the x P
nap.) t times Often Time
A. Your boss or other people over you) 38 (21) | 47 (125)| 48 (171)] 51 (145)| 54 (133)} 2.6 N.S.
B. People you supervise directly or|
indixectlyAee eee ELE CE Ee ee ECL ee 33 (340)) 57 (28) | 52 (46) | 64 (72) | 69 (110)} 55.5 <.001
C. Others who work in your depart-
Meneeee eee eee eee eee eee iy 38 (157)] 50 (62) | 51 (130)| 58 (106)] 42 (141)} 14.0 <.01
D. Others in your company, but not|
in the same department......... 35 (200)) 46 (137)} 59 (135)} 54 (77) | 51 (51) | 14.6 | <.01
E. Outsiders who have business with|
your company............0.0e0e 34 (278)| 64 (66) | 59 (71) | 65 (69) | 47 (108)} 38.1 | <.001

 

* In this as in the following tables the number of cases in each cell is shown in parentheses. Total number of cases in each row
does not always add up to 596 because of N.A.'s.
{ Cases coded Inap. have been combined with those coded Never.
in one’s own department or outside it—
or with outsiders who have business with
one’s organization, are apt to be more
tension-producing than those that do not.

Let us now ask whether roles that re-
quire the maintenance of contacts with
many classes of role senders (high diver-
sity) show a greater incidence of high
tension than those which involve only a
moderate or small number of such rela-
tionships. The question is answered in
Table 2. The result strongly supports the
hypothesis that there is a significant asso-
ciation between tension on the job and
PERCENTAGE OF HIGH-TENSION CASES IN
RELATION TO SUPERVISORY RESPONSI-
BILITY AND ROLE-SET DIVERSITY

Low | Moderate | High

 

Supervisory Ow odera poate
Responsibility | Diversity | Diversity | Diversity
None:
Per cent....... 20 36 63
(127) (200) (70)

 

N
Direct, indirect, or|
both:
: 67 77

Per cent. 49
N (12) (67) (113)

 

 

 

Nore: x?for tension in relation to supervisory responsibility :
low diversity: 12.01 (corrected for continuity), P < .01; modér-
ate diversity: 3.75, P < .10; high diversity: 4.23, P < .05.
PREVALENCE OF HIGH TENSION IN SMALL AND
LARGE COMPANIES,* CONTROLLING FOR
ROLE-SET DIVERSIFICATION AND SUPER-
VISORY RESPONSIBILITY

Levet or Roe-Set Diversityt

  
  

 

 

Company
ae Low | Moderate | High
(1-2) (3-4) (5-6)

Small (<500
Per cent.. 27 40 64
N (06) | (201) | (114)

26 39 85
(38) (72) (72)

LEVEL oF SUPERVISORY

 

 

Responstsitity t
f Direct
None | Teck and
mY | Indirect
Small (<500):
Percent....... 35 57 68
eee Eee CELE (281) (84) (40)
Large (>500)
Per cent....... 38 73 86
Eee eee (124) (40) (29)

 

 

 

* x2: small versus large (high diversity, 9.3, P < .01).
tx? role-set diversity (small company, 31.3, P < 001;
a company 45.7, P < .001).
supervisory ae (small company, 24.1, P <
001; fee company 30.1, P < .001).
PREVALENCE OF HIGH TENSION BY
AGE, SEX, AND EDUCATION

 

 

Stand-
pide | ardized
Tence* | P°V® | Base W
Dar | lencet

er
Cent) | Cent)

64
169
148
128
92
384

 

Female. 38 43 219
Education:
Grade school (0-8)....} 32 39 144
High school (9-12).... 43 44 284

College (13-4). 63 | 52 | 170

 

  

* 2 (crude rates): ge 24.4, P < .001; sex: 18.5, P < .001;
education: 32.1, P <

} Standardized for on set diversity and supervisory respon-
sibility; x? calculated on standardized rates fails to show signifi-
cant associations.
The first column of Table 6 shows the
prevalence of high tension in relation to sex,
age, and education. High tension tends to be
more common among males than females,
among the younger than among the older
age groups, and among college-educated
than among high-school— or grade-school-
educated groups. These findings are in ac-
cord with those published by Indik, Sea-
shore, and Slesinger, who reported the
demographic correlates of job-related ten-
sion among a very large population of
employees of a single company.?9

It is, of course, possible that the apparent
association of tension with age, sex, and
education can be attributed to differences
among these demographic groups in the
distribution of role diversity and super-
visory responsibility. The second column
of Table 6 shows the relationship between
tension and each of the demographic var-
iables after the figures have been adjusted
to take account of the influence of role di-
versity and supervisory responsibility.2°
A comparison of the crude and standard-
ized prevalence figures shows that, espe-
cially in the case of sex and education, the
degree of association between the demo-
graphic variable and tension is substan-
tially reduced after role diversity and super-
visory responsibility have been taken into
account. Chi-square values calculated on
the adjusted figures fail to reach the 5
per cent level of confidence, although the
trends noted in the crude figures are still
apparent. The reduction of tension differ-
entials is especially apparent in the case
of sex and education, but less so in the
case of age. In short, the high prevalence
The data support the conclusion that
one important source of strain in the work
roles of wage and salary workers is the
requirement to maintain working relation-
ships with a wide variety of complementary
roles. In this paper this condition has been
referred to as “diversification” of the role
set. On the basis of other observations by
students of organizational behavior, it
seems reasonable to assume that the greater
the diversity of organizational positions
occupied by the individual’s day-to-day
associates, the greater the likelihood that
his associates will hold conflicting goals,
values, and role expectations. The person
whose work role is characterized by such
a diversity of orientations among his role
senders is more apt to experience difficulty
in integrating their role expectations. We
might call this the problem of normative
integration of the role set.

While at least a moderate degree of role-
set diversification is very common among
supervisory personnel and, therefore, un-
doubtedly a factor contributing to the high
level of tension reported in these jobs, our
results show that not all of the tension
associated with supervision is accounted for
by this aspect of the supervisor’s role.
The explanation for the association between
tension and supervision that remains when
we control for role-set diversification must
be sought in other aspects of the role and
the types of persons who are recruited
for it.

Although this study does not contribute
direct evidence on the nature of the diffi-
culties encountered by respondents work-
ing in diversified role sets, previous investi-
gations suggest at least four common prob-
lems.?4 At the top of the list are direct
conflicts, in which incompatible role expec-
tations from two or more role senders must
somehow be reconciled. An oft-described
case in point is the first-line supervisor’s
role. A second common problem is that of
overload, a condition which exists when the
demands from all sources pile up to a total
in excess of the worker’s capacity. Over-
load problems are typically experienced as
conflicts between priorities, but they are
distinguished from intrarole conflicts in
that the demands upon the role occupant
are not inherently incompatible. Overload
problems are likely to occur in diversified
role sets (1) because the members of the
set are often unaware of each other’s ex-
pectations, or (2) because they do not share
each other’s evaluation of the relative im-
portance of various tasks. The role of the
student who must learn to cope with the
academic demands of several courses simul-
taneously provides a familiar illustration
of overload problems. Ambiguity charac-
terizes a third class of problems likely to
occur in diversified role sets. Because mem-
bers of the same role set occupy such a
variety of positions, implicit assumptions
are often not shared, unspoken rules are
broken, and unexpected failures of com-
munication tend to occur. Moreover, am-
biguity may increase when members of a
role set deliberately restrict communica-
tion with each other in an effort to avoid
or reduce open conflict. Finally, certain
common problems arise out of the frequent
necessity to exert influence without legiti-
mate authority. In diversified role sets we
often encounter relationships in which
there is no provision for the exercise of
legitimate authority. Take, for example,
relationships with such role senders as
customers and suppliers. Whether in the
service of his job or in sheer self-defense,
the individual whose job requires him to
deal with such role senders must develop
some relatively reliable means for eliciting
their co-operation. In the American busi-
ness world, such influence is often built
upon the manipulation of “favors” and

* See Kahn et al., op. cit., for a more extended
discussion of sources of role strain.
“business friends,” but we are also well
acquainted with the conflicts of interest
(and of conscience) that accompany these
arrangements. Inside the organization, the
need to exert influence without legitimate
authority often reflects imperfections in
the “planned” organizational mechanisms
for co-ordination, which must be corrected
by the individual’s own initiatives and at
his own risk.

It has been suggested that the factors
that tend to make role-set diversification
a strain-producing condition, namely, in-
flexibility on the part of role senders and
opposition of interests among them, ought
to occur more often in complex organiza-
tions with a high degree of bureaucratiza-
tion. The present results give some support
to this hypothesis, if one is willing to ac-
cept company size as an indicator of bu-
reaucratization.2? The hypothesis awaits
further testing with a better index of
bureaucratization.

In summary, role-set diversification is
likely to be a significant aspect of a role,
in industrial as well as in other types of
organizations. The problem of defining
diversification was approached in this study
by an a priori classification of what seemed
to be significant classes of role senders. In
the future this problem might well be ap-
proached by an empirical determination of
the equivalence of various role relationships
in terms of the nature of the interdepend-
ence between ego and alter.
