Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
2Harold F. Dorn and Samuel A. Stouffer,
“Criteria of Differential Mortality,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, XXVIII (1933),
402-14; Clark Tibbitts and Samuel A. Stouffer,
“Testing the Significance of Comparisons in Socio-
logical Data,” American Journal of Sociology, XL
(1934), 357-63.

*E.g., Margaret Jarman Hagood, Statistics for
Sociologists (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1947),
pp. 538-40; and Margaret Jarman Hagood and
Daniel O. Price, Statistics for Sociologists (rev. ed.;
New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1952). In referring to
the Tibbitts-Stouffer article, Hagood and Price say:
“For an excellent example of the reasoning preced-
ing, accompanying, and following actual statistical
procedures, which makes such procedures meaning-
ful, the student is urged to read this article” (p. 378).
The main purpose of the present paper is to
propose some modifications of the published
formulas.

Dorn, Stouffer, and Tibbitts have as-
sumed implicitly that the difference between
two groups (e.g., lone offenders without a
previous criminal record and group of-
fenders without a previous criminal record)
with respect to a particular dichotomous
classification (say, parole violation or non-
violation) can be measured by the difference
between the corresponding relevant propor-
tions (e.g., the difference between the rates
of parole violation) in the two groups, and
that the difference between the difference
between these two groups (with respect to
this particular dichotomous classification)
and the difference between two other com-
parable groups (say, lone offenders with a
previous criminal record and group offend-
ers with a previous criminal record) can be
measured by the difference between the cor-
responding differences between the relevant
proportions. For the sake of simplicity, we
shall also make a similar assumption
throughout a large part of the present paper.
On the other hand, the research worker
should be aware that there exist measures
other than the difference between the cor-
responding relevant proportions for measur-
ing the difference between two groups (e.g.,
the ratio of the corresponding odds, the
“angular difference’? between the cor-
responding proportions, measures related to
the measurement of association in 2 X 2
4 The difference between corresponding propor-
tions, the ratio of corresponding odds, and the
“angular difference” between corresponding propor-
tions are all discussed as possible measures of the
difference between two groups in Sec. 3.2 of Sequen-
tial Analysis of Statistical Data: Applications (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1945) prepared
by the Statistical Research Group, Columbia Uni-
versity. For further details on the difference between
corresponding proportions and on the angular dif-
ference between these proportions (i.e., on the differ-
ence between the inverse-sine-transformed propor-
tions) as possible measures of the difference between
two groups, see, e.g., Edward Paulson and W. Allen
Wallis, ‘Planning and Analyzing Experiments for
Comparing Two Percentages,’ chap. vii in Sta-
tistical] Research Group, Columbia University, Tech-
niques of Statistical Analysis (New York: McGraw-
Hill Book Co., 1947), pp. 247-66; Churchill Eisen-
hart, ‘Inverse Sine Transformation of Proportions,”
chap. xvi in Statistical Research Group, Columbia
University, of. cit.. pp. 395-416; and the relevant
literature cited therein. The problem of measuring
the difference between two groups with respect to a
dichotomous classification is closely related to the
problem of measuring association in 2 X 2 cross-
classification tables; this relationship is discussed
further in the final section of this paper.
In order to test the statistical significance
of the difference between the differences in
two proportions, it is necessary first to esti-
mate the sampling variance, o?, of this dif-
ference. The estimator, s?, of this sampling
variance, o?, should be a consistent estima-
tor; that is, s? should be such that, roughly
speaking, it is almost sure to be close to o?
when it is computed from data obtained
from a large random sample.® Since con-
sistent estimators are readily obtainable in
many practical situations, consistency is
sometimes considered a fundamental prop-
erty, and estimators that are not consistent
are often ignored when samples are large.’

6 See, e.g., Helen M. Walker and Joseph Lev,
Statistical Inference (New York: Henry Holt & Co.,
1953), for some further comments on consistent
estimators. A somewhat more rigorous definition of
a consistent estimator is the following: s? is a con-
sistent estimator of o? if s? becomes close to o? with
probability approaching 1 as the sample size in-
creases without limit.

7A more thorough discussion of consistent esti-
mators appears, e.g., in Herman Chernoff and Lin-
To explicate and illustrate this modifica-
tion, the data presented by Tibbitts and
Stouffer on rates of parole violation will be
re-examined. A second (hypothetical) set of
data concerning rates of parole violation will
also be presented. For the Tibbitts-Stouffer
data this modification does not lead to sub-
stantially different results from those ob-
tained using the earlier formulas, while for
the second set of data there are, in fact, sub-
stantial differences. If the variability be-
tween the relevant observed proportions is
rather large, then the differences between the
modification and the earlier formula can be
great.

Table 1 is reproduced from the Tibbitts-
Stouffer article. Tibbitts and Stouffer ask:
“Ts one difference significantly larger than
the other?’”’ They wish to evaluate the sta-
tistical “significance of the excess of one
difference between two proportions over
another difference between two proportions,
such as the excess of .2592 over .0233” (in
Table 1). They state that the first difference,
d,=~1— pj, has a sampling variance
P;O\(1/m1 + 1/mj), where P, is the ratio
between the total number of violators with-
out a previous criminal record and the
total number of parolees without a previous
criminal record; Q: = 1— Pi; m is the
total number of parolees without a previous
criminal record who are lone offenders; and
m, is the total number of parolees without a
previous criminal record who are group of-
fenders.

If we assume that f; is the proportion of
are group offenders (i.e., $1 = By); then the
sampling variance of d; = pi — py is
BiQi(1/m + 1/n}), where OQ, = 1 — $y. In
this particular case where 3; = Bj, it is true
that the sampling variance of d; can be esti-
mated by P,Q:(1/s1 + 1/n{), computed
from the observed data. However, if there
is some relationship between whether a
parolee without a previous criminal record
is or is not a lone offender and whether he is
or is not a violator (i.e., if $1 is not equal to
$1), which is, in fact, what was suggested
by Tibbitts and Stouffer, then it can be
shown that P,Q,(1/ + 1/z{) will not be a
consistent estimator of the sampling vari-
Dorn and Stouffer refer to the formulas
for these two different estimates in a foot-
note, stating that ‘a somewhat more stable
estimate of the unknown sampling variance
is probably given by the former.’”’® If $B; is
not equal to $B, this will not be so. In fact,
we noted above that, if $B; is not equal to Bi,
then the estimator recommended in the
Dorn-Stouffer article and in the Tibbitts-
Stouffer article will not even be a consistent
estimator of the appropriate sampling
variance. If $3, = $j, then the estimator
presented in the present paper and the
estimator recommended in the earlier pub-
lished articles will both be consistent esti-
mators of the sampling variance. (If the null
hypothesis is that 1 = Bj, then there is
some justification for the use of either esti-
mator, although there may be some reasons
for preferring one to the other.) However,
when it is desired to “evaluate the statistical
significance of the excess of one difference
between two proportions over another dif-
ference between two proportions,” then the
null hypothesis of interest does not specify
that $B, = Bj, and in this case the estimator
proposed in the present paper should be used
rather than the estimator recommended in
the earlier published articles.

Tibbitts and Stouffer also state that the
second difference, d, = p2 — ~}, has a sam-
pling variance P2Q2(1/m2 + 1/13), where P2,
Qe, m, and m3 are defined for the parolees
with a previous criminal record analogously
to the definitions of P1, Qi, m, and mj, re-
spectively, for the parolees without a previ-
ous criminal record. However, if #2 is the
proportion of violators observed in a random
sample of 2 individuals from the popula-
tion of parolees with a previous criminal
record who are lone offenders, and if p is the
proportion of violators observed in a random
sample of 3 individuals from the population
of parolees with a previous criminal record
who are group offenders, then it can be
shown that P,Qo(1/m2 + 1/23) will not be a
consistent estimator of the appropriate
sampling variance in situations where ez is
not equal to 83 ,where Bz and Bj are defined
for the population of parolees with a previ-
ous criminal record analogously to the
definitions of B, and ij, respectively, for the
population of parolees without a previous
criminal record. In this case, a consistent
estimator of the sampling variance of d; is
The Tibbitts-Stouffer article also pre-
sents an estimator for the sampling variance
of the difference between the differences be-
tween the differences in two proportions.
However, it is possible to show that this
estimator is not, in general, a consistent
estimator of the appropriate sampling vari-
ance. On the other hand, it may be modified
so as to be consistent. We shall now illus-
trate this modification using the Tibbitts-
Stouffer data concerning foreign-born of-
fenders (Table 1) and their data concerning
native-born offenders (Table 3).

For the data in Table 3, ps, 3, 4, Diy 4s,
quite different interpretations of the data.
The Dorn-Stouffer-Tibbitts formula would
suggest that d, — d, = —.04 is clearly not
significantly different from zero, while the
formula recommended here would indicate
that the observed difference may be sta-
tistically significant. Approximate confi-
dence intervals for the expected value of
d, — dz would be larger in this particular
case if the Dorn-Stouffer-Tibbitts formula
was utilized, rather than the formula sug-
gested here, to estimate the sampling vari-
ance in the computation of the confidence
interval.
and dy, are defined for native-born offenders
analogously to the definitions of pi, pj, pe
px, d, and dz, respectively, for the data in
Table 1. (We introduce here the terms d;
and d, for native-born offenders, since we
shall want to compare ds — d, with d, — dz
computed for the foreign-born offenders.)
For Table 3 we see that ds; — dy = .0856 —
.1539 = —.0683. (As an estimate of the
sampling variance of ds — d4, the Dorn-
Stouffer-Tibbitts articles would recommend
Other comparisons might also be of inter-
est; for example, d; — ds, dz — ds, pi — po,
Pi — Px» bi — bs, Pi — Pas pr — by dr —
bs Ps, Ps bar (b1— Po) — (ba — Pa),
etc. An estimator of the sampling variance
associated with each of these comparisons
can be obtained using the general method
just described.

Tibbitts and Stouffer examined the dif-
ferences between the observed values of
d; = p;: — ~; for i = 1 and 2 and for i = 3
and 4 (ie., for foreign-born parolees with
and without a previous criminal record and
for native-born parolees with and without a
previous criminal record). There were four
values of d; (i = 1, 2, 3, 4), since the classi-
fication of parolees into those with or with-
out a previous criminal record among those,
in turn, foreign-born and native-born forms
a 2X 2 cross-classification and thus four
subgroups. If still another dichotomous sub-
division of the population were of interest
(e.g., married or unmarried) and if the
relevant data were available, there would be
2X2X2=8 values of d;. One of the
many possible comparisons that could be
made would be the following:
All the comparisons of the d; mentioned
earlier herein are particular examples of
linear comparisons. Quite a large number of
published articles deal with testing the
statistical significance of all possible linear
comparisons of a set of means, or a specified
subset of these linear comparisons, in the
particular context of the analysis of vari-
ance.® Since the present article is not con-
cerned with data obtained from the usual
analysis of variance, the particular tech-
niques presented in the published literature
are not directly applicable, although some of
them can be modified, under certain circum-
stances, so as to be appropriate for data of
the kind considered here.!° We shall not be
concerned herein with the problem of testing
the significance of all possible linear com-
parisons, of making an over-all confidence
statement for all possible linear compari-
sons, or of making other related kinds of
over-all confidence statements. However,
the research worker should be aware of the
concepts and methods presented in the
literature cited, since it deals with making a
number of different comparisons based on a
The preceding sections of this paper were
concerned mainly with determining the ap-
propriate estimator of the sampling vari-
ance of the difference between proportions,
of the difference between differences be-
tween proportions (e.g., d; — dz), of the dif-
ference between differences between differ-
ences between proportions [e.g., (di: — d2) —
(ds — d)], of the difference between differ-
ences between differences between differ-
ences between proportions (e.g., [(d, — d2)
— (dz — ds)] — [(ds — de) — (dz — ds)]) etc.
These estimators of the sampling variances
can be used, in situations where the random
samples are sufficiently large (so that the
usual normal distribution will be a satisfac-
tory approximation to the exact sampling
distribution of the relevant statistic), to ob-
tain an approximate confidence interval for
the expected value associated with a par-
ticular comparison—for example, an ap-
proximate confidence interval for the ex-
pected value of, say, d; — dz. Textbooks on
elementary statistics explain how to obtain
such approximate confidence intervals in
the situation where a statistic that has a
sampling distribution that can be approxi-
mated by a normal distribution is observed
(say, d; — de) and where there is a consistent
estimator of the sampling variance of this
statistic." The usual elementary methods
presented in textbooks can also be used to
test various hypotheses concerning the ex-
pected value associated with a particular
comparison. For example, it is possible,

11 See, e.g., Walker and Lev, op. cit., chap. vii.
Where the samples are large, confidence intervals
based on the normal distribution (i-e., the ¢-distribu-

tion with an infinite number of degrees of freedom)
will often lead to satisfactory approximations.
using these methods, to test the hypothesis
that the expected value of d; — dz is equal to
some specified value.

Tibbitts and Stouffer were interested in
the particular hypothesis that the expected
value of d, — d; was zero; that is, that the
expected value of d; was equal to the ex-
pected value of d:. Using the estimators pre-
sented above for the sampling variance of d,
and de, it is relatively easy to test, by the
usual methods, the null hypothesis that the
expected value of d; is equal to the expected
value of dz. It is also possible to generalize
this procedure in order to obtain a test of the
null hypothesis that the expected values of
d,, of dz, of ds, and of dy are all equal to
each other. In fact, if appropriate kinds of
estimators of the relevant sampling vari-
ances are used (e.g., the estimators sug-
gested above), then a general procedure is
available for testing whether any specific set
of independert statistics (e.g,. any specific
set of d’s) that are approximately normally
distributed is such that the expected values
of each of the statistics in the set considered
are all equal to each other.”
them somewhat different methods must be
used for testing the various hypotheses that
may be of interest.!*

The difference between two d’s, say d;
and dz, can be viewed as a measure of a cer-
tain aspect of the association present in the
2 X 2 X 2 cross-classification table describ-
ing the relationship between whether a
parolee is or is not a lone offender, whether
he has or has not a previous criminal record,
and whether he is or is not a violator. A
number of different aspects of association
might be of interest in such a 2 X 2 X 2
table. The difference between d; — d, and
d; — dg can be viewed as a measure of a
particular aspect of association present in

14 Statistical procedures for testing hypotheses
concerning measures of association for cross-classi-
fication tables, and for obtaining (approximate) con-
fidence intervals for them have been presented for a
variety of different kinds of such measures in Good-
man and Kruskal, “Measures of Association for

Cross Classifications. III: Approximate Sampling
Theory.”
45 For further details, see, e.g., M. S. Bartlett,
“Contingency Table Interactions,” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Supplement, II (1935),
248-52; S. N. Roy and Marvin A. Kastenbaum, “On
the Hypothesis of No ‘Interaction’ in a Multi-way
Contingency Table,” Annals of Mathematical Sta-
tistics, XXVII (1956), 749-57; Juan Bejar, ‘“Con-
tingency Tables,” Trabajos de Estadistica, IX (1958),
85-101 (Spanish with English summary); Alexander
McFarlane Mood, Introduction to the Theory of
Statistics (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
1950), pp. 273-82; and the articles by Goodman and
Kruskal, mentioned in nn. 5, 12.
