Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
This paper calls attention to the image
the public holds of an organization and to
some of its consequences upon the organiza-
tion’s internal dynamics. The importance of
the public image and the consequences of the
attempt to shape it became evident during
the study of the goals and authority struc-
ture of a 300-bed voluntary general hospital,
from which many of the illustrations here
are drawn.” Other illustrations from a vari-
ety of organizations are offered to suggest
the widespread applicability of the analysis.

An organization is dependent upon the
environment for many things, such as the
charter to operate, personnel, operating rev-
enue, and funds for expansion and develop-
ment, but dependency entails some loss of
autonomy. Reducing dependency upon the
environment is one way of increasing auton-
omy, but most organizations cannot mini-
mize input if they are to expand or main-
tain a competitive position. Autonomy can
also be increased, however, by controlling
dependency, thus making it possible to ex-
pand and increase organizational power
while cultivating new publics.

One of the many ways of controlling de-
pendency is to create and maintain a favor-
able image of the organization in the salient
publics.? If an organization and its product
are well regarded, it may more easily at-
tract personnel, influence relevant legisla-
tion, wield informal power in the commu-
nity, and insure adequate numbers of clients,
customers, donors, or investors. Organiza-
tions may be placed along a continuum
from unfavorable to favorable public images.
A predominantly favorable image we shall
call “prestige,” and it may range from low
to high.
ing the product. However, the image of the
product, irrespective of its own essential
quality, may be determined by association
with some value-laden symbol or with char-
acteristics of the organization that bear no
necessary relation to the quality of the
product, such as the physical appearance of
the unit where the product is made or dis-
tributed or the organization’s labor policies,
political leanings, charitable donations, and
so forth.

While an analytical typology may be de-
rived from such considerations as these, in
this preliminary analysis only a crude dis-
tinction will be made—that between prestige
based on intrinsic or extrinsic characteristics
of the goods or services. Intrinsic character-
istics are fundamental to official purposes
of the organization and are regarded by the
organization as essential to maintaining
standards of production set forth in official
goals. Extrinsic characteristics are not es-
sential to maintaining production standards,
though they may be vital in insuring accept-
ance and resources.

Since official goals may be ambiguous and
difficult to determine, and since the essen-
tialness of a contribution may be disputed,
it is sometimes difficult to distinguish be-
tween what is intrinsic and what is extrinsic.
An example of intrinsic characteristics is the
durability and efficiency of an automobile,
relative to its price. Extrinsic characteristics
would be the entertainment programs on
television that the company sponsors, as-
sociation with status symbols in its adver-
tising, and the elegance of showrooms and
techniques of salesmen. Styling might be
either intrinsic or extrinsic, depending upon
the organization’s goals and the perspective
of the person who interprets them.*

The term “ethical drug house” conveys
an image that relies on an intrinsic referent:
of a firm with a reputation for producing
drugs of exact specifications and making no
unwarranted claims. This is intrinsic to the
operation of the organization and is gov-
erned by professional and technical stand-
ards. But the organization may also build
up prestige through “institutional advertis-
ing,” sales techniques and packaging: these
would be extrinsic characteristics. The pre-
sumption is that the image based on ex-
trinsic referents will promote public favor
and even be a substitute for an image based
on intrinsic referents among those unable
to evaluate the quality of the product. In
some cases it may even replace an unfavor-
able image: if the quality of a highly pub-
licized drug, such as a vaccine, is found
wanting, prestige may be recouped through
an intensification of efforts to exploit ex-
trinsic characteristics.

It is the nature and the value of extrinsic
characteristics that the group to be influ-
enced—the “target group”—can judge them
directly and form an appropriate image.®
This is not always the case with intrinsic
qualities; the target group may not be quali-
fied to evaluate them. In this case the in-
dorsement, through use or certification, of
the product by another group capable of
judging its essential quality can be used to
validate the prestige claim made by the
organization; or indirect indexes may be
used which attest to intrinsic quality with-
out directly measuring it. It is rarely neces-
sary to use these two strategies to promote
prestige based on extrinsic characteristics;
the strategies require considerable effort and
are utilized primarily for maximizing pres-
tige based on intrinsic qualities.
lems of prestige are simplified. The market-
ing of products entails the marketing of
intrinsic referents upon which prestige is
based. This would be the case with special-
ized toolmakers, custom clothiers, or any or-
ganization producing goods or services for
another organization under contractual
specifications. Some emphasis upon extrinsic
characteristics is to be expected; it almost
always helps but is not crucial.

In the hospital that was studied—let us
call it “Valley Hospital’’—research in can-
cer chemotherapy provides an example of
simplified production and marketing. The
target group, an organization supporting
cancer research, can easily judge the effec-
tiveness of the results, and all the research-
ers need to do to control their dependence
upon the agency for grants is to test chemi-
cals according to established methods. But,
by and large, there are few occasions when
the official goals of the hospital—promot-
ing the health of the community through
care of patients, teaching and research of
high quality—can be properly evaluated by
the clients, or donors. To promote prestige
based on intrinsic quality, “validating
groups” and indirect indexes are useful.
If the goods or services produced for spe-
cialized consumers are so highly technical
or experimental that no evaluation is pos-
sible, the organization tends to rely upon
indirect indexes of intrinsic quality, that is,
upon publicizing characteristics of the or-
ganization which are thought to insure qual-
ity. The reputation of the personnel, the
specialized equipment, the number of re-
search projects in operation—all these are
familiar indexes used for this purpose in
the hospital and other research organiza-
tions. Indexes of promoting the health of
the community are, for instance, statistics
on the amount of free and partly paid care
given patients. The teaching program attests
to contributing to medical education and
suggests a high quality of care for all pa-
tients. However, statistics on the amount of
free care do not necessarily mean good care,
nor does the number of medical students
necessarily indicate their quality, the teach-
ing they receive, or the care they give. In-
deed, some persons claim that the hospital’s
standards in these matters are low and that
© While indirect indexes are usually used because
direct validation is impossible, indirect indexes may
also be used when the organization does not have
dependable direct ones. Subversion of intrinsic
quality is similar to “displacement of goals” as
described by Merton and others (Robert K. Mer-
ton, Social Theory and Social Structure (Glencoe,
Ill: Free Press, 1949], p. 155), where, however,
the example is the bureaucrat’s emphasis upon rules
for their own sake. Our example is the organiza-
tion’s emphasis upon indexes for the sake of pres-
tige. Peter M. Blau provides examples of displace-
ment dictated by organizational needs in The Dy-
namics of Bureaucracy (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1955). Sheldon Messinger discusses
the attempt to maintain the “core-identity” of the
Townsend organization in “Organizational Trans-
formation: A Case Study of a Declining Social
Movement,” American Sociological Review, XX
(January, 1955), 3-13. Closer still to our own ex-
ample is the analysis of dependency upon students
and the criteria of legislators and professionals
(Burton R. Clark, Adult Education in Transition:
A Study of Institutional Insecurity (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1956]). What
Clark calls the “marginality” of adult education we
would speak of as a condition of high dependency
which is uncontrolled. The defense of “precarious
values,” in Clark’s sense, is difficult without the
autonomy afforded by control over dependency,
that is, without, in part, prestige (ébid., chaps. ii,
vi).
to quality, and the differences can easily be
publicized and promoted. Marginal differ-
entiation is sought not only in the product
but in other aspects of the organization, such
as plant design, packaging, contacts with
target groups, and, of course, in advertis-
ing.” Since extrinsic characteristics, by def-
inition, are unrelated to the essential quality
of the product, their virtually unlimited
varieties are assiduously explored by organ-
izations conducting “motivation” or mar-
keting research.

The production and marketing of extrinsic
characteristics conferring prestige are de-
veloped to a high degree in all mass-pro-
duced consumer goods. Attempts to promote
images of intrinsic quality are still very com-
mon, however, as instanced by the cigarette
industry’s tests of filters, aging of tobaccos,
and the approval of “men who know tobacco
best.” Extrinsic themes are not limited to
competitive industries. Monopolies also are
dependent upon the public and seek to in-
fluence the public’s image by, for example,
appeals to the way they support free enter-
prise or by association with cultural refine-
ment, as found in “institutional advertis-
ing.” Apparently, the more successful the
organization, the more irrelevant may be the
themes and the closer they may draw to-
ward values of the society as a whole, thus
implying an even stronger claim for support.
An example is an advertisement containing
only a brief statement of a democratic ideal
symbolized by a painting.
policy restricting the use of human-interest
stories—an extrinsic item. Direct competi-
tion with another hospital for donations
forced Valley Hospital to abandon the poli-
cy and, instead, to send human-interest
stories to a local paper as the other hospital
had been doing.

Physicians will bring patients to the hos-
pital available to them that offers the best
facilities. But when similarly equipped hos-
pitals compete for doctors, the enterprising
hospital will emphasize extrinsic details
which insure the physician’s comfort, con-
venience, and deference. A new adminis-
trator at Valley Hospital increased the per-
centage of occupied beds from the lowest in
the city to the highest for comparable hos-
pitals in part through such devices.

Patients are incompetent to judge the
care they receive from the hospital: they are
unable to gain the information required to
make a judgment, and they lack the knowl-
edge to interpret correctly what they do ex-
perience. They may, however, judge many
superficial aspects of the professional care
and especially the “hotel” aspects of hos-
pital care. The hospital has placed great
emphasis upon producing extrinsic items
which patients are able to evaluate, and a
public relations department promotes them
assiduously. In a four-year period an aver-
age of over eight news items a year appeared
in the mass media covering such subjects
as wine with meals and a beauty salon for
maternity patients. Emphasis upon these
hotel-like services has helped increase oc-
cupancy and kept the name of the hospital
before the public. Other patient-oriented
features include extended visiting hours and
circulating coffee carts for visitors, television
sets for patients, snacks and special cookery,
elaborate devices to suppress noise, and me-
ticulous housekeeping.

The creation of a public relations depart-
ment (headed by a former newspaperwom-
an) coincided with a concerted attempt to
increase occupancy, donations, and prestige
in general. The department both stimulates
and publicizes innovations. Its success, while
bringing the hospital awards from the Amer-
ican Hospital Association, engendered cri-
ticism from within and without. However,
most other hospitals in the city subsequently
created their own departments, perhaps,
considering the publicity Valley Hospital
was receiving, in self-defense.

Shaping the image held by external groups
is the explicit task of public relations depart-
ments. However, the work may be carried
on by other groups or individuals in organi-
zations. The administrator of Valley Hos-
pital was looked upon by some of his staff
as an “outside man,” more active in dealing
with the public than with internal affairs.
Current research in correctional institutions
suggests that the division of labor, common-
ly found at the apex of large organizations
between an “outside”’ man and an “inside”
man, is effective.8 While an implicit or ex-
plicit assignment of public relations func-
tions to individuals or groups does not neces-
sarily signify the production and marketing
of extrinsic characteristics, concerted efforts
to shape images suggests that the product
cannot “speak for itself” and that prestige
based on these referents is also desired. Of
course, personnel who deal with external
groups are also involved in bargaining and
in political functions that have only a re-
mote relationship to organizational prestige.
tions and concessions to physicians. Some
administrative personnel felt that the crea-
tive energies and talents of the administrator
were expended upon publicity-producing
“frills” or physicians’ conveniences while
serious administrative matters were neg-
lected, eventually to the patients’ detriment.
Nurses complained that requests by private
patients for coffee or other services described
in brochures took time from the care re-
quired by free and part-paying patients.
Interns and residents complained that pa-
tients were unwilling to interrupt their tele-
phone conversations or snacks for necessary
examination and treatment. Physicians
found that allowing unlimited visiting hours
interfered with their work. The hospital may
unwittingly be encouraging the selection of
a clientele that demands more and more of
these services. But it cannot afford to re-
dress what personnel see as the proper bal-
ance between services and care without find-
ing some other way to attract patients. Such
complaints are probably common in organi-
zations.
tor to exploit the dramatic and unique na-
ture of new facilities for a highly specialized
type of surgery. On two occasions the ad-
ministrator argued that the community gave
$100,000 for the facilities, that the donors
would be pleased most by publicity in na-
tional magazines, and “that was what they
gave the money for.” However, the staff of
the specialized unit argued that publicity in
this form would endanger grants from the
national agencies supporting the research,
whose representatives would view it as ir-
relevant to the project, that it would expose
the staff to ridicule from other physicians
since facilities rather than research results
were being publicized, and that publicity
would increase the demand for services on
behalf of those patients who were not good
research material, thus impeding the re-
search program. The facilities were evidence
of intrinsic quality to local target groups but
were judged extrinsic to official goals by the
researchers and agencies supporting the cur-
rent research.

Physicians as a whole have relationships
which conflict with those of the hospital:
they are dependent upon outside colleagues
and the profession as a whole for validation
of individual claims for prestige, for valida-
tion of the claims of the profession itself,
and for maintaining professional contacts.
A basic tenet of the profession, occasioned
by competitive practice as much as any-
thing, is the avoidance of publicity. While
they may seek it individually, collectively
the medical staff must oppose publicity in
most cases. The hospital, on the other hand,
finds that use of physicians’ names or pic-
tures serves to give authenticity to news
releases and creates interest in the hospital.
This, in part, has led to a long series of dis-
putes between the respective public relations
committees of the medical staff and the hos-
pital, restricting the ability of the hospital
to publicize legitimate prestige items.
control dependencies through promoting
organizational prestige. The production of
indirect indexes of intrinsic quality may take
precedence over maintaining the quality of
goods and services. Resources may be di-
verted from activities supporting official
goals to those which produce and market
extrinsic characteristics. Finally, multiple
dependencies may interfere with the mar-
keting of either intrinsic or extrinsic ref-
erents and may create conflicts within the
organization or between the organization and
its target groups.

Decisions regarding indirect indexes of
prestige, the allocation of resources, and
marketing methods may shape the character
of an organization through establishing
precedents and long-range commitments.
An unacknowledged priority of goals based
upon an expedient calculus of gain may
emerge. There was tentative evidence of this
possibility at Valley Hospital. The key tar-
gets of efforts to create prestige were poten-
tial patients and local donors. Maximal or-
ganizational resources were devoted to ac-
tivities which furthered prestige in their
eyes, while minimal resources were received
by some of those activities which had little
or no relevance to prestige, even though
they were essential for achieving official
goals.

Thus, while preventive medicine was a
goal of the hospital, little was done to sup-
port it. The authorities were indifferent to
the ineffectiveness and disorganization of
one small, unglamorous, but potentially
valuable diagnostic program, which, in un-
trained hands, threatened to do more harm
than good. However, a proposal to build
and maintain a museum of medicine on the
premises which would be open to community
and the schools was actively considered,
despite the expense and effort involved.
Though of less value than the diagnostic
program, it could be billed as a part of the
program of preventive medicine, while sub-
stantially contributing to prestige.

More striking was the fate of one service
essential to the major goal of providing
patient care of high quality. This was a goal
far from achieved in the case of free and
part-paying patients in the outpatient de-
partment, largely because good care there
does not at present bring prestige. The de-
partment was denied funds for remedying
even the grossest physical deterioration and
obsolescence; attendance and performance
of the staff was undisciplined, and efforts
to reform the department were, for several
years, not backed by the authorities in the
organization. On the other hand, while the
outpatient department was in a state of
physical deterioration and professional neg-
lect, funds, much energy, and inventiveness
went into constructing and publicizing an
elaborate, highly specialized surgical suite,
even though its contribution to official goals
was relatively peripheral.

Striking a balance between the conflict-
ing demands for goal achievement and in-
creasing inputs in the form of donations and
patient revenue is difficult. Without pres-
tige, whether based on intrinsic or extrinsic
qualities, resources may be inadequate to
achieve goals or provide for expansion and
development. But, without proper use of
resources for avoidance of intra- and inter-
organizational conflicts and achievement of
all goals for which responsibility is acknowl-
edged and assumed, control of dependen-
cies may be a hollow accomplishment.
