Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

 

EVR LeU
Types of Integration and Their Measurement
Author(s): Werner S. Landecker

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 56, N
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/277 1696
Accessed: 06-06-2016 18:31 UTC
Ever since the days of Comte and Spen-
cer, sociologists have been concerned with
the integration of smaller units into social
wholes. The literature has dealt with such
questions as these: What constitutes the dif-
ference between a group and a mere sum
total of individuals? In what sense is it one
single entity? What is the nature of its
unity?

From the modern empirical point of view
the problem of social integration is as chal-
lenging as it was from the older, more specu-
lative point of view. However, a change has
occurred as to the kind of question asked
about integration. Nowadays it seems less
pertinent to ask: What is integration? If
this question is asked at all, then it is only
in preparation for the more fruitful question:
How can integration be measured? And,
again, this latter question is not of interest
in itself but merely a preliminary step,
which leads to genuine problems of research
such as these: Under what conditions does
social integration increase? Under what con-
ditions does it decrease? What are the con-
sequences of a high degree of integration?
What are the consequences of a low degree
of integration? Sociology is in need of basic
research oriented toward this kind of prob-
lem.

Early in the exploration of a type of phe-
nomena it seems advisable to break it up in-
to as many subtypes as one can distinguish
and to use each subdivision as a variable for
research. This appears to be a more fruitful

* The writer is indebted to Professor Robert C.
Angell for helpful suggestions.
procedure than to attempt immediately to
generalize about the generic type as a whole.
The main advantage of subclassification in
an initial phase of research is that it leads to
problems of relationship among subtypes
which would evade the attention of the in-
vestigator if he were to deal with the broader
type from the very beginning. Generaliza-
tions on the higher level of abstraction will
suggest themselves as a matter of course,
once regularities common to several sub-
types are discovered.

We do not know enough about social in-
tegration to postulate any one set of data as
the index of integration as such. Thus in this
paper problems will be formulated with ref-
erence to social integration in particular re-
spects. No general definition of social inte-
gration will be offered, but several types of
integration will be stated and defined. Each
type will refer to one particular respect in
which some degree of integration may exist
in a group. To determine relationships
among the types is a problem for research.
Research may show a correlation between
some of these types sufficiently high to sug-
gest that one can be used as an index of the
other in further investigations. It may also
be discovered that one particular type is
basic to all others and therefore can be des-
ignated as a measure of social integration in
general. Or research may lead to the con-
struction of a composite index, with several
types of integration as units. Even the types
themselves must be considered as entirely
provisional. They may turn out to be useful,
or, on the other hand, research may show
the necessity of modifying the very typology
from which it proceeds.

In order to distinguish among the different
ways in which a group may be integrated, it
is necessary to assume the existence of dif-
ferent types of group elements. A typology
of integration can be developed on the prem-
ise that for sociological purposes the smallest
units of group life are cultural standards, on
the one hand, and persons and their behav-
ior, on the other. If one uses this premise as
a criterion of types of integration, three
varieties suggest themselves: integration
among cultural standards, integration be-
tween cultural standards and the behavior
of persons, and integration among persons.

The first of these, which we will call “cul-
tural integration,” varies along a continuum
ranging from extreme consistency to a high
degree of inconsistency among standards
within the same culture. Integration be-
tween cultural standards and the behavior
of persons will be called “normative integra-
tion,” since it measures the degree to which
the standards of the group constitute effec-
tive norms for the behavior of the members.
It varies from an extremely high frequency
of conformity to cultural standards to a high
frequency of violation. The manner in which
persons are integrated in relation to one an-
other will be employed as an additional cri-
terion in classification. There is integration
among persons in the sense of an exchange
of meanings, or communication; and there is
integration among persons in the sense of an
exchange of services, or division of labor. In-
tegration with respect to an exchange of
meanings will be called ‘communicative in-
tegration.” It ranges from communication
throughout the group to the prevalence of
barriers to communication within the group.
Integration with respect to an exchange of
services will be called “functional integra-
tion,” in that it measures the degree to
which the functions exercised by the mem-
bers of the group constitute mutual services.
Functional integration varies from extreme
interdependence to a high degree of self-suf-
ficiency.
I, CULTURAL INTEGRATION

The work of anthropologists like Linton
and Benedict has made it apparent that cul-
tures are configurations which vary in inter-
nal consistency or integration.? But, while
the concept of cultural integration is famil-
iar, it has not received a sufficiently specific
and quantifiable definition for purposes of
research. Linton’s conception of cultural in-
tegration can probably be represented most
adequately in terms of a proportion among
types of culture traits which he calls “uni-
versals,” “specialties,” and “alternatives.”
His theory is that, “while the universals and
specialties within any culture normally form
a fairly consistent and well-integrated unit,
the alternatives necessarily lack such con-
sistency and integration.” Thus cultural in-
tegration can be measured by determining
the proportion of alternatives in relation to
universals and specialties. The lower the
proportion of alternatives, the higher the
degree of cultural integration.

The accuracy of Linton’s assessment of
two of his types, alternatives and specialties,
in their significance for cultural integration
is not beyond question. If “alternatives” are
taken to mean traits which a culture offers
to the person as a matter of choice, then one
may wonder whether alternatives seriously
affect the internal consistency of a culture.
As long as freedom of choice exists and a

2 For a detailed analysis of the concept “cultural
integration” in a broader sense see John P. Gillin,
The Ways of Man (New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts, Inc., 1948), chap. xxiv; see also David F.
Aberle, “Shared Values in Complex Societies,”
American Sociological Review, XV (1950), 495 ff.

3 Ralph Linton, The Study of Man (New York:
D. Appleton—Century Co., 1936), p. 282.
clash of moral pressures is lacking, it is
doubtful whether the person is faced with a
real dilemma. Nor is it apparent that the
function of a culture as a universe of dis-
course is impaired among persons faced with
the same cultural alternatives, even though
they do not make the same choice at one
time. Therefore, it is possible to restrict the
concept of cultural integration to a relation-
ship among traits which constitute cultural
standards in the sense that they require ad-
herence.

Inconsistency among cultural standards
can exist in two forms. It may occur, first, in
the form of contradictory demands made by
universals. For example, the same culture
may demand altruistic behavior and com-
petitive behavior, without necessarily limit-
ing each to a particular group or situation.
The more inconsistencies of this kind exist in
a culture, the lower the degree of its integra-
tion. Therefore, it seems possible to measure
cultural integration in terms of the frequen-
cy of inconsistency among universals. The
criterion of inconsistency should not be
sought in logic but in experience. Durkheim
suggests that the idea of contradiction de-
pends upon social conditions. What may
appear to an outsider as a logical contradic-
tion is not necessarily felt as such by those
who live under these standards. Therefore
the earmark of inconsistency among stand-
ards should be an experienced difficulty.

A second form of inconsistency among
standards exists in the area of cultural spe-
cialties, although not all standards of spe-
cialty character are relevant to cultural inte-
gration. The situations to which some of
these standards refer exist only among the
specialists themselves. Many standards
which have evolved in an occupational cate-
gory refer to situations which do not exist
outside that category. For example, the
medical profession has a code of ethics, and
so have realtors. Obviously, professional
standards for physicians and for realtors are
not and cannot be the same. Nevertheless,
the two sets of standards do not clash be-
cause each refers to situations which do not
exist in the other profession. Therefore, dif-
ferences among standards which vary from
one another not only with respect to the
persons who uphold them but also with re-
spect to their situational reference do not
interfere with cultural integration.

In distinction to the preceding type of
standard, which might be called “specialty
with specialist reference,” there is another
type which might be called “specialty with
societal reference.” The latter is the kind of
standard which is shared mainly by mem-
bers of a particular group or category but
which establishes norms for situations which
are society-wide in their scope. If several
“specialties with societal reference” are at
variance with one another, cultural incon-
sistencies exist. For example, if labor and
management differ in their standards as to
the proper place of labor and of management
in the business enterprise, two sets of spe-
cialties are in conflict with each other. The
same is true if different segments of the pop-
ulation disagree in their standards as to
whether divorce is right or wrong, whether
the government should own the big indus-
tries, or as to what is right and wrong in race
relations. The larger the number of incon-
sistent specialties with societal reference in
a culture, the lower the degree of its integra-
tion.

Thus indices of cultural integration can
be developed in several ways, each apparent-
ly measuring a somewhat different phase.
Following Linton, one might use the propor-
tion of alternatives in a culture as a negative
index of its integration. On the other hand,
from the point of view suggested in the pre-
ceding paragraphs, an index would be con-
structed on the premise that the fewer the
inconsistencies among universals and among
specialties with societal reference among all
standards in a culture, the higher the degree
of integration of that culture.5 Possibly, re-
Cultural standards can be viewed not
only in relation to one another but also in re-
lation to the persons for whom they estab-
lish norms. Integration in relation between
standards and persons is called “normative
integration,”’ and it varies with the degree to
which conduct is in accord with such norms.
The importance of integration in this sense
has received particular attention in the
work of R. C. Angell. He considers obedi-
ence to societal norms as the difference be-
tween a mere society and one that possesses
elements of moral community.‘ It is sympto-
matic of what he assumes to be the basis of
societal integration, i.e., the orientation of
persons by common values.

In recent studies of American cities, An-
gell has devised an index of social integra-
tion as shown by conformity to social stand-
ards.’ His index of integration is composed
of two, more specific, indices—a crime index,
which measures integration negatively, and
a welfare effort index, which measures it

to persons who combine several roles with one an-
other provides a fruitful point of departure for the
mechanics of index construction (see Samuel A.
Stouffer, “An Analysis of Conflicting Social Norms,”
American Sociological Review, XIV [1949], 707 ff.;
and Mirra Komarovsky, “Cultural Contradictions
and Sex Roles,” American Journal of Sociology, LIT
[1946], 184 ff.; see also Paul Wallin, “Cultural Con-
tradictions and Sex Roles: A Repeat Study,” Ameri-
can Sociological Review, XV [1950], 288 ff.).

6 Robert C. Angell, The Integration of American
Society (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1941),
p. 22. Fora similar view see Talcott Parsons, Essays
in Sociological Theory, Pure and Applied (Glencoe,
Ill: Free»Press, 1949), p. 50.

7 Robert C. Angell, “The Social Integration of
Selected American Cities,” American Journal of So-
ctology, XLVILI (1941-42), 575 ff.; “The Social Inte-
gration of American Cities of More than 100,000
Population,” American Sociological Review, XII
(1947), 335 ff.
positively. The crime index is made up of
rates for those crimes which are most relia-
bly reported, i.e., murder and nonnegligent
homicide, burglary, and robbery. The wel-
fare effort index is based on the assumption
that social standards demand that the citi-
zen contribute a share of his resources to the
welfare of the community as a whole. The
index consists of the amount raised by the
Community Chest in proportion to the
quota established, the number of pledgers in
proportion to the number of families in the
community, and the proportion of the
amount raised to other family expenditures
as expressed in the volume of retail sales in
the community. The welfare effort index and
the inverted crime index are combined into
the integration index in such a manner that
the crime index receives greater weight be-
cause it correlates more highly with vari-
ables which accompany community integra-
tion than does the welfare effort index.

If the accuracy of crime reporting in-
creases, as is likely, further gains in the de-
velopment of this index can be expected.
The selection of reliably reported crimes for
the purpose of index construction has been
accomplished at a price; most crimes select-
ed are acts of violence. Conceivably, crimes
of this character are expressive of noncon-
formity in a relatively limited segment of
the total population. If it should become
possible to include offenses which involve at
least some amount of white-collar criminali-
ty, such as fraud and embezzlement, a more
significant measure of normative integration
could be obtained. However, the need for
further contributions to the measurement of
normative integration is greatest with re-
gard to social groups other than the com-
munity as such. The local community is a
unit for the tabulation of crimes and of con-
tributions to welfare chests. An index based
on such data cannot be used, and is not in-
tended, as a measure of the normative inte-
gration of groups like the family, the labor
union, the service club, the church congrega~
tion, the congeniality group, or the juvenile
gang. Not only are the data required for the
The extent to which communicative con-
tacts permeate a group, the degree of its
communicative integration, will bear some
relation to the integration among its cultural
standards and the integration of conduct
with these standards. The precise statement
of these relationships awaits research; and as
prerequisites for such research, ways are
needed to determine the degree to which the
members of a group are linked to one an-
other through communication.

The degree to which communication con-
stitutes a connection throughout the group
has not yet entered into the focus of the soci-
ologist as a variable for research. Therefore,
in the absence of experience with the prob-
lem, what will be suggested here as a guide
in measuring communicative integration is
not a master-index but a number of more or
less tentative indices, each of limited ap-
plicability. In fact, it will be seen that sev-
eral of the potential indices rest on assump-
tions which themselves need to be tested
further by research.

The more comprehensive the network of
interpersonal communication, the smaller
the number of socially isolated persons. It
would appear, therefore, that the percentage
of group members who display symptoms of
social isolation can be used as a negative in-
dex of communicative integration. It was
one of Durkheim’s hypotheses that social
isolation of the individual is one of several
situations in which suicide is relatively fre-
quent.® “Egoistic suicide,” as Durkheim
calls it, is committed by the person who is

8 mile Durkheim, Le Suicide (Paris: Felix Al-
can, 1897).
detached from social contacts beyond the
point of toleration. This involves, as its most
crucial element, a lack of, or at least rela-
tively little participation in, communication
with others. If it were possible to develop
definite criteria by which “egoistic suicide”
could be distinguished from other types of
suicide that do not involve social isolation,
rates of “egoistic suicide” in different groups
could be used as a measure of their relative
degree of communicative integration.

Some mental disorders constitute another,
very similar symptom of isolation. To ex-
plain delusions of grandeur or of persecution
as the result of restrictions in communica-
tion was one of the fruitful implications of
Cooley’s theory of the “self.’’® More recent-
ly, the hypothesis, in this or another form,
has received support among psychiatrists’®
and social psychologists." The relationship
between mental disorders and isolation from
communication needs to be explored fur-
ther. Presumably, certain disorders lack this
particular functional basis. As the etiology
of mental disorders advances, it will become
possible to distinguish disorders sympto-
matic of lack of communication from those
which are not. Once this is accomplished, it
could be assumed that a high incidence of
the disorder in question expresses a high fre-
quency of socially isolated persons and, in
this sense, a low degree of communicative
integration of the group. Perhaps a more ac-
curate index could be obtained by combin-
ing the rate for the relevant types of mental
disorder and that for suicide.

Indices consisting of rates of suicide or
personality disorders would determine the
frequency of isolation through the observa-
tion of its symptoms. A more direct ap-
proach could be taken by attempting to dis-
cover the proportion of persons in a group
who lack intimate social contacts. Commu-
nicative integration would vary inversely
with the proportion of such persons. Re-
search techniques which have been devel-
oped in studies of patterns of social visiting
in the community” and of the frequency of
personal contacts in the neighborhood*s
could be utilized for the purpose of deter-
mining the local number of isolated persons.
Another useful technique would be that
which has been employed in so-called ‘“so-
cial participation” studies. These deal most-
ly with the participation of the individual in
organized groups.4 As their scope is being
extended to include the analysis of member-
ship not only in formally organized but also
in informal associations, they yield infor-
mation as to the frequency of persons who
are not in close communication with others.

T. M. Newcomb has stressed the function
of barriers to communication in the main-
tenance of antagonistic relationships."® It
would follow that the degree to which inter-
personal relations in a group, on the average,
are antagonistic would be indicative of the
degree to which its members fail to commu-
nicate with one another. On this premise,
sociometric techniques of measuring the vol-
ume of attraction and rejection in a group as.
a whole would seem to be a device by which
the adequacy of communication in the group
can be indirectly measured. Among the sev-
eral forms which sociometric research has
taken, perhaps the one most relevant to the
task of measuring the communicative inte-
gration of the small group is the technique of
measuring “group morale” designed by L.
D. Zeleny.™” In its simplest form the tech-
nique consists in determining the number of
atractions or “likes” that are found in a
group and expressing it as a ratio of the total
number of attractions which would be theo-
retically possible in that group, i-e., if each
member were attracted to each other mem-
ber. Allowance is made for the intensity of
the attraction measured. This ratio Zeleny
calls the “morale quotient.” If one assumes
with Newcomb that, in general, hostility is
indicative of disturbances in communica-
tion, Zeleny’s “morale quotient” would seem
to constitute a useful measure of the com-
municative integration of a group.

One way in which barriers to communica-
tion may interfere with the communicative
integration of the group is by isolating the
person. Indices discussed up to this point are
concerned with this phase of communicative
integration. Another manner, also pointed
out by Newcomb, in which barriers to
communication may be drawn can be de-
scribed by a line which divides several major
subdivisions of a group from one another
without necessarily creating isolated per-
sons. Within each of these subdivisions
communicative links may be strong. How-
ever, in relations between them, misunder-
standings and distortions restrict communi-
cation and, on their part, are augmented by
the very barriers to communication which
they themselves foster. Thus prejudice
bears a close relation to communicative inte-
gration. It flourishes where the communica-
tive links among the subdivisions of a pop-
ulation are weak. Groups which lack much
give-and-take of ideas develop unrealistic,
prejudiced notions of one another. This con-
clusion is supported by studies which show
that prejudice is acquired in contacts with

17 “Sociometry of Morale,” American Sociological
Review, IV (1939), 799 ff.

8 Op. cit.
those who share it rather than with those
who are its objects.??

Thus the volume of communication
among the subgroups of a society consti-
tutes a distinct aspect of this type of inte-
gration. There seem to be several ways in
which it can be measured. One may, first of
all, focus on barriers to communication, in
the residential distribution of minorities;
spatial contacts provide opportunities for
communication, and residential segregation
is a barrier to it.*° Elaborate techniques to
measure residential segregation have been
devised and can be employed as a negative
measure of integration.

Since weaknesses in communicative inte-
gration are highly interdependent with prej-
udice, the problem of measurement can also
be approached on the premise that prejudice
is symptomatic of barriers to communica-
tion. In fact, it would seem that measures of
prejudice can be used as negative measures
of the degree to which the subgroups of a
population are linked by communication. A
number of techniques to measure prejudice
have been developed” which would serve as
useful tools for integration research.
labor. This type of integration is of prime
concern from the modern ecological point of
view as formulated by A. H. Hawley.*3 Al-
though division of labor is a strictly behav-
ioral and observable phase of integration,
not all obstacles to its measurement have
been overcome. Measurement is difficult be-
cause interdependence is a phenomenon
with several dimensions. First of all, it in-
volves specialization, a characteristic which
may exist in a number of degrees and for
which no generally applicable index has been
devised. However, to demonstrate speciali-
zation does not mean to show division of la-
bor among the specialists, because a given
number of persons specialized in different
ways are not necessarily interdependent.
Some may be organized into one, and others
into a different, system of division of labor.
Thus we need to ask: Who exchanges func-
tions with whom? in addition to asking how
specialized these functions are.

So far, only limited aspects of functional
integration have been subjected to direct
measurement. The Bureau of the Census has
defined a metropolitan district as a territory
with a specified minimum of population den-
sity, surrounding a metropolitan center.
Thus the area is measured over which a pre-
sumably high degree of functional interde-
pendence extends, but the degree of that in-
terdependence is not determined. Other in-
dications of the extent of metropolitan dis-
tricts are newspaper circulation, the dis-
tance over which commuting takes place,
the area over which metropolitan stores pro-
vide free delivery, and the volume of tele-
phone calls.24 D. J. Bogue has measured the
degree to which a population is concentrated
in each of four types of economic activity:
retail trade, wholesale trade, services, and
manufacturing. As indices of specialization
he uses the proportion of the population em-
ployed in any of these activities, the number

23 Hawley’s term is “ecological organization” (see
Amos H. Hawley, Human Ecology [New York:
Ronald Press Co., 1950], chap. x).

24R. D. McKenzie, Readings in Human Ecology
(rev. ed., Ann Arbor, Mich.: George Wahr, 1934),
P- 333:
of establishments of any of these types per
population, and the value in dollars of busi-
ness done in the kind of establishment con-
cerned. Thereby he is able to determine not
only the degree to which a local population
is functionally concentrated in each of these
fields of activity but also its corresponding
interdependence with other local units of the
larger area dominated by the same metro-
politan center.

For more indirect devices to measure
functional integration no other writer is as
suggestive as Durkheim. His best-known
idea on the subject is to use, as an index of
what he calls “organic solidarity,” the pro-
portion of legal norms with merely restitu-
tive sanctions among all norms in a legal
system. His basic assumption is that, as di-
vision of labor increases, legal norms with
punitive sanctions diminish and those with
restitutive sanctions increase proportionate-
ly. The validity of this assumption is dubi-
ous, especially in view of the relative paucity
of punitive sanctions in societies with very
little division of labor. Nevertheless, his hy-
pothesis suggests the need for research to
determine whether and to what degree the
frequency of a particular type of legal sanc-
tion correlates with other measures of func-
tional integration.

Less well known but also relevant is his
theory that, with increasing division of la-
bor, it becomes more and more difficult for
the member of a group to break away.* He
applies this idea to the family by suggesting
that the more division of labor there is in the
family, the more difficult it is for the indi-
vidual to live outside the family relation-
ship. One would expect that Durkheim
might have proceeded to propose that the
functional integration of the family be meas-
ured negatively by certain rates of separa-

5 Don J. Bogue, The Structure of the Metropolitan
Community: A Study in Dominance and Subdomi-
nance (“Contributions of the Institute for Human
Adjustment, Social Science Research Project” [Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan, 1949]).

% Emile Durkheim, The Division of Labor in Soci-
ety, trans. George Simpson (New York: Macmillan
Co., 1933), pp. 148 ff.
tion of individuals from the family, possibly
by a combination of rates of divorce and of
desertion. The reason why Durkheim did not
actually pursue this idea is presumably the
fact that a low separation rate may be in-
dicative not only of a high degree of func-
tional integration but also of a high degree
of cohesion due to other causes. Neverthe-
less, the frequency of separation from the
group could be used as a measure of its func-
tional integration if research techniques
were employed to hold other types of inte-
gration constant.

For the purpose of measuring the func-
tional integration of a community, variables
could be employed which distinguish urban,
highly differentiated populations from rural,
much less differentiated populations. Care
would have to be taken to limit the index,
as much as possible, to variables which are
symptomatic of the difference in division of
labor rather than of other urban-rural dif-
ferences. For example, the proportion of the
nonfarm population in an area might be a
useful measure. The larger the proportion of
the nonfarm population is, the higher the de-
gree of functional differentiation will be. The
fact that reproduction rates are lower in ur-
ban than in rural areas suggests another pos-
sible index of functional integration. These
and similar measures are limited, however,
in that they do not apply to all kinds of
groups. For example, they would be useless
as measures of functional integration in
comparison among groups within the urban
community. Such groups, being in an urban
environment, can be expected to be made up
of people in nonfarm occupations and with
low reproduction rates. And yet such groups
within the urban community may differ con-
siderably in functional integration. At pres-
ent, it seems we are better equipped to meas-
ure functional integration by different in-
dices for different types of groups than by
employing one single index of functional in-
tegration for all types of groups.
the standards of a culture; normative, or
conformity of conduct in the group to cul-
tural standards; communicative, or ex-
change of meanings throughout the group;
and functional, or interdependence in the
group through exchange of services. In each
of these four respects, integration may range
from high to low.

The immediate problems suggested by
this analysis are methodological. In order to
promote substantive research involving dif-
ferent aspects of integration, more effort
must be spent in developing techniques of
measuring integration in its several forms.
With respect to the measurement of all four
types, unmet problems of basic importance
were pointed out. But, while the area as
such is, by and large, underdeveloped, the
present status of the component types is not
identical. Future work on normative inte-
gration should be facilitated by research ex-
perience already gained with a measuring
device. In so far as communicative integra-
tion is concerned, index construction has not
yet been attempted, but a considerable
amount of relevant theory and research, es-
pecially in social psychology, may prove in-
strumental in this task. With respect to
functional integration, indices have been de-
veloped which measure the spatial area
within which functional interdependence
exists, and a promising beginning has been
made in measuring the degree of interde-
pendence among spatially defined units. For
groups other than local communities, how-
ever, no practicable measure of functional
integration has as yet been provided. Final-
ly, in the area of cultural integration the first
step from preliminary theoretical considera-
tions to the actual development of measur-
ing devices is still to be taken.

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
