Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
Cities must be in an economic or politi-
cal relation with areas of countryside that
can produce the food to keep them alive.
This basic rule determines the main lines
of the ecology of cities and will continue
to do so, at least until technology advances
to the point where cities can produce their
own food by mechanical means. Since the
cities of precolonial, colonial, and independ-
ent Asia have had distinctive relations to
their hinterlands, the operation of the rule
has resulted in cities of different function
and physical layout in the three periods.

Asian cities from earliest times to the
present differ from those of North America
in being as much political as economic cen-
ters. They were the points from which rulers
administered their large or small domains.
Where the domain was an expanse of coun-
tryside consisting of more or less self-con-
tained villages, the problems of administra-
tion centered on the control of the hierarchy
of officials who collected the taxes. Through
these, sometimes mediated by money, flowed
the food on which the chief city lived; on
them depended the armies that would defend
the city and surrounding territory, the
craftsmen who would produce its art, and
the scholars and theologians who would
make it conscious of itself. Ancient Indian
writers speak of periods of prosperity when
the countryside was filled with industrious
peasants and of periods of harsh rule when
the peasants deserted their farms and there
was no one to pay the taxes. In times of
peace when the administration was strong
with that blend of cruelty and paternalism
that held the ancient empires together, taxes
were large and the capital city expanded its
area and population. When administrations
were weak and viceroys broke away or were
not assiduous in getting food from the vil-
lages, the capital city diminished and pro-
vincial towns grew. The best system could
break down under foreign attack or a ruler
whose building programs were too ambitious.

The facts of ecology alone cannot tell us
whether the surplus made possible by the
technology of agriculture produced the
towns or whether it was the organization for
collecting the harvest instituted by the ruler
which forced the improvement of technol-
ogy and brought a surplus into view. We do
know that even inefficient irrigated rice cul-
ture can support five hundred people per
square mile of good land at the same time
as it sells part of its product to pay taxes.
The terracing and irrigation of land started
in an earlier millennium in Central and East
Java and has spread in a course which is
only now reaching the extreme west of the
island. This spread was part of a process of
diffusion that carried irrigated rice culture
through most of Southeast Asia and South
China.

The internal] structure of the ancient Java-
nese cities can be inferred from their present
form, although by now it is overlaid with
much subsequent building. The kraton or
court is central, imposing, large enough for
the comfort of the ruler and his host of re-
tainers. Near it is the alun-alun, a great
square on which many communal activities
took place and around which an open or
covered market place, houses of nobles, and
various other buildings were arranged.
Wertheim believes that the location of the
town was more a matter of the will of the
prince than of economics.? If the will was
ecologically based, for instance by centering
the town on a crossroads, this would help
hold the kingdom together. In any case, the
internal arrangement of the town was strict-
ly prescribed by a tradition whose ecological
sense it is hardly worth going back to an-
alyze.

This is the inland city, living on exactions
of rice. Kediri, Mataram, Singosari, and
other Hindu-Javanese capitals were of this
type; some idea of their physical nature
can be seen in Djokja and Solo today. They
depended on the skill of a ruler and on the
inertia of the tradition-bound peasantry—
pious, respectful of their elders, lacking in
initiative or the urge to innovation. A ruler
who did not have facility in the judicious
exercise of justice and severity discovered
that even the most pious peasantry would
rebel when pressed too hard. The possibility
of rebellion and of flight helped to make
life tolerable for peasants before the colonial
powers established a stronger central rule
and population growth took up all land to
which flight was possible.

Different in their relation to sources of
food, and their internal form, were the coast-
al cities, where the porcelains of China were
exchanged for the cloves and nutmegs of
the Moluccas; the cloth of Gujerat and
Bengal for the pepper of Sumatra; the rice
of Java for the tin of Malaya. They were
likewise under the absolute rule of a prince,
but one whose domain was the water as
much as the land. He maintained himself
by taxes on the town market and the harbor,
by the profits of his own ships which went
out to trade, by piracy, by providing slaves
or other easily available local commodities
to the passing trade. The harbors contrasted
with the conservative inland empires in that
they were the points of entry of all the new
fashions in religion, language, and custom:
Hinduism, Islam, and Christianity, each in
its turn. Islam was introduced by Gujerati
Muslims as late as the fourteenth century.
Mohammed was a member of a trading com-
munity, and princes who adopted Islam be-
came part of the continent-wide trading
network that had been built up in the seven
hundred years following the death of the
Prophet. Islam had barely made its entrance
before it was under attack by the Christian-
ity of the Portuguese Albuquerque; only
during the succeeeding centuries did it work
its way through the interior, and paradoxi-
cally enough it gained most of its present
dominance during Dutch rule.

Perlak, Pedir, Cheribon, Grisek, all on
the north and east coasts of Sumatra and
Java convenient to the main water route
from India to China, were cities of this type.
The prince’s palace again dominated, but
the market place was bigger; there were
settlements of foreigners privileged to trade
but not to become citizens, living in their
designated areas; the sails of Chinese junks
flapped against the houses.

The colonial powers started, as their
Muslim predecessors had done, by taking
over existing coastal cities or building new
ones, like Batavia. In due course, however,
they came to inherit the land empires as well.
The goods produced by peasants under their
traditional organizations filled but a few
ships bound for Italy, Holland, or Eng-
land each year; the increase of the European
market during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries demanded much larger supplies.
And so the Dutch persuaded, bribed, and
compelled local rulers to bring extensive
areas under forced cultivation. Peasants
had to deliver quotas of sugar and coffee.
Estates under Western management suc-
ceeded this system, and, as the nineteenth
century progressed, railways appeared, along
with banks to finance the long period be-
tween planting and producing and harbor
installations to handle the increasing ship
traffic. The cities became centers of both
administration and trade; they still fed
themselves by collecting taxes in the coun-
tryside, but they had a new economic func-
tion as a tranfer point for the rapidly in-
creasing export crops on their way to the
European market. Through them flowed a
succession of commodities: coffee, then tea,
then rubber; sugar during three centuries
ending with World War II; palm oil, sisal,
kapok, and cinchona bark; petroleum and
tin. Flowing in were some of Europe’s new
and cheap manufactured products, especial-
ly cloth and minor consumption goods from
kerosene lamps to hairpins. After 1800 the
prices of these were determined by machine
production in Europe; village methods of
manufacture languished in Java as they did
in Holland. The difference was that Java
did not develop urban manufacturing of its
own. The main point for an understanding
of the colonial cities is that they combined
the functions of the two kinds of cities that
preceded them: they lived both on the sea
and by dominion over interior agricultural
areas.

The internal constitution of the cities
changed drastically through this period. The
Dutch dug canals in early Batavia and along
them their tall buildings touched one an-
other but it was not long before the East
changed their thrifty style of life and a new
mestizo culture, as Wertheim calls it, de-
veloped. This included spacious villas for
the new administrators and traders; a class
of officials who had not existed before built
houses that were neither Dutch nor Indone-
sian in style, made of plastered brick with
highly polished red tile floors; the front of
each house consisted of a series of broad
doors which could be folded back so that
the living space within was continuous with
an outdoor terrace shaded by trees. The
villas were ranged along tree-lined streets
which needed no sidewalks; the Dutch ad-
ministrators always drove, and the Indone-
sians were not considered. The Indonesian
middle class lived in brick dwellings in more
crowded sections, often not on streets at all
but on footpaths; here, too, lived the Chi-
nese, who found various commercial niches
in the colonial enterprises and who were able
to pursue their own trade and money-lend-
ing under the rule of law established by the
colonial system. Throughout the city, where-
ever they were tolerated, were the kampongs
in which lower-class Indonesians lived: the
policemen, messengers, domestic servants,
and ricksha-pullers drawn in by the new
regime.

The cities so formed have been both the
strength and the weakness of the nations of
South Asia created after World War II.
Their functions have continued to be trade
and administration, and they have at no time
come to include any important amount of
manufacturing or other production. A two-
way traffic by which manufactured articles
are shipped into the countryside and so draw
food into the cities has barely started; yet
this exchange is crucial not only for the sur-
vival of the cities as such, but also for the
economic and political stability of the nation
which the cities dominate ecologically.

Meanwhile, the cities are centers of trade
and government have grown faster than has
the population of Indonesia as a whole. The
largest of them seem recently to have been
doubling in size every ten to fifteen years;
thus the 1955 population of Djakarta was
3,250,000 against 533,000 in the 1930 cen-
sus, and that of Surabaya 1,800,000 com-
pared with 342,000.° The six cities of popu-
lation greater than 100,000 held 2.83 per
cent of the population of Java and Madura
in 1930, 3.75 per cent by 1940 (Wertheim).
On the other hand, the smaller towns, those
of under 25,000 population, were declining
as early as the 1920’s; this may have been
for the same reason that small towns in parts
of America have lost out to larger cities:
the improvement of rail and road transport.

During the 1930’s the flow of plantation
goods through the cities and harbors de-

* “Indonesia,” in Encyclopaedia Britannica (1959),
XII, 267.
clined sharply, and so did the number of
people that the cities could support. War
and the Japanese occupation further reduced
trade, and the occupation authorities tried
to compel people to return to the country-
side. But neither depression nor war reduced
the size of the cities appreciably, and after
World War II a new and rapid increase set
in. This consisted in part of refugees from
areas of the countryside in which life was
still dangerous and was in part because the
cities had now become the stage on which
the new national life was being acted out.
Some of the plantations that had employed
the peasantry were abandoned when Japa-
nese occupation cut them off from prewar
markets; others, particularly sugar, suffered
from the scorched-earth policy of the revo-
lutionary war. The sugar factories were
burned to the ground, and without them
cane is useless, since it is too perishable to
export as such. Indonesian exports of sugar
have not yet reached one quarter of their
prewar million tons per year.

It became evident after the war that the
very diminution of the productive power of
the countryside that brought people to the
cities also deprived the cities of some of their
prewar banking, transport, and marketing
functions. But many of the people who came
in had been displaced by the struggle for
independence, and the new government rec-
ognized its responsibilities by making jobs
for them. The public service, which had been
150,000 strong in 1939, employed over
500,000 in 1954.

How have these people been maintained?
In money terms there was no difficulty: the
new sovereign government was able to put
them on the payroll and to meet the payroll
with ever-fresh supplies of currency, a pro-
cedure referred to in successive annual re-
ports of the Bank of Indonesia. As prices
rose, there was dissatisfaction among the
government personnel for whose pay the
money had been printed; they had now
largely lost their base in the countryside and
could not retreat from their dependence on
salaries. The government’s attempt to help
by printing more money was anticipated by
foreigners and the local Chinese alike; the
former were able to avoid some of its effect
by buying their rupiahs on the black market,
the latter to speculate by hoarding hard
goods and so to corner an additional portion
of the real wealth of the country.

But money is of secondary interest for
ecological study, and we must bring the
argument back to the movement of goods
with which the people of the city are fed and
clothed. Before the war they were able to
buy the rice marketed by peasants who
needed cash to pay their taxes; in years
when the local supply was short, non-edible
rubber and other commercial goods could
be exchanged through international markets
for Burmese, Thai, or Vietnamese rice. The
movement of food from the Javanese coun-
tryside was strengthened by collection of
land rents. When the landlord received rent,
he used some of it to provide for his local
retainers but also caused some food to be
moved to the city to be exchanged for city
goods. Some manufactured goods were pro-
duced in the cities of Java, but most were
imported from abroad and paid for by the
foreign exchange earned from the sale of
plantation products. The rent taken by the
landlord contributed through one route or
another to the feeding of the city people,
who either made or handled the luxuries
the landlord bought for his personal comfort.

I have referred elsewhere to the institu-
tions by which the peasant in the Javanese
village shares whatever food there is among
the members of his extended family and
with his fellow villagers who do not have
direct access to the land as owners or ten-
ants.* These institutions include the finer
and finer division of the work of tilling,
planting, weeding, and harvesting, always
on a crop-sharing basis, as well as the de-
terioration of the technology of agriculture
so that the crop comes to be harvested stalk
by stalk and draft animals are replaced by
the man with the hoe. This in itself does not
cause suffering or hunger within the village,
but it does steadily diminish, in the measure
of the increase of village population, the
amount of crop which is available for sale
outside the village and hence the amount of
non-food items which the villagers can pur-
chase. As the village populations use more
and more of the food they produce, the rice-
purchasing power for city products steadily
diminishes. This process, which has been go-
ing on for a hundred years, has made what
were formerly the richest parts of Asia into
the poorest.

Since the war the supplies of food to the
cities of Java have diminished at the same
time as the number of city people to be fed
has increased. Land taxes have tended to
remain the same in money terms as before
the war despite a fifty-fold increase in prices,
so that such taxes draw very little food. To
increase land taxes has seemed impossible
to a national government which depends on
votes. But the main problem is not demo-
cratic government but rather the fact that
taxes in underdeveloped countries can never
be taken from the existing meager produc-
tion; they must be a spur to more produc-
tion. In Java the peasant has the time to
raise more crops than he does now, but he
has no land on which to apply his effort.
This fact is what underlies the repeated as-
sertion of administrators that they cannot
tax poor people.

The contribution of landlords to the flow
of food has been reduced by rent control and
the expulsion of some owners. Meanwhile,
the severe policing of the forest reserves by
the Dutch has ceased, and squatters have
taken over many of the slopes formerly kept
under forest for the control of erosion. A
vicious circle sets in, whereby shortage of
food results in cutting down the forest, con-
sequent loss of soil into the sea accentuates
the shortage of food, and more forests are
cut down.

The result is that much of the food con-
sumed in the cities is now brought from
abroad. Imports of food grains were 800,000
tons in 1956. If a ton nourishes five people,
it looks as though some four million people,
mostly in cities, are dependent on imported
food grains, at least in some years.

Since the Korean boom in rubber and oil
subsided, a chronic difficulty of the Republic
has been shortage of foreign exchange. City
populations are a charge on the resources
which could go into the industrialization of
the country. Here again is a vicious circle:
investment in industry would enable the
cities to solve their problem, for with effi-
cient industrial plants they could produce
goods for which peasants would trade their
food. If this exchange is not possible for
Javanese peasants until their numbers di-
minish, it is still possible for Sumatra and
other less crowded parts of the Republic.
These could become an economic hinterland
of Djakarta. Oneneed not ask for the pres-
ent that industry attain the high degree of
efficiency necessary to trade for food in
world markets in competition with countries
like the United States and Japan which have
such a long start. Internal trade of this kind
could be protected by a customs tariff from
the sternness of world competition.

So long as the Republic is a unit, its cities
can be fed either by a surplus of food or a
balance of foreign exchange generated any-
where within its boundaries. The trouble
with using the taxing and redistributing
power of the state to ensure that one part—
say the cities of Java—is fed by the other—
the Sumatran plantations—is that this cre-
ates centrifugal tendencies in the Republic.
The rich and sparse portions consider that
they are entitled to use for their own devel-
opment purposes the foreign exchange they
earn, and sooner or later—if they take eco-
nomic life seriously—they will resist taxa-
tion for the benefit of the cities of another
island. They have resisted multiple rates of
exchange and other devices which result in
territorial redistribution of the proceeds of
exports. Rangoon was able, by setting its
internal buying price for rice well below the
world price, to tax farmers who were in terri-
tory controlled by rebels and so feed itself;
it could do this because it had physical con-
trol of the ports through which rice alone
could be exported from the country. The
government of Indonesia lost partial control
of the export of rubber from Sumatran east-
coast ports during the years 1955-57 and
had to face a Sumatran rebellion during
1958.

Maintaining cities simply by taxing the
countryside does not provide them with a
durable ecological basis under modern con-
ditions when regional interests are all too
quickly recognized. If cities live by a free
sale of their produce on world markets, they
depend not on any assertion of national
power but on the efficiency of their manu-
facturing production and services. Singapore
and Hong Kong are able to do this, but it is
too much to ask of a new country. In most
countries of the world cities live neither by
pure political power nor by pure economic
efficiency. The intermediate condition is the
usual one, in which cities produce manu-
factured goods, but less efficiently than do
foreign competitors. Nearly all the countries
of the world accept tariffs. Their shortcom-
ings in economic efficiency do produce a con-
flict of interests, but this is bridged and the
tariff accepted as a matter of national senti-
ment.

It is true that capital cities everywhere
have part of their base in providing govern-
ment services against tax payments. If the
services of a city are in the form not of goods
for sale but rather of services provided
whether the recipients want them or not,
there will be instability, or political tension,
equal to the difference between the taxes
paid and the value of services received, as
this value is assessed by the taxpayers. They
may think them worth all that they pay, or
more. If they do not, the resulting tension,
like that provoked by tariffs, will be a hin-
drance to the formation of a stable and uni-
fied national state, commanding the loyalty
of all its citizens. The task of forming a na-
tion out of people speaking many languages,
whose horizons until a few years ago were
limited to their own families and villages, is
a formidable one even without the clash of
economic interest between city and country-
side.

We have shown the difficulties of getting
food out of the villages of Java as the vil-
lage population grows. The villagers, being
closer to the food, can get to it more easily
than can either the tax collector or the land-
lord. It is politically awkward to buy it
abroad with Sumatra-produced foreign ex-
change. Foreign exchange would buy the
industrial equipment that could make the
city economically independent, and what-
ever can be mobilized should be used for this
and not for food.

Can the difficulty be resolved by a for-
eign supply of food, a kind of food loan, to
the cities of Java? The use of food grown
abroad to maintain city populations while
they do the construction work and instal the
equipment that will make them productive
seems to represent the soundest type of for-
eign aid. However, when this is done both
the donors and the receivers ought to be very
sure of the purpose to which the gift or loan
is in fact being applied. Food made available
in the cities will draw more people into them,
helping to loosen population from the village
moorings and to deprive it of the claim to
the crop which derives from proximity. The
ecological base of the city thus comes to in-
clude the production of food in America.
The process of drawing people into the city
is largely irreversible; their village source of
food closes up behind them, and they can
hardly go back to the village. Gifts of food
under foreign aid, in their tendency to bring
people into the city, contrast with gifts of
fertilizers, with agricultural extension serv-
ice, with aerial surveys which help open up
new agricultural areas, or transport facili-
ties that bring people to such new areas. If
the gifts of food are not simultaneous with
the industrialization of the cities whose in-
crease of population they make possible,
then the most serious economic, political,
and moral problems will confront any donor
who later tries to cut off the supply of gifts.

Changes are occurring within the cities at
the same time as in the relation of cities and
hinterland. Indonesia is aware of a problem
in the internal physical structure of its cities
and has invited outsiders to advise on what
might be done to make them more livable.
The town planner who comes to Djakarta
seems to find his services badly needed. A
city whose physical structure was designed
for half a million is now the home of about
six times that number. It shows in particu-
larly intense form the overcrowding common
to nearly all the cities of the world: over-
full hotels, traffic tie-ups, queues in stores
and markets. The post-World War II in-
crement of population lives in thatch and
bamboo huts; people queue at water foun-
tains or buy gasoline tins of water for do-
mestic use; they bathe and wash their
clothes in the turbid canals.

Especially conscious of the need for better
housing and urban facilities is the new mid-
dle class of government servants. No one
could blame them for trying by the use of
influence to get into tolerable houses. Infla-
tion has reduced their real wage so that they
cannot hope to buy or rent suitable housing
on the free market as do the Chinese. Some
building has been done by the government
for their benefit; the new town of Kebajoran
contains many pleasant single dwellings and
apartment buildings around which gardeners
work diligently to make trees and shrubs
grow; its construction is a great achieve-
ment in these hard times.

How much of national effort ought to go
into the physical development of cities in
these circumstances? In the relatively free
market of Brazil a sizable portion of the
total national income goes into the magnifi-
cent skyscrapers of Rio and Sao Paulo. I
have no opinion on whether these cities have
a permanent, stable, and natural basis for
their growth in the form of manufactures
and services which draw food from the coun-
tryside, but study of the situation would
enable one to find out. In Indonesia there is
not a free investment market, and expendi-
tures in the city are largely determined by
government. There is free movement of
population, and so the erection of housing
facilities in the cities, improvement of roads,
introduction of subsidized bus services—in
short, any alleviation of the discomfort of
city life—will operate along with subsidized
rice to draw people from the crowded coun-
tryside. But in the framework we have de-
scribed the efforts of town planning and
house construction are frustrated; people
are drawn to the cities faster than decent
places for them to live in can be found. The
disordered physical arrangements within the
city symbolize the uncertainty of their eco-
nomic role.

These facts must be taken into account if
the great efforts being made by devoted citi-
zens toward Indonesian construction are to
bear fruit. One admires the ingenuity with
which an impossible amount of traffic has
been kept moving, the splendid highways
that have been laid down, the apartment
houses that have been erected, such enter-
prises as the site for the Asian Games which
bulldozers are now clearing between Dja-
karta and Kebajoran. The study of ecology
is useful insofar as it looks behind such
trends to incentives and to the directions in
which they cause people to move, especially
to the relation between people and the food
that will maintain them.
