Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

 

EVR LeU
Sociology and the Atom

Author(s): William Fielding Ogburn

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 51, N
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2770492
Accessed: 06-06-2016 18:13 UTC
The explosion of the atomic bomb over
Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, is thought to
have ended an era of history. This event
may be of greater concern in the histories of
the distant future than World War II. The
first great use of mechanical power—steam
—ushered in the “industrial revolution.”
The use of atomic energy appears to be a
beginning of the “scientific revolution”
which will underlie and be more extensive
than the “atomic age,” as the new era is
now popularly called. Atomic energy, then,
is expected to change many of our social
institutions and hence is not unrelated to
sociology.
other fields of sociology, such as population,
community, social organization, and even
social psychology, will be affected by the
modifications which atomic energy will
make. There is, of course, a good deal known
about the general processes by which sci-
entific discoveries and mechanical inven-
tions change society, and this knowledge
is useful in any anticipation of the changes
precipitated by the release of atomic energy.
But we are interested in the implications of
this particular discovery.

Just as it takes time, money, and re-
search on the part of physicists, chemists,
and engineers to produce an atomic bomb,
so time, money, and research are necessary
for sociologists to uncover the social effects
of this new source of power. The ready
advice of editorial writers, lecturers, preach-
ers, columnists, and radio commentators is
not worth very much, perhaps even less
than the advice of natural scientists on the
social implications of their discoveries. It
is the function of the natural scientist to
make the atomic bomb, but of the social
scientist to say what the social consequences
are likely to be.

The scientific studies of the social effects
of invention have been almost exclusively
of what has happened in the past. Thus the
Hammonds wrote on the effects of the in-
dustrial revolution on village life in Eng-
land; and Webb described the effect of
barbed wire, the windmill, and the “six-
shooter” on the settling of the Great Plains
of the United States. However, since the
processes by which techniques change social
institutions have been studied and in part
generalized, it ought to be possible to an-
ticipate the impending changes in society
which are due to atomic energy. No doubt,
if sociologists had the two-billion-dollar
fund, which the physicists and engineers
had to finance constructing the bomb, then
in several years’ time they could advise
adequately on the social adjustments to
this new source of power.

The first step in the process of studying
the problem is to analyze the concept. The
only application of atomic energy up to the
present is the atomic bomb, made by split-
ting the nucleus of the atom of uranium.
Later, there is every reason to think that
this fission may be made to yield a steady
flow of energy to heat water or otherwise
to run machines. This has not yet been
achieved; but, since the speed of the neu-
trons which break up the nuclei of atoms
may be controlled precisely, it should be
possible in perhaps from two to five years to
utilize atomic energy industrially, at least to
generate steam. Then, too, it must be re-
membered that important inventions evolve
from the often crude, simple, and small
forms they have when they are first made.
It may be that the atomic nuclei from ele-
ments other than uranium will yield their
vast energies. Finally, the splitting of the
atom’s nucleus may provide a very great
impetus to many other varied types of sci-
entific research. Already the nuclear physi-
cists have produced for the first time a new
element beyond the ninety-two that com-
pose the periodic table. Indeed, two new
elements have been made that, so far as we
know, did not exist until 1942. These are
neptunium and plutonium.

This new scientific achievement is a
most extraordinary one. The atom itself is
very small. If a drop of water were expand-
ed to the size of the earth, one of its atoms
would be about the size of an orange. But
the atom itself is like our planetary system,
with electrons composed of electrically
charged protons and revolving around a
nucleus at its center, These electrons and
protons are, too, extremely small. The
radius of a human hair is ten billion times
greater than that of an electron. Yet it is by
the energy from such incredibly small par-
ticles that the city of Hiroshima was de-
stroyed by one small bomb, exploding one
thousand feet in the air and killing one
hundred thousand human beings.

The potentialities of the invention under
discussion are further seen from the famous
equation formulated by Einstein in 1905 to
show how mass is changed into energy:
E = MC’, where E is the energy in ergs,
M the mass in grams, and C the speed of
light, measured in centimeters per second.
It is the size of C? which makes E so large.
The speed of light is 186,000 miles per sec-
ond, or, squared, it is 3(x0)'° in centimeters
per second. This equation shows how the
full release of nuclear energy from so small
an object as a railroad ticket is enough to
run a passenger train several times around
the earth.
methods are already working on the prob-
lem. But to the layman it would seem that
aggregations of naval units would be very
vulnerable; that the very important naval
base and the naval airplane carrier which
made possible the marvelous achievements
of our fleet in the Pacific will afford much
less security; and that if they should be
easily destroyed, then the operation of
fleets will be severely restricted. Will these
vessels be driven under the sea as subma-
rines?

That atomic bombs will be carried by
rockets is almost assured. The V-2 rocket
bomb traveled from the coast of the Nether-
lands to London at a speed of three thou-
sand miles an hour. In view of such an ac-
complishment and taking cognizance of the
principle of the evolution of invention, it
seems that in the next war bombs will cross
such distances as the Atlantic Ocean or the
Polar regions of the north in a very few
minutes. Even if the aim should be bad,
bombs launched from planes high above
antiaircraft fire should have better aim. If
the bombs increase in size, it is quite con-
ceivable that the city of Chicago could be
completely destroyed by one bomb, and
probably by a very few of the present size.
Among the many military research projects
to be started by the atomic bomb, the most
important will be the attempt to prevent
the murderous missile from reaching its
destination. Physicists, however, hold out
little hope; for realistic theories along which
to work are yet unknown. Premature deto-
nation seems impossible, and interception
will surely be difficult. How this will be done
rests upon research beyond the reach of the
social scientist.

However, some effects of the bomb on
social institutions are in the realm of so-
ciology. A possible effect is on national and
international organization. These may be
changed in the very effort to obtain an
agreement on the part of nations not to
make bombs or not to use them in war.
There are certain precedents to make us
think that such agreements may be ob-
tained. There was, for instance, an agree-
ment not to use poison gas in warfare.
Then, with a few months’ effort, the Pact of
Paris to outlaw war was signed by nearly all
nations. But the agreement not to use poison
gas was violated, and in a decade after the
Pact of Paris the world was at war. The
problem is to make an agreement that will
not be broken. Hence the concern should
be on the subject of controls. The most
common suggestion on controls is to have
reports on the nuclear-fission activities with-
in their borders made by different nations to
other nations or to a central organization of
all the nations. More difficult would be in-
spection by other nationals of laboratories
and factories, either periodically or with-
out notice. Even though the Security Coun-
cil of the United Nations Organization
should undertake such a supervision, there
would still be the problem of policing and
punishment, which might be effected in the
case of a small nation but would be very
difficult with one of the great powers. What
is needed is a stronger organization than the
former League of Nations or the newer
United Nations Organization. Such strength
could not be obtained without surrendering
sovereignty, to do which the great powers,
in particular, would be most reluctant.

The drive necessary to produce such a
strong central world government would
have to be tremendous. There are those who
claim that the fear of the atomic bomb in a
“pushbutton” war will be enough to furnish
that drive. But is there not a greater proba-
bility that we shall forget the bomb rather
than develop the awful fear necessary to
banish it? Within a week after Hiroshima,
department stores were having “atomic”
sales and burlesque theaters were announc-
ing atomic or anatomic dancers. Here is
certainly a field for research in social psy-
chology.

But suppose a world government is set
up again. The question arises as to how long
it will endure against the drives for power
and self-interest on the part of large local
units of such a world organization. The
League of Nations did not prevent a world
war, nor did the stronger constitution of the
United States prevent a civil war. If a world
government cannot prevent a war, then
there comes the terrible atomic bomb with
all its destructiveness. The sociologist
would have something to contribute in
setting up studies of the coherence of groups.
Much research has been done on the bonds
that hold individuals together in groups,
such as the family, the local community,
the face-to-face group. It is not difficult to
know why the cohesion is strong in a village
community covering so little territory that
personal contacts with everyone in the vil-
lage are frequent. But when a people ex-
pands to cover more territory, as in a na-
tion the size of the United States, China, or
Russia, then the problem of cohesion is
greater. Contacts must depend upon the
communication and transportation inven-
tions and the extent to which they are used.
There are many instances in history when
government expanded more rapidly and
further than the agencies that make co-
hesion. These empires of great sway general-
ly broke up.

There are some who believe that if the
fear motive fails, the spirit of the brother-
hood of man may be so strong as to over-
tide all these obstacles and build ‘“one
world.” But if the brotherhood-of-man ap-
peal has not succeeded in the past, what has
the bomb done, aside from the fear it in-
stils, to make it any more probable of suc-
cess now?

There is another way of obtaining world
government than by agreement, a method
that has proved very effective in the past in
extending the territory under a single gov-
ernment. It is the method of conquest. In-
deed, with the bomb and the airplane, a
world government by one conquering power
may be as probable as a world government
by agreement. Such a world government,
once achieved through the ghastly use of
the bomb, might have as good a chance of
enduring as a world confederation or even a
world federation. That such an event as a
conquest of the whole world by one nation
is possible may be considered on the basis
of history. The empires in the age of the
horse and the sailboat were perhaps larger
when measured in units of speed of the
transportation agencies of the time than the
world is today in terms of the speed of the
airplane. But empires have broken up in
the past, too, and so may a world govern-
ment based on conquest—until the agencies
of cohesion make the peoples of the world
more nearly like a community.

The foregoing narration of the possible
consequences of the atomic bomb upon in-
ternational organization suggests some lines
of needed sociological research as a basis of
action. The presentation has, by design,
showed difficulties, for the purpose of in-
dicating the many steps of development on
which research is needed before a stable
world government will be probable. Certain
sections of our vocal leaders are turning
with fervor toward working for world gov-
ernment and the abolition of war. Such a
movement is natural in view of the tragedies
of a long war just finished and in view of a
new instrument of destruction. The psy-
chology of the times favors such an expres-
sion of hope; but there must be studies of
ways and means, which, in turn, rest on
social research.
States, having a total population of 50,000,-
ooo. To remake these 200 cities into 1,000
would cost around $250,000,000,000, which
is less than the cost of the second World
War to the United States and perhaps less
than the cost of a third world war. This
expenditure could be spread out into several
five-year plans with an annual cost of
$10,000,000,000-$15,000,000,000.

This undertaking is stupendous—
so much so that it seems utterly imprac-
ticable. Perhaps it is. However, we must
consider that the alternative is the possible
killing of fifty million city dwellers in a few
minutes in a sneak attack by a formidable
enemy.

If men cannot make this effort, it may be
because they can no more be trusted to re-
frain from blowing themselves up with the
atomic bomb than anthropoids could be
trusted with a stick of dynamite. The trou-
ble seems to be with man rather than with
the bomb.

If, however, we should not be successful
in making a lasting agreement not to use the
bomb, should we not study the problem of
breaking up our cities into towns and vil-
lages and removing some of them from the
crowded eastern seaboard into the less
crowded area west of the Mississippi and
further removed from the national borders?
The Pueblo Indians once moved their cities
from the plains, where they were the prey
of their warlike enemies, and set them in
caves scooped out of canyon walls high above
the river. This was a task as difficult for
them, perhaps, with their simple tools, as a
decentralization of our big cities would be
for us, with all our technology and wealth.
We lived as a race for hundreds of thousands
of years without cities. In fact, we have
lived in cities scarcely a century: seventy-
five million of us in the United States live
away from cities now.

Other issues concern the possible loss of
the advantages of our urban civilization.
Do the desirable products of city life come
only from the big cities? With thought and
planning, might they not be had from cities
of fifty thousand population, especially if
there was specialization by cities and ade-
quate transportation? What are these ad-
vantages? Symphony orchestras, museums,
universities, aggregations of intelligentsia,
quick facilities for making personal con-
tacts, luxury markets, metropolitan news-
papers, etc. Only research will reveal the
possibilities of obtaining these advantages
in smaller places. Much study would also
be needed on the maximum size of the city
and its configuration to escape attack by
atomic bombs launched from an airplane or
arriving by rocket.

It is possible that our urban civilization
might be much better with well-planned
smaller cities and towns. We could have
better health, fewer accidents, wider streets
for automobiles, more parking places for
automobiles, landing places for helicopters,
more sunlight, space for gardens, more
parks, less smoke, more comfortable homes,
efficient places of work, and, in general,
more beauty.

The plan for a city might be different.
The radial type, like a wheel lying on the
ground, is, indeed, similar to the traditional
target in rifle practice. The city plan might
better take the form of a rope laid out
straight or coiled in various designs. Any
realistic design of a city, however, must be
based on transportation. Cities are creations
of long-distance and local transportation.
Therefore, any redistribution of cities
means a redistribution of transportation.
Hence much research on transportation and
the location of the new cities is needed.

The breaking-up of two hundred large
cities into smaller ones will appear to many
readers as an extreme and impossible sug-
gestion, which, of course, it is—unless seen
against the alternative of atomic warfare.
To those who appreciate the significance of
the atomic bomb the idea will at least not
appear absurd. For those who do not ap-
preciate the significance, it has been sug-
gested that the United States should drop
one of its atomic bombs on every country
in the world, including the United States,
to wake the people up to a recognition of its
meaning.
To those who think a major frontal at-
tack on the problem is out of the question,
a piecemeal approach is suggested. Thus it
might be agreed that, whenever a slum area
in a city is cleared, no new buildings be con-
structed there. Or a possible policy would
be to deny any city a population growth
beyond, say, fifty thousand. Or again, a
definite number of buildings per year might
be transferred to a distant suburb. Even the
piece-by-piece approach is extraordinarily
difficult. For instance, what city or what
business in a city would. be willing to limit
the growth to a definite figure? Nearly
every business in a city profits by increase
in size of the city, as the single-taxers have
shown in their discussion of the unearned
increment. As to moving buildings out one
at a time, it must be recalled that there are
interrelationships that hardly permit such
a fragmentary change. For instance, the
University of Chicago is planning to build a
new building. Should it be built in another
city or in the suburbs, while the present
buildings remain on their present site with-
in the city? It seems a very difficult task to
move the University of Chicago a hundred
miles away. Yet within twenty-five years an
atomic bomb may melt down all the build-
ings now on the campus and all the equip-
ment, books, and laboratories.

The first step in any piecemeal effort
should be to place underground, or to make
plans to place underground before a war
begins, the buildings supplying crucial or
necessary goods or services for war or for
civilians during war. Such would be central
electric stations, railroad terminals, fac-
tories that make key war products. Es-
pecially should factories making atomic
bombs be secreted and the stockpiles scat-
tered or protected.

The problem of the location of cities in
an atomic age has effects, too, on the rank-
ing of the great powers of the world. Hither-
to the countries with the most factories
(and hence the most cities) have been the
greatest military powers. But in the atomic
age the very concentration of this urban
population becomes a weakness. For in-
stance, the United States has a much great-
er concentration of urban population than
Russia and hence is more vulnerable to
atomic bombs. From the same observation,
it may be argued that Russia, who has yet
to build most of her cities, is in a better
position to keep them small, since the
task is not the very difficult one of breaking
up old cities but the easier one of building
new ones. These can be scattered and kept
small in Russia, China, and other less ur-
banized but expanding areas.

Perhaps the helicopter will help in the
gradual breaking-up of cities into small
units. The automobile has created many
suburbs, by moving out families which once
lived within the city. Perhaps the helicopter
will create more. But with aircraft the proc-
ess will be very gradual.

The scattering of our cities by wholesale
or retail methods will necessitate a concerted
effort not made in peacetime and only ap-
proached during a war. For instance, local
government and local autonomy would, it
seems, have to give way to a strong central
national government. Some central au-
thority must see that cities do not grow
larger than a given size, unless the cities
would all voluntarily support such a re-
striction. The breaking-up of cities would
be beyond the financial powers of the in-
dividual cities. There would be so many
balances and equities disturbed in the re-
locating of a city as to cause great friction
and resistance. It would be a collective un-
dertaking, well-nigh impossible except un-
der the spur of a great crisis. A crisis great
enough to spur us to dismember our cities
is almost sure to come sometime. But then
it will be too late. Are we farsighted enough
to act in advance, when such action calls for
an almost superhuman effort? Perhaps it
would be easier to create a world govern-
ment to control the atomic bomb.

Thus the probable social effects of the
bomb on cities makes necessary a great deal
of sociological research, perhaps hundreds
of large projects, in order to find the best
The discussion up to this point has con-
cerned only one single fabrication based on
atomic energy, the atomic bomb. The
atomic age, though, will not be the creation
of the bomb but of the industrial and per-
sonal peacetime uses of nuclear fission of
uranium and very probably of other ele-
ments. It is these that will create the atomic
age and that will form the bases for great
scientific discoveries in a variety of fields
and thus usher in the scientific revolution.
We know little as yet about peacetime uses
of atomic energy, for there have been none,
so far.

It is very difficult to speak sensibly about
the social effects of inventions when we do
not know what the inventions are to be.
Also, reliable predictions of social effects of
inventions can. hardly be obtained without
accurate ideas about prices and costs. For-
tunately, the purpose of this article is not
to predict, but rather to indicate, the effects
of these new scientific discoveries on so-
ciology. Here it is only necessary to say that
the uses of this enormous power will proba-
bly make many profound changes in the so-
cial order.

The nearest analogy is the industrial
revolution, based upon the first extensive
use of mechanical power—steam. Wind on
sails and windmills had led to some social
changes, but not to the extent that steam
did. The range of the influence of the metal
machine using steam has been so great that
hardly a single branch of the social sciences
dealing with modern times is not concerned
to some extent with the industrial revolu-
tion. Steam made possible the cities with
their urban civilization; though steam was
not used on the farms directly, yet indirect-
ly it shifted farming from the subsistence
type to commercial farming and thus radi-
cally altered agriculture. With the factories
and railroads run by steam, there came a
new economic organization. The social
classes were altered and new ones created.
A new division and distribution of wealth
followed. The ranking of nations in military
power was shifted, and the nature of war-
fare changed. The nations with blast fur-
naces became the great powers. Before
steam, the factories of production were in
the household. Steam destroyed the house-
hold economy, eliminated the women’s
work, and gave them jobs in factories,
stores, and offices. Both the family as an
organization and the position of women in
society were radically changed by steam.
Steam brought to cities many new prob-
lems of health, crime, education, divorce,
recreation, morals, religion, justice. The
foregoing are only a few of the important
social changes precipitated by the use of
this first great source of mechanical power.
Now there comes from the atom a new
source of energy, enormous in quantity.
Does atomic energy foreshadow social con-
sequences comparable to those that fol-
lowed the discovery of steam power and the
invention of machines to use it?

The answer to these questions depends,
first, upon when the uses of atomic energy
will become widespread industrially. This
we do not know. We already have cheap
sources of power in coal, oil, and electricity.
If these are cheaper than atomic power, they
will be used. In countries where there is no
coal, it is imported. The energy from the
atom, if used industrially, must, of course,
be used in machines, almost surely such as
are used now. These machines are made of
metals which must be processed as now. In-
deed, power is only a small part of the total
costs of production. Hence it may be argued
that atomic energy is, at best, merely the
substitution of one type of power for an-
other and that all we can expect is the con-
tinuation of present trends.

The same argument could have been
used in the early 1700’s regarding the steam
engine. Steam would be only a substitute
for human or animal energy and would be
used only if it was cheaper. People were al-
ready living together in communities.
Steam would only make them grow, and
hence it would mean only a continuance of
trends. Yet, within two centuries, steam
had profoundly altered civilization and had
left unchanged hardly a single social institu-
tion.

It is only necessary to state that the
evolution of the release of atomic fission
bears watching and that there are factors
which make it possible that the social effects
will be many, radical, and profound. This
conception of probability is strengthened
by the precedent of steam and by the enor-
mous energy that becomes available, as in-
dicated by the equation E = MC*. Much
depends on (a) whether the nucleus of more
common elements may be fissioned and (6)
the cost of the operation.

Without allowing too much speculation,
it is possible that very cheap power might
work out to increase greatly the standard of
living. Production in factories might be
done with fewer and fewer human laborers.
The hours of labor might become very much
shorter. If atomic energy could be used for
transportation purposes, community life
and the structure of nations might be tre-
mendously changed. If used in airplanes by
jet propulsion, it would make practicable
Previous studies of the social effects of
invention have shown that, whenever re-
search in the physical sciences results in a
major invention, it precipitates a variety of
social changes and a consequent need for
research in the social sciences. Thus the in-
vention of the automobile created problems
for the family, for the city, for the courts,
for the police, for education, for children,
for health, for other transportation agencies,
for government, for morals, for the church.
For every subsidized piece of research in
natural science there should be correspond-
ing financial aids to research in social sci-
ence. Since two billion dollars were spent
on making the atomic bomb which will
produce many social problems, an intelligent
society would aid social research to solve
the problems the bomb creates. The atom,
then, will change the subject matter of
sociology.

It also raises the question as to a change
in method. For instance, the study of in-
stitutions, custom, social behavior, and
ideology has been nearly always a study
either of the past or of the present, which
very quickly becomes the past. But does
not the discovery of nuclear fission raise the
question as to whether sociologists should
not study the future? There is a time se-
quence between the discovery and its social
effects. Nuclear fission is achieved in 1939
and is put to use in 1945, but the social
effects will come in the 1950’s and in suc-
ceeding decades. With the invention known,
is it not possible to study the impending so-
cial changes in advance? The method is
somewhat different from that of the his-
torical method, whether quantitative or
descriptive, and it presents many difficul-
ties. New methods are often products of
social conditions. The social conditions of
the present time that may modify socio-
logical methods are those of social change
which necessitate social planning, which, in
turn, deals with the future. Almost every
social institution except the faculty of a
university deals with the future in connec-
tion with some planning, rudimentary
though it may be. But social scientists al-
most universally deal with the past, either
remote or very recent. But action in an age
of social change should rest on considera-
tions of the future. So the atom forces soci-
ologists to look to the future.
