Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
The findings reported here are based on
a study of attitudes among first-year stu-
dents in a school of pharmacy. Specifically,
we were concerned with (1) their general
ideological frame of reference; (2) the occu-
pational image which they projected of
themselves; and (3) whether their orienta-
tion was predominantly toward business or
professional goals.

More generally, we were interested in
how persons entering a marginal occupation
handle their special status subjectively:
whether occupational marginality creates in
them a self-consciousness which, assuming it
to be externalized, would appear in their al-
locations of prestige to their own and other
occupations. Do such persons view the pres-
tige ratings of the occupational hierarchy
differently from others, and do they enter-
tain a different ordering of occupations as
to prestige? And to what degree is their
sensitivity, as it might appear in their rat-
ings and ranking, checked and restrained by
reality?

The considerations which prompted this
inquiry were several, among them a growing
appreciation of the importance of marginal
occupations for theories of social stratifica-
tion. Processes of change and adjustment
are frequently more visible in the occupa-
tions which lie along the edges of any given
system of occupational classification than
elsewhere. And such processes must, indeed,
be understood if a classificatory scheme is to
do more than account for mere numbers in
the labor force.
Pharmacy is of special interest because,
unlike new or antisocial occupations, its
marginality is of degree rather than of kind.
Its structure is sufficiently undefined so that
it may attract persons who are marginal in
the social structure and who impose the con-
comitants of the ambiguous status on the
occupation.! Its functions are sufficiently
unclear that the problems of acquiring sanc-
tion and legitimacy persist.2 But what pri-
marily distinguishes pharmacy as marginal
is its incorporation of the conflicting goals of
business and profession. The role of the
pharmacist is unstable to the degree that it
is beset by the cross-pressures of the busi-
ness and professional worlds. These pres-
sures are by no means unique to pharmacy.
On the contrary, the numerous observations
that businesses are becoming professional-
ized or that the professions are becoming
businesses show that the dualism is endemic
and a common problem. In the case of phar-
macy it is more acute.

The special intensity of the conflict in
pharmacy can be explained largely by the
rapid economic and technological develop-
ments of the last thirty years. At an earlier
time pharmacy was more clearly a smal] re-
tail business and the pharmacist an entre-
preneur. But the growth of chain stores and
other forms of large-scale retail enterprise
have increasingly threatened the business-
man status of the pharmacist. In 1948, for
example, corporations which accounted for
only 17 per cent of the number of drugstores
did approximately the same amount of busi-
ness as the two-thirds which were individual
proprietorships.* And as the trend toward
concentration continues, fair-trade agree-
ments notwithstanding, the pharmacist is
harder pressed to find new goods and serv-
ices to offer the consumer. In the United
States, as in England, in the near future
there may well be increasingly less freedom
to choose whether one will be a self-em-
ployed pharmacist or a salaried employee.*

Professionalization by means of formal
training has been the major counteracting
force. The movement for higher and more
uniform educational standards for pharma-
cists began at the turn of the century and
was stimulated in part by increasing knowl-
edge of scientific medicine and therapeutic
agents. Since 1932, four-year programs be-
yond high school are required by states for
a pharmacy license; five- and six-year pro-
grams are currently under consideration.
These programs require university courses
in mathematics, chemistry, biology, and re-
lated sciences. But, more important, they
project a model of the pharmacist as a dis-
interested scientist, a man who understands
“the principles upon which the methods of
pharmacy depend.’

The young pharmacist who develops a
professional identification through his edu-
cation may not view the present economic
development of pharmacy with alarm. In-
stead, he may look upon the loss of entre-
preneurial opportunity as a blessing in dis-
guise, freeing him from demands which in-
terfere with the full realization of his inter-
ests. A job with a large pharmaceutical com-
pany, a hospital, or a university may seem
more attractive than an independent busi-
ness. But to others with a business orienta-
tion, the pleasures of being a member of the
“new middle class” may seem more dubious.
Many of them will be able to own or partly
own their own pharmacies, only to discover
that their education has failed to equip them
for the hard facts of the market place. Final-
ly, a fourth group includes those who have a
professional identification but are in busi-
ness for themselves.6 Such a pharmacist
must pay dearly in time and energy for the
small part of his work which gives him his
claim to professional status.”

It is the fourth group for whom the dilem-
ma is most keen and on whom may depend
the long-range outcome of the occupation,
whether it becomes more clearly a profes-
sion or a business. In the interim he is able
to function because of the overlapping of
business and professional demands. As Par-
sons has indicated, both are rational as con-
trasted with traditional; both seek univer-
salistic solutions; both make authority de-
pendent on technical competence and view
authority as highly specialized rather than
diffuse.® Yet within this framework the two
systems are not in accord, and the “collec-
tive” or service objectives of a profession
are at odds with the pecuniary goals of a
business. Continually the pharmacist faces
decisions which involve a choice of one or
the other. How these decisions are made will
depend to some degree on his value-system
—whether he sees himself as a professional
performing a social service or acting in the
capacity of a seller.
A questionnaire was given to students
entering a college of pharmacy. The sched-
ule included the Hatt-North list of occupa-
tions, so that comparisons could be made of
prestige ratings given to occupations by stu-
dent-pharmacist respondents with those
given by business and professional respond-
ents in the national sample.® The number of
student-pharmacist respondents was 117
and consisted of the entire Freshman class
of the school; median age was eighteen
years; all but 4 were male; and but 6 were
nonveterans, and all but 11 per cent were
single. One-third of the group were Protes-
tant, one-third Catholic, and one-fourth
Jewish. The remainder were either “inde-
pendent” or gave no religious affiliation.l°
Over half had spent most of their lives in
cities of over 100,000, and only 16 per cent
were the grandchildren of farmers. The re-
spondents came from families in which the
median number of children was two; in al-
most 20 per cent of the cases the respondent
was an only child. Among youngest children,
i.e., cases in which it could be assumed that
family size was fixed, 45 per cent were from
families of two children. Among Catholic
respondents, 24 per cent were only children.

The impression that pharmacists are
drawn from small, upwardly mobile urban
families is confirmed by the socioeconomic
status of the students. Only one-third came
from homes where the chief wage-earner was
a manual worker; the remaining two-thirds
were from the small-business and white-col-
lar classes. None were from high-status pro-
fessional groups—medicine, law, or the
ministry. Only one was the son of a teacher,
and only one was the son of a manufacturer,
in this instance, a pharmaceutical manufac-
turer. Seventeen per cent were sons of phar-
macists, while another 11 per cent had some
“near relative’ who was a pharmacist."
Pharmacy appears, then, to be an occupa-
tion partially open to lower-income groups
and unappealing to those in high-income
groups, which draws mainly from within the
middle class with occupational inheritance
still in evidence.”

Mobility and other economic expectations.
—If these data suggest that pharmacy is
more often a point on a horizontal than on
a vertical mobility continuum, it is not seen
as such by those entering the occupation, 85
per cent of whom expected to have incomes
greater than their fathers’. The expectation
of economic ascent is, of course, part of the
ideology in our culture, and prevailing full
employment of pharmacists encourages the
optimism. But the factor which sustains this
belief, perhaps more than any other, is the
educational mobility already realized by the
group. As first-year college students, 63 per
cent had more education than their fathers,
and if the entire group completes the four-
year program, 78 per cent will have had
more education than their fathers. To the
degree, then, that formal education is instru-
mental in upward mobility and correlated
with it in an absolute sense, their expecta-
tions may not be entirely unrealistic.

Another indication of their aspirations is
the images they have of themselves for the
future. Overwhelmingly they saw them-
selves as owners of retail drugstores (85 per
cent), located in medium-sized cities or
small towns (73 per cent), and carrying out
their businesses in residential rather than
business districts (80 per cent). There was a
decided disinclination to run a small busi-
ness in a large city or commercial district
where conditions would be strongly com-
petitive and the conflict between profession-
al and commercial demands greatest. The
dream of working in suburbia, like the
dream of living in it, lessens the threat of
conflicting interests.

How the images of one’s economic role
are formed still eludes precise analysis.
These respondents appear largely to agree
that personality, ethnic, and socioeconomic
differences are of little importance. What
appears to be operating is a situational
image capable of withstanding the assault of
selective needs. But this image is by no
means spontaneous. Historical factors enter
into it. Some light is thrown on it by a
comparison of students of pharmacy with
students of accounting. When they were
asked about their goals, student pharma-
cists mentioned “ownership of organization”
significantly more often than student ac-
countants.!? Since it is extremely unlikely
that there is an ideological bias here which
would make accountants more critical of
business values than pharmacists, the ex-
planation appears to be the organizational
differences between the two occupations:
pharmacy, with its small-business tradition,
encourages the expectation of being an em-
ployer; accountancy, so closely tied to the
development of large-scale corporate fi-
nance, projects an image of being an em-
ployee.

The pervasiveness and strength of the
situational image would seem to be more
puzzling. It would be understandable
enough in the case of well-established non-
marginal occupations, but presumably the
stereotypes of marginal occupations offer
more opportunity for individual and arbi-
trary projection. And, indeed, this may well
be the case, nor is it contradictory to suggest
that the marginal occupation, no less than
others, requires some conformity by its
members. To the extent that occupational
stereotypes function to curtail disruptive
deviations, pharmacists are required to sub-
ordinate their individual differences to its
demands, regardless of how inconsistent the
image may be with the changing economic
environment.

In pharmacy, apprenticeship, one of the
oldest and most effective means of transmit-
ting and preserving an occupational stereo-
type, is important. Ninety per cent of the
respondents had worked in drugstores prior
to enrolling in the school. Moreover, for 79
per cent of the cases, this face-to-face con-
tact with the older generation took place in
independent stores; only 11 per cent had
worked in chain stores exclusively.

Class identification —It was not unusual
to find that three out of four thought chain
drugstores were undesirable, and nine out of
ten disapproved of pharmacies in depart-
ment stores. Those with chain-store experi-
ence were significantly less opposed to
chains than were those whose experience was
restricted to independent stores.!* Also,
those who came from working-class families
were more favorably disposed toward chains
than those from middle-class families. The
consumer advantages of big business and its
rationalized employment policies were pos-
sibly better known and more attractive to
the lower-income groups. However, the
higher-income groups did not view them-
selves as executives of chains or in other
ways in control of large organizations. Their
limited economic aspirations protected their
professional interests, for, along with low-
income groups, they saw big business as in-
terfering with “professional” performance.

Attitudes toward trade-unions were
slightly more sympathetic. More than two-
thirds said they would not join unions. But
put in the situation of employers, more than
half said they would probably approve if
their employees wanted to join unions. In
each case the favorable attitude toward
unions was significantly greater for those
who came from low-income groups and for
those who had chain-store experience. Many
of them, more experienced with unions, were
more aware of their functions and more
critical of the negative stereotypes of organ-
ized labor. Already many of them had had
firsthand knowledge of the wide gap be-
tween themselves and top management and
knew the obstacles in the way of individual
bargaining.

Although the majority expected to own
pharmacies, not all preferred to start out
this way. Forty per cent wanted to begin as
employees. In most cases they felt that there
were tricks of the trade not taught in
schools, and to this extent they were skepti-
cal of the “impractical” professional em-
phasis of their formal training.

Whether they saw themselves starting
out as proprietors or working up to it, they
regarded economic self-sufficiency and pro-
fessional status as both within reach. Their
failure to question the possibility of enjoying
the best of two worlds was reflected largely
in their admiration of the physician. When
asked what occupation they would advise a
young man to go into, 37 per cent mentioned
medicine.

Reasons for selecting pharmacy.—Medi-
cine had a real hold on their imagination,®
yet 7 per cent were convinced that pharma-
cy is instrumental to a later career in medi-
cine, and 7 per cent said that they chose
pharmacy because they were unable to go to
medical school. Fifty per cent said they
chose it because of an aptitude; economic
security was mentioned by 40 per cent, and
14 per cent mentioned a desire to contribute
to social welfare.

The importance given to aptitude and the
indifference to the social function of phar-
macy points again to an individualism which
seems to characterize the group. Paradoxi-
cally, there is some evidence that the popu-

% The discrepancy between occupational pres-
tige and one’s own occupational aspiration was even
more apparent in Form’s study of Greenbelt,
Maryland (William H. Form, ‘“‘Toward an Occupa-

tional Social Psychology,”? Journal of Social Psy-
chology, XXIV [1946], 85-99).
lar stereotype of the pharmacist credits him
less with skill than with “idealism” and a
desire to serve the community. This mis-
understanding between the pharmacist and
his public may have an adverse effect on the
former. If the opportunities for the use of
aptitude are sufficient in the practice of
pharmacy, he may find it satisfying enough
to dismiss the public’s attitude. But if, on
the contrary, the work provides fewer op-
portunities for the use of his scientific train-
ing and aptitude than anticipated, serious
adjustment difficulties may ensue.

Most of our respondents were aware of
the extra-aptitudinal demands of their call-
ing. When asked to describe the most impor-
tant characteristics of a successful pharma-
cist, 56 per cent mentioned personality
traits. And when asked why some pharma-
cists did not succeed, technical ineptitude
was mentioned by only 27 per cent, as con-
trasted with an undesirable personality
mentioned by 51 per cent and lack of busi-
ness ability by 41 per cent. Yet some doubt
persists as to how realistic they are about
success or failure. Specifically, a question
may be raised about their preoccupation
with “personality”: whether it is, in a de-
based form, an expression of what they view
as American individualism and hence the
survival of an older ideological tradition, or
whether it is, as Mills has suggested, a new
value emerging concurrently with the de-
cline of skill.17 In any case it reflects the
pharmacist’s insight that he cannot survive
alone by dispensing a necessary service and
that he must, like a businessman, give some
attention to marketing techniques. Though
not conclusive, there is some evidence that
pharmacy is seen by others as a highly im-
personal occupation.1®
macists to vest more prestige in pharmacy
than others would be willing to do.
Although pharmacists idealized their
chosen occupation (and it may be recalled
that for 28 per cent it was the occupation of
a near relative), they were not without what
Hartmann has called “occupational in-
sight” as to its position in the occupations
hierarchy: they rated it high, but not high-
est.!® Unlike full-fledged professionals, they
deferred to recognize professions above their
own.” Their modesty might have been more
apparent if “physician” did not occupy an
inordinately high rank and exert an upward
pull on other scientific and medically related
From these data it might be thought that
marginality in this instance makes for a
deviant outlook, at least as far as the pres-
tige of occupations is concerned. But this
conclusion would be unwarranted, for if we
examine even the raw prestige scores given
to major occupational categories, there is a
striking agreement between pharmacists
and the national sample (Table 3). The aver-
age prestige score, based on the total list of
occupations, was 67 for pharmacists and 69
for the national sample.

A more justifiable conclusion would be
that pharmacists deviate in their prestige
judgments only for the class of occupations
in which they perceive their own. There per-
ception error was restricted to the profes-
sional situs,” where they (1) allied them-
selves with a medical-scientific group,
(2) upgraded themselves within this group,
and (3) raised the entire group above other
professional occupations. But outside their
own situs, they perceived the occupational
hierarchy much as it is perceived by others.

Professional and business prestige judg-
ments—It is clear from the tendency of
pharmacists to equate themselves with den-
tists and chemists that they do not see
themselves as marginal to the professional
group. Nor do they, at the present time,
clearly differentiate between the self-em-
sons were made between pharmacist re-
spondents and each of these two groups. The
coefficient of rank-order correlation for
pharmacists and professionals was .95; for
pharmacists and business people, .96. The
average prestige score for pharmacists based
on this selected group of occupations was 60;
for professionals, 57; and for business re-
spondents, 64.

There seems to be little doubt, then, that
there is a strong ambivalence in the atti-
tudes of pharmacists. Father’s occupation
had a slight influence on the business or pro-
fessional orientation, contrary to expecta-
tion: pharmacists with working-class back-
grounds behaved more like the professionals
than like the business respondents. Specifi-
cally, they rated middle-range occupations
lower than these were rated by pharmacists
who had white-collar and middle-class back-
grounds. The explanation for this may lie in
a differential mobility aspiration: students
with low socioeconomic status backgrounds
may judge occupations near their own class
backgrounds harshly, since they are more
dissatisfied with their own economic envi-
ronment and more eager to disengage them-
selves from it. If this is the case, it raises
more problems than it answers, for it is in-
consistent with the present theory of mo-
bility: that if and when upward mobility
occurs, it is within the narrow range of ad-
jacent classes. To the extent that pharma-
cists with working-class backgrounds be-
have like the top prestige groups, whatever
their motivation, they are, in effect, jumping
the business group.

But this leap is not so clear-cut as it ap-
pears at first. There were three occupations
to which pharmacy respondents with work-
ing-class backgrounds gave unusually high
prestige ratings: local official of labor union,
official of international union, and tenant
farmer who owns livestock and manages the
farm. Again, it may well be that this group
is better informed about union officials; yet
this fact and the earlier findings on trade-
union sympathies make it appear probable
that they retain certain loyalties to their
own class, despite their high mobility as-
pirations.
pendent professionals, thus fusing the two
systems and avoiding a final choice. In this
process the entrepreneurial drive is modified
by criticism of big business and by retreat
from highly competitive circumstances; the
professional drive is blunted by subordinat-
ing a service goal to individual achievement
for its own sake.

At best, this adjustment is not capable of
providing the satisfactions of either pole. A
search for prestige is one of the devices used
to acquire a sense of importance apart from
the work itself. Pharmacists, as we have
seen, give greater prestige to their own occu-
pation than it would ordinarily be accorded.
But more important and more revealing of
marginality was the way in which this pres-
tige was acquired, i.e., by viewing it as part
of a medical-scientific group. In this in-
stance the tendency toward closure, often
regarded as an inherent characteristic of
professions, was reversed. The pharmacists’
aim was to force the established medical-
scientific professions to include pharmacy.

But if the young pharmacist inflates his
own prestige by inflating that of the group
in which he sees himself, his manipulation of
reality ends there. For his general view of
the occupations structure was the same as
others. His judgements outside the medical
group were in agreement with those of the
larger population. A marginality of kind
rather than of degree might show a greater
distortion.

Our data consistently suggested that the
socioeconomic backgrounds of trainees may
well influence the way they finally resolve
their problem of identification. Those who
come from low-income groups have fewer
loyalties to business and may find it easier
to adjust to the role of a salaried profession-
al. But, ironically, they may be the very
ones excluded as the professional training
required is lengthened. In that case the
marginality which now exists may be pro-
longed over a greater period of time.
