Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
One of the most compelling instances of
personal change and development in adult
life in our society is to be found in the
typical growth of an “occupational per-
sonality” in the young adult male who, as
he matures, takes over an image of himself
as the holder of a particular specialized
position in the division of labor. This paper
is an attempt to specify the processes by
which such occupational identifications are
internalized by the individual in the course
of his entrance into and passage through
a set of training institutions and thus to
provide an example of a mode of analysis
suitable for the study of adult socialization.

We make use of two complementary sets
of concepts in dealing with the develop-
ment of identification. Changes in institu-
tional participation and the contingencies
on whch these depend are analyzed in terms
of the notion of career, which directs atten-
tion to typical sequences of movement and
2The concept of career has been treated ex-
tensively in the sociological literature. See par-
ticularly H. H. Gerth and C. W. Mills, From
Max Weber: Essays in Sociology (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1946), chap. iv, “Sci-
ence as a Vocation”; Oswald Hall, “The Stages
of a Medical Career,” American Journal of So-
ciology, LIII (March, 1948), 327-37, and “Types
of Medical Careers,” ibid., LV (November, 1937),
404-13; Melville Dalton, “Informal Factors in
Career Achievement,” American Journal of So-
ciology, LVI (March, 1951), 407-15; Howard S.
Becker, “The Career of the Chicago Public School
Teacher,” American Journal of Sociology, LVIL
(March, 1952), 470-77, and “Some Contingencies
of the Professional Dance Musician’s Career,”
Human Organization, XII (Spring, 1953), 22-26.
formation into new identities, on the other.?

The analysis is based on interviews with
graduate students in three departments in
a large state university: physiology, me-
chanical engineering, and philosophy.* The
interviews ranged in length from one-half
to two hours, were tape-recorded, covered
students at all stages in graduate work,
and were centered around the individual’s
feeling of work identity and the changes
taking place in it. Analysis proceeded in
terms of stages of development, looking in
each case for the ways in which career
movements into new situations made pos-
sible new experiences, transforming the
self-image and thus creating the conditions
for further movement.

It is clear that tension may arise where
the newly acquired work identity fails to
mesh with or to meet the specifications of
other strongly held identifications, such as
those growing out of participation in the
family of orientation. The person finds it
expedient to acquire a work identity, since
general cultural emphases require some oc-
cupational attachment, some answer to the
ubiquitous question, “What’s your line?”
But this may also produce conflict, as the
individual is unable to achieve a desired
identity, or does not know what to want,
and so ends up with an identity in some
respects incongruent with his others. We
have left consideration of such conflicts for
later analysis.5

Descriptions of the types of change
which occur in the three groups and the
conditions under which they change are
presented first, indicating the general type
of change illustrated by each and thus the
way each training institution operates to
produce specific kinds of occupational iden-
tities. The physiology students are a group
in which originally strong preferences for
other fields are transformed by the grad-
uate department into a well-developed iden-
tification with physiology. In the case of
the philosophers, the experiences provided
by their graduate training allow for a
kind of moratorium in which a broad and
unspecialized intellectual commitment can
be maintained, being replaced only partial-
ly by a specialized work identification. For
the engineers, graduate school serves to
maintain a work identity already strongly
established in college, little further change
taking place.®

Viewed comparatively, as involving dif-
ferent degrees of change in identity, the
three cases serve to locate some general
mechanisms through which such change
occurs, at least in those occupations whose
recruits are trained in graduate schools
and perhaps are also to be found in less
pretentious settings. Taken singly, they ex-
emplify various problems and sequences
of development which no doubt have their
analogues both within and beyond academic
confines. Our discussion, while focused on
the three cases at hand, may thus be
thought of as raising questioss and sug-
gesting answers outside these limits.
Students typically begin graduate work
in physiology without having done their
undergraduate work in the field. This is
true partly because the department faculty
prefers students with a firm background in
one of the sciences physiology draws on,
such as chemistry or zodlogy, to those who
would have to unlearn painfully the half-
truths necessarily taught in undergraduate
courses. It is true more importantly because
these students had not intended to study
physiology until shortly before entering
graduate school. Twelve of the eighteen
had instead fastened their hopes on the
medical profession, eight of them turning
to physiology only when they were not
accepted into medical school. At this point
they decide to spend a year in physiology,
on the premise that when they do enter
medical school the training will prove valu-
able; they do not give up the notion of
becoming physicians but see physiology as
the best available stopgap. The others have
either had an early interest in biological
science or acquired such an interest in the
course of their premedical program. After
receiving the B.S. degree, they feel that
real professional success depends on higher
degrees, and they enter physiology, perhaps
out of an interest developed in undergrad-
uate work, perhaps at the suggestion of an
interested teacher.

In any case, no student enters the de-
partment irrevocably committed to the no-
tion of becoming a physiologist; most, in
fact, are still committed to medicine, and
the others feel it quite possible that they
may later want to switch fields. Further,
they are vague as to the real nature of the
field and the kinds of experiences they are
likely to have in it, possessing not even the
kind of unrealistic picture which may be
provided by public stereotypes, such as are
attached to other, more well-known occu-
pations like law or medicine. (The ab-
sence of such stereotypes or public knowl-
edge of the field is no doubt important in
restricting occupational choices in the area
to the late college years.) They view their
task as students as one of acquiring the
vast body of certified knowledge in the field
and thus earning good marks and, perhaps,
degrees, a perspective created by their
undergraduate experience. They are com-
mitted through their enrolment as students
in the department to at least a year of such
activity.

As the year progresses, the student is
taught in a new way, with a tremendous
stress on the many problems yet to be
solved, on the research that needs to be
done, and on the essentially problematic
character of the “facts” so laboriously ac-
quired as an undergraduate. At first dis-
illusioned, he becomes excited at the
thought that all the great work has not
been done, that he too may make funda-
mental and important discoveries, and he
begins to realize the value of small, care-
fully done studies. This interest in the
specific problems of the field is enhanced
by casual conversations with other students.
Likewise, he begins to learn the techniques
of research and to acquire a pride in his
technical abilities through the evaluations
of his instructors and comparisons of his
own work with that of others. And, finally,
he begins to take over an ideology which
identifies physiology for him as the most
comprehensive and important of the life-
sciences, including medicine.

At the end of the first year the student
may again apply for admission to medical
school. Those who do and are rejected do
not immediately give up all hope but do
decide that they might as well continue
until they get the Master’s degree and per-
haps beyond that the Ph.D. As medicine
becomes more unattainable, their very real
interest in physiology takes on new mean-
ing as they come to consider it as the basis
for an alternative career; those whose in-
terests always lay in science begin to real-
ize that unless they remain for a Ph.D. they
will be doomed to careers as laboratory
technicians.

No later than the end of the second year
(and often earlier for those who hold assist-
antships) the student finds himself spend-
ing a great deal of time in the department
laboratories, working on his own or his pro-
fessors’ research, and is thrown into con-
tinual day-and-night contact with “the
clique.” This is a loosely organized group
of those whose work is centered around the
laboratory; in no way exclusive, entrance
into it is accomplished simply by being
around and is an automatic accompaniment
of the laboratory work of the advanced
student. Conversations with third- and
fourth-year students in this group take
place at work and during “coffee breaks,”
and the student thus becomes integrated
into a group whose major concerns are the
problems and techniques of physiological
research and the job and career prospects
of the young physiologist. His interest in
the science is reinforced, and he begins to
develop specific notions as to the kind of
occupational future he might expect as a
physiologist, the kinds of jobs available,
and the ways in which one gets them.

These changes are strengthened in the
informal apprenticeship in which he now
gets involved with professors in the course
of beginning his thesis or working on their
projects. He is told more of the beauties
of physiological research and is often able
to model his behavior after that of a pro-
fessor or of an ideal constructed of the
characteristics of several professors, learn-
ing through observation of them the kind
of tasks which physiologists in fact per-
form. He learns the facts of their careers
and becomes aware of the jobs for which
he will qualify as a physiologist in univer-
sities, government, and the research de-
partments of pharmaceutical concerns. Fre-
quently, he is deliberately groomed by the
professor for some particular kind of job,
either because it is felt that he “has what
it takes” or because it is felt necessary to
point him toward a less difficult job but
one which he will be able to handle. (Some
students are thus encouraged to take tech-
nician jobs after the M.S. rather than try
for the Ph.D.)
At the end of the second year he is think-
ing quite seriously of staying in physiology
and can even envision turning down a
place in medical school if one materializes
(if, indeed, he has even bothered to apply
a third time). He feels not only that physi-
ology has something to offer him but that
it would be a terrible waste of time to
“start over,” to give up what he has learned
and begin again in a new field. Also, his
newly acquired ideology gives him reasons
to discount the prestige of the medical pro-
fession, a profession he now sees in terms
of an invidious comparison between “art”
and “science”; this ideology also serves to
insulate him against the appeals of other
sciences whose importance is deprecated.

All these elements combine to produce in
these students an identification with the
field of physiology and to lessen identifica-
tion with other possible work statuses. At
some point (for the medically oriented, the
point at which they must decide whether to
try for medical school again) they become
aware of the new identity and accept it,
perhaps with the proviso that this accept-
ance is only temporary and that after the
Ph.D. they will again pursue the medical
degree. Behavior is now reoriented in terms
of what is proper and desirable for the
bearer of such an identity, in terms of the
motives they consider appropriate for the
kind of persons they have become. Whereas
first-year students are unable to under-
stand, for example, the reasons why some
of their seniors choose an academic career
while others turn to a career in commercial
research, the older student has acquired in
interaction with teachers and still older
students a set of explanations (motives) to
be attached to such behavior, and it is in
terms of these that he now orients his own
behavior. He perceives his own dispositions
in terms of these group-assigned motives
and makes his choices accordingly, choos-
ing the academic life if he feels himself
more interested in “science,” commercial
research if he is more interested in
“money.”
The engineers have made a firm choice
of occupation long before reaching graduate
school; college and, in some cases, indus-
trial experiences attendant on this choice
have produced a very strong identification
with engineering. They have acquired a
characteristic ideology, centering around
the notion of the engineer as a logical
thinker, and have internalized the typical
motives of the group, primarily “making
money” and “getting opportunity for ad-
vancement.” They expect to spend their
careers in the field, with the qualification
that they may move, as engineers, into the
higher ranks of industrial management; a
few older men are teachers of engineering
who have found a Ph.D. necessary for fur-
ther academic promotion. The others either
are just out of college or have had a year
or two in industry beyond this when they
enter graduate school, feeling on the basis
of knowledge of the job market (derived
from work experience or interviews with
employer representatives) that they will be
able to command a higher salary if they
have additional training and/or an M.S.
degree. The choice of graduate training is
thus realistically oriented to a specific and
limited goal.

The pattern for the younger group be-
gins with a year of courses devoted to im-
proving one’s market price. Many students
hold research or teaching assistantships,
which do not begin to match financially
what they might have had had they left
school. The assistantships prevent them
from finishing work for the M.S. in one
year, and most require a second. But they
leave as an open question whether they will
continue work for the degree or move on
(or back) to the far greater financial re-
wards of industry, for they will have lost
no time by spending the year in school
without completing the degree and so feel
free to leave without doing so. They tend
to reckon the benefits of their graduate
work in terms of courses finished and new
knowledge gained rather than degrees. New
problems and skills interest them only to
the extent that they are seen as useful in
the pursuit of their basic aims.

In short, this move does not commit
them to anything beyond a semester or
year of school, which they expect will have
immediate practical results; when the re-
sults are unsatisfactory, or the immediate
goal is achieved, they leave. Most leave at
the end of a year, having accomplished
their purposes; this is suggested by the
fact that, although there are thirteen first-
year students, there are none at all in the
second year. A few who have comparative-
ly well-paying research jobs stay on, taking
a minimal amount of course work. They
are interested, although not greatly, in get-
ting a degree; more importantly, they like
their jobs and feel that they offer as much
in money and in opportunity to meet im-
portant people in industry and become
known through publication as does an in-
dustrial position. So they keep making
these short-term commitments year after
year without feeling constrained to do so,
for it would cost them nothing to leave.
When they get the degree, they have be-
come specialists in some particular area,
know the people in it, and get jobs as tech-
nical experts.

A few others are tempted by the aca-
demic life sufficiently to continue as teach-
ing assistants until they finish their Mas-
ter’s work, at which time they may well be
offered faculty positions, since engineering
schools find it difficult to keep younger
faculty, not being able to match the sal-
aries common in industry. They appear
during this period to have come to like the
relatively relaxed atmosphere of the cam-
pus and to have taken over the lower finan-
cial and class-mobility goals of academic
life, so that industry no longer appears as
attractive. And, in any case, if they find
that academic life is not so desirable as
they had imagined it, they can easily find
an industrial position at an appropriate
level.

There appears to be little in the way of
organized peer relations, perhaps because
the conditions of their work do not draw
them into touch with one another. The stu-
dents are typically employed on semiauton-
omous kinds of projects which do not pro-
vide situations in which they might meet
and become friendly. It may also be true
that the fact that they feel themselves to
be in school only temporarily and always
have an eye on the outside world mitigates
against the development of such groups.

The engineers, then, maintain their basic
identification with engineering, simply add-
ing to their abilities during their further
schooling in order that they may have a
greater range of better jobs available to
them as engineers, in industry and possibly
in universities. Relations with professors
are friendly but not close; where a close
relation exists, it is one between younger
and older professionals rather than between
teacher and student. The older man’s spon-
sorship is considered helpful but not in any
way essential to getting a good job. The
students’ identification and goals do not
change much and can be maintained in
school or out.
The philosophy students _ typically
choose their field of graduate work as being
the least bad among a set of undesirable
possibilities. Sometime during college, and
in some cases even earlier, they have chosen
as an important basic identification that of
the “intellectual.” From the perspective of
this identity their task is to be aware of
and interested in the whole field of human
intellectual endeavor, from science through
aesthetics to metaphysics and ethics, to
keep an open and inquiring mind, and to
avoid the dangers and rigidities of speciali-
zation. Philosophy seems to offer the great-
est opportunity to maintain such a stance
vis-a-vis the world of knowledge.

Although they profess to be uninterested
in jobs and financial matters, and do in
fact show little apparent interest, they
seem to consider a higher degree necessary.
Thus the choice of fields is, they feel,
forced on them by the organization of uni-
versities into departments, in one of which
they must take their Ph.D. (They differ in
this from intellectuals of earlier periods,
who might as easily have gravitated toward
the then socially acceptable role of the un-
attached intellectual.)

They enter graduate work with back-
grounds ranging from the natural sciences
to the arts and retain interests in these
fields along with others they have become
aware of since their commitment to the in-
tellectual life. Some made this commitment
early enough to escape ever having special-
ized at all. Their course work can easily
cover an equally wide range, so that they
are not constrained by departmental re-
quirements to narrow the focus of their
intellectual activity and concentrate on
some particular specialty. They thus are
able to maintain the over-all intellectual
identification and avoid being shunted into
activities which might have as their conse-
quence the development of a specialized
one another, do not operate to make a co-
hesive group of the department but rather
to provide conditions under which little
essential change in identification will occur.
Student-faculty relations are largely con-
fined to the classroom and office consulta-
tions over classwork, and the student sees
little and learns little of his professors’ pro-
fessional aims and activities; the professor,
likewise, does not come to know students
well enough to take a realistically active
role in the shaping of their interests, even
if he should so desire. Students do not in
these circumstances develop any picture of
their probable future as philosophers; nor
does this trouble them, for they are deter-
mined resolutely to avoid the effects of
such institutional commitments as jobs.
They expect to have them, probably in col-
lege teaching, but consider such details un-
important. In the same way, they do not
see their teachers at work and thus never
learn in the detail that is crucial just what
it is that a philosopher does and so do
not come to identify themselves with any
particular set of tasks.

Their student work does not provide the
conditions in which they must come to-
gether in continuous association—the
equivalent of the physiologist’s laboratory
is missing—and there is in fact on cohesive
student grouping into which younger stu-
dents are systematically recruited by older
ones. Instead, they tend to find their
friends scattered through the university, on
the basis of those interests which override
the boundaries of academic specialties:
political and social ethics, art and music,
the philosophy of science, and so on. Their
primary group participation thus does not
channel interest into the confines of a spe-
cialized occupational identity but rather re-
inforces its flowing into areas which cut
across the traditional dividing lines be-
tween disciplines and academic identities,
reinforces their concern with maintaining a
“balanced” as opposed to a “specialized”
approach to knowledge. If anything, these
associations (as well as the professors’
example) help them to discover new areas
of intellectual activity across which they
may spread themselves.

Because philosophy suits the purpose of
avoiding specialization so well, the students
come increasingly to identify with it as they
continue graduate work, viewing it as the
academic identity which least constrains
their intellectual pursuits; for this reason
they do not switch fields as one might ex-
pect, given their wide-ranging interests. In
addition, like the physiologists, they have
after a few years made a sizable investment
of time, if nothing else, in a philosophy de-
gree and feel that it would be wasteful to
begin again on a degree in another field;
they do not question, however, the neces-
sity of getting the degree, as well they
might, given their views on jobs and spe-
cialization.

As they approach graduation, it becomes
clear that they will have to get jobs some-
where and engage in some kind of work.
This comes as something of a surprise, for
neither faculty nor student associates talk
about such things, and the matter has
never before been brought forcibly to their
attention. Their professors provide rela-
tively little sponsorship, and so they are
not constrained to remain in the field be-
cause of obligations to such sponsors.
Faced with the problem of getting jobs,
they do realize that their work futures
must be seen in terms of their identification
by others as philosophers, and they tend to
accept this fact and incorporate it into
their own self-images. In looking for jobs,
they become aware of a number of kinds
of positions besides that of member of a
college philosophy faculty which they
might hold; for example, depending on
their other interests, they may find it pos-
sible to compete for teaching posts in tan-
gential fields such as literature, research
jobs as specialists in logic, and so on. They
are thus able to maintain a nonspecialized
task orientation even upon entering the
labor market.

These heavily intellectually oriented stu-
dents become Ph.D.’s with a less special-
ized job potential than most but, except in
Our analysis suggests the operation of
certain specific mechanisms producing
changes in identity. These mechanisms, as
our introductory statements indicate, con-
sist of ways in which participation in or-
ganized groups of various kinds affects ex-
perience and, through this, self-image.
Among the mechanisms operating in the
cases under consideration are the develop-
ment of problem interest and pride in new
skills, the acquisition of professional ideol-
ogy, investment, the internalization of mo-
tives, and sponsorship.

Among graduate students changes in
participation are the result of movement
into the orbits of three kinds of groups:
the informal peer group or student clique,
the apprentice relationship with profes-
sors, and the formal academic structure of
the university, involving courses, grades,
credits, and degrees. Each such movement
generates characteristic kinds of experi-
ences for the person and consequently cre-
ates a potential for change in or develop-
ment of occupational identification. Com-
parison of our three cases indicates the
conditions under which these mechanisms
come into play and the way they produce
work identification in three of the areas
outlined elsewhere: attachment to occupa-
tional title, task commitment, and commit-
ment to particular work organizations and/
or positions in them.”
Movement into the academic structure,
through matriculation as a graduate stu-
dent, sets the investment mechanism go-
ing. Such a move is an investment of an
irreplaceable quantum of time in a partic-
ular career, and not to follow that career
means a loss of the investment. It is a first
step up a ladder, and a misstep necessitates
a new start and thus a falling-behind in the
competition. Such a mechanism works only
where general cultural expectations empha-
size age-graded mobility (as they do in this
country) and where movement out of the
academic structure entirely or into some
other specialty would actually prove costly
in this respect. The case of the engineers is
instructive, for leaving graduate school
costs them nothing, and they feel free to
leave at any time; they show little change
in their occupational identification. The
opposite is true of the philosophers and
physiologists who, in differing degree, do
make this kind of investment. Once in the
graduate program, they must continue
through until the degree if they are not to
lose precious time by having to “start
over”; and, once they have the degree,
they must remain what they have become
in order to cash in on their investment. To
the extent that this is true changes take
place in their identification, particularly in
the area of identification with particular
work institutions and positions within
them.

Movement into the formal academic
structure places the person in classroom
contact with men teaching materials new
to him and teaching them, owing to the
different aims of graduate training, in a
quite different way. Matters presented to
undergraduates as fact are now interpreted
as problematic, as requiring further re-
search, and the person’s interest in these
problems is aroused. New work techniques
are presented, and the student is faced
with the challenge of mastering them. Thus
constrained by the school situation, per-
haps with the opportunity to observe his
professors making use of these skills, he
acquires them and the interests they pre-
suppose and so becomes associated in the
eyes of others with the particular work
identity they symbolize. Since his future
depends in part on how others identify him,
he is pushed in the direction of assuming
the identity that goes with his new inter-
ests and skills in order that he may satis-
factorily meet the expectations of others in
the work world. This kind of identification
process occurs most strongly where tech-
niques are highly specialized and there is
opportunity to see professors using them
and where the graduate program keeps in-
terests clearly pointed in one direction,
both being the case with the physiologists
and to a smaller degree with the philos-
ophers, whose graduate program does not
so direct their interests and who have no
techniques to learn and no chance to watch
their professors at work. (The engineers
simply maintain and deepen previous inter-
ests and skills, and there is little change in
identification, except in the case of those
who become teachers, where the interest
aroused by teaching experience is influen-
tial.) This mechanism of development of
interest and acquisition of skill thus oper-
ates to produce identification in the area of
task commitment.

The mechanism of acquisitian of ideol-
ogy, which operates to produce commit-
ment to occupational title, appears to be
closely related to participation in informal
student groups and, secondarily, to class-
room and informal participation with teach-
ers. It comes into operation when the per-
son begins to raise questions, or have them
raised for him, about the worth of the ac-
tivity he is engaged in, when he asks him-
self why he is doing this rather than some-
thing else. He looks for answers, finds them
in the developed professional ideology he
becomes aware of in interaction with older
students and professors, and takes them
over for his own use. Thus armed, he is
able to say why one should be interested
in his field rather than others and why it is
the best of all possible pursuits. Both the
physiologists and the engineers have this
strongly, the former acquiring it in their
intensive interaction with students and
faculty, the latter having already developed
it in their undergraduate work. The philos-
ophers have no such specialized ideology
tying them to the field of philosophy and
correspondingly little attachment to occu-
pational title, a consequence of the fact
that they do not participate in cliques of
fellow-philosophers and have relatively lit-
tle informal interaction with teachers.

The internalization of motives,® most
effective in producing attachment to insti-
tutional positions associated with a given
work identity, seems to operate primarily
in clique and apprenticeship relations. As
the person learns about the kinds of posi-
tions he may expect after finishing his
schooling, he also learns why people want
these things. The gossip of the student
clique, as well as the talk of his teachers
about “placing” him, provides him with a
set of reasons for wanting the things which
will be available to him and for making
choices between them, in the terms of the
professional identity he is assuming. He
becomes able to explain and understand
the choices and acts of others and thus ac-
quires the means of developing impulses
and translating them into socialized action
in the sphere of work. Among the groups
studied this is clearest for the physiologists,
who have the greatest degree of clique in-
teraction and apprenticeship.

The structural functions of the sponsor-
ship pattern have been explored in many
studies, in which it has been described as a
means by which persons low in an occupa-
tional hierarchy are recommended by more
highly placed persons for better positions;
it is seen as functional for the organization
in recruiting able and loyal people and for
the individual in achieving upward mobil-
ity. We wish here to call attention to its
social-psychological functions, to the way
it operates in the process of change and
development in identification. Sponsorship
involves a complex net of responsibilities.
The sponsor is responsible to his colleagues
for the performance of the person he spon-
sors, who is in turn responsible to him for
his behavior. When a person is sponsored
into a first position in the work world after
leaving graduate school, he feels obligated
to act as a true member of the occupation
and to remain within it, because of the
trust placed in him by his sponsor. The
creation of this obligation solidifies occupa-
tional attitudes and loyalties—the individ-
ual feels that he must remain what he has
become in order not to let down his spon-
sor—and thus strengthens the identifica-
tion with occupational title and ideology.
The physiologists benefit from a fairly
well-operating sponsorship system and ex-
hibit correspondingly strong identification,
while the philosophers do not get such ener-
getic sponsorship, operating much more on
their own in the search for jobs, and show
as a result much weaker identification with
their field. The engineers do not, in the
state of today’s job market in their field,
need much sponsorship from their profes-
sors, and there is thus little opportunity
for the mechanism to operate; there is con-
sequently little change in their identifica-
tions in graduate school (except among the
teachers, where this may be a factor).

It is through the operation of mecha-
nisms such as those we have described,
made up of changes in participation in or-
ganized groups and transformations of vari-
ous aspects of the self-image, that occupa-
tional identifications develop and change.
Our comparison of the three cases indicates
that change in identity, occurring in differ-
ent degree in each, may be explained in
terms of the coming-into-play of these
mechanisms and that lack of change is un-
derstandable in terms of the failure of such
mechanisms to operate because of the ab-
sence of the necessary structural conditions
and appropriate individual perspectives.
This being so, it constitutes in some sense
a validation of our original model and sug-
gests that a similar mode of analysis may
prove generally useful in the understand-
ing of changes in individual identity in
the course of group experience.
