Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
During the latter part of the nineteenth
and the first half of the twentieth centuries
the factory system of production was intro-
duced, at least on a small scale, to most
areas of the world. The factory has generally
been accompanied by a relatively standard
set of occupations, including the factory
manager (sometimes also owner) and his ad-
ministrative and clerical staff, engineering
and lesser technical personnel, foremen,
skilled, semiskilled, and unskilled workers.
In the factory, authority and responsibility
are allocated largely according to the degree
of technical or administrative competence
required for the job. In addition, the alloca-
tion of material and social rewards, the lat-
ter generally in the form of deference, is
closely adjusted to levels of competence and
degrees of authority and responsibility. The
pattern of differentiation of authority is un-
doubtedly functionally necessary to the pro-
ductive activity of the factory, and it may
be that the associated pattern of reward dif-
ferentiation is also functionally necessary.

There is, however, no clear-cut impera-
tive arising from the structure of the factory
as such which dictates how the incumbents
of its typical statuses should be evaluated by
the population at large. One possibility is
that in popular esteem the typical occupa-
tions will stand relative to one another in a
rank order strictly comparable to their
standing in the formal hierarchy of compe-
tence, authority, and reward in the factory.
It is also possible, however, that the popular
evaluation of these occupations will be
quite different. Indeed, where the factory
system has been introduced into societies
like those of Spain or Japan, with well-estab-
lished values based on tradition and expres-
sive of the culture, one might expect signifi-
cant differences between an occupation’s
standing in the formal hierarchy of the in-
dustrial system and its position in the popu-
lar ranking scheme.

Thus the interaction of the two systems
—the standardized modern occupational
system and the individual national value
pattern for rating occupations—presents an
interesting and important problem in com-
parative sociology.

We may posit two extreme positions in
this interaction, while granting that it
might be difficult to find live exponents of
either. The extreme “structuralist” would
presumably insist that the modern industri-
al occupational system is a highly coherent
system, relatively impervious to influence
by traditional culture patterns. Indeed, he
might go so far as to insist that the tradi-
tional ranking system would in time have to
be subsumed under, or integrated into, the
industrial system. Consequently, his argu-
ment would run, even such occupations as
priest, judge, provincial governor, not part
of the modern occupational system and
often given unusual deference, would come
in time to have roughly the same standing
relative to one another and to other occupa-
tions, no matter what their national cul-
tural setting.
By contrast, an extreme “culturalist”
might insist that within each country or cul-
ture the distinctive local value system would
result in substantial—and, indeed, some-
times extreme—differences in the evaluation
of particular jobs in the standardized mod-
ern occupational system. For example, he
might assume that in the United States the
company director would be rated unusually
high because of our awe of the independent
businessman and large corporations or that
in the Soviet Union the standing of indus-
trial workers would be much higher relative
to managerial personnel than in Germany,
with its emphasis on sharply differentiated
status hierarchies. Furthermore, he might
argue that the more traditional occupational
roles assigned special importance in particu-
lar cultures would continue to maintain
their distinctive positions in the different
national hierarchies. Indeed, he might hold
that the characteristic roles of the modern
industrial system would come to be sub-
sumed within the traditional rating system,
each factory occupation being equated with
some traditional occupation and then as-
signed a comparable rank.

A systematic test of these contrasting po-
sitions is not beyond the capacity of contem-
porary social research. A standard list of oc-
cupations—say thirty or forty in number—
might be presented for evaluation to com-
parable samples from countries presenting a
range of culture types and degrees of indus-
trialization. The list should contain both
standard industrial occupations and the
common, but differentially valued, tradi-
tional roles (e.g., priest, legislator, etc.).

Data are available which, though far
from completely adequate, will carry us a
long way beyond mere speculation on these
matters. In the postwar years studies of
occupational ratings have been conducted in
and reported on five relatively industrialized
countries: the United States, Great Britain,
New Zealand, Japan, and Germany.? In ad-
dition, the authors have available previously
unpublished data for a sixth country, the
Soviet Union.

Since these six studies? were, on the
2 Additional studies of occupational prestige are
available for the United States and for Australia.
The authors decided to restrict the United States
data to the most comprehensive study available.
The Australian case (Ronald Taft, “The Social
Grading of Occupations in Australia,” British
Journal of Sociology, Vol. IV, No. 2 [June, 1953]) was
not included in this report because it was felt that
little was to be gained by the inclusion of another
Anglo-Saxon country.

3(1) A. A. Congalton, “The Social Grading of
Occupations in New Zealand,” British Journal of
Sociology, Vol. IV, No. 1 (March, 1953) (New
Zealand data); (2) John Hall and D. Caradog Jones,
“The Social Grading of Occupations,” British Jour-
nal of Sociology, Vol. I, No. 1 (January, 1950)
(Great Britain); (3) National Opinion Research
Center, “Jobs and Occupations: A Popular Evalua-
tion,” in Reinhard Bendix and S. Martin Lipset,
Class, Siatus, and Power (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press,
1953) (United States data); (4) the Schleswig-
Holstein data are taken from an article published
in Der Spiegel, June 30, 1954, reporting a study
by Professor Karl-Martin Bolte, of Christian-
Albrecht University, in Kiel, Germany, to be pub-
lished early in 1955; (5) Research Committee, Japan
Sociological Society, “Report of a Sample Survey
of Social Stratification and Mobility in the Six
Large Cities of Japan” (mimeographed; December
1952) (the authors are grateful to Professor Kunio
Odaka, of the University of Tokyo, for bringing this
valuable study to their attention) ; and (6) the Soviet
materials were collected by the Project on the Soviet
Social System of the Russian Research Center at
Harvard University. The authors plan to publish
several articles dealing with the special features of
the occupational ratings secured from former Soviet
citizens.
Germany: 1,500 Schleswig-Holsteiners: vo-
cational-school students, university stu-
dents, and male adults (not otherwise
specified) ; adult sample only used here

Overlap among occupations studied
Each study involved a different number

of occupations, ranging from 88 in the case

of the National Opinion Research Center

American study to 13 in the Soviet re-

search. Only the New Zealand and the

British groups studied exactly the same

occupations. Each of the remaining four

studies used a different, but partially over-
lapping, set of occupations.

In order to make comparisons between
pairs of countries, each occupation studied
in each research was matched, when pos-
sible, with an occupation in the data
gathered in the other country. In many cases
it was necessary to disregard the informa-
tion about an occupation in one of the paired
countries because no comparable occupation
was studied in the other. In other instances,
in order to increase the number of occupa-
tions which could be compared for any
“... Please pick out the statement that
best gives your own personal opinion of
the general standing that such a job has.
Excellent standing, good standing, aver-
age standing, somewhat below average,
poor standing.”

Japan: Respondents were given a set of
thirty cards and asked: “‘. . . Think of the
general reputations they have with peo-
ple, and sort them into five or more
groups, from those which people think
highly of to those which are not thought
so well of.”

Great Britain: Respondents were told: “We
should like to know in what order, as to
their social standing, you would grade
the occupations in the list given to you.
[Rate them]...in terms of five main
social classes... ABCDE.”

U.S.S.R.: Respondents were asked: ‘“Tak-
ing everything into consideration, how
desirable was it to have the’ job of
( ) in the Soviet Union? Very de-
sirable? Desirable? So-so? Undesirable?
Very undesirable?”
For most of the comparisons, further-
more, the findings go beyond establishing
mere comparability of rank orders. With the
exception of the correlations involving Ger-
many, each coefficient represents the rela-
tionships between prestige scores given to
the same occupations in two different na-
tions. Hence there is a high relationship be-
tween the relative “distance” between occu-
pations, as expressed in score differences, as
well. In other words, if, of two occupations,
one is given a much lower score than the
other by the raters in one country, this dif-
ference in prestige scores and not merely
crude rank order also obtains in another
country.
efficients which result are presented in Table
2.4 It will be seen immediately that the levels
of correlation are considerably higher than
the magnitude to be expected if there were
only rough agreement on placement in the
top and bottom halves of the prestige hier-
archy. Indeed, twelve of the fifteen coefti-
cients are above .9, and only one is below .8.
The three coefficients below .9 all concern
the Soviet ratings, which, it will be recalled,
involve only a very small number of occu-
pations, maximizing the chances for lower
correlations arising from merely one or two
“mismatches.”
It should also be noted that these high cor-
relations were obtained by using samples of
occupations which were not strictly identi-
cal from country to country, including such
very crude comparisons already mentioned
as that of collective farm chairman and farm
owner and operator. One may anticipate
that if the occupations studied were more
uniform, the similarities of prestige hier-
archies from country to country would be
even higher.

In other words, despite the heterogeneity in
research design, there exists among the six na-
tions a marked degree of agreement on the rela-
tive prestige of matched occupations. To this
extent, therefore, it appears that the “struc-
turalist” expectation is more nearly met
than is the expectation based on the cul-
turalist position.

Each of the six nations differs in the ex-
tent to which its prestige hierarchy re-
sembles those of other nations. The average
of the correlations for each nation, con-
tained in the bottom row of Table 2, ex-
presses these differences among nations
quantitatively. Thus we may see that the
American and German occupational pres-
tige hierarchies are most similar to those of
other nations, while the Soviet and Japa-
nese hierarchies are most dissimilar. When
we consider that the Soviet Union and
Japan are, of the six, the more recently in-
dustrialized cultures, we may see there some
small degree of evidence for the culturalist
position.

Furthermore, if we examine the correla-
tions among the three nations which have
the closest cultural ties and which share a
common historical background and lan-
guage—Great Britain, the United States,
and New Zealand—we find these coefficients
to be among the highest in Table 2. Again,
the evidence to some extent supports the in-
terpretation of a small “cultural” effect.
However, the coefficients in question are
not sufficiently distinguished in size from
those involving Germany® and the three
Anglo-Saxon nations to allow much weight
to be given to the influence of the common
Anglo-Saxon culture. In other words, what-
Although the relationships among the six
occupational hierarchies are very high, they
do not indicate one-to-one correspondences
among the national ranks of occupations.
Each nation shows some variation from
every other, and the international discrep-
ancies may perhaps throw further light on
the relationships between social structure,
culture, and occupational prestige.

One possibility is that unique aspects of
the culture or social structure of a particular
country determine distinctive appraisals of
a certain type or types of occupation. Na-
tional differences are thus to be interpreted
in a unique fashion for each country.

A second possible explanation is that it is
the type of occupation which engenders dis-
agreement, some occupations being similarly
rated everywhere and others yielding no
consistent rating. To some extent these con-
trasting explanations are similar, respec-
tively, to the culturalist and structuralist
positions discussed earlier.

Here again the available data place
marked limits on the possibility of a defini-
tive answer, but it is nevertheless feasible
for us to go some distance in exploring the
problem. In order to obtain some means by
which to assess the presence or absence of
disagreement among nations, regression
equations were computed to predict the
prestige positions of the occupations in one
country as against the prestige positions of
the comparable occupations in each other
country. Ten such equations were comput-
ed, interrelating the prestige hierarchies in
Applying this criterion, we have, in Table
3, presented the discrepancies in ratings be-
tween all the relevant pairs of nations. The
columns show the occupations rated higher
by a given country in relation to each of the
other countries represented in the rows.
Reading the table by rows, we find the occu-
pations rated lower by one country than by
other nations, not forgetting that each com-
parison of a pair of countries involves a
somewhat different set of occupations from
the comparison of ratings for any other two
countries. Only a few occupations, such as
farmer, teacher, doctor, factory manager,
and some form of industrial worker, were
rated in all five countries and therefore ap-
the cultural differences in structure and
role between the Buddhist religion in Japan
and the Judeo-Christian religion in the
three Anglo-Saxon countries. Equally no-
table is the consistently lower position of
farm manager as rated by displaced persons
from the Soviet Union. While the occupa-
tion collective farm chairman is not strictly
comparable to those with which it is
matched, there can be no doubt that the dis-
placed persons regard that occupation with
a special ambivalence arising out of the posi-
tion of agriculture in the Soviet economy
during the last three decades.

Despite the clarity with which a particu-
lar occupation may stand out, it is difficult
to find any definite pattern characterizing
the disagreements expressed by any one
country. Of course, such a pattern, if it does
exist, may be obscured in our data by the
modest number of occupations rated by
each country. There are seldom more than
one or two occupations of a given type in
each of the comparisons, and it is hazardous
to assume from the fact, for example, that
since the Japanese rate the occupation
newspaper reporter higher than Americans,
Britishers, or New Zealanders, they would
rate occupations of this type higher than the
other two countries. Nevertheless, it will be
noticed that in the country with the largest
number of comparisons, the instances of dis-
agreement involve a wide variety of quite
disparate occupations. Those rated higher in
the United States, for example, range from
building contractor to farmer and from sci-
entist to dock worker and appear to have
little in common. The same range and ab-
sence of a common denominator are shown
by the occupations rated lower in the United
States. Furthermore, the discrepancies do
not consistently appear in all the relevant
comparisons: farm owner is out of line in
only two out of four comparisons; as to
truck driver, the two recorded disagree-
ments go in opposite directions, that occu-
pation being rated higher in comparison
with Britain and lower in comparison with
New Zealand.
as in the preceding table, that is, on the
basis of predictions from regression equa-
tions.

Because our findings so far have so
strongly supported the structuralist expec-
tation concerning the influence of industri-
alization in producing uniformity, our ini-
tial expectation may well be that occupa-
tions closely allied to the industrial system
will enjoy highly comparable standings from
country to country, while occupations more
remotely connected would be the focus of
international discrepancies. Table 4 indi-
cates that industrial occupations do enjoy
comparable standing in all five countries.
Nevertheless, the Jowest proportion of dis-
agreements is shown by the professions. In
«c SSOUISNY BBI2] B 10} JURJUNODIE $93¥Ig parTUy,, SuyuuTs9q

BUT] 99S ‘SaTI}UNOD 19y}0 YIM WostredutoD Jog “ULdef YIM UostreduroD 107 ATUO 3194 Pas() §
cc TOdV9H HOO $9727 partuy,, SuzwuySoq aay] 29s

‘soqrunod 18y}0 YUA Uostredus0o 10,J “WoTUD TAOS Oy} YT UostIedtOD 10} ATuO d10q pas f

320
79 §(reda0qq00g) TOT aorgo Auedurog rOr sap eurnoy,
“uotmg 2TA0g ay3 YIM AJuo osHTed
-uyoo @ se 9104 pasn sea pur Uedef UF ammgeU [RoTTyD9} v Jo VON enD00 ATuO ap ST }a}TGOTY |
«¢ 99UTBUd [LAT $998IG paHTUy,, SurTUpsq
AUT] 298 ‘SaTIzUNOD 19430 YIM UostedurOD 10g “ULdeL YI uustiedutoo 10} A]UO 912q Pest)
(sareq ut r0de0q

ror ya9p ournoy 61 -3o0q) x93 HueG 99 sodoosj00g
lodedsmau
‘a1qe} 94} UT 1932] rvedde Soy} se suoryednov0 fenptarput as ‘saq17
-UNOD 12430 BLM wostreduros 10 “UoTUs) JOLAOG ey} YR Wosfreduzos 10 ATUO 2194 pasy ||

£°Sz weqyiod Aeayrey
oe J9ALIp 10,98,
ysquosoeq
O'ST -0} pur juade smany
#9 TOSCUUT SHION
09 seSeuvur ssoujsng

an ee
suvdef Ty wostreduroo 105 A[UO O79q POs) 4x

Boreas
Be paynqysqns woryedna00 ay} ‘puryeaz MeN UT UoTyednod0 ayqeieduroo ou sem e104} SY #
£°Sz royi0d Avapreyy
8°22 eATIp 10,981],
ysTuoooeq
PST -0) pue juase sane
OL reseueU SYIOM.
eS ze3eueUr ssoulsng

eae) oiadaaw nmenaane
addition, other occupational types, such as
the political occupations and the traditional
crafts, which are not necessarily closely al-
lied to the industrial system, manifested
levels of disagreement as low as that en-
joyed by the industrial occupations. Only
the agricultural and service occupations
yield a degree of disagreement which sets
them apart from the other occupational
groups.

Accounting for these discrepancies ap-
pears to require a combination of argu-
ments. In the first place, some types of non-
industrial occupations are easily assimilated
to the industrial system. The traditional
crafts serve as the prime example here, since
the skills involved in such occupations as
bricklayer, carpenter, and plumber have a
close resemblance to the skills of industrial
workers. Indeed, some crafts have been
partly incorporated into the industrial sys-
tem, and, it may be argued, such occupa-
tions are easily placed within the hierarchy
of industrial occupations and may tend to
assume roughly the same position vis-a-vis
industrial occupations. Likewise, some pro-
fessions, such as engineering and applied
scientific research, have a most immediate
connection with the industrial system, and
others, such as architecture, are easily
equated with it.

However, closeness or assimilability to
the industrial system will not suffice to ex-
plain the relatively stable position of other
professions, such as doctor. Nor will it serve
to explain the low proportion of disagree-
ment concerning the political occupations.
We must recognize that the nations being
compared have certain structural and cul-
tural features in common, in addition to the
presence of industry. For example, they
share certain needs, as for socialization, and
values, such as health and systematic
knowledge, which insure relatively com-
parable standing to doctors, teachers, and
scientists. Furthermore, all the countries
compared have in common the national
state, with which is associated a relatively
standardized occupational structure ranging
from ministers of state to local bureaucrats.
In addition, both the professions and the
political occupations are highly “visible,”
and agreement as to their standing is proba-
bly facilitated by the relatively objective
and easily perceived indexes of power,
knowledge, and skill manifested by their in-
cumbents.

The types of occupation which generate
the greatest amount of disagreement are
highly variant and unstandardized or diffi-
cult to assimilate to the industrial structure.
Agriculture may be conducted, as in Japan,
on relatively small holdings, on collective
farms as in the U.S.S.R., or, as in the west-
ern plains of the United States, in “agricul-
tural factories.” Being a farmer means very
different things in each of the five countries,
quite unlike the standardized image of the
machinist or the factory manager. It can be
anticipated, however, that as agriculture
tends to be similarly organized in different
countries, agricultural occupations will
achieve more uniform standing.

The “service” occupations—barber, shoe
shiner, chef, street sweeper—show the
greatest amount of variation. Many of them
antedate the industrial system and are in
agrarian as well as industrial societies. They
have no fixed position relative to the indus-
trial order, nor are they similar to typical
industrial occupations, as are many of the
traditional crafts. They therefore appear to
be most easily evaluated according to the
traditional culture. Personal service in coun-
tries like Japan and Great Britain, in which
a servant class was historically well devel-
oped and benefited from intimate associa-
tion with an aristocratic upper class, may
still be regarded as not so degrading as in the
more democratic societies, such as the Unit-
ed States and New Zealand. In fact, the
greatest discrepancy to be found among all
the comparisons involves the differences in
prestige position accorded to chef in Great
Britain as compared with either the United
States or New Zealand, although in the case
of the former the match was poor, since the
comparable occupation was “restaurant
cook.” As these services come to be organ-
ized and mechanized—as in modern laun-
dries or restaurants—they will become more
thoroughly integrated into the larger eco-
nomic order and may in time achieve more
strictly comparable status from country to
country.

All told, it would appear from this exami-
nation of international discrepancies that a
great deal of weight must be given to the
cross-national similarities in social structure
which arise from the industrial system and
from other common structural features,
such as the national state. The greatest in-
cidence of discrepancies occurs for occupa-
tions which are hardest to fit into either the
one or the other structure. To this extent
the structuralist position which we outlined
earlier seems to be more heavily borne out
in these data.
differentiated in important respects. In ad-
dition, the fact that the countries com-
pared also have in common the national
state and certain needs or values, such as in-
terest in health, apparently also contributes
to the observed regularity of the ratings,
since both professional and political occupa-
tions are foci of agreement. Perhaps the
most striking finding is the extent to which
the different classes of occupation have been
woven together into a single relatively uni-
fied occupational structure, more or less
common to the six countries. At the same
time, there is strong evidence that this rela-
tively standardized occupational hierarchy
does not apply without major exception to
all occupations in all large-scale industrial-
ized societies. In some instances, important
disagreement may arise from the distinctive
role of a single occupation in a particular
country. In the majority of cases, however,
the disagreement appears to involve certain
classes of occupation, notably agricultural
and service, about which there is only mod-
est agreement. Disagreement probably re-
flects differences in the length and “maturi-
ty” of industrialization in various countries
but also clearly results from differentiations
in sociocultural systems which may well be
relatively enduring.
