Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
Why do men shift from farming to fac-
tory and other urban work? The question
presupposes a distinction between the types
of work, and perhaps between social worlds.
It also presumes a special importance to
the particular direction of change; writ
large, the shift from field to factory sums
up much of what is meant by moderniza-
tion.

The notion that farmers are “driven” off
the land by overpopulation, poverty, or
some combination of these fails to explain
why some stay while others leave, and why,
of the latter, only a portion seek factory
work, As an explanation for the generally
increased rate of movement off the land
over the last centuries it is deficient, be-
cause it assumes the existence of cities
without taking into account their prob-
able influence. Finally, the evidence to be
reviewed below flatly contradicts it.

A more positive line of explanation
emphasizes the interplay among such
factors as individual capacity, family and
class reinforcement, and the opportunity
structure of cities. According to Lipset,?
the key variable in this frame of reference
is the size of the community of orientation.
This factor predicts non-manual job place-
ment even when education is held constant.
Lipset’s interpretation of the result is
phrased in terms of the quality of educa-
tion and the greater awareness of the wider
opportunities in cities, and, in general,
size of orientation community is considered
only one of an array of factors, such as
socioeconomic status and ethnic origin,
that determine an individual’s mobility.
Of course, the size of one’s community of
orientation, while convenient and adequate
for large-scale surveys in heterogeneous
areas, has the obvious limitation that it
does not predict for persons coming from
communities of the same size. Presumably
we should then turn to the other factors,
but here we lack theoretical guidance.
Which factors? What exactly should we be
concerned about? In Lipset’s interpreta-

*S. M. Lipset, “Social Mobility and Urbaniza-
tion,” Rural Sociology, XX (December, 1955),
220-28. See also S. M. Lipset and Reinhard Bendix,
“Community Structure,” Social Mobility in In-
dustrial Society (Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press, 1962), chap. viii. Although Lipset and
Bendix were interested in predicting manual ver-
sus non-manual occupational placement, the same

approach should apply to the prediction of farm
versus non-farm and, specifically, factory work.
tion, education—broadly conceived—ap-
pears to be the mediating variable, but we
must still ask what it is about education
that accounts for its association with rela-
tively high-status occupations.

The hypothesis here proposed asserts
that the probability that a person will be
firmly committed to an occupation of an
urban type is determined by the number
and strength of the social relationships,
particularly kinship, that link him to the
wider urban environment. The defining
characteristics of such “urban” associations
include rationality in the Weberian sense,
their generalized or standardized quality,
and their differentiated nature, that is, the
diversity of perspectives that the activity
involves. More simply, and more in line
with the actual indicators used in this
study, urban ties are relationships with in-
stitutions that emanate from cities. Even
the smallest peasant village is linked to
the city and oriented to the market via
its shopkeepers and journeymen. The
people in these roles form a nucleus of a
network that may extend to the lowliest
farmer’s son. To the degree that a person
participates in or is linked by primary ties
to this urban-oriented web of social rela-
tions, he will act in terms of it. This hy-
pothesis gives real guidance to the task
of constructing measures, and it helps to
interpret otherwise mute indicators such
as the number of years a person attended
school, the socioeconomic status of his
father, and the sheer population size of
his community of orientation.

The analysis begins with a demonstra-
tion that an individual’s occupational ex-
perience can be viewed as a continuum
reflecting more or less of an urban com-
mitment. The typology constructed for
this purpose is validated by showing the
association between it and a range of ob-
vious attributes of urban style of life. It
is then shown that urban occupational
commitment is predicted by a range of
indicators of primary urban ties which,
when taken together, indicate a broad net-
work of relationships. Thereafter the many
ramifications of the hypothesis are pursued.
These include supporting evidence on the
respondents’ working sons, the influence
of landowning fathers, and the control on
and rejection of education and landless-
ness as separate exploratory factors.

The setting of this research is the area
around Ciudad Sahagun, Hidalgo, a rela-
tively new industrial town begun about
1950 with a population of about 5,000 and
located some seventy miles northeast of
Mexico City. The jobs in the several fac-
tories (assembling automobiles and trucks,
manufacturing textile machinery and small-
er items, and constructing railroads cars,
as well as the work of building the town)
provided a range of industrial work pre-
viously unavailable to the area. Although
most of the skilled workers came from the
capital or other large cities, enough of the
labor force left the nearby agricultural
villages to provide contrasting cases. Per-
haps more important, some returned to
farming after experience in industrial work,
and the sample also includes a great num-
ber of farmers who did not shift. In short,
the research setting is perhaps unique in
being a microcosm of industrialization,
with the full range of transition types still
available.®
This study focuses on what is assumed to
be the most intense kind of involvement:
the influence of one’s kinsmen. It is as-
sumed that the communication of the urban-
industrial outlook through primary ties is
likely to be extended over time, be adapted
to the particular interests of the individual,
and be many-sided. Not only will a young
man hear about the urban-industrial world
but he may be exposed to the “demonstra-
tion effect” of observing or learning from
a relative working in a factory job. Another
reason for focusing on generalized exposure
through primary ties rather than on nar-
rowly defined attitudes or values is the
assumption of this study that one develops
his vocabulary of motives as he is drawn
into the urban structure. Initially, a per-
son has only skeletal ideas of urban life
and these are accompanied by great areas
of vagueness. Only gradually, as he par-
ticipates in the urban structure, are these
areas replaced by more certain knowledge
and attitudes.*

The measure of occupational placement
is a variation of “career mobility” and
consists of a typology based on present
and past occupational experience. It was
constructed by combining present occupa-
tion and any instance of the other listed
occupations in the past. The previous
occupation is not necessarily a man’s first
job, although quite often it is. When the
occupational categories are arranged in
past-present order, the four major types
are farmer-farmer, obrero-farmer, farmer-
obrervo, and obrero-obrero. We retain the
Spanish term obrero because it covers both
factory and unskilled construction work.
The term “blue collar” is equivalent but
more awkward. The very small number of
cases of many of the types, particularly
white collar and shopkeeper, makes analy-
sis of them impossible, although a subse-
quent section describes the shopkeeper
category in particular and occasionally the
relevant types are collected together as
“other urban occupations.” The focus of
the ensuing analysis is on the four major
types named above, which may be labelled,
respectively, the career farmers, the transi-
tional farmers, the transitional obreros,
and the career obreros.

The data consisted of questionnaire re-
sponses obtained in 1958 from a 50 per
cent systematic sample of household heads
in four villages near Ciudad Sahagun, the
populations of which were 314, 586, 1,636,
and 1,688. The industrial town itself was
not surveyed.

Although the respondents were not
asked about their community of orienta-
tion, for most of them their present com-
munity of residence was also the place
where they grew up. Most of the workers
from large cities lived in the newly con-
structed housing in the industrial town.
Accordingly, the proportions of career
farmers and of career obreros may be com-
pared across the increasingly large village
populations to reveal a rough association,
corroborating Lipset’s finding. The smallest
place has the largest proportion of career
farmers (44 per cent contrasted with 19 per
cent for the largest village), while the larg-
est place has the largest proportion of career
obreros (10 per cent as contrasted to 4 per
cent for the smallest community). How-
ever, the percentage differences are not
great and the relationship is not linear.
More refined analysis is indicated.

Table 1 shows the relationship of the
four occupational types to a range of vali-
dating attributes. The contention is that
this typology indicates increasing involve-
ment in the urban sector by way of occu-
pation. The types are interpreted as a
rough continuum, and the regular increase
in most of the proportions supports this
VALIDATING CORRELATES OF OCCUPATIONAL-SEQUENCE TYPOLOGY

 

 

 

 

 

 
   
 
  

 

 

FARMER- “OBRERO”- FARMER- “OBRERO”-
FARMER FARMER “OBRERO” “OBRERO”
ATTRIBUTES

Per Per N Per Per

Cent Cent Cent Cent
Thirty years old or younger..... 23 107 | 26 50 45 54 46 26
Third-grade education or better 33 105 | 38 50 45 53 63 24
Does not belong to an eido*... 15 100 | 20 40 15 34 31 13
Prefers urban-industrial work 20 104 | 35 49 75 55 86 22
Worked in a factory. .. 16 112 | 42 50 32 53 54 26
Prefers to work in a city 33 106 | 43 49 53 55 68 25
Worked ina city........ 16 112 | 42 50 43 54 81 26
Goes to Mexico City at least occasionally 47 109 | 53 49 51 53 75 28
Wants an urban place of residence for sons...| 31 97) S1 46 54 52 77 21
Wants at least a secondary education for sons.| 40 98] 48 46 65 52 82 22
Wants a non-farm occupation for sons....... 64 100 | 65 46 83 54 92 22

 

* The communal landholding organization.
interpretation. Thus, if a man’s present
job is that of obrero, and especially if he
started as an obrero, he is likely to be
young;> have had a better-than-average
education; to prefer non-farm work and
city life; to have worked in a city, and
probably in a factory; not to belong to
the village communal land organization;
and to want an urban occupation, urban
residence, and higher education for his
sons. Most of the indicators discriminate
all four types, and those that do not are
explicable in terms of the local situation.
The evidence negates an interpretation of
An exception is the item concerning a
member of the family who is working in
the nearby industrial center. A low pro-
portion (46 per cent) of the career obreros
have close relatives working in the factories
in Ciudad Sahagun. Very likely this low
proportion is an artifact of the local situa-
tion: the factories in the industrial town
had been operating only five years by 1958,
so only a few of the respondents’ fathers
or brothers would have had time to enter
industrial work in some other way and then
transfer to one of the factories. The local
situation favored the transitional obreros
URBAN CONTEXT OF THE FOUR OCCUPATIONAL SEQUENCES

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

FARMER- “OBRERO’’~ FARMER- “OsRERO”’-
FARMER FARMER “OBRERO”’ “OBRERO”
Invicators or URBAN ContTEXT
Per Per Per Per
cent | % | cent | % | cent | % | cent
Father was in an urban occupation.......... 16 96] 38 47 24 50 60 25
Father’s education was third grade or higher..| 28 64 | 50 40 17 35 88 16
Brothers’ education averages three or more
VearS. cece cece eee 43 69*| 50 34 39 41 69 23
Father owned some land. 56 95 | 55 47 75 48 68 26
Has at least one brother who is an obrero. 19 75 | 57 40 63 43 58 24
At least one brother is in an urban occupation 29 75 | 62 40 75 43 92 24
At least one brother lives in a large city...... 61 76 | 58 40 64 45 75 24
Has a relative working in Mexico City. 62 110] 70 50 76 54 85 27
At least one compadre is an obrero........ 28 89 | 36 40 61 Ai 60 20
At least one compadre is in an urban occupation 45 112} 50 50 60 55 61 28
Some member of family has worked in nearby
industrial center......... 0.00.0 cee cece eee 35 108 | 57 49 61 55 46 28
Wife’s education is three years or more....... 23 108 | 26 47 31 54 65 28

 

 

 

 

 

* In this and subsequent rows referring to attributes of brothers, respondents with no brothers were omitted.
URBAN CHARACTERISTICS OF WORKING CHILDREN OF MEN
IN THE FOUR OCCUPATIONAL SEQUENCES

 

 

 

FARMER- “OBRERO”- FARMER- “OBRERO”-
FARMER FARMER “OBRERO” “OBRERO”
CHARACTERISTICS
Per Per Per Per
N
Cent cent | % | ceat | % | cent

 

Children sixteen or over average three or more|
years of education.......... .
At least one son is an obrero
All working sons are obreros. .
At least one son is a shopkeeper
All sons are in urban occupations.

50 59 43 28 44 18 66
49 43 48 23 79 14 75
26 43 35 23 57 14 50

9 43 0 23 21 14 38
37 43 39 23 79 14 | 100

 

   
 

00 60 00 60 10
RELATIONSHIP OF OCCUPATIONAL-SEQUENCE TYPES TO FRATERNAL
URBAN CONTACT WHEN RESPONDENT'S
EDUCATION Is CONTROLLED

 

 

OccupatIonAL-SEQUENCE TyPE

 

No. oF No. oF (Per Cent)
* BROTHERS IN —.. $$
YEARS OF Urpan N
Epucatton | Occupations | Farmer- | “Obrero”-| Farmer- | “Obrero”-
Farmer | Farmer | “Obrero’’ | “Obrero”’
0 66 22 10 2 59
wed 1+ 23 25 36 16 44
0 57 12 31 0 16
34 1+ 25 28 34 13 32

5+ 0 80 0 0 20 5
1+ 18 23 14 45 22
RELATIONSHIP OF AMOUNT OF LAND OWNED BY FATHER IN AGRICULTURE
TO CHARACTERISTICS OF SON (RESPONDENT)

 

No. or Hectares or Lanp FATHER
Does on Dip Own*

Son’s CHARACTERISTICS

 

 

 
 

 

0 1-4 5-6 1+
Has two or more brothers... 43 (70) 60 (30) 69 (42) 71 (49)
Has at least one brother in fa: 45 (47) 62 (21) 76 (38) 74 (39)
Has three or more years of education. . 26 (65) 44 (27) 56 (43) 53 (49)
Brothers have an average of three or more years|
of education. ......... 0. ccc eee cece eee eee 11 (44) 25 (20) 33 (36) 37 (38)
Has two or more brothers living in a large city. . 40 (48) 36 (25) 34 (38) 54 (43)
Respondent has a relative working in Mexico City] 62 (71) 69 (29) 84 (43) 80 (51)
Is a career or transitional obrero............2+5 14 (71) 37 (30) 33 (33) 32 (50)
Is a career obrer0... 2... cece eee eee cece eee 3 (71) 3 (30) 6 (33) 12 (50)

 

* Number in parentheses = NV.
62 per cent of the career obreros, as com-
pared with only 10 per cent of the career
farmers, had no land, and the transitional
types had the expected intermediate pro-
portions. Those obreros who did have land
had very little—under four hectares usu-
ally—and typically they worked it them-
selves.

But just because the obreros have no land
now does not mean that they were forced
into industrial work because they lacked
it. The mobility required for industrial
work is not compatible with landholding,
and it would not be surprising if an obrero
chose to invest in other things if he had
any wealth to begin with. Moreover, we
have seen that obreros are better educated
and have more urban connections and
higher aspirations, so they do not have
the restricted cultural background char-
acteristic of the truly poor. If landlessness
pushed them out of farming, it was a spe-
cific push and not a general economic and
cultural marginality.

A crucial piece of evidence in support
of the urban influence as against the land-
lessness hypothesis has already been pre-
sented in Table 2. There it was shown that
having a father who owned some land was
associated with going into obrero work. In
line with the rest of the indicators, amount
of father’s land was interpreted as an in-
dex of involvement in the urban sector;
landowning necessarily involves such con-
tacts. Table 5 continues this interpreta-
tion by presenting a number of charac-
teristics of the respondent that are asso-
ciated with the amount of land owned by
his father, if the father was in agriculture.
The table is confined to farmer fathers in
order to focus on the problem of rural
people entering factory work. The first
characteristic is simply the size of the
family. Large landholders tend to have
more sons, and more have sons who are
farmers. Nonetheless, they educate them
better, and the sons are more likely to
grow up knowing relatives who live in
large cities. Landowning fathers are more
likely to have sons who are transitional or
career obreros, although the proportions
do not increase with the amount of land
held. When the analysis is confined to the
career obreros, however, as shown in the
last row in Table 5, entering and staying
in obrero work is somewhat more frequent
for sons with fathers in the largest land-
owning category.

Support for this interpretation appears
in two previous studies of occupational type
and landholding. In a study of factory
workers in Puerto Rico, Gregory® found
the same lack of landholding among most
of his subsample of 291 obdreros with
agricultural experience. On the other hand,
over two-thirds of these same workers re-
ported having been previously employed
throughout the year in agricultural work—
a record far superior to that of the ordinary
farm worker. Moreover, only 15 per cent
said they had left primarily because of
sporadic employment. When asked about
the conditions under which they would
return to agriculture, some 60 per cent
said they would not return under any con-
ditions, and over two-thirds said they
had hope of higher earnings in industry
and little in agriculture.® Although Gregory
does not report data on the landholdings
of the fathers of these workers, and al-
though he has no group of farmers with
which to compare his factory workers, his
evidence does not support the economic
marginality explanation. Rather, the fac-
tory workers were shown to be familiar
with and favorable toward the urban-
industrial sector and were embedded in it
by way of education and social contacts.1°

Finally, Moore’s data, which originally
suggested to him the importance of land-
lessness, admit of an alternative interpre-
tation in line with that proposed here. He
finds the same initial fact that fewer fac-
tory workers have land or rights to culti-
vation when compared to those in farm-
ing." Supporting this fact are the majority
replies of the workers emphasizing neces-
sity, improving their situation by their
own efforts, and lack of land to support
all of them when asked why they got into
factory work. In addition, Moore’s data
show that the factory workers have more
education, are more likely to expect help
from the union, and more often had
fathers in non-agricultural work.!2 As in-
terpreted by Moore, the combination
amounts to the “push” of poverty and the
“pull” of urban alternatives.

But is it not odd that the villagers who
were driven to factory work because of
poverty are also the best educated? And
would it not be surprising if the factory
workers did hold more land than the
farmers? The interpretation is internally
contradictory, a fact that is masked by
the push-pull framework. More penetrat-
ing analysis, impossible for Moore because
of lack of cases, might have revealed what
the present data show, that factory workers
with no land of their own tend to come
from families with considerable land.

A variation of the economic-marginality
explanation is proposed in the International
Labour Office’s (ILO) report Why Labour
Leaves the Land. According to its au-
thors, the main “push” factor is the lower
level of income in agricultural work. They
qualify this factor by another, the expan-
sion of employment in non-agricultural
occupations, and attribute to this second
factor the determination of the rate of
movement out of agriculture. But other
sections of the ILO report actually con-
tradict the emphasis on low incomes. For
instance, they note that the low-production
countries, presumably those with the low-
est farm wages, have the lowest rate of
movement out of agriculture. “Viewed
from the international angle, rates of
movement are lowest where levels of la-
bour productivity in agriculture are lowest,
and where a higher rate of migration is
most needed.” Moreover, it appears that
the low income groups within the farm
population are least likely to move.
“People who are unskilled, insecure and
underemployed find it difficult to get job
information, to move to places where em-
ployment is growing, and to acquire quali-
fications for work in other types of em-
ployment. This is the crux of the problem
It has been argued that occupational
placement in the urban-industrial sector
is a function of a person’s links to that
sector through primary relationships that
communicate and support the differen-
tiated styles of life and multiple perspec-
tives that are associated with cities. This
particular study has stressed access to the
urban world through one’s kinsmen, but
other factors, such as formal education,
father’s landownership, and even age, have
been interpreted as indicators of the
presence of a network of urbanized rela-
tionships. An additional range of factors,
such as exposure to mass media, political
participation, and certain aspects of level
of living might be interpreted similarly,
although they have not been included in
this report.

It has been assumed that the actual
temporal sequence of association usually
moves from kinsmen to mass media if for
no other reason than the fact that such
is the typical sequence of exposure as one
matures, and this is especially so in peas-
ant villages. In later life a man might ap-
pear to respond first to mass media, but
we would argue that this is possible only
because of prior socialization by way of
interpersonal contacts. The hypothesis has
not specified which primary ties are most
crucial or the number required for vari-
ous prediction levels. With so much over-
lap in the influence of diverse kinsmen, it
seemed inappropriate to attempt to score
them, although a general cumulation is
hypothesized and appears to be demon-
strable with more refined methods. Again,
the problem of cause versus association
has been skirted. Occupational placement
is here taken as a dependent variable, and
the cumulation of primary urban ties is
asserted to lead to commitment to an
urban-industrial occupation, but our analy-
sis does not demonstrate a causal sequence
except insofar as we can appeal to the
actual temporal priority implied in the
influence of a father, then one’s brothers,
and on to friends and compadres.

It may be, indeed, that the placement
measured by the occupational-sequence
typology is simply a correlate of the other
factors, and all are indexes of an urban
style of life. If this is so, the real problem
for investigation is why the nuclei of the
urban networks form and why some of
these expand and others do not. The solu-
tion of this problem would require a com-
parative study of communities and sub-
communities, a task that goes beyond the
available data. However, such an alterna-
tive interpretation of the results in terms
of group formation and expansion is close
to our assumption that the process of urban
influence is not simply a matter of trans-
mitting a state of mind. We interpret our
data in terms of a web of ongoing rela-
tionships; without these the urban outlook
would not exist. We would even go further
by proposing that the urban state of mind
or, more precisely, the urbanized vocabu-
lary of motives and labels consists ini-
tially of minimal cues and sketchy knowl-
edge. As one becomes involved in the web
of urban affiliations, one’s stock of symbols
expands, clarifies, crystallizes, and becomes
operative. A previous paper based on such
vocabulary data from this sample lends
support to this interpretation. The per-
ception and evaluation of obrero work by
the farmers and shopkeepers were vague
and unrealistic in comparison to those of
the obreros themselves.1¢
The hypothesis of kin-mediated urban
influence is in general complementary to
those explanations that stress the over-all
opportunity structure or, in Lipset’s words,
“the variables which determine the hori-
zons and opportunities of individuals.”17
But the relationship is not one of adding
factors in a way that would only perpetuate
the ad hoc research that is presently being
pursued in terms of the opportunity struc-
ture approach. Instead, it proposes a com-
mon, abstract interpretation of these fac-
tors and guides the selection or rejection
of others. It would interpret factors such
as education, social class, or size of com-
munity of orientation as diverse indicators
of the probability that a given individual
will be tied into the urban sector. What
they all have in common is their relation-
ship to a differentiated way of life. They
are all indicators of “education” in a very
broad sense, but it is probably inappro-
priate to attempt to stretch the meaning
of the word so far. Even “intelligence” may
be another way of indexing a person’s in-
volvement in a more complex and ab-
stracted perspective. In other words, these
attributes should not be seen as so many
separate “factors,” such that a pinch of
this and a year of that add up to place-
ment in an occupation of a more urbanized
type, and the rules for combining the in-
gredients are left unspecified.

The urban-influence hypothesis appears
to be more parsimonious, too. It requires
fewer assumptions about the “perception of
opportunities.” In terms of the network
conception, perception is an integral part
of participation in the urban sector; one
index of involvement is possession of a
stock of labels for discriminating oppor-
tunity. It is not a matter of being raised
in a large city, “seeing” that white-collar
work is “better” than manual, and then
searching out the “opportunities.” What
happens is that aspirations and evaluations
of urban opportunities develop or are taken
over as the individual is drawn into the
urban network. Said more generally, the
network-influence interpretation refuses to
separate the “out there” as sharply as the
opportunity-structure approach appears to
require.

There is a practical implication of this
research that bears mention. If placement
in an urbanized occupation is indeed a
matter of associations with significant
others in the urban network, then attempts
at “retraining” or special preparation that
ignores the wider web of support and com-
munication are inadequate. In this view,
no amount of formal education is sufficient
in itself to put a man into the urban sector
and insure his commitment. Only if he is
grafted into the social fabric will he com-
prehend and respond to it sufficiently to
sustain his position. Granted that school
attendance on the part of the young often
amounts to a microcosm of the urban
world, it is easy to see how specialized
training programs for adults might, in the
interests of “efficiency,” omit the very ex-
perience that spells the difference between
participation in or relative exclusion from
the more urban social placement that is
the wider goal of such programs.
