Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
+ The author is grateful to Norman Bradburn of
the University of Chicago Graduate School of Busi-
ness and to Clifford Holmes and Alex Shukin of
George Williams College for aid in obtaining
subjects; to Lawrence Carson, Brian Heller, and
Thomas Tyler for assistance in the analysis of the
data; to Peter Blau for comments on the manu-
script; and, particularly, to Morris Friedell for
insightful contributions to the conceptualization
as well as to later stages of this research. This
research was supported by U.S. Public Health
Service grant MH 05350, “Experiments on the
Resolution of Interpersonal Conflict.”

2 This notable correspondence of psychological,
sociological, and general usage is found in Horace
B. English and Ava C, English, A Comprehensive
Dictionary of Psychological and Psychoanalytic
Terms (New York: David McKay, 1958), p. 24;
Emile Durkheim, Suicide (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press,
1951), p. 221; and C. L. Barnhart (ed.), The
American College Dictionary (New York: Random
House, 1962), p. 38.
An explicit assessment of altruism as an
individual characteristic serves at least two
major lines of inquiry. First, it helps in
the traditional problem of evaluation of
the operation of general norms, as char-
acterized by Durkheim in his examination
of altruistic suicide, or by Parsons in
positing collectivistic and individualistic
orientations.®

More recently, emphasis upon under-
standing interpersonal behavior by evalu-
ating its costs and rewards—epitomized by
the work of Thibaut and Kelley, Homans,
and Blau—has added new relevance to the
concept of altruism. If the behavior of
two individuals is to be assessed strictly as
a function of the rewards (positive and
negative) to each, then it becomes crucial
to know to what extent these interact, such
that the welfare of one person provides a
reward to the other.
Interpersonal behavior may be charac-
terized by situations in which two or more
persons each take certain of alternative
actions, whose combination produces out-
comes providing particular rewards for
each. Such a formulation, deriving from
and elaborating upon bargaining and game
theory, has proven highly provocative of
both conceptual and empirical analysis.>

As conceived in this analysis, a person’s
selection among alternative actions de-
pends, to some degree, upon the resultant
welfare not only to himself but to the other
as well. Explicitly or implicitly, he places
a certain weight upon the other’s welfare
in relation to his own. Three particular
values of this weight are of special in-
terest, for they define the following promi-
nent orientations.

Co-operation, individualism, and com-
petition—Assume that Person is inter-
acting with Other in a situation in which
there are several possible outcomes, not all
equally favorable to both. Then, in arriv-
ing at a preference among these outcomes,
three prominent orientations that Person
can take are these: (1) He can prefer that
outcome in which the sum of his welfare
and that of Other is the greatest; (2) he
can simply prefer that outcome in which
his own welfare is the greatest, irrespec-
tive of Other’s; or (3) he can prefer that
outcome in which the relative advantage of
his welfare over Other’s is the greatest.
These three orientations may be con-
sidered as pure co-operation, pure indi-
vidualism, and pure competition, and the
conceptual element that differentiates them
is the weight Person places upon the wel-
fare (O) of Other in relation to his own
(P). If Person is acting purely co-opera-
tively, he maximizes P-+O; if acting
purely individualistically, he maximizes P
alone; and if acting purely competitively,
he maximizes P — O. Examples of pure
co-operation, individualism, and competi-
tion occur in the interaction of (1) hus-
band and wife striving to augment family
income, (2) entrepreneurs each attempting
merely to maximize his own profit, and (3)
bureaucrats competing for relative pres-
tige and status.

Most interaction probably does not cor-
respond exactly to any of these three situa-
tions but rather to intermediate orientations
involving their combination: for example,
Person may place some positive weight
on the welfare of Other, but not so much
as on his own. The cases in which Person
maximizes P-++O, P alone, and P—O
serve as defining orientations to establish
a continuum of degrees of altruism, on
which pure co-operation and pure compe-
tition are extremes, and pure individualism
the midpoint. Then Person may be re-
garded, not simply as evidencing one of
three tendencies, but more generally as
maximizing P + aO, where a (altruism)
normally ranges from 1.0 (pure co-
operation) through 0 (individualism) to
—1.0 (pure competition). The relative
weight placed upon the welfare of the
other is thus summarized in a single param-
eter, a—the assessment of which is the
purpose of the Altruism Scale.

In the present formulation, altruism is
not necessarily opposed to egoism; it is
possible (as in pure co-operation, when
a equals 1.0) to be equally concerned with
both one’s own and the other’s welfare.
Altruism is not incompatible with a desire
for greater individual welfare. If, for ex-
ample, we both prefer a travel grant to
Moscow over one to Los Angeles, then my
preference that we each receive one to
Moscow is equally altruistic with a pref-
erence that we each receive one to Los
Angeles, and both are more altruistic than
a preference that mine be to Moscow and
yours to Los Angeles.

Conditions prescribed by Durkheim for
altruistic suicide imply a value of @ much
greater than 1.0; the value placed upon
oneself is very small in relation to that
placed upon (collective) others. Though
this extreme act is relatively rare, lesser
degrees of selflessness are common and
find favor with various moral systems.
Logic, however, cannot universally recom-
mend even such lesser degrees of selfless-
ness. In fact, it is reasonable for the
altruism of one of two interacting persons
to exceed 1.0 only if the other’s does not:
Only if, for example, a husband’s altruism
toward his wife is less than 1.0 can hers
toward him reasonably be greater than
1.0; then they are agreeing that his wel-
fare is more important than hers.

If, however, each person values the
other’s welfare more than his own, this
may cause an infinite regress in which
each person says, “I want to do what you’d
like,” and the intrinsic values, over-
shadowed by the altruistic values, may
never become known. For example, sup-
pose that, in dining together, each of us
would rather let the other have his choice
of restaurant. Then I will try to make
you believe that my preference is the
restaurant I think you like, and you will
do the same. Thus I will discount what
you say, and guess at your true preference.
If I guess wrong, you may eventually be-
come convinced that the restaurant I
claim I like is truly my preference (since
you know it’s not yours), and we may
thus go to a place neither of us prefers,
though each may think (for a time, at
least) that the other does.

Toward the other end of the altruism
continuum, values of @ less than —1.0
may also have unreasonable aspects. Com-
petition normally doesn’t go this far: If
you and J are each trying to reach a goal
before the other, I may welcome an event
that slows me a week but slows you two
weeks—but this only implies a value of a
between 0 and —1.0. For a to be less
than —1.0, I have to be so interested
in your delay that I am willing to sustain
even greater delay myself; such a feeling,
especially if reciprocated, has highly
destructive implications.

Thus both unusually high and low
values imply potential difficulties, and
values from —1.0 to 1.0—between pure
competition and pure co-operation—may
be considered to constitute a normal range.
Within this range, values should vary
widely, depending upon the situation and
upon the two persons. What levels of al-
truism are typical for given situations, per-
sons, and others is an empirical question,
but it seems likely that effective inter-
personal relations imply some moderately
positive value, definitely greater than 0
and less than 1.0.
ever, conceives of altruism as a charac-
teristic that may vary, within individuals,
as a function of the object of the altruism
and of the commodity and situation in
which it is expressed. For example, one
may be altruistic toward peers but not
toward subordinates, altruistic with pres-
tige but not with money, or vice versa.

A direct and theoretically desirable way
to assess such variation in a person’s
altruistic behavior would be to observe him
in specific natural situations where he
makes choices that affect his own and
another’s welfare. But practical difficulties
of observation and methodological prob-
lems of uncontrolled and unknown biases
detract from this approach and suggest
what is perhaps the next best procedure:
Ask a person to report what he feels his
behavior would be in such situations. This
is the approach of the Altruism Scale,
which employs for this purpose two sepa-
rate measures—one a ranking of outcomes
for self and other, the other a direct esti-
mation of altruism on a scale from 1.0 to
—100.

Ranking of outcomes.—Subjects (all of
whom were college students) received the
following written instructions:
In Figure 1, the response matrix is
filled in as it would be by a purely co-
operative respondent, who cares exactly
as much about the other’s grade as about
his own. Two A’s are best and two C’s
worst, and it is better that one of them
have an A and the other a B than that
both have B’s, though the strictly co-
operative person does not care whether he
or the other person gets the A.

A purely individualistic orientation re-
sults in choices as in Figure 2, where a
person prefers first the three combinations
that give him an A, but does not dis-
criminate among these by the grade the
other receives. The third defining orienta-
tion—pure competition—is represented in
Figure 3. Most preferred is an A for one-
self and a C for the other, and the oppo-
site is the least preferred. A purely
competitive person is indifferent between
an A for himself and a B for the other,
and a B for himself and a C for the other;
in both cases his relative advantage—his
only concern—is the same.®
The ranks are scored to indicate how
much a person values the other’s welfare
in relation to his own—producing, for the
three defining orientations, @ values of
1.0, 0, and —1.0. The value placed upon
own welfare is indicated by the extent to
which one prefers higher to lower grades;
this is indexed by the sum of the ranks
he gives to the three cells in which he re-
ceives C’s minus the sum of the ranks he
gives to the three cells in which he re-
ceives A’s. The larger the difference (the
more he discriminates between an A and a
C), the more he cares about his own wel-
fare.

Orientation toward the welfare of the
other is assessed similarly, by subtracting
from the summed ranks for the three cells
in which the other receives a C the summed
ranks for the three cells in which the other
receives an A. For the other, however, one
may prefer C’s to A’s, and the correspond-
ing difference can be either positive (indi-
cating positive altruism) or negative (in-
dicating negative altruism).

To produce the measure of relative al-
truism, a, the discrimination between C’s
and A’s for the other is divided by the dis-
crimination between C’s and A’s for self.
Thus,
8.5)/(21.5 — 8.5), or 1.00; in Figure 2,
@ equals (15 — 15)/(24 — 6), or .00;
in Figure 3, a equals (8.5 — 21.5)/(21.5
— 8.5), or —1.00.1°

Thus, this measure of altruism trans-
lates into a single value on an essentially
continuous scale™! the several choices a
person makes among alternatives that are
better or worse for him or the other; it
infers the value of altruism from the per-
son’s choice behavior. Alternatively, how-
ever, the person can, as in the following
measure, estimate his value of @ directly
upon a graphic scale.

Direct scale estimation—The scale
ranges from —1.0 to 1.0 by tenths, and the
person checks one of the resulting twenty-
one boxes. The scale is anchored by de-
scriptions attached to the boxes at the
ends and midpoint of the scale (the three
defining orientations) and to the boxes
halfway between these, as follows:

1.0 I am equally interested in how good his

grade is and in how good my grade is

.5 Iam half as interested in how good his

grade is as I am in how good my grade is

.0 I am only interested in how good my

grade is; how good or poor his grade is
makes no difference to me
The italicized words emphasize to the
respondent the relation between his and
the other’s welfare at each of the five
anchor points.1? The words are chosen to
correspond to values of @ in the general
expression P + aO of the total weighted
welfare. For the first three alternatives,
the value of a@ is directly specified (by
the words equally, half, and only). The
fourth anchor statement specifies equal in-
terest in P—O and in P, a total of
2P — O, which is relatively the same as
P — .50O. In the last anchor statement, the
word “better” specifies P — O as the
criterion.

Thus defined by these five statements,
this scale reflects the same rationale that
underlies the previously described measure-
ment through rankings; rather than in-
ferring altruism from choices that allocate
welfare, however, direct estimation as-
sumes that a person can make a reasonable
estimate of his preference for his own and
other’s welfare. This serves to quantify
such common feelings as “I’d do as much
for him as for myself,” “I’m just looking
out for myself,” and “All I care about is
beating him.” A design to examine how
well it serves is specified in the next sec-
tion.
both by ranking of outcomes and by direct
scale estimation, for three groups of sub-
jects, each toward three different alters and
in two situations.

Alters: friend, stranger, antagonist.—
Since reciprocation of friendship or an-
tagonism forms the most basic kind of
interpersonal balance—widely theorized
about and observed'*—altruism should
vary strongly with the nature of one’s
relation to the other person. To assess the
influence of affective relations, subjects
were presented not only the previously
described situation I, involving a friend,
but the following as well:
Measures: ranking and direct estima-
tion Each person responded using both
measures, in both situations, toward all
three alters—in this order: ranking of
grades (first for friend, then stranger, then
antagonist), direct estimation for grades,
ranking of salaries, direct estimation for
salary.

Groups: social science, business, and
YMCA _ students—Responses were ob-
tained from three groups thought to differ
in altruism: social science students (mostly
sociology graduate students) in a small
groups class at the University of Chicago;
students in the University’s Graduate
School of Business; and students at
George Williams College, which trains stu-
dents for YMCA and other social service
positions. George Williams students come
mainly from  lower-middle-class back-
grounds, have usually been oriented to-
ward the YMCA for some time, and are,
according to Grinker and his associates, of
unusual mental health.t¢
MEAN ALTRUISM TOWARD FRIEND, STRANGER,
AND ANTAGONIST, BY YMCA, BUSINESS,
AND SOCIAL SCIENCE STUDENTS*

 

Group

Srrvation, MEAs-

ure, Ano Arter | yMcA| Bust | Social | All 3

ness | Science | Groups

 

N=
We | (= | (W=
62) | “32) | 28) | 122)
Grades (Ranking) |
Friend. 47 29 AL 41

 

Jf 24 03 12 16
Antagonist....| —10 | —28 | —41 —22

  

 

  

Friend 63 43 55 56

Stranger. 18 —03 09 10

Antagonist....] —06 | —37 | —35 | —21
Salary (Ranking):

Friend. . ‘ 35 22 35 32

Stranger. 19 03 06 12

Antagonist....} —0O1 —25 —25 | -13
Salary (Scale):

Friend. . 51 39 60 50

Stranger. 15 | —O1 03 08

 

Antagonist....| —02 | —25 | —31 | —15
Both situations
and both meas-

  

ures:

Friend........ 49 33 48 45

Stranger. : 19 o1 07 12

Antagonist....| —05 —29 | -—33 | —18
All twelve re-

sponses........ 21 02 07 13

 

 

 

 

 

* All altruism values are in hundredths.
consistency, such differences should emerge
regardless of the mode of measurement,
and altruism shown toward the three alters
for the two commodities should correlate
moderately though not too highly.!7

Distinction among alters——As Table 1
shows, there are, for all three groups, in
both situations, using either measure,
large and consistent differences among the
three alters. Altruism toward a friend is
substantially greater than that toward a
stranger, which in turn is substantially
greater than that toward an antagonist.18
The over-all averages, .45, .12, and —.18,
place the stranger almost exactly halfway
between the friend and the antagonist;
there is slight positive altruism toward
strangers; and though altruism toward
antagonists is negative, it is considerably
smaller in absolute magnitude than the
positive altruism shown toward friends.

Group differences—YMCA college stu-
dents are generally more altruistic; their
mean altruism toward all alters is .21, and
even toward an antagonist, it is barely nega-
tive. Social science and business students
both have mean altruism near zero, but dif-
fer in the extent to which they discriminate
among friend, stranger, and antagonist.
Responses of business students are almost
exactly balanced around the zero point,
with a spread of about .6 between friend
and antagonist. Social science students
discriminate more (about .8) between
friend and antagonist.

Thus, each group appears to respond
according to values generally ascribed to
it: YMCA college students, interested in
social service, show more altruism, gener-
ally, toward anyone; business students are
more concerned strictly with maximizing
their own welfare, disregarding the other’s;
social science students, trained to recognize
individual differences in behavior, give
more weight to their specific previous ex-
perience with the other person. More than
the other groups, the social science stu-
dents act in accord with principles of ex-
change and reciprocity.1® Grossly, the
tendencies differentiating the three groups
may be put as follows: YMCA students
help everyone, business students help
themselves, and social science students
help those who help them.

Individual characteristics —These group
differences on altruism are reinforced in
two ways by relations for the characteristic
of authoritarianism, as measured by the
F Scale.2° First, altruism appears to be
quite distinct from authoritarianism, as
evidenced by the correlation of —.03, over
all 122 individuals, between a person’s F
Scale and his total score on altruism,
summed over the twelve measures. Even
separate scores, computed for altruism
toward friends, toward strangers, and
toward antagonists, and for grades and
for salary, all correlate less than .10 with
the F Scale.

Second, the F Scale itself discriminates
among the three groups in a way that
appears reasonable, lending further cre-
dence to their use as standards: Business
students are the most authoritarian, social
science students the least, and YMCA col-
lege students—whose lower-middle-class
background suggests authoritarianism, but
whose social service orientation suggests
the reverse—are in the middle.

Two sex differences appeared. Among
YMCA college students, women are gen-
erally even more altruistic—toward friend,
stranger, or antagonist—than are men. Con-
sidering the background of these students,
it seems reasonable for them to display
what is probably the general norm, belief,
and fact—that women ave more altruistic.
In social science, a less conventional field
for women, their responses are more simi-
lar to those of men. Only in their failure
to share men’s unusual punitiveness
toward antagonists do they differ marked-
ly; women’s altruism toward antagonists
is —.22, men’s —.42. If, within social sci-
ence, these women are less likely than
are men to achieve full-time professional
status, it seems reasonable that they are
also less likely to see antagonists as com-
petitors whom one wishes ill.24

Within the males of the YMCA college
group, two variables of family struc-
ture relate to altruism.2? The 30 per cent
who are married have a mean altruism of
.39; mean altruism for single males is .15.
The number of older sisters correlates .35
with total altruism; for men having no
older sisters, mean altruism is .14, for those
having at least one older sister, mean
altruism is .47. Number of older brothers,
younger brothers, or younger sisters is not
related to altruism.

To understand why only the older-
sister sibling relation might be associated
with altruism, one should recognize that
of the four possible age-sex combinations
for a pair of siblings (twins excepted), only
the pairing of an older sister and a younger
brother fails to produce a clear dominance.
Among like-sex pairs, the older is domi-
nant, while an older brother is clearly
dominant over a younger sister. But in
the older sister-younger brother combina-
tion, dominance of the older and domi-
nance of the male may be partially com-
pensatory—and by thus having a more
nearly equal sibling relation, the boy with
an older sister may thereby have a greater
chance to learn the value of co-operation.
This interpretation is also consistent with
the greater altruism of married men; it
may in both relations be the opportunity
for prolonged and intensive co-operation
with a near equal—whether an older sis-
ter or a wife—that causes these experiences
to relate to the display of altruism.

Internal consistency—The most direct
index of over-all altruism, across the vari-
ous alters, measures, and situations, is
simply the sum of the twelve separate
scores a subject receives; considered as
a twelve-item scale, this measure of
altruism has an internal-consistency re-
liability of .79.23 Other consistencies ap-
pear between particular subsets of scores:
A composite score for the four scales in-
volving a stranger correlates .63 with a
corresponding composite for friends and
.57 with one for antagonists. Thus not
only is altruism toward strangers midway
between that toward friends and antagonists
(as previously shown by the means) but it
is equally related to each. The correlation
between the two more distant points of
friend and antagonist is correspondingly
less: .31.

Altruism in situations involving grades
corresponds rather closely to altruism in
situations involving salary; the correla-
tion between the two six-item composites
is .75. Correlation between the six-item
composite measuring altruism by direct
subjective estimation and the composite
measuring it by ranking is much smaller:
.32. Despite the logical relation that con-
nects the two modes of measurement,
subjects are far from perfectly consistent
in their responses. This discrepancy may
result partly from lack of understanding
or of motivation by the subjects, since the
task is in some ways novel and complex.
However, complete ranking of pairs of
grades—the more difficult task—can be
achieved instead by presenting a number
of paired comparisons, each calling only
for a preference for one pair of grades or
another.

The low correlation of the two measures
may also partially reflect multidimension-
ality in the rankings. Direct estimation on
the twenty-one-point scales promotes uni-
dimensional judgments, but ranking the
nine pairs of outcomes in the matrix makes
it easy for persons to consider more than
the single dimension of altruism. One
added principle is egalitarianism—indeed
shown by some subjects, who prefer first
A’s for both, then B’s for both, then C’s
for both; by preferring these over such
alternatives as A for one and B for the
other, they show that they value strict
equality more than absolute level of re-
ward.”4 Such egalitarianism warrants sepa-
rate assessment as another principle for
allocating rewards between persons—
though one that in these data accounts
for fewer choices than does altruism.

Everything considered, the present re-
search shows the Altruism Scale to assess,
with moderate validity and reliability, a
continuum, ranging from co-operation
through individualism to competition, that
defines a central orientation of a person
toward the rewards he and another expe-
rience in interaction.
