Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
Introduction. — Previous __ investigators
have found a negative correlation between
the level of income of a community and its
proportion in the labor force.? The state of
knowledge is well summarized by Long:

The conclusions Douglas derived from study-
ing city data for 1919-1920 and 1929-1930 com-
mand considerable support from ours gotten by
examining the same cities for 1899-1900 and
1939-1940. The correlation between income and
labor force is fairly good and certainly inverse.
In cities where the average wage or salary in-
come was relatively low, the labor force per
1,000 of working age population was relatively
high. Among urban areas of the 48 states in
1940, among 38 cities in 1940, 1930, 1920, and
among 34 cities in 1900, inverse associations
were definite for persons 14 and older, were
rather more so for females than for males over
24, and were especially distinct for boys and
girls of high school age and for women living
with their husbands (or the economic equiva-
lent). Also fairly evident was the inverse associ-
ation for men and women 65 and older. Since
this study covered, in addition to large cities,
The inverse correlation observed by
Douglas and Long may be the result of dif-
ferences in the proportion of non-whites in
each city. If southern cities have lower medi-
an incomes and a higher proportion of non-
whites and if non-whites have a higher rate
of labor-force participation than whites,
then a negative correlation between income
and labor-force participation would be a
result.

Douglas attempted to take the number
of Negroes in a city into account in relating
labor-force participation and income. In
using partial-correlation techniques, no
great change was produced by considering
this variable.* Long did not adjust for color
differentials in any way, although he showed
the importance of race in analyzing the
trend of labor-force participation through
several decades.> In this study the relation
of income and labor-force participation will
be viewed for the first time as it affects the
white and non-white components of the
total labor force.
The cities in the study —The 1940 Census
gives labor-force participation for non-
whites by age and sex groups only for those
cities having a sizable non-white popula-
tion.’ Such data are available only for 50 of
the 92 cities with a population of over
100,000 in 1940. Of the 38 cities studied by
Douglas and Long, non-white data are avail-
able for 28. The other 22 cities were not in-
cluded in the samples of Douglas and Long.

Standardization for age and sex.—Long
has stated that standardization of age and
sex, using any population base in the United
States, would give similar results in the
analysis of labor-force participation. The
greatest variability between cities arises for
the age group under fourteen, and this group
is not considered in the labor force.’ Yet,
studying changes in labor-force participa-
tion between decades, Long finds that the
standard used is of extreme importance.’
The safer choice is to ascribe considerable
importance to the standardization process
and thereby use discretion in the choice of a
base population.

Douglas used Chicago and Detroit as his
standard populations, while Long used only
Chicago. There seems to be no particular
reason for the choice of these specific cities.
In the present analysis, labor-force partici-
pation and income will be studied in relation
to the non-white and white populations of
50 selected large cities for 1940. The non-
white population of these large cities is pro-
duced to a considerable extent by migration.
Therefore, to use any one or two of the
cities as the standard population is to risk
biasing the results.

In order to get a standard population
which is relatively independent of accidental
factors related to an individual city, a ran-
dom sample of 20 of the 50 cities was select-
ed by means of Tippett’s numbers. For each
age-sex-color group the populations of the
20 cities were added together, then divided
by 20. This gave the standard population for
the calculation of labor-force participation
rates adjusted for differences in age and sex
composition within color groups.®

Money income and real income.—A corre-
lation between earnings and the size of the
labor force might be based on circular rea-
soning. The total number of workers in-
cludes women and children, whose yearly
earnings are lower than those of adult males.
Therefore, a high proportion of women and
children in the labor force would decrease
the level of income for the community, pro-
ducing the observed negative correlation.
By using the median annual income of all
experienced male workers who worked
twelve months in 1939, circular reasoning in
studying the relation of income to labor-
force participation is avoided. However, it
is still necessary to use income of all males,
for no color breakdown of income is avail-
able. There remains, in addition, the prob-
lem of devising a measure of real income.

Twenty-five of the 50 cities in our sample
are included in the areas whose cost of living
was studied in 1935!° and 1941." Since we
are using income figures for 1939, one might
expect an interpolation process by which
two-thirds of the difference between the
1935 and 1941 estimates would be added to
the 1935 figures. However, the rise in the
cost of living was probably appreciably
steeper in the period 1939-41 than in 1935-
39. In the former period the defense boom
had begun to bring the economy out of the
depression. Therefore, the mean of the two
estimates of cost of living will be used as the
estimated cost of living in 1939. Dividing
paired comparisons which are in the inverse
order: + = S/[4n(n — 1)]. Tau may take
values ranging from —1 to +1. It is a non-
parametric measure, making no assump-
tions about the form of the distribution
function. Therefore, it is preferable in this
case to the Pearsonian product-moment cor-
relation coefficient, since the Pearsonian r
assumes a bivariate normal distribution.
Tau is also superior to Spearman’s rank-cor-
relation coefficient, for it is possible to com-
pute confidence limits for r for any given
value, while p can be tested only for signifi-
cant differences from p = 0. However, r is
more difficult to compute than either of the
other correlation measures.

Income and labor-force participation —
Table 1 presents the correlation coefficients

12 Maurice J. Kendall, Rank Correlation Methods
(London: Charles Griffin & Co., 1948).
cantly positive for the white women twenty
to twenty-four.

Non-white males show a negative corre-
lation for all ages, with only the correlation
for older persons forty-five to sixty-four and
sixty-five and over failing to be significant.
The white males, however, are significantly
negative only for youths and the aged.
There is a slight positive correlation for the
age groups twenty to sixty-four.

Youths, both male and female, show a
highly significant negative correlation be-
tween labor-force participation and city in-
come. Aged persons sixty-five and over also
show a negative correlation between labor-
force participation and income, usually sig-
nificant. In the ages when most men work,
twenty to forty-four, the negative correla-
tion between income and labor-force partici-
Real income and labor-force participation.
—Using Kendall’s 7 for real income and la-
bor-force participation gives results similar
to those using money income (Table 2).
Within each age group the correlations by
real income were ranked from most negative
to least negative. The same was done for
money-income correlations for the same age
group. Kendall’s + was used for a rough
measure of the similarity of the correlations
by each method. The coefficients were, re-
spectively, .57, .58, .77, .44, .92, .59, .89,
61, .35, and .58. All the coefficients are
positive, all are high, although the number
of cases is too small for a test of their sig-
nificance.

Conclusion.—This paper has analyzed the
relation of income and labor-force participa-
tion by age, sex, and color for the 50 cities
over 100,000 which gave data for non-
whites in 1940. The effect of the color break-
down is to show that the previously ob-
served universal negative correlations are
based to a considerable extent on the non-
white component of the labor force. The
negative correlations are found for non-
white males and females of all ages. For
white persons, the correlations are negative
for youths and the aged, but white males
twenty to sixty-five show a very slight posi-
tive correlation. The most striking phenom-
enon is the positive correlation between in-
come and labor-force participation for white
females eighteen and nineteen and twenty to
twenty-four. The latter group shows a sig-
nificant positive relationship, the first time
this has been observed for a group of supple-
mentary workers.

White women now often work by choice
in the period between school and marriage
or childbirth, and northern cities provide
many suitable positions. The changing defi-
nition of work may explain the positive as-
sociation for young white females. The dif-
ferent patterns for non-white females may
reflect a divergence in values or a lack of job
opportunities. Regardless of the underlying
explanation, the labor economists must
necessarily revise their theory to place it
within a social setting.
