Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
A major feature of social organization
in the modern West is the limitation and
diffusion of authority. This pattern is ex-
emplified by “decentralization,” judicial
review, committees, parliaments, congre-
gations, etc. It has operated not only with-
in diverse spheres of activity, such as the
economy and the polity, but also between
them.

Under some conditions, the limitation
and diffusion of authority can promote the
instrumental effectiveness of a social sys-
tem. Accordingly, social scientists fre-
quently have applied a functionalist analy-
sis to this pattern of organization. Func-
tionalist and structural-functional ap-
proaches have not been restricted to social
structure or to explaining how an ongoing
system works, however; cultural factors
and the question of system development
and change also have been considered. In
this context, evolutionist frames of refer-
ence are prominent.?

These efforts have contributed greatly
toward formulating the general requisites
for the limitation and diffusion of au-
thority (in the West, at least); the theo-
retical work on bureaucracy is a good
example. Much less has been accomplished,
however, in explaining adequately the
actual occurrence of the limitation and
diffusion of authority in the West. This
phenomenon was blocked by powerful
people in high positions who were dedi-
cated to centralized absolutism and/or
found it expedient. I contend that function-
alist, evolutionist approaches alone cannot
adequately explain or predict the elimina-
tion of this potent blockage. Such ap-
proaches must be supplemented by con-
sideration of catalysts of external origin,
catalysts that fostered revolutionary break-
through.3
I suggest that one crucial breakthrough
was the revolt against the state-church
establishment in seventeenth-century Eng-
land. Unlike the Wars of the Roses, which
were essentially only power struggles
among competing dynastic elites, the
seventeenth-century conflict involved a
fundamental challenge to basic institutions.
The latter struggle gave rise to a torrent
of daring philosophical speculation on
politics, economic activity, and religion.
This speculation helped bring on the
American Revolution and the French Rev-
olution, thereby spreading the struggle far
beyond England.

It is further suggested that Puritanism
was the most potent factor in organizing
and sustaining the revolt in England—and
that Hebraic influence on Puritanism was
crucial in this matter. Thus, it is con-
tended that Hebraic culture was an ex-
ternal factor that entered and catalyzed a
fundamental Western revolt against what
was conceived of as centralized absolutism.
This paper deals with the Hebraic basis
for the revolt, the Hebraic influence on
Puritanism, and the Puritan impact on
public life in seventeenth-century England.
°See the story of Creation (Gen. 1, 2). The
Deity exists before man and nature, and His essence
does not change through creating them. Man
(aDaM) is created independently of nature, i.e.,
from the dust of the earth (aDaMaH) rather
than from an earlier form of life (Gen. 2:7). Also,
Solomon explicitly postulated God’s separateness
from the forces of nature that He manipulates (I
Kings 19:11-12).

°® See the following assertions: (a) Although man
should praise God, God is exalted beyond all hu-
man praise and has no need of it (Neh. 9:5).
(b) Man cannot become wealthy or achieve great
things without God’s generosity and help (Deut.
8:11-18; I Chron. 29:11-16). (c) God gives moral
man military victory over numerically and tech-
nologically superior immoral man (Deut. 9:1-4;
Judg. 4:1-16; 7:2-22; Isa. 31:1-3).

7 It is asserted not only that God created nature
but also that He subsequently manipulates it at
will. Miracles entail omnipotent manipulation, for
they are fundamental suspensions or reversals of
the “laws of nature” rather than mere elaborations
or modifications. See (a) Sarah giving birth long
after her menopause (Gen. 17:15-21; 18:9-15;
1 Note that the only food forbidden to man in
the Garden of Eden was fruit from the tree of
knowledge of good and evil (Gen. 2:15-17) and
that ethical knowledge is implicitly asserted to be
Divine knowledge (Gen. 3:2-7, 22-24).

7 Hellenic culture inherently linked beauty to
truth and goodness, while early Christian culture
suspected that beauty masked falsehood and evil.
By contrast, scriptural culture postulated neither
a positive nor a negative correlation between sen-
sory appeal and moral merit. (Both hedonism and
asceticism were avoided thereby.) The Hebraic
principle of dissociation is stated in I Sam. 16:7
and Prov. 31:30. It is evident in Samuel’s choice
of a new king from among the sons of Jesse (I
Sam. 16:1-13). The handsome Eliab is rejected
because of his character, not his looks, David, who
is also handsome, is chosen irrespective of his ap-
pearance, not because of it and not in spite of it.
Thus, in terms of P. A. Sorokin’s conceptual
scheme, scriptural culture is “idealistic”? rather
than “mixed” (Social and Cultural Dynamics [one
vol.; Boston: Porter Sargent, Publisher, 1957]).

38 The conditional propriety of prosperity and
physical gratification is expressed, directly or in-
directly, in Deut. 8:7-18; 12:20-21; 26:11; 28:11-
12; 32:13-14; Prov. 5:18-19; Eccles, 2:24; 3:12-
13, 5:17-18; Neh. 8:9-12.
ties, notably for rationality and ethical
evaluation.11 Man’s mentality enables him
to achieve a substantial degree of control
over the physical forces of animate and
inanimate nature—in both the external
and internal environments.

Man’s control over nature would be
spurious, however, if it depended entirely
on his rationality. Rationality provides
only means, not ends. Without ethical
evaluation to institute goals, man’s ends
would be dictated by pleasure/pain im-
pulses, and he would be only an unusually
dynamic aspect of nature. This scriptural
rejection of spontaneous impulse gratifi-
cation as the most basic guide to human
behavior is expressed and supported by
the rejection of all deities that are appre-
hended through mystic experience or
sensory observation.1? However, man is
like nature, and unlike God, in being at
least partly subject to physical forces and
limitations. Consequently, asceticism is
rejected along with hedonism; moderate,
conditional impulse gratification is held
to be appropriate for man.!8
Scriptural culture asserts that God not
only provided man with the capacity for
ethical evaluation, but also offered specific
codes of behavior. Acceptance of these
codes, not to mention conformity to them,
is problematical, for it is postulated that
the omnipotent Deity intentionally leaves
much of human behavior to man’s free
will. Thus, man is seen as no more a
pawn of God than a pawn of nature.!#

The Hebrew Scriptures assert further
that in the ancient Middle East, some re-
lated kin groups collectively accepted the
codes of behavior offered by the Deity,
and on this basis they became a single
national community. Acceptance of these
codes as binding obligations was sancti-
fied and institutionalized through a cove-
nant. As was not the case in previous
covenants, Divinity was not just a witness
and enforcer of agreements among people;
the Deity was also a direct participant.
Henceforth, in all man-to-man interaction
and all God-man interaction, both parties
to the Covenant (God and the nation of
Israel) were bound by its ethical codes
and by the rational implications of these
codes.

By binding God to rational ethics and
ethical rationality, the Covenant enabled
the people involved to limit Divine au-
thority (as distinct from Divine power)
while accepting this authority. Indeed, the
Hebrew Scriptures at least implicitly pos-
tulate man’s right to confront God directly
and debate with him on the morality of
his own behavior2® It is even considered
possible, sometimes, to dissuade the omnip-
otent Deity from some harmful interven-
tion in human affairs. Such conditional
limitation of Divine authority certainly
precludes unlimited Auman authority.

Since God was regarded as a party to
the Covenant, subsequent shifts in public
opinion could xot legitimate human abro-
gation of the agreement. This restriction
involved more than Divine transcendence
over man. Even if all the people wanted
to renege, acting on such unanimity would
still constitute unilateral abrogation. The
multiple kin groups involved had assumed
their obligations as a single nation, as one
participant in a new dyadic relationship
between the unitary Divinity and a unitary
human social system.

Although the kin groups composing this
social system were closely related to one
another, they were also closely related to
certain other kin groups that did not par-
ticipate.” The most fundamental basis for
this social system is attachment to the
Covenant rather than kinship. This at-
tachment weakens some kinship ties (be-
tween participating groups and related
non-participating groups) while it strength-
ens other kinship ties (among participating
groups).1® Thus, attachment to the Cove-
nant transcends kinship ties even when
it coincides with them.

Unlike a kinship system, this social
system is regarded not as an end in itself
but as a necessary means for maintaining
conformity to the Covenant and _ its
derivative scriptural culture. Hence, the
legitimate exercise of social control must
at least be compatible with the dictates of
scriptural culture. Just as man is thought
of as transcended by God, the human
social organization is transcended by its
basic culture, which is held to have Divine
sanction.®
An important corollary of this view is
that obligatory loyalty to the social sys-
tem (and to the members exercising
authority) is conditional on the social
system’s adherence to scriptural culture.?°
Such adherence became more problematical
with the transformation from theocratic
government to monarchy. With the polity
semiautonomous, authority over the nation
was exercised by people who were not
essentially the guardians of scriptural cul-
ture. The repeated misuse and abuse of
royal authority fostered the doctrine that
no man inherently rules over others, that
there is nothing sacred about a particular
dynasty—or even about monarchy per se.?+
Rulers who are unduly exploitative or op-
pressive need not even be tolerated, much
less obeyed; their overthrow is at least a
privilege, if not an outright obligation.2?

Theocratic combination of governmental
and religious authority had obscured the
complexity of the role of guardian of the
scriptural culture. The structural differen-
tiation that is reflected in the emergence
of a semiautonomous polity did not create
this complexity; it only made it more ap-
parent. All along there was not one but
three basic mechanisms for maintaining
scriptural culture. They can be designated
as priestly, prophetic, and rabbinic. Inso-
far as these mechanisms were institutional-
ized, they can be thought of as three
constituent roles of the more macrocosmic
guardian role.

The priestly function is to officiate in
ritualized behavior, and this function was
ascribed exclusively to members of the
Levitic kin group. The prophetic function
is to respond to Divine prompting to
catalyze changes in people’s everyday be-
havior, changes that would yield greater
conformity to the codes and principles of
the Covenant. The rabbinic function is to
ponder the specific codes held to be
promulgated by God—and extrapolate
corollaries to handle behavioral problems
that had not been covered explicitly by
Divine revelation through prophets.

One important type of variation was the
degree of coalescence among these func-
tions. Some people who exercised authority,
such as Moses, tried to fulfil two or all
three of them—simultaneously or suc-
cessively. Whenever priestly Levites also
functioned prophetically and/or rabbini-
cally, the priestly role tended to seem
paramount—partly because its assignment
was so restricted. If the priests seemed to
be deficient or defective in prophetic or
rabbinic activity, however, tendencies
toward centripetal coalescence were out-
weighed by tendencies toward centrifugal
separation among the functions.

Regardless of the degree of coalescence
involved, none of these functions has any
clear logical or chronological priority over
either of the other two. They constitute
three basic approaches to controlling be-
havior without ultimately relying on force.
In this connection Max Weber’s tripartite
analysis of the legitimation of authority
is quite useful. The priestly role entails
“traditional” authority, the prophetic role
entails “charismatic” authority (or leader-
ship), and the rabbinic role entails
“rational-legal” authority.?8
Although all three functions are peren-
nially basic, there has been a long-term
change in relative emphasis, with the rab-
binic function becoming dominant. Ade-
quate explanation of this change requires
at least two approaches: (1) structural-
functional analysis of roles and (2) ap-
praisal of cultural influence on social
development.

With respect to  structural-functional
analysis, one should note that the prophetic
role could be filled much more flexibly
than the priestly role. Consequently, those
men who were acknowledged as legitimate
prophets often were more capable and dedi-
cated, on the average, than those men
who were priests alone. The exercise of
prophetic authority tended to be relatively
unstable, however, for people often re-
sponded more to the personality of a man
than to the merit of his message. The ulti-
mate dominance of the rabbinic role seems
partly to be due to its having much of the
stability of the priestly role, without the
latter’s rigidity in assignment, and much
of the flexibility of the prophetic role,
without prophetic instability.

The effective exercise of the rabbinic
role rests essentially on the incumbent’s
superior knowledge and superior interpre-
tive skill, not on his descent or personal
magnetism. Furthermore, a cumulative
body of law was developing from the dis-
crete prophetic announcements of Divine
rulings on specific new problems.?4 This
accumulation was reducing people’s need
for revelation through prophets, but was
increasing their need for rabbinic instruc-
tion and interpretation.2>
With respect to cultural influence on
social development, the eventual domi-
nance of the rabbinic role entailed in-
creasing application of the emphasis on
rationality (in ethics and ritual). This
emphasis is better served by legalism than
by traditionalism or revelation. What is
especially crucial for the limitation and
diffusion of authority is that, unlike the
priestly function, the rabbinic function is
open to every man of the socioreligious
community, and unlike the prophetic
function, the rabbinic function is open to
all men (of the community) simultane-
ously,

The rabbi is an expert, not a monopolist.
He is an expert on the Law and related
historical events who helps people (him-
self and others) to gain greater knowledge
and insight. Since this knowledge and
interpretive skill are available to every-
one, a rabbinic pronouncement, unlike a
priestly or prophetic pronouncement, need
not be accepted unquestioningly. Anyone
may challenge a rabbinic pronouncement
by offering an alternative interpretation of
the Law. The alternative must compete
or conflict with the original pronounce-
ment, however, and the alternative inter-
pretation must be demonstrably superior.
Thus, the very essence of rabbinic author-
ity promotes its limitation and diffusion.
Furthermore, those people who adhered
to Roman Catholicism or Anglo-Catholi-
cism tended to be more receptive to the
Hellenic/Hellenistic outlook than was
true of the Puritans. Whereas the Hebraic
orientation toward centralized, absolutist
authority is one of active opposition, the
classical orientation tends to be one of
active compliance. No sharp distinction
was made between the social system (polis
or Hellenistic state) and the culture (sym-
bolized by the patron deity). Uncondi-
tional loyalty to those in authority was
expected, and rebellion was deemed in-
herently immoral. Although philosophers
such as Plato and Aristotle had grave
reservations about unconditionally sup-
porting the established social order, and
even considered possible justifications for
rebellion, such thinking never seriously
undermined the institutionalization of
absolutist authority either in the polis or
the Hellenistic state.

There have been serious doubts as to
how much Hebraic impact there was on
Puritanism (and, in turn, on the limita-
tion and diffusion of authority in the
West). Scholars expressing such doubts
have pointed to New Testament orienta-
tions in Puritanism that differ appreciably
from those of the Hebrew Scriptures.?¢
There are at least two factors to consider
in this connection: (1) the respective de-
grees to which the Hebrew Scriptures and
non-Hebraic aspects of the New Testament
influenced Puritanism; (2) whether the
non-Hebraic New Testament influence also
could have promoted the limitation and
diffusion of authority.

As regards the respective degrees of in-
fluence, I suggest that both the scripturally
oriented students of Puritanism and the
New Testament-oriented ones are some-
what in error. Scripturally oriented ap-
praisals tend to overestimate the relative
degree of Hebraic influence on Puritanism,
while New Testament-oriented appraisals
underestimate the absolute degree of
Hebraic influence. Much of the scholarly
conflict becomes spurious if it is conceded
that in some respects there was great
Hebraic influence on Puritanism, while
in other respects there was heavy influence
by non-Hebraic aspects of the New Testa-
ment.

Since a non-Hebraic early Christian
ethos also molded Puritanism substantially,
one needs to consider whether this ethos,
as well as the Hebraic ethos, helped pro-
duce Puritan rebelliousness. The early
Christian reaction to objectionable abso-
lutist authority was not direct and active
revolt, however, but rather was abstention
or withdrawal from involvement in civic
affairs, insofar as it was feasible.” This
ideal is developed further in Augustinian
individualism, which essentially entails
detachment from the objectionable features
of the mundane world. Thus, it constitutes
a negative adaptation, individualism by
default rather than true decentralization.?®
Consequently, it seems to me that of the
three major ideological influences men-
tioned (the Hebraic, the classical, and the
early Christian), only the Hebraic influence
could play a major direct part in shaping
the Puritan emphasis on limited, diffused
authority.

In the mid-seventeenth century, the
English Puritans broke out in open revolt
against the Anglican monarch, and the
Hebraic influence was clear. Some Puri-
tans compared their struggle to that of the
Maccabees and drew inspiration from the
latter.2° Although the rebellion gained
enough momentum to become a full-fledged
civil war, the Puritan-Parliamentarian
forces initially suffered one military set-
back after another, and only the most
dedicated Puritans were able to maintain
faith in ultimate victory for their cause.®°
This faith was bolstered by continual,
widespread rereading and discussion of the
Hebrew Scriptures,?4 which told of right-
eous men gaining victory in war although
the odds against them seemed overwhelm-
ing. The Puritan chaplains, serving also
as official war correspondents, frequently
used scriptural analogies to support the
claim that their side was fighting God’s
enemies and could expect Divine assist-
ance.3? Countless sermons on the home
front did the same.*?

The Puritan spread of Hebraic orienta-
tions toward authority is perhaps more
evident in America than in England. (Be-
fore the major revolt, the Puritans who
were most strongly opposed to the estab-
lishment often emigrated from England,
sometimes by necessity.) Puritans who left
during the reign of James I (1603-25)
often compared their departure to the
Hebrew Exodus from Egypt—and com-
pared King James to the corresponding
pharaoh.’* America was called “The Prom-
ised Land,” and the Puritan immigrants
and their geographically spreading de-
scendants gave scriptural names such
as Salem, New Canaan, Jericho, and
Rehovoth to many of the towns they
founded. In addition, Englishmen and
Anglo-Americans frequently have given
their children such scriptural names as
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Sarah, Rebecca,
Rachel, Benjamin, Joshua, Samuel, Josiah,
and Jeremiah. The frequency suggests that
at some time the corresponding scriptural
persons were regarded as appropriate mod-
els for behavior.

The scriptural doctrine of resistance to
an unduly oppressive monarch was echoed
in America as late as 1776. Although Eng-
land had set up a limited monarchy much
earlier, the American Declaration of Inde-
pendence nevertheless blamed the king for
alleged British tyranny. For the United
States, Franklin and Jefferson proposed
a seal that bore the motto: “Resistance to
tyrants is obedience to God.” The scrip-
tural influence on it is demonstrated by
the accompanying illustration. It depicted
the overwhelming of Pharaoh’s charioteers
in the Sea of Reeds.®>

At the beginning of this paper it was
noted that in the modern West, limited
and diffused authority is widely charac-
teristic of social organization (eg., in
economic, governmental, and religious ac-
tivity). To explain adequately the exten-
siveness of this pattern, one needs to con-
sider not only its actual spread from one
sphere to another but also the initial com-
mon denominators that fostered this dif-
fusion (and possibly fostered some inde-
pendent parallel development as well). In
seventeenth-century England the ethos of
the clergymen inclined toward Puritanism
resembled the ethos of the rising mer-
chants, on the one hand, and the ethos of
the lawyers of the common law, on the
other hand. Although the underlying simi-
larities probably are independent of Puri-
tanism, they nevertheless fostered its
spread among the merchants and the prac-
titioners of the common law.

Both the merchant and the Puritan
divine insisted on keeping a complete, ac-
curate account of all debits and credits
incurred in dealing with others and with
oneself. The Puritan divine interpreted
his experiences and observations in terms
of competition and conflict between God
and Satan, and he carefully recorded each
interaction and its outcome in his diary.3¢
With respect to similarities between the
common-law practitioner and the Puritan
clergyman, both are said to have stressed
institutional autonomy and_ interdepend-
ence, decentralized authority, legalism,
and rational interpretation of laws. Also,
allegedly both were often narrow con-
structionists, prone to exaggeration, and
intolerant of their opponents.°7

The extensive spread of Puritanism in
seventeenth-century England is partly
due to its proponents’ attempts to achieve
mass communication and mass involve-
ment (middle class and lower class),
rather than focus on small elites. The
clergymen who leaned toward Puritanism
concentrated on preaching—and preaching
“in plain English to the plain people” at
that.38 Families were encouraged to re-
tain an esteemed clergyman of Puritan per-
suasion to tutor the boys of the house-
hold.8° Laymen became increasingly and
quite actively involved in Puritan worship
and church organization.

Self-interest as well as idealism led to
increasingly organized opposition to the
state-church establishment. Royal attempts
to centralize control over all major spheres
of public life induced diverse opposition
groups to unite in an alliance of expediency.
Both the Puritan clergymen and the law-
yers of the common law opposed the ex-
tensive jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical
courts. Whereas the Puritan clergy objected
mainly to the Anglo-Catholic religious
policies pursued, the lawyers perceived
these courts (along with the royal-preroga-
tive courts) as endangering their liveli-
hood, for such courts did not use the sys-
tem of common law.*? Up-and-coming
merchants opposed the establishment be-
cause the early Stuart monarchs granted
monopolies to a few export companies.
This royal policy was geared to controlling
(and even restricting) economic activity
by concentrating trade in the hands of a
few very rich, docile merchants.‘

Although much of the initial unity with-
in the opposition was dictated by expedi-
ency, the unity itself fostered the spread
of Puritanism—and the further spread of
Puritanism induced still greater unity.
Tronically, the diffusion of Puritanism was
promoted unwittingly by the supporters of
the state-church establishment. They de-
risively labeled an opponent of any estab-
lished policy or entrenched interest as a
“Puritan.”42 Since Hebraic-inspired Puri-
The Hebraic stress on limiting and dif-
fusing authority fitted in well with the
social and cultural development of the West
along industrial lines. Western instrumental
effectiveness has been promoted by a high
degree of specialization, and such speciali-
zation often was made tenable by organized
decentralization of authority.

The Hebraic orientation toward au-
thority did not stem from pragmatic
considerations, however, but from an
independent, pervasive system of ultimate
concepts and ethics. The Hebraic and
Puritan passion for moralizing tends to
apply the central, ultimate ethos to pass-
ing judgment on all behavior. Little, if
anything, is left both optional and ethi-
cally neutral. This centralization of cul-
tural control sharply limits the eufunction-
al flexibility that may be gained via
decentralized authority.

The cultural control in question is lim-
ited, however, by the basis for its centrali-
zation. The idea of adhering to a supreme,
all-encompassing Deity and his eternal
principles prevents people from readily
accepting their own collective impulses or
collective expediency as legitimation for
basic changes in outlook and behavior.*®
The concept of a transcendent meta-
physical guide to propriety has been erod-
ing in the West, however. An intermediate
stage of erosion is manifest in certain
forms of “Deism,” which postulate that God
has retired from managing the world and
has left the charting of its course entirely
to man.‘ In this context it is illuminating
to contrast the Mayflower Compact (with
its strong overtones of the Hebrew Cove-
nant) to the subsequent U.S. Constitution,
to which God clearly is not a party—and
which man may amend at will.

Actually, systems such as Deism can-
not maintain their ground continually.
Severe crises arise, and they undermine
man’s faith in his independent supremacy
over the environment. In response he tends,
at least implicitly, to postulate something
greater than himself. People who claim to
be completely objective and secularized
often unwittingly deify nature—whether
or not they spell it with a capital 7.
Philosophies based on or buttressed by the
work of Rousseau, Darwin, Malthus,
Marx, Freud, etc., often postulate that
modern man’s troubles stem from his lack
of spontaneity or his interference with
some inherent natural order (static or pro-
gressive). Such an orientation divests
people of responsibility for their own be-
havior; homicide, economic depression,
war, etc., are attributed to reified abstrac-
tions that are cloaked in statistical proba-
bilities.

Abrogating responsibility does not nec-
essarily lead to a fundamental increase in
flexibility (freedom), however. The de-
cline in the Hebraic and Puritan types of
moralizing has led, rather, to the replace-
ment of one kind of restriction with an-
other. It has led to excessive control by
masses of people. Tyranny does not de-
pend on a minority suppressing the ma-
jority; the majority can unduly constrain
a minority—or even unduly constrain it-
self. Through the decline of transcendent
cultural control, the very diffusion of
authority that such control had fostered
may make the West more vulnerable to
tyranny rather than less vulnerable.
Without restraining ethics based on a
metaphysical referent that transcends
both man and nature, democratic rule can
be far more totalitarian than control by
a royal despot. (Note George Orwell’s ver-
sion of human brotherhood in Nineteen
Eighty-Four.) Discussion of democratic
rule should include even those twentieth-
century European systems that have been
labeled “totalitarian dictatorships,” for
they have had a much broader base of
popular support and participation than
the respective systems they supplanted.
They have no monopoly on modern totali-
tarianism, however; the “liberal” democ-
racies also have strong basic tendencies
in this direction. Totalitarian democracy
may well be germane to the Western type
of industrial society per se,** despite the
influence of Hebraic culture (and indi-
rectly, in part, because of it).
