Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

 

EVR LeU
Anomie, Authoritarianism, and Prejudice: A Replication
Author(s): Alan H. Roberts and Milton Rokeach

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 61, No. 4 (J
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2773537
Accessed: 06-06-2016 18:47 UTC
In 1951 Dr. Leo Srole read a paper! before
the meetings of the American Sociological
Society in which he considered the relation-
ships existing among anomie, authoritarian-
ism, and ethnic prejudice. Anomie is a socio-
logical concept derived from Durkheim and
refers, according to Srole, to “the phenome-
na variously referred to as social dysfunc-
tion or disorganization, group alienation,
and demoralization.”? Srole hypothesized in
his paper that it is such an anomic state of
affairs which comprises “one of the prime
forces on the urban scene contributing to the
formation of patterns of distance, discrimi-
nation and rejection toward out-groups in
general and toward minority groups in par-
ticular.”

Srole distinguished five theoretical com-
ponents of anomie and developed a five-item
scale designed to tap each. He then adminis-
tered the anomie scale, together with a
shortened five-item version of the California
authoritarianism scale (the F scale) and
measures of ethnic prejudice to a sample of
401 bus riders in Springfield, Massachusetts.

Analysis of the data thus obtained re-
vealed, according to Srole, the following:
(a) Both anomie and authoritarianism were
equally and substantially related to preju-
dice; (6) when authoritarianism was held
constant, anomie was still substantially re-
lated to prejudice; and (c) when anomie was
held constant—and this is his crucial finding
—authoritarianism was found to be “no
longer highly correlated with social distance
attitudes toward minority out-groups, at
least not independently of the psycho-socio-
logical factors presumably measured by my
Anomie Scale.’”4

A further analysis by Srole had to do with
the manner in which status, as measured by
amount of education, was related to the
variables under consideration. Srole report-
ed that, for the lower “education-status”
level, it was anomie rather than authoritari-
anism which was independently related to
social distance, and, conversely, at the col-
lege level “the roles are reversed: authori-
tarianism emerges as the primary determi-
nant and anomie as the secondary.’

On the basis of these findings and his ob-
servation that the samples studied by the
California group® were drawn almost exclu-
sively from the middle socioeconomic class,
Srole concluded that authoritarianism and
prejudice “appear to stand in different rela-
tionships to each other within different edu-
cation-status groups in the population.” He
further concluded that “the California
Study’s finding of a correlation between
authoritarian personality tendencies and
ethnocentrism may in some measure be
spurious, i.e., may be accounted for by the
high correlation between authoritarianism
and the anomie factor, which factor in turn
is significantly and independently correlated
with our social distance scores.”®

Srole’s study has important implications

4 Ibid., p. 7. 5 Ibid., p. 9.

®T. W. Adorno et al., The Authoritarian Per-
sonality (New York: Harper & Bros,, 1950).

7Srole, op. cit., p. 9. 8 Tbid., p. 10.
for further thinking and research on the role
of situational and personal factors in deter-
mining social attitudes. Indeed, although
Srole’s study has not yet been published, it
has already attracted considerable attention
in both psychological and_ sociological
circles, since it pointed to a need for exten-
sive modification of the findings and conclu-
sions reported in The Authoritarian Person-
ality.’ In particular, Srole’s work has been
given prominent attention in the chapters
by Christie and by Hyman and Sheatsley in
the recently published Studies in the Scope
and Method of “The Authoritarian Person-
ality.”

In early 1952 the Srole study was repli-
cated as closely as possible in Lansing,
Michigan, and a brief report of this research
was presented at the 1952 meetings of the
American Psychological Association." The
results of this replication were at variance in
a number of important respects with those
reported by Srole, and our purpose here is to
publish a full account of these findings.

First, however, it is perhaps desirable to
point to several methodological shortcom-
ings in the Srole study which led us to feel
that a replication would be worth while:

1. Srole’s sample was limited to bus
riders.

2. Throughout the Srole study, no corre-
lations were computed among the variables
being considered. Instead, extent of relation-
ship was established by inspection of data,
which, while continuous in their distribu-
tion, were grouped into trichotomies of
highs, middles, and lows. Srole’s conclusions,
therefore, can be no more accurate than the
accuracy of his subjective estimates of the
degree of relationship existing among the
several variables. Also, no attempt was
made to test any of the reported differences
for statistical significance.
3. Although Srole’s sample was relatively
large (WV = 401), his major conclusion that
authoritarianism is not related to prejudice
independently of anomie was based, to no
small extent, on twelve subjects who scored
highest on the authoritarianism scale and
five subjects who scored lowest on the
authoritarianism scale.” The reliability of
conclusions based on an W so small is ques-
tionable.

4. Education alone is used as a measure
of class status.1%

Our intent, then, was to replicate the
Srole study as closely as possible and, at the
same time, to eliminate the methodological
shortcomings just discussed. It was hoped
that, simultaneously, quantitative estimates
of the degree of relationship existing among
anomie, authoritarianism, prejudice, educa-
tion, and income could be obtained from a
sample more representative of the various
strata of our society.
1-hour orientation lecture on the particular
methodology required for this study. They
were not informed about the specific pur-
pose of the study until all the data had been
collected.

The questionnaire consisted of the same
five anomie items’ and the same five
authoritarianism items" as those employed
by Srole, together with the ten-item ethno-
centrism scale, Form 45, used in the Califor-
nia study.!® Each item was scored 1 point if
the subject disagreed with the item, 2 points
if he was undecided, and 3 points if he
agreed. The possible range of scores, there-
fore, for the anomie and authoritarianism
scales was from 5 to 15, with the higher
scores indicating greater anomie or authori-
tarianism. Similarly, the ten-item ethnocen-
trism scale had a possible range of from 10
to 30. Finally, age, education, and income
data were obtained from all respondents.
equally related to ethnocentrism. Authori-
tarianism and ethnocentrism correlate .64,
and anomie and ethnocentrism correlate .55.

As pointed out previously, Srole found
that when authoritarianism is held constant,
anomie still correlates highly with prejudice,
but when anomie is held constant, authori-
tarianism and prejudice are related to a neg-
ligible extent. Our findings do not support
his. As can be seen from Table 2, when ano-
mie is held constant by the method of par-
tial correlation, the correlation between
authoritarianism and ethnocentrism drops
only from .64 to .53. On the other hand,
when the effect of authoritarianism is par-
tialed out by the same method, the correla-
tion between anomie and ethnocentrism
drops from .55 to .37. Thus, contrary to
Srole’s finding, we find that authoritarian-
ism correlates substantially with ethnocen-
trism independently of anomie.

We turn, now, to a consideration of the
manner in which socioeconomic status is
related to anomie, authoritarianism, and
prejudice. Implicit in Srole’s analysis is the
assumption that status is an important de-
terminer of anomie, which, in turn, is an im-
portant determiner of prejudice. If this as-
sumption is correct, then we should expect
anomie to be highly related to income, a
relatively direct measure of status. (In his
study Srole uses education rather than in-
come as a measure of status.) We find that
this expectation is not borne out. For our
data, we find that anomie correlates only
—.22 with income after education has been
held constant (not shown in Tables 1 and
2). Furthermore, we would expect, if Srole’s
assumption is correct, that the correlation
between anomie and ethnocentrism would
be greatly reduced when status is held con-
stant. This also is not borne out, as can be
seen in Table 2. When income is held con-
stant, the correlation between anomie and
ethnocentrism drops only from .55 to .51.

From these findings and from comparable
findings regarding the relationship between
authoritarianism and ethnocentrism when
status is held constant (see Table 2), we con-
clude that status, whether measured by in-
come or education or both, has no appre-
ciable effect on the relationships existing
among anomie, authoritarianism, and eth-
nocentrism.

To be noted, finally, with respect to
Table 2 is that all the correlations between
authoritarianism and ethnocentrism, sec-
ond-order as well as first-order partials, are
higher than the comparable correlations be-
tween anomie and ethnocentrism.
Our finding of a significant relationship
between anomie and ethnocentrism even
when other variables are held constant indi-
cates that Srole has indeed located a vari-
able relevant to the formation of prejudice,
but certainly not one which supersedes
authoritarianism. In each instance we find
that the relationship between ethnocentrism
and authoritarianism is greater than the re-
lationship between ethnocentrism and ano-
mie, regardless of which variables are held
constant. In particular, our findings do not
support Srole’s conclusion that the correla-
tion between authoritarianism and ethno-
centrism is spurious, being accounted for by
the high relationship between authoritarian-
ism and anomie, which, in turn, is signifi-
cantly and independently related to preju-
dice. Our obtained correlation of .53 be-
tween ethnocentrism and authoritarianism
when anomie is held constant shows a great-
er independent relationship between these
two variables than exists between ethno-
centrism and anomie when authoritarianism
is held constant (r = .37).

To be noted further is that our findings do
not bear out Srole’s contention that anomie
is a function of status. Employing income
rather than education as a measure of sta-
tus, we find that the relationship between
income and anomie is negligible when edu-
cation is held constant. Furthermore, we
find that holding status constant, whether
status is measured by income or by educa-
tion, has a negligible effect on the correlation
existing between anomie and prejudice.

From the preceding, it is reasonable to
conclude two things: first, that Srole has
isolated a new variable, anomie, which is an
important correlate of prejudice and which,
therefore, merits further study; and, second,
that anomie is not demonstrated to be a
more important correlate of prejudice than
authoritarian character structure.
