Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

 

EVR LeU
1870

Author(s): Hildegard Binder Johnson

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 51, N
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2770497
Accessed: 06-06-2016 18:20 UTC
Intermarriage has been called ‘‘the final
test of assimilation.’ It should then be sig-
nificant to study this subject with respect
to the Germans, the largest non-English
immigrant group in the United States, for
different periods in the history of their di-
versified immigration. The material pre-
sented in this study of an earlier generation
was derived from a hand count of the manu-
script censuses for Minnesota in 1860 and
1870. It therefore represents a complete
enumeration for each of the two years with
respect to one nationality in a pioneer state.

The method of this count has been dis-
cussed elsewhere.’ We do not know when
the immigrants arrived in the United States
or at which age. They may have come as
small children with their parents, or they
may have been in the country for a very
short time before they married. A German
married to a German without German-born
children may have lived in this country for
a longer period than a German married to
an American with American children. Inter-
marriages between Germans and other non-
American nationals might have been con-
tracted abroad; children born in Germany or
elsewhere in Europe may indicate this fact.
The problem of the length of stay in this
country with respect to the marriage part-
ners could not be solved even for recent in-
termarriages in studies based on marriage
licenses. In this study we shall not ask when
and how the intermarriages could occur but
where they were found in a middle western
state, with whom they were contracted, and
how they were distributed. To know the
number and character of intermarriages
among the Germans in a pioneer state means
to ascertain the starting-point for the fusion
of one nationality with others in the Ameri-
can melting-pot.

In 1860, 18,400 persons living in Minne-
sota were born in Germany; by 1870, their
number had risen to 48,457. The number of
persons of purely German blood, called
“German stock,” rose from 27,309 to 79,345
during the decade, representing 15.8 and
18.04 per cent of the total population of the
state. It has been explained elsewhere why
Swiss, Austrians, and Luxemburgers with
their children were included in the count
of German stock.‘ For this investigation it is
important to remember that marriages be-
tween, for instance, a Swiss and a Badener, a
Luxemburger and a Rhinelander, or an
Austrian and a Bavarian were not counted
as intermarriages. The most recent study of
population trends in Minnesota includes in
the “German group” persons born in Hol-
land, Switzerland, and post-war Austria.s
There is no doubt that a marriage between
a person born in Holland and one born in
Germany can mean a purely German mar-
riage in ethnological, cultural, and linguis-
tic respects. Many of these marriages as they
were listed in the manuscript census must
have been contracted in Europe, because
one or more children were born abroad be-
fore an American-born child was added to
the family. Yet the Dutch preserved dis-
tinguishing language characteristics for
some time, while, for instance, Swiss news-
papers in this country are printed in Ger-
man and the only history about the immi-
gration from Luxemburg was written in
German.’ With the exception of a small
group in Houston County in 1860, a mar-
riage between a German and a Hollander
was counted as an intermarriage.’
Marriages between French and Germans
constituted a difficult problem. For the
years under consideration in Minnesota they
were probably purely German marriages.
A large number of natives from Alsace
and Lorraine who gave their country of
birth as “France” were really German by
descent and language.’ Whenever the man
came from “France,” his name was clearly
German. Sometimes children born in Ger-
many or in one of the German states neigh-
boring the two French provinces indicate
that the couple had lived in Germany for
some time before emigration. Until 1871,
when the two provinces were returned to
Germany, German emigrants from Alsace
and Lorraine far outnumbered French-
speaking emigrants. But to classify the
“French” as German, if only in this case,
seemed an extraordinary procedure which
might jeopardize the comparability with
other studies. They will receive special at-
tention when it is indicated.

The genuineness of an intermarriage
seemed also somewhat doubtful when the
names of men born in Russia, Poland, Bo-
hemia, and Hungary indicated that they
were of German descent. By the middle of
the nineteenth century Germans had spread
over the political frontiers of Germany to-
ward the east, and members of German pop-
ulation islands in Poland, Rumania, Hun-
gary, and Russia were persistent in their ad-
herence to German customs and language,
be it in eastern Europe or, after emigration,
in America. Still, their number is negligible.

In the original count German family
heads were counted separately from Ger-
man-born persons and from German stock.
The intermarriages were counted so as to
make it possible to determine the sex in-
volved.? Thus the number of purely Ger-
man marriages was obtained by subtracting
the number of non-German women married
to German men from the number of German
family heads. Not all counties reported
German settlers, and in some counties
which did no intermarriage had occurred.

The intermarriages were counted and
tabulated. For 38 counties in 1860 and for
50 counties in 1870 the number of intermar-
riages were listed according to the nationali-
ties of the non-German partners divided in-
to male and female groups and also the total
number of intermarriages for each county.
Table 37° lists the states of origin of native

9 The system can be recognized from a reproduc-
tion of a page from the count in Johnson, o#. cit., p.
23.
10 The tables, which could not be published for

technical reasons, will be readily furnished to read-
ers upon their request by the author.
Americans married to German immigrants
in both years and the number of these na-
tive Americans. In Table 4 the percentages
of mixed marriages from purely German
marriages in 1860 and 1870 were computed
for 19 counties in which the percentage of
German stock was higher than ro. Seven of
these counties reported more than 25 per
cent of German stock in 1860 and more than
35 per cent in 1870. In Table 5 the town-
ships with lowest and highest percentages
of German stock in these 7 counties are
listed, with their respective intermarriage
ratios. In Table 6 certain urban and rural
areas with approximately equal proportions
of German stock are compared with respect
to their intermarriage ratio.

In 1860, 5,374 purely German marriages
were counted and 492 intermarriages. This
means that for approximately one hundred
German couples in Minnesota nine could be
found where one partner was not German-
born. This percentage may seem high or low
for pioneer society; but it is quite certainly
an exaggeration. An analysis of the nation-
alities of the non-German marriage partners
shows that 66 of these 492 marriages were
contracted between Germans and French
and therefore quite likely to be German, too.

It is more difficult to evaluate the 267 in-
termarriages between Germans and native
Americans, a relatively high number. Of
these, 162 came from New York, Ohio, and
Pennsylvania. These were the states which
provided the greatest number of American
migrants to Minnesota; at the same time
they were the states with large proportions
of Germans. Only thirty-five native Ameri-
cans married to Germans came from Wis-
consin, Indiana, Iowa, and Illinois. This
may partly be explained by the pioneer
character of these regions and the nonexist-
ence of a sufficiently large native popula-
tion born in these states. We also are re-
minded of the typical progress of the young
single immigrant as he appears in literature,
immigrant letters, and biographies which
abound in county histories: The young man,
usually of military age (fear of draft was a
main cause of emigration), traveled via

Hamburg, Bremen, or Le Havre and arrived
in New York, usually with a group from his
own village or one to which he had attached
himself on the boat. He lived for some time
with friends or relatives in New York, Phila-
delphia, Cleveland, or Cincinnati and worked
wherever opportunity offered until he could
establish himself at his trade or profession or
buy a farm. Whether he met his future wife
among other immigrants or a.nong the sec-
ond or third generation of older immigrant
families depended upon chance.

Many of the numerous novels and stories
written by German immigrants of the nine-
teenth century describe the difficulties
which confronted young German men and
women when they tried to mix socially with
non-German groups. German-American lit-
erature invariably found the solution in the
marriage with a partner of purely German
blood. In reality, intermarriages did take
place. But sociologists also have observed
that immigrants tend to marry into their own
ethnic group in the American population.™
These marriages usually were contracted
before the couple went west. That the man
from Pennsylvania or Ohio or the woman
from New York or Indiana met and married
their German-born partners in their own
states and not after independent arrival in
Minnesota is proved by a great number of
cases in which children were born to such
marriages in the state of the native Ameri-
can father or mother. Consequently, inter-
marriages with persons born in New Eng-
land states are negligible. Of the southern
states, only Missouri, with twelve intermar-
riages, is worth mentioning. Germans who
had traveled via New Orleans liked to stop
in the German quarters of St. Louis before
proceeding farther north.

Thus 267 intermarriages with native
Americans are very doubtful as to their
truly mixed character. Sixty-eight marriages
with French are most doubtful for the
reasons given above. Finally, 20 intermar-
riages between Germans and other nation-
als with children born in Germany or neigh-
boring European countries cannot be con-

1 Nelson, op. cit., p. 586.
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Mon, 06 Jun 2016 18:20:09 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
sidered as an outcome of the melting-pot
process, because they were contracted before
emigration. Only about 150 intermarriages
represented a true mixture—a very modest
beginning of the fusion that we partly as-
sumed and partly proved for the second and
third generation.

By 1870 the number of German family
heads had increased to 14,941; purely Ger-
man marriages numbered 13,562; and mixed
marriages numbered 1,850. The percentage
the latter makes of the former is 13.64.
This rate is considerably higher than the
rate in 1860.

There were other changes: The total num-
ber of non-German men who married Ger-
man women was 139 in 1860 and 471 in
1870; that is, the percentage of non-German
men in intermarriages dropped slightly from
37 to 34. The absolute number of marriages
between Germans and native Americans
increased from 267 to 1,177; that is, from
54.2 to 63.6 per cent during the decade. Of
these 1,177, 803 were born in New York,
Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Wisconsin. Illinois
and Indiana together did not contribute as
much as either of the first four states. Wis-
consin, ranking as the eighth state in 1860,
had become the fourth state ten years later.”
Eight persons had come from Wisconsin
in 1860 and 166 in 1870 to settle with Ger-
mans in Minnesota. The explanation prob-
ably is found in improved transportation
between Milwaukee and Minnesota and in
the development of the St. Paul-Milwaukee
railroad in the late sixties, which made Min-
nesota more accessible to those who had
traveled to Wisconsin via the Great Lakes.
Hitherto many Germans had come from
Europe to Minnesota via New Orleans and
St. Louis. This route became less important
during the second half of the century. By
1870, 48 marriages between Germans and
persons born in Missouri were listed, as
compared with 166 for Wisconsin.
In both years intermarriages with native
Americans amounted to more than half of
all intermarriages counted. Those with
French followed and then those with Irish.
But, during the decade, intermarriages with
Irish had increased by 215 per cent, while
all intermarriages had increased by 380 per
cent. In 1870 only two intermarriages be-
tween German and Irish were recorded in
Stearns County, which was predominantly
Catholic and contained a considerable num-
ber of Irish settlers, normally of Catholic
faith. In other counties with strong Catholic
communities like Winona and Blue Earth
the number of German-Irish marriages was
also comparatively low: no German-Irish
marriage was reported in Blue Earth in
1860 and only one in 1870. Four were re-
ported in Winona in 1860 and seven in
1870. While we cannot assume that these
intermarriages were contracted in the Mid-
dle West, we can expect to find German-
Irish intermarriages chiefly in Catholic com-
munities. Of 124 intermarriages in Stearns
County, ror had been contracted withnative
Americans. These native Americans must
have been mostly Catholic, and in 1870 very
few Americans were Catholic unless they
were of German or Irish descent. Since in-
termarriages between Germans and Irish
were generally rare, the assumption that
most native Americans married to Germans
were of German descent is strengthened.

Church affiliation has been recognized as
an important factor in intermarriage. The
impression is that religious barriers are
stronger than nationality barriers. Fre-
quently the two coincided. This was particu-
larly true of pioneer society. Even the Cath-
olic church, less nationalistic in character
than any other religious body, was not able
to break down barriers of nationality during
the first and second generation. Where mixed
Catholic parishes were founded, the Irish
or German or French Canadians walked out
and founded their own parish as soon as
they could afford to build a church and to
support a priest. It might be better to speak
of the barrier of language rather than of
nationality.*3 The data for Stearns County
in 1870 offer excellent proof of the inability
of the Catholic church to promote inter-
marriages between immigrants of different
tongue.

Again, it is quite possible that the inter-
marriages between Germans and Americans
were mostly endogamous and that 118
French married to Germans were of German
tongue and descent. Of the marriages be-
tween Germans and non-American nation-
als, 58 had children born in Europe, and the
marriages therefore were probably con-
tracted before emigration. Of 1,850 inter-
marriages, only 544 were certain to be mixed
marriages, which would lower the percent-
age considerably. Thus we can say that the
percentage of intermarriages was between
2.6 and 9.1 in 1860 and between 4.01 and
13.6 in 1870. If we include the offspring of
mixed marriages, that is, the children “at
least half German,” the percentages were
16.4 and 19.5 for the twoyears. These figures
indicate a slight proportional increase of in-
termarriages during the decade. It remains
to be seen which factors helped to decrease
or increase intermarriage ratios in the same
nationality group.

Residential propinquity has been recog-
nized as an important factor in marriage
selection.'4 During the pioneer period na-
tional cohesion played a great part in draw-
ing German settlers to certain districts and
determined what partners would be acces-
sible to the second generation.* Thus it
should be of interest to see whether the ratio
of intermarriage was markedly different in
districts of solid and in those of thin Ger-
man settlements. For this purpose the inter-
marriage ratios of the state as a whole were
compared with those of eighteen counties
in 1860 which reported more than one hun-
dred German heads of families and with
those of twenty counties in 1870 which re-
ported more than three hundred German
heads of families. With the exception of
Rice County in 1860, these were the same
counties where the German stock repre-
sented more than 1o per cent of the total
population in both years. The intermarriage
ratio drops from 9.15 for the state to 8.1
per cent for eighteen counties in 1860 and
from 13.64 for the state to 12.81 per cent for
twenty counties in 1870. When the six
“most German counties’ where German
stock amounted to more than 25 per cent in
1860 and to more than 35 per cent in 1870,
are tabulated, the ratio drops to 7.69 in
1860 and to 9.6 in 1870. The decrease of the
ratio is more marked in 1870, because the
density in the six respective counties had
reached higher proportion. The trend is con-
tinuous: the thinner the distribution, the
higher the intermarriage ratio.

The same tendency is noticeable when
townships with highest and lowest propor-
tions of German stock in the same county are
compared. Since the proportion of German
stock changed during the decade in different
townships, it was not always feasible to
compare the same townships for both years.
The intermarriage ratio in ten townships in
1860 and fourteen in 1870 varies greatly ac-
cording to numerical and proportional dis-
tribution of the Germans and is inversely
proportional.

Occasionally extreme cases occur: Han-
cock, Carver County, and Montgomery, Le
Sueur County, with small German propor-
tions reported no intermarriages at all. An
extreme case in the opposite direction is
Ottawa, Le Sueur County, in 1860, where
two purely German and four intermarriages
were counted. Again in Hampton, a town-
ship in Dakota County with 65.4 per cent
Germans, there was not a single case of in-
termarriage of the twenty-two in the coun-
ty. Finally, the true character of certain in-
termarriages, like the one in Arlington in
1860 between a Prussian and a woman from
France or the one in Lafayette in 1870
between a Holsteiner and a woman from
Denmark, might have been German in
character and nullify the smallest ratio. In
city wards also the intermarriage ratio de-
clines with higher German proportions
and increases with lower German propor-
tions. These findings corroborate the find-
ings on intermarriages in Wright County,
Minnesota, in 1930-40.%° This indicates
that the original distribution of the settlers
has a persistent influence on the intermar-
riage ratio. It is an instance of the historical
causality of the current pattern of social as-
similation.

The relationship between intermarriage
ratios and density of settlement does not
explain the proportional increase of inter-
marriages between 1860 and 1870. Perhaps
the comparison between urban and rural
German communities can yield information.
On the basis of the tendency just described
only such units with approximately the
same percentage of German stock were com-
parable. It also was desirable to compare
neighboring units rather than, for instance,
a newly settled rural township with a city
ward of St. Paul. Therefore, the selection is
limited to seven counties, and it was neces-
sary to compare city wards in some cases and
whole cities in others with rural townships of
the same county. In Blue Earth, Hennepin,
Ramsey, Stearns, and Winona counties the
urban ratio was higher than the rural. Has-
tings in Dakota County is an exception to
the general trend. With respect to New Ulm,
in Brown County, where the intermarriage
ratio was only 8.73 and slightly lower than
in rural Cottonwood Township, it is possible
that a high degree of national concentration
counteracts the influence of urbanization.
This possibility is also indicated by the in-
termarriage ratio of the first ward of St.
Anthony, with 64.04 per cent of German
stock and the low intermarriage ratio of
9.5. There was no comparable rural unit in
Hennepin. The tendency is again confirmed,
however, when the intermarriage ratio of
15.09 for the second ward of St. Anthony
with 25.08 per cent of German stock is com-
pared with that of the rural township of
Corcoran, where it was 5 per cent lower. On
the whole, urbanization favored intermar-
riage, and the growth of such cities as Min-
neapolis and St. Anthony, St. Paul and
Winona, must have influenced the increase
of intermarriages in Hennepin, Ramsey,
and Winona counties. Between 1860 and
1870 in these counties, respectively, inter-
marriage grew from 23 to 109, from 76 to
187, and from 33 to 132.

There is no indication that pioneer life
and the frontier promoted intermarriage
and whatever it means for assimilation.
Wherever consolidated German settlements
were found directly on the frontier or in
Dakota County, close to St. Paul, the inter-
marriage rate was low.

The order of preference in intermarriages
changed perceptibly only among those
groups that were numerically insignificant:
in both years intermarriages with native
Americans far outnumbered all others;
French and Irish followed far behind. After
these three, the order was, for 1860: Dutch,
English, Danish, Canadian, Bohemian,
Swedish, Polish, Norwegian. For 1870 it
was: Bohemian, Dutch, Canadian, English,
Norwegian, Swedish, Polish, Danish. All
other nationalities were so small in numbers
that they were grouped. Whether or not the
influx of Scandinavian immigration to Min-
nesota changed this order decisively cannot
be answered as yet. We need more data
which, as Drachsler put it, will have to be
gathered “piecemeal, now for one communi-
ty, now for another, now for this nationality,
now for the other.’””"7
