Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
This report illustrates a method for in-
vestigating and quantifying public per-
ceptions of disease. It then analyzes per-
ceptions of a specific disease, tuberculosis,
among a population sample. Particular
attention is paid to how social and ethnic
groups differ in their perceptions of tuber-
culosis, and how this difference is asso-
ciated with varying group experiences with
this disease.

The following questions will be con-
sidered: Do the various social classes view
tuberculosis (TB) differently? Do mem-
bers of different ethnic groups have dif-
ferent ideas about this disease? What
qualities or attributes of TB are inter-
preted differently by adults in these
various categories? Aside from quantita-
tive differences, are there variations be-
tween groups in the basic dimensions of
thinking and feeling about TB? Are these
somehow related to the group’s mortality
experience with TB over the past genera-
tion?

This study was intended both to pro-
vide substantive data concerning beliefs
and attitudes about disease and to con-
tribute to the body of knowledge regard-
ing the influence of group-membership
factors on perceptions of socially relevant
events.

It is generally acknowledged that diseases
are perceived as dissimilar in many re-
spects. Various diseases arouse different
amounts of feeling having distinct qualities
(gnawing worry, sudden panic, embarrass-
ment, guilt, distaste, etc.). Past approaches
to this research problem have been sparse
and not too precise. Survey-type. multiple-
choice questions give results that have
often been more highly influenced by the
social desirability of the alternatives than
by the respondents’ underlying beliefs
about health. Projective techniques over-
come this objection but are an expensive
procedure, the reliability of which is
greatly influenced by the level of skill
(and the uniformity of approach) of the
field interviewers.

A newer method for the study of beliefs
and feelings is the semantic differential
developed by C. E. Osgood, G. J. Suci,
and P, H. Tannenbaum.? To date, this
technique has been used most conspicu-
ously in studies of linguistics, communica-
tion, and personality. The semantic dif-
ferential does not depend on verbal fluency.
The subject responds by making a mark.
It does not prestructure a subject’s re-
sponse to the same degree as a multiple-
choice question.

The Osgood method was altered slightly
by H. Maclay and E. Ware in their study
of three American Indian tribes.2 They
found this modified semantic differential to
be suitable for use with non-literate sub-
jects and to be a valid discriminator be-
tween the constellations of meaning found
in three different tribal languages (Hopi,
Zuni, Navajo). The technique was further
modified for the present study by the
development of scales directly pertinent
to health-related behavior and by certain
technical additions, such as the use of
verbal labels at several points along the
scale, in addition to words expressing ex-
tremes at the ends of the scale.

Scales were constructed with the inten-
tion of eliciting the following perceptions
and feelings about the diseases under
study: general public susceptibility; per-
sonal susceptibility; prominence (‘“sali-
ence”) of the disease in thought and con-
versation; three forms of severity (pain,
risk of death, and amount of residual
disability); difficulty of prevention; feel-
ing of mystery about the disease; the
clean-dirty continuum; the proud-disgraced
continuum; a moral judgment about the
kind of people attacked by the disease;
and two scales as markers to dimensions
commonly found in factor analyses of Os-
good’s semantic differential—speed and
power (see Fig. 1).*

This instrument, subsequently referred
to as the Semantic Differential for Health
“Selection of these variables was prompted
largely by the emerging theory discussed by I. M.
Rosenstock, G. M. Hochbaum, and S. S. Kegeles,
in “Determinants of Health Behavior” (Washing-
ton, D.C.: Behavioral Studies Section, Division of
Community Health Services, U.S. Public Health
Service, 1960 [mimeographed]).

5 Each respondent worked two sample scales be-
fore proceeding with the SDH. Interviewers read
the verbal labels on each scale to each respondent,
the latter reacting by marking an X on the five-
inch scale line at the point he felt best characterized
his attitude. Fig. 1 is a reduced size photoreproduc-
tion of the sixteen SDH scales.

The marked responses were scored with a plas-
tic ruler on a scale of 0-20. The observed dis-
tributions of scores on each scale were sometimes
relatively normal, but often either multimodal or
markedly skewed. For testing the similarity of dis-
tributions of scores between subgroups, the non-
parametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sample test
was used in all instances (S. Siegel, Nonpara-
metric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences [New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1956], pp. 127-36).
For calculation of correlation coefficients and fac-
tor analysis, the scores on each scale were trans-
formed to normalized, standardized scores using
the procedure described by J. P. Guilford, in Psy-
chometric Methods (2d ed.; New York: Mc-
Graw-Hill Book Co,, 1954), pp. 237-41,
Fic. 1.—Photoreproduction of scales of the Semantic Differential for Health (reduced to eight-tenths
of the size used in the field).
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Mon, 06 Jun 2016 19:11:59 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
republics. “Negroes” as here used refers
to persons whose appearance suggests a
clear African genetic component, irrespec-
tive of primary language. Only one or two
Negroes spoke primarily Spanish. All other
persons are labeled “Anglos,” essentially
Caucasians whose primary language is
English. Some persons included here were
of Greek or Italian background.

These three ethnic groups think about
TB in remarkably different ways. Of
course, some people from each group view
diseases in the same way as some people
from the other two groups. Taking the
distribution as a whole, however, there
are significant group differences in per-
ceptions of TB on nine of the sixteen
scales of the SDH. The views of the Anglos
and Latins were generally more alike, while
the views of the Negroes as a group dif-
fered from the first two ethnic categories.
Thus, ideas about TB seem to be based
on cultural differences associated with
race and not on whether the person is
part of a Spanish-speaking or English-
speaking subcommunity. The _ specific
divergences between ethnic groups in be-
liefs and feelings about TB are discussed
below.

Negroes believed that TB is far more
frequent in the population than did either
Anglos or Latins. Over 50 per cent of them
felt that “many people” get TB, whereas
only about 30 per cent of Anglos and 30
per cent of Latins reported this frequency.
(All differences to be reported are signifi-
cant at p= .05 or less.) Similarly, over
half the Negroes reported that TB is “of-
ten talked about.” In comparison, only 10
per cent of the Anglos and 16 per cent of
the Latins gave answers at this end of the
scale. The bulk of the latter groups re-
ported their experience to be that TB is
“almost never” or only “occasionally”
talked about. Negroes gave most personal
thought to TB; the Anglos thought about
it least. The Latins reported thinking
about TB sufficiently more than the Anglos
to make the Negro-Latin difference not
significant.®
Views of the severity of the disease were
also divergent. Negroes perceived TB to
be a fast-moving, powerful disease. The
Anglos believed it to be slow-moving and
weak. The Latins had diffuse perceptions
but were closer to the Anglos on both
scales. The groups did not differ signifi-
cantly in their perceptions of the pain and
risk of death associated with TB, but the
weak tendencies for Negroes to perceive
greater pain and death were consistent
with the speed and power scales.

The three ethnic aggregates had dif-
ferent ideas about the degree of mastery
man has achieved over this disease. Ne-
groes more often viewed TB as a mystery,
while Anglos more often believed the
disease to be well understood by science.
Latins expressed even greater certainty of
medical understanding than did the
Anglos.

Tuberculosis was more acceptable so-
cially to Anglos and Latins than to Ne-
groes. The latter associated a social stigma
with this disease as shown by their pre-
ponderance of responses that TB is a dirty
disease and that it is a source of embarrass-
ment. While most Anglos and Latins in-
sisted upon a precisely neutral moral
evaluation of the kind of people most at-
tacked by TB, the Negroes, including
some with average or higher education,
more frequently were willing to say that
TB mostly attacked either particularly
bad people or, less commonly, particularly
good people. The tendency to imply nega-
tive evaluative overtones to TB contrasted
sharply with responses to the same scale
for poliomyelitis. Among Negro respond-
ents the idea that polio most often at-
tacked especially “good people’ was
three times as frequent as the notion that
it usually attacked “bad people.”

In summary, these differences between
individual scales portray the typical
Negro perception of TB as a disease with
which they are very much involved. It
attacks many people, it is talked about
and thought about. Tuberculosis is seen
as a powerful, fast-moving disease which
is embarrassing and dirty. It is rather
poorly understood scientifically and at-
tacks “bad” people more often than it
attacks particularly “good” people. Anglos
and Latins feel TB is less of a threat, and
feel more distant from it. They see it as a
mild, slow-moving, infrequent disease, well
understood by medical science. They judge
it to be clean and acceptable and to at-
tack without regard to the “goodness” of
people.

Social class—Social class was deter-
mined by Warner’s Index of Status Char-
acteristics (ISC), as modified for use in
the southern United States by McGuire
and White.” The distribution of ISC
scores was divided into quartiles for these
analyses. Quartile I (or Class I) refers to
the upper and upper middle classes.
Quartile IV includes the lower lower class
and the lower margins of the working
class. The initial analysis for all ethnic
groups combined showed that persons in
the top social-class quartile (I) felt far
removed from TB. They stood alone
among the social classes in believing it to
have a very low incidence. Classes II, ITI,
and IV clustered together in their percep-
tions, but, in that rank order, showed in-
creasing tendency to believe that TB at-
tacks larger numbers of people (Scale A).
This over-all social class difference held
only among the English-speaking, white
subgroup (Anglos). Among the Latins and
Negroes, the higher classes tended to see
TB as having greater incidence than did
their respective lower-class counterparts.
All levels of Negroes perceived higher fre-
quency of TB than any level of any other
ethnic group. Estimate of incidence was
influenced most by ethnic membership and
only secondarily by social class.

The distributions of perceptions by so-
cial class for all ethnic groups combined
suggested that persons in social-class Quar-
tile I only rarely thought or talked about
TB. Classes II, III, and IV reported suc-
cessively increasing frequency of conversa-
tion about TB. Ethnic-specific distributions
by class showed that much of this effect
was due to the exaggerated involvement of
Negroes with this disease. Ethnic member-
ship was more strongly associated with
amount of thought and talk about TB than
was social class, when both these variables
were statistically controlled.

Perceptions of the characteristics of the
disease process did not show marked differ-
ences among social classes. Negroes viewed
TB as culminating more frequently in
death than did Anglos, and within each
of these two groups the lower social strata
tended to judge death as more frequent
than did the corresponding higher social
strata. Both social class and ethnic group
seemed to have an independent impact on
this perception.

Upper-class persons believed TB to be
a well understood disease. This is not just
a general perceptual difference applicable
to all diseases, as evidenced by con-
trary observations in related studies of
other diseases. Each lower stratum showed
greater doubt about how well TB is under-
stood, to the point where Class IV felt TB
to be a real mystery (Class I differs from
IV at = .001). When ethnic groups were
considered separately, this social-class
difference held up in Anglos and Latins.
Except for Anglo social-class Quartile IV,
whose perceptions they approximated, all
strata of Negroes exceeded all other ethnic-
class categories in frequency of believing
TB to be a mystery. Latins were much like
Anglo middle classes, but were even more
certain that TB is well understood. Two
factors seemed to be associated independ-
ently with the idea that TB is a mystery,
social class among white persons and an
ethnic factor among non-white persons.

With regard to the personal virtue of
people thought to be in greatest risk of
getting this disease, the initial analysis
showed Classes I and II to have taken a
strictly neutral position, with Classes III
and IV somewhat more likely to have re-
sponded that TB attacks either “mostly
good people” or “mostly bad people.” This
contrast was primarily the result of propor-
tionally high representation of Negroes
and Latins in the lower social-class quar-
tiles. Those upper- and middle-class Latins
and Negroes who departed from a strictly
neutral judgment tended to see TB as
attacking good people more than bad peo-
ple. In the lowest classes this tendency
was reversed, with bad people seen as
having greater risk.

It should be emphasized that for all
groups, except Class-IV Negroes, 60-90
per cent of persons maintained a neutral
judgment, asserting that TB (and all other
diseases thus far investigated) occur with-
out any regard to the goodness or badness
of people. Only 17 per cent of Negroes in
the lowest social-class quartile asserted this
neutral position. Thirty-seven per cent
said “TB attacked mostly good people,”
and the remaining 46 per cent asserted
that it “attacked mostly bad people.” A
6X3 contingency table showing response
by social-class level within ethnic group
(not reproduced here) yielded a x? signif-
icant beyond the .001 level.

None of the SDH scales that failed to
show significant differences between social
classes on the initial analysis became sig-
nificant when ethnicity was controlled.
The initial analyses of all respondents col-
lectively showed social-class Quartiles I
and IV to differ in their distributions of
responses on six of the sixteen SDH scale.
Controlling for ethnic-group affiliation re-
duced to three the number of scales that
continued to show significant social-class
differences within one or more ethnic
groups.

Educational level—Respondents were
divided into four levels by the amount of
formal education they reported having.
Significant differences in perception be-
tween groups were noted on only two
scales.

Persons who had not gone to school be-
yond the eighth grade viewed TB as a
rather frequent disease. As higher levels
of education were reached, respondents
steadily decreased their estimate of TB’s
prevalence. This difference became more
marked when ethnic group was controlled.

Respondents with eight or fewer grades
of schooling believed that TB was a more
mysterious, unknown disease than did re-
spondents with higher education. Those
with college experience rated TB as one of
the best understood diseases. Education
had a stronger effect than did ethnic group
on this belief. In all other instances where
either of these two variables was associ-
ated with differences in perception of TB,
ethnic affiliation had the stronger statisti-
cal effect.

It is interesting to note that educational
level of respondents was associated with
fewer differences in perceptions of this
disease than was social class, despite the
fact that the latter datum derives from
head of household and not from the in-
dividual respondent, Only about half of the
respondents in this sample were heads of
households.
GENERAL FACTOR: TOTAL SAMPLE’S BELIEFS

ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS
Com-
Scale Verbal Label Factor | munal-
at Left Extreme I ities
ie
Many people get it «55 | 303
Usually a disease of ba- -03 | .001
bies
Is extremely painful 34 | .116
People recover fully -00 | .000
You have big chance of | .51 | .260
getting it
Usually causes death -53 | .281
Clean (dirty) —.17 | .029

Nothing can prevent it | .29 | .084
A fast-moving disease 635 | 123
A powerful disease -40 | .160
A mystery .27 | .073
I think about it often 54 | .292
Attacks mostly good -07 | .005

 

people
N........] Tokeep from gettingit, |—.09 ] .008
I'd give a day’s pay
OEErEee Often talked about -49 |) .240
Po... Proud (disgraced) —.01 | .000

+12 | 124
GENERAL FACTOR: ANGLOS’ BELIEFS
ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS

 

Com-
Scale Verbal Label Factor | munal-
at Left Extreme I ities
i
Many people get it .58 | .336
Usually a disease of ba- .00 | .000
bies
.| Is extremely painful .27 | .073
People recover fully —.00 | .000
You have bigchanceof | .58 | .336
getting it
Usually causes death .52 | .270
Clean (dirty) —.18 | .032
.| Nothing can prevent it | .27 | .073
A fast-moving disease -25 | .063
A powerful disease 34 | .116
A mystery .23 | .053

I think about it often 55 | .303
Attacks mostly good | .15 | .023

 

people
\ Tokeep from gettingit, |—.15 | .023
I'd give a day’s pay
OereeEe Often talked about ~39 | .152
Poo... Proud (disgraced) —.03 | .001

-116) .116
VERIMAX FACTOR MATRIX: LATINS’ BELIEFS ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS

 

 

Factor

 

 

 

 

VERBAL LABEL coe
SCALE NALITIES
at Lert ExTREME i
I II III Iv v
ASECEEEEEee Many people get it 55 | —.10 | —.01 | —.05 54 607
B.. .| Usually a disease of babies -48 02 13 AT 01 -469
C.. .| Is extremely painful 63 310) —.14 | —.11 05 593
D -| People recover fully 05 -00 | —.70 -18 05 527
E You have big chance of getting it 21 35 .08 03 55 476
F .| Usually causes death 37 03 .08 | —.60 .26 572
G .| Clean (dirty) 03 -00 14 06 06 028
H .| Nothing can prevent it -20 -68 | —.06 | —.04 02 508
I.. .| A fast-moving disease 53 18 .16 31 02 435
J.. .| A powerful disease 55 04 -08 | —.06 13 331
K .| A mystery 02 74 00 .16 01 574
L.. .| I think about it often 28 -23 | —.09 52 25 472
M. .| Attacks mostly good people 19 03 27 21 03 155
N To keep from getting it, I’d give -12) | —.03 55 -08 04 326
a day’s pay

O.. ...| Often talked about 73 .07 | —.18 .09 00 578
P .| Proud (disgraced) 24 | —.30 | —.04 | —.09 .40 317

a?/16...}. 16 09 -06 07 06 -436
unusual combination of six scales. It seems
to represent a dimension of potency and
threat not centering on the self. The major
scales are: “Often talked about” (.73),
“TJs painful” (.68), “Many people get it”
(.55), “Is a powerful disease” (.55), “A
fast-moving disease” (.53), “Is a disease
of young people” (.48).

It cannot be said that the Latins as a
group scored either on the “threatened”
end of this dimension or on the “mild,
unconcerned” side. The Latins did not
differ significantly from other ethnic groups
on most of these scales. As individuals
they seemed more often to take extreme
positions on the scales rather than middle
positions. This may account for the high
correlation coefficients in their matrix.

The second factor is the human-mastery
dimension found in studies of other dis-
eases. The Latins associated the percep-
tion of “well understood” to that of “easi-
ly preventable.” These two scales loaded
-74 and .68, respectively, on this doublet
factor.

The third factor, also a doublet, remains
uninterpreted for the present. It involves
two scales: “People recover fully” (—.70)
(this is the same as the opposite pole posi-
tively loaded: “People have obvious per-
manent disability” [+.70]), and “To keep
from getting it I’d give a day’s pay” (.55).

It seems paradoxical that people who
believe TB is seriously disabling say they
would give Jess money to prevent it than
people who believe recovery from TB is
complete. The total sample gave highly
skewed distributions of responses to both
scales, with the skew in opposite directions.
Most people believed in full recovery from
TB, yet gave the cliché answer that they’d
give a month’s pay or a year’s pay to pre-
vent each of these four diseases. Yet the
use of a #-score transformation and evi-
dence from other scales rule out “skew”
as the explanation of this finding.

The fourth factor is also difficult to in-
terpret. The most important scales are:
“Rarely causes death” (+-.60), “I think
about it often” (.52), “Young people get
it” (.47), and, of lesser loading, “A fast-
moving disease” (.31). It may be that
Latins tend to polarize themselves by view-
ing TB either as “A fast but non-lethal
disease of young people which they think
about freely” or, conversely, as “A slow,
fatal disease of older people which they
try to avoid thinking about.” The latter
syndrome of perceptions would make psy-
chological sense, especially for the older
respondents.

The fifth factor extracted from the per-
ceptions of the Spanish-speaking subgroup
dealt with perceptions of susceptibility and
of social acceptability. The strongest scales
follow: “Many people get it” (.54), “I
have a big chance of getting it” (.55), and
“Proud” (.40). This combination was not
found in any of the other derived factors.
Yet it is rather logical that the more com-
monplace a disease, the less embarrass-
ment would be associated with it.

The study should be repeated with a
larger sample before the factor structure
found here can be accepted confidently as
a valid representation of that for the Latin
subculture. Some of the uniqueness of the
factor structure observed for Latins may
be attributable to differences in connota-
tion and overtone between the English-lan-
guage scales and their Spanish translation.

Factor structure for Negroes —Negroes
comprised 124 per cent of the total sample
(N = 54). The basic organization of their
ideas about TB differed from the way
Latins and Anglos organized their ideas.
Four factors were found to account for 29
per cent of the total variance in the matrix
of Negro perceptions (Table 4).

Their first factor might be termed “es-
cape from social damage.” A very similar
factor emerges from Negro perceptions
of polio. These are the relevant scales
(listed in terms of their positive loadings):
“To keep from getting it, I’d give a year’s
pay” (+.60), “A dirty disease” (+.56),
and “Attacks mostly bad people” (-+-.41).
The following scales were more weakly
related: “I never think about it” (+.36),
“Many people get it” (.34), and “People
recover fully” (.31).

The general picture sketched by this
factor makes sense emotionally, yet it does
not fit our preconceived theories of how
diseases are perceived. Negroes, more than
any other group, see TB as a common
disease with social stigma. It does not en-
tail residual physical disability, but peo-
ple do not like to think about it and would
make sacrifices to avoid it. This describes
the Negro group’s quantitative position on
these scales as well as the structure of in-
tercorrelations.

The second factor calls up ideas of a
shared feeling of dread of TB. These are
VERIMAX FACTOR MATRIX: NEGROES’ BELIEFS ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS

 

 

 

 

 

Factor
sot Venn: ane come
Av Lert ExTREeME ee
I I It IV
A. Many people get it 34 24 —.37 04 312
B. Usually a disease of babies —.10 .16 05 —.42 212
Cc. Is extremely painful 20 31 —.14 ~—.25 218
D. People recover fully 31 12 03 25 174
E. You have big chance of getting it .09 13 — .66 —.09 -469
F.. Usually causes death 02 71 15 —.06 531
G. Clean (dirty) —.56 .04 — .08 —.16 347
H. Nothing can prevent it 08 15 54 —.16 346
I.. A fast-moving disease .07 .00 01 45 208
J A powerful disease 13 -08 —.10 37 .170
K. A mystery —.25 41 —.15 —.21 297
L.. I think about it often — .36 26 — .38 19 378
M. Attacks mostly good people —.41 17 17 .08 ~232
N. To keep from getting it, I’d give —.60 —.01 00 —.14 - 380
a day’s pay

OPEEEEEEEEere Often talked about — .08 51 —.i1 21 323
Priceeee eee ee Proud (disgraced) —.25 15 01 —.15 .108
2G? (LOE PEPE EEE E EEE EEE CLE EC Eee Ee eee 09 -08 07 -06 294
of this same dimension feel TB can be pre-
vented and, consequently, have less need
to underestimate personal and community
risk and do not need to repress the topic.
The fourth factor, like several of the
others, follows emotional logic rather than
cognitive logic. It relates age of patient
to the impact of the disease. It is marked
by these scales: “A fast-moving disease”
(.45), “A powerful disease” (.37), “Usu-
ally a disease of old people” (+.42).
Respondents who perceive TB as fast
and powerful tend to be thinking of the
disease as attacking old people, perhaps
because of the much higher mortality rates
among older TB patients. Those who think
of TB in terms of its attack on youth and
children see the disease process as slower
and milder. These inferences are derived
from the degree and direction of correla-
tions between the scales discussed.

Latins also associate their view of the
age group most attacked by TB with the
severity of the disease, but different as-
pects of disease impact are correlated, and
not all in the same direction. For the An-
glos the “age scale” did not load on any
factor for any disease.

Possible explanations of group differ-
ences in perceptions—The observed quan-
titative and organizational differences
among ethnic groups in beliefs and feelings
about TB call for an explanation. As men-
tioned earlier, statistical analyses not pre-
sented here showed these differences were
not a function of differential levels of edu-
cation. While social class has a notable
association with variations in perception,
this association is not as strong, nor is it
spread across so many SDH scales, as is
the association of ethnic identification with
these perceptual differences. Age and sex
composition of the three ethnic samples
was comparable, thus ruling out these var-
iables as explanations.

The hypothesis was then put forward
that the history of a group’s experience
with a disease might be a potent determi-
nant of its current perceptions of that dis-
ease. Data were gathered to test this hy-
pothesis.

Florida’s census and vital statistics re-
cord data by race but make no provisions
for recording ethnic background or lan-
guage used. Thus, no denominator would
be available for disease rates among Latins
even if number of cases or number of
deaths attributed to this disease could
somehow be obtained. The analysis is thus
reduced to a comparison of white versus
non-white segments of the population. This
was also the distinction most strongly as-
sociated with quantitative differences in
perception of TB.

The number of active cases of TB re-
ported in this county by race for the five-
year period 1959-63 was obtained. The
1960 Census provided the data on the
population at risk. For this five-year period
the mean annual rate of reported active
TB cases (per 100,000 population) was
26.1 for the white population and 74.5
for the non-white population. This indi-
cates a rate of illness three times higher
for the non-white population. This county
and state have a record of complete re-
porting of TB, yet questions can always
be raised that possibly TB-screening of
one race in the population may be less
complete than for the other race, or that
whites more often than non-whites may
go to medical centers outside the county
(rather unlikely in this instance) for treat-
ment of respiratory disorders. The same
criticisms can be leveled even more strong-
ly at hospitalization data for TB, so this
source of information was not sought. In
any event, data going back only five years
do not test adequately the hypothesis that
a group’s history of TB, perhaps over one
or more generations, influences its current
perceptions.

Tuberculosis mortality data for this state
and county are available for a longer
period and are less subject to reporting
bias than are morbidity figures. Further-
more, a death from a disease has a more
stark and penetrating influence on the re-
mainder of the subcommunity than mere
illness of one of its members, The occa-
sional migration of persons with TB out of
the county and state, which may occur
particularly among white upper-middle-
class persons, would cause a small under-
reporting of deaths for that ethnic cate-
gory, but the absence of these people from
the community would also reduce their
impact on the views of TB held by their
subcommunity. Mortality rates, then, seem
to be a crude but fair index of the per-
reservoir of dread and the emotional and
cognitive involvement the Negro associ-
ates with TB. The fact that the SDH
yields data in directions theoretically ex-
pectable in view of the group histories of
TB supports the notion that the SDH is a
promising technique for measuring beliefs
and feelings about diseases and for
studying further the relation of group
experience to group perceptions. The
table also demonstrates the notable prog-
ress that the state and county public-
health programs have made against TB
in the past quarter century, particularly
among non-white persons.

Discussion—It is an accepted truism
in social psychology that past experience
creates a frame of reference which guides
the perceptual process. Perceptions, in
turn, provide the substance for the beliefs
and feelings that direct behavior. A. W.
Gouldner, in discussing Karl Mannheim’s
concept of “paradigmatic experiences,”
points out that the important experiential
determinants of perception are frequently
the shared experiences of a group or the
shared conception of what group members
think they have experienced. A specific
past event need not have happened to a
given individual to mold his perception
into a replica of his group’s common per-
ception.

Thus the collective experience of the
previous generation could influence the
perception of the next. This appears to be
the case with Negro perceptions of TB. A
death rate for a specific disease of only
one per thousand (100 per 100,000) per
year could create a pervasive shift of an
entire social group’s perceptions of that
disease, assuming that some process such
as “paradigmatic experience” operates to
disseminate vicariously a sense of personal
involvement in loss of a significant other
person to death from TB.

In David Mechanic’s discussion of the
“concept of illness behavior,” four char-
acteristics of a disease are asserted to be
important in influencing whether an in-
dividual will seek medical aid. These are:
(1) the frequency with which the illness
occurs in a given population, (2) the fa-
miliarity of the symptoms to the average
group member, (3) the relative predictabil-
ity of the outcome of the illness, and
(4) the amount of threat and loss likely
to result from the illness.!° As has been
shown, all four of these characteristics
differ for TB between the white and non-
white subcommunities in this county. It
would follow both from Mechanic’s frame-
work of thought and from general psycho-
logical theory that these two groups will
differ markedly in their behavioral re-
sponse to symptoms of this disease and
health programs aimed at its prevention
and cure.

The greater commonness of TB and the
greater group familiarity with its signs
and symptoms among Negroes apparently
do not breed indifference, inasmuch as
feelings of threat and personal involvement
were found to be highest in this group.
The perception of the disease as poorly
understood and frequently fatal, however,
may predispose them to inaction born of
a feeling of helplessness.

The actual effect on behavior needs to
be determined empirically. An attempt was
made to obtain the recent history of chest
X-rays for respondents of all ethnic groups.
These data were clouded by differential
entry into occupations where chest X-rays
are legally required, by different attitudes
toward voluntary X-rays stemming from
different experiences with official govern-
mental agencies, and by possible biases in
accuracy of memory. A valid and reliable
criterion of adequate self-initiated TB-
preventive behavior is not as simple to
establish as may at first appear.

The striking differences between the
three ethnic groups in the factorial struc-
ture of their perceptions of TB were un-
expected. Small sample sizes in the Negro
and Latin groups dictate caution in ac-
ceptance of these observed factor struc-
tures. Yet it seems unlikely that replica-
tion with larger samples could reconcile
into a single general frame three such ex-
tremely different factor structures as ap-
peared here for Anglos, Latins, and Ne-
groes. This raises the broader question
of the degree to which one can justifiably
apply a factor structure—or its fruits in
the form of a factor score or test scale
derived, for example, from college students
or hospital patients—to groups of sharp-
ly differing cultural and social identifi-
cation. Osgood and his associates, usually
evaluating rather abstract concepts, have
shown considerable similarity of seman-
tic structure across cultural groups. Morris
and Jones, using concrete descriptive state-
ments as material in their pioneering study
of values, report different factor structures
for students of different nationalities.
Perhaps there will be less assumption of
the universality of factor structure in cer-
tain domains of socially influenced con-
tent and greater description of diversity of
factor structure as populations of differ-
ent cultural identifications and atypical
histories of collective experience are stud-
ied with quantitative social-psychologi-
cal techniques.
