Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
The sociological literature on class sys-
tems in American communities raises a
number of problems for research at the
childhood level. The present study is of the
general question concerning to what extent
and in what observable ways the factor of
social status affects the social development
of children. Specifically, is the social-class
position of the family a contributing factor
in determining a child’s choice of friends
or the child’s reputation among his age-
mates? If so, how does its operation vary
with the increasing age of the child?

A community was selected for which the
status structure was known and in which
families whose children would be the sub-
jects of the research had already been class-
typed. Children of two age levels were
chosen as subjects.
Group A, 2 per cent of the population, is
locally known as the “upper crust,” “the five
hundred,” “the landed gentry,” “the old fami-
lies,” or “the money crowd.” This group is
referred to as “the power behind the throne”;
while they take little part in community affairs,
they are the people who are consulted on critical
issues and who are supposed to “‘keep the com-
munity in line.” Members of this class are dis-
tinguished largely on the basis of wealth and
lineage.

Group B consists of professional men, offi-
cials of the industries of Hometown, and the
“better” businessmen. Members of this group
are the active community leaders: members of
the school board, officers of commercial organi-
zations, holders of political office, and church
leaders. They have higher incomes than the
average, live in big houses, and are the most
highly educated. Members of this group are re-
ferred to as “the people you go to if you want to
get anything done,” “the pillars of the church,”
and “the backbone of the community.” They
have the reputation of high moral standards
and take a great deal of civic pride in the com-
munity.

Group C is the “average man” of Hometown.
This group constitutes the bulk of the member-
ship of various associations—the rank and file
of the economic, political, church, and social
organizations. These are the people who have
their bridge clubs and “get-togethers” which
fill the society columns of the local newspaper.
They make their livings as small businessmen,
THE SUBJECTS

The subjects of the present research were
all children enrolled in Grades V and VI and
X and XI of the public schools of Home-
town. The median age for the younger group
was eleven years and three months; for the
older group, sixteen years and three months.

x The description of the social structure of Home-
town has been taken from confidential field reports
on file with the Committee on Human Development
of the University of Chicago. The writer had no part
in the research on the social structure of Hometown.

For detailed descriptions of the methods used to
differentiate social classes see W. Lloyd Warner and
Paul S. Lunt, The Social Life of a Modern Communi-
ty (“Yankee City Series,” Vol. I [New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1941]), chaps. iii, v; The Status
System of a Modern Community (“Yankee City
Series,” Vol. II [New Haven: Yale University Press,
1942]), chap. i.

Group A of Hometown is comparable in most
respects to the upper class of Yankee City. Home-
town is not old enough, and this group is not large
enough, to differentiate an upper-upper from a
lJower-upper class. Group B closely resembles the
upper-middle class of Yankee City. Group C cor-
responds to the lower-middle class of Yankee City.
Group D, resembling Group C more than Group
E, takes on the color of a lower-middle, rather than
an upper-lower, class. Group E is clearly the lower-
Jower class.
white-collar workers, lesser professional men,
skilled tradesmen, and skilled workmen.

Group D is the large group which is primarily
concerned with making a living. They consti-
tute the lower-income group, working at less
skilled jobs and as laborers. These people live
in the poorer sections and in the areas surround-
ing the two large industries of Hometown.
They are referred to as “poor but honest,” “the
little people,” or “the people who never give
anybody any trouble.”” Members of this group
tend to place great emphasis upon respectability
and upon piety.

Group E is distinctive primarily on the basis
of nonrespectability. Members of this group are
considered dirty, shiftless, dishonest, and bio-
logically and morally inferior. People in other
classes refer to them as “those river rats,” “the
squatters along the canal,” or “the bottom of
the heap.” They have the lowest income and
the least education, and they live in dilapidated
shacks clustered together in outlying sections
of town. These people made up the bulk of the
federal relief lists of a few years ago, and their
names appear often on local police records."
DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECTS ACCORDING TO SOCIAL-CLASS POSITION

Grapes V anp VI

Grapes X anp XI

 

   

 

See Per Cent Per Cent
Boys Girls Total | of Popula~| Boys Girls Total | of Popula-
tion tion
A ° ° ° ° 2 ° 2 I
B. 6 4 10 6 6 9 15 7
Cc. 17 13 30 17 36 52 88 43
D : 48 59 107 62 45 43 88 43
E. 14 13 27 15 6 7 13 6
Total......... 85 89 174 100 95 III 206 100

 

* The relative pr
he Hometown high schoo!

‘oportions of the five social classes differ at the two age levels: there are fewer children from lower-

status groups in t
The larger proportion of nae from C Group Cin Grades X and XT is probably due to at least two factors: first,
the presence of rural children, who tend to come from better-than-average farm homes and, second, social mobility.
‘The social distance between Groups C and D is relatively small; it is possible that many Group D families who are ‘up-
wardly mobile will have had time to establish themselves in Group C by the time their children reach high-school age.
ment: A Study in Experimental Sociology [Cleveland,
Ohio: School of Applied Social Sciences, Western
Reserve University, 1938]; Leslie Day Zeleny, “So-
ciometry of Morale,” American Sociological Review,
IV [1939], 799-808; Helen H. Jennings, “A Socio-
metric Study of Emotional and Social Expansive-
ness,” in Child Behavior and Development, ed. Roger
C. Barker, Jacob S. Kounin, and Herbert F. Wright
[New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1943], pp.
527-44).

For the Guess-Who, test-retest correlations are
reported of .76 for boys and .80 for girls (see Caro-
line McCann Tryon, “Evaluations of Adolescent
Personality by Adolescents,” in Barker, Kounin,
and Wright, of. cit., pp. 545-66).
Figure 1 presents the data on “best
friend” and “don’t want for a friend” for
fifth- and sixth-grade children. The number
of votes, expressed by the M.S.J., appears on
the vertical axis; groups of subjects appear
on the horizontal axis.

Each group of four bars signifies the
M.S.J.’s obtained by that group of subjects
from each of the four groups of judges. The
first bar of each cluster shows the M.S.J.
obtained from Group B judges; the second
bar, that from Group C judges; the third
bar, Group D judges; and the fourth bar,
Group E judges.

Figure 1 shows that, on “best friend,”
the largest proportion of the votes obtained
by each group of subjects came from the
corresponding group of judges—the largest
M.S.J. for subjects B is obtained from
judges B; for subjects C, judges C; for sub-
jects D, judges D; for subjects E, judges E.
In other words, children are selected as
friends by children from their own social
level more often than by children from other
social levels.

On the negative item, “don’t like,” of
all the votes given to Group B, the largest
proportion came from Group E; and of all
the votes given to Group E, the largest
proportion came from Group B. The mutual
rejection between Groups B and E is greater
than that between any other two groups.

The average M.S.J. for each group of
subjects is shown by the horizontal arrow
drawn across each group of bars. On the
positive item in Figure 1, the average M.S.J.
decreases as status decreases—the lower the
social class of the subject, the fewer times
he is mentioned as a “best friend.” On the
negative item, the trend is reversed—the
lower the social class of the subject, the
more times he is mentioned as “don’t want
for a friend.”

Figure 1 also shows how any group of
judges cast its votes. The bars which come
first, second, third, or fourth in each cluster
show that Group B judges voted most often
for Group B subjects on “best friend,” less
often for Group C subjects, still less often
for Group D, and least often for Group E.
Group C judges voted for Group B subjects
more often than for its own members—as is
also true of Group D. Group E children are
the only ones who voted more often for
members of their own group than for Group
B.
THE REPUTATION OF ELEMENTARY-
SCHOOL CHILDREN

“

Figure 2, showing the data on “good
looking” and “not good looking,” is repre-
sentative of all the statements on reputa-
tion for fifth- and sixth-grade children. The
mirror-like relationship between the posi-
tive and the negative items of this and the
other pairs was found to be consistent for all
such items. The average M.S.J. for each
group of subjects shows a steady decrease,
as status decreases, on the favorable items;
and a steady increase, as status decreases,
on the unfavorable items.

As exemplified by Figure 2, Group B
children rank first on every favorable state-
ment dealing with reputation; Group C,
second; Group D, third; and Group E,
fourth. On the unfavorable items, Group E
ranks first every time.

On the whole, data on reputation follow
the same pattern as data on friendship. One
difference between the two sets of data is
the greater extent to which all groups of
It is not the contention of the writer, in
the light of these findings, that young chil-
dren are conscious of the class structure of
their community. They probably select and
reject their associates not on the basis of
social class itself but on the basis of a whole
configuration of factors related to social
class—whether or not the child is clean, the
kind of clothes he wears, the kind of play-
things he has, the language he uses, his
manners, where he lives, his attitude toward
school, and a host of similar factors. The
child from the middle class may be told not
to play with “that Smith boy—he’s dirty,”
or “he lives down by the tracks,” or “he
steals,” or “he swears.” The child of lower
class may have it pointed out to him that
“that White boy—his father’s rich,” or “he
thinks he’s too good for you,” or “he’s not
your kind.” The child, consciously or un-
consciously using these criteria in selecting
his friends, is probably reflecting the class
stereotypes as he has learned them from his
parents; and he applies these criteria un-
critically.
scribed “traits” of different orders of ob-
jectivity. For example, “dirty—clean” can
be more objectively rated than “good look-
ing—not good looking”; and the latter, in
turn, can probably be more objectively
rated than “always has a good time.” Yet
the data show the same pattern from item to
item.

It is probable that Group E children—
because of the fact that they are from the
lower class—are actually less well groomed
than those of Group B; they are more likely
to be “dirty” and certainly more likely to
be “not well dressed.” It is somewhat less
probable, however, that Group E children
should actually be less good looking than
Group B. Certainly, the adult who steps in-
to a fifth-grade classroom in Hometown,
knowing nothing of the social background of
the children and being careful to distinguish
between good looks and good grooming,
would rate the children very differently on
this item from the way in which they rate
each other.

The data warrant the conclusion that
fifth- and sixth-graders make judgments
about each other along extremely stereo-
typed lines and that the halo effect, so often
discussed in connection with more formal
rating scales, is very much in evidence here.
A group of subjects, rated low on one trait,
is rated low on all eighteen and vice versa.

The lower-class child in the elementary
school in Hometown has the reputation of
being poorly dressed, not good looking, un-
popular, aggressive; of not liking school;
of being dirty and bad mannered; of never
having a good time; and of not playing fair.
These opinions of him are shared even by
members of his own class group. The child
of a family of upper status, on the other
hand, enjoys a reputation almost exactly
opposite—he is considered well dressed,
good looking, popular, a leader; as liking
school; as being clean and well mannered;
as always having a good time; and as play-
ing fair.

It is clear that, by the time children
reach Grade V, the child of the lower class
faces a very different problem of adjustment
in his school life than does the child from the
middle class.
and votes obtained on the positive item but
that, on the negative item, differences of
social class are not apparent. Data for the
other statements on friendship for high-
school students show the same results as in
Figure 3.

There is, then, this important difference
between the two age levels: while both age
groups are discriminating along class lines in
their selection of friends (and their parents’
selection of friends), the older judges are not
doing so as regards those whom they reject
as friends.

There are a number of considerations
which may explain the age difference. First,
the adolescent probably exercises more in-
dependence of judgment than the younger
child. Although factors related to social
class may influence his immediate choice of
friends, when he is called upon to make
judgments concerning the larger group he
may base his judgments on factors which
are more directly the result of the behavior
and personal attributes of each individual.
The high-school boy or girl is probably
judged more on the basis of talent and per-
sonality than as a representative of his class
group.

Another possibility is that class differ-
ences are as Clearly recognized among
adolescents as among younger children but
are differently expressed. It may be that
expressions of rejection at an earlier age be-
come expressions of indifference; that the
adolescent boy or girl who receives no votes
as a “best friend” may be socially rejected
quite as much as the younger boy or girl
who receives many votes on the item,
“wouldn’t want for a friend.”

Not being mentioned at the high-school
level may be indicative of an even greater
degree of rejection than unfavorable men-
tion at the elementary-school level. At the
younger age, Group E children may still be
considered potential playmates and, as such,
come in for their share of attention. At the
older age, Group B (and, to lesser extent,
Group C) may be psychologically so far
removed from Group E that the latter do
not enter their thinking either as potential
friends or—as will be seen in the following
section—even as persons to be mentioned
on the test of reputation. Just as in other
areas of human relations, indifference may
express greater social distance than does
antagonism.

Still another factor is that differences in
social status may themselves be less recog-
nizable at the high-school age. In the fifth
and sixth grades, there are more children of
Figure 4 represents the data on the
twenty statements concerning the reputa-
tion of high-school subjects. It shows es-
sentially the same pattern as the data on
friendship—there is a clear relation between
social class and number of votes obtained
on the positive items but no significant re-
lationship on the negative items.

Group E high-school subjects receive
very few votes on either positive or negative
items (the same is true, to a lesser degree,
of Group D). The older group of judges
seem indifferent toward lower-class sub-
jects and do not single them out on any of
the items about reputation. This finding
seems to support the hypothesis suggested
above—that, in all probability, the lower-
class high-school students are actually less
conspicuous than lower-class students in the
elementary grades. They probably look
and behave like middle-class boys and girls.

Figure 4 illustrates, furthermore, a fact
which was even more in evidence on other
be less representative of lower-class behavior
and therefore less conspicuous than the cor-
responding group at the younger age level.
If a boy whose family occupies the very
lowest social position has continued in
school to the tenth or eleventh grade, he is
quite likely to have certain characteristics
which set him apart from other lower-class
boys: he is probably more ambitious, more
studious; he may have certain special abili-
ties; he is likely to find the school less frus-
trating socially, perhaps because he tries to
adopt the middle-class values and behavior
which he sees about him. In short, he is
probably the mobile member of his social
class.

If we follow this hypothesis further, we
may assume that such a select group of
lower-class boys and girls would not be the
focus for unfavorable mention from their
classmates; their appearance and behavior
will not differentiate them markedly.

These factors probably explain the data
on reputation, well as friendship.
The finding that social-class differences
in friendship and reputation are so well es-
tablished by the time children reach the
fifth grade may be of some importance to
the psychologist. The child of eleven or
twelve soon becomes aware of his reputation
and desirability as a friend, and he must
make his adjustment in the light of what
others think of him. Perhaps one of the
reasons that the child of lower class is so
often a “behavior problem” in school is
that he finds himself rejected by his class-
mates and enjoys such an unenviable repu-
tation. This may also be one of the reasons
why lower-class children often find school
unpleasant and unrewarding and why the
child of lower class so often welcomes the
first opportunity to leave school altogether.

From one point of view the data also
raise the general question of the extent to
which the school, in communities like Home-
town, is encouraging democratic living on
the part of its children. It is undoubtedly
true that the teacher plays a central role in
influencing the opinions of one child toward
another. While there is no systematic re-
search on the topic, anecdotes and observa-
tions suggest that teachers’ behavior to-
ward children of lower class is different from
their behavior toward those of middle or
upper class and that this discrimination
follows the differences in reputation among
the social groups.

One of the crucial problems facing the
school today is the reconciling of its middle-
class point of view with the lower-class
culture of so many of its pupils. This might
be done not only through the personal rela-
tionships created between teacher and child
but also through the relationships between
child and child fostered by the teacher.
More research is needed, of course, on the
whole problem of the school’s role in rela-
tion to the social-class hierarchy: whether
it encourages or discourages social mobility
and in what ways. Certainly, this is a prob-
lem of far-reaching significance to a society
which places so much faith in its schools as
an agency for inculcating democratic at-
titudes in its children.
