Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
There is fairly general agreement that
within the factory the job, with its implicit
reference to skill, income, and social ‘“con-
nections,” is the most important criterion
used by individuals for ranking themselves
socially. “Job” is an all-inclusive term. It in-
cludes not only major differences in work
(such as those between foreman and safety
engineer) but also such subtle differences as
the round of work performed by two men on
identical machines but handling different
types of materials. Among workers, assign-
ment to a particularly easy job will usually
call forth the envious comment: “That’s
not a job, that’s a position”; or “Since when
have they been pensioning guys your age
around here.” Among supervisors and mem-
bers of management jobs are often meas-
ured—in the course of conversation—in
terms of responsibility, the number of in-
dividuals placed under the job-holder in the
formal plant hierarchy, or the amount of
freedom to move about which the job allows
the individual. The advantages and disad-
vantages of certain jobs are discussed again
and again. Therefore, examination of the
phenomena which are a part of job occu-
pancy and of promotion is relevant to the
study of factory social structures.

It is one of the shibboleths of modern
management that advancement from job
to job must be based on efficiency. By “effi-
ciency” is meant the capacity to do work.
Management argues that, if an institution
is to continue to function, the majority of
its members (in this case job-holders) must
have at least a minimum capacity for per-
forming their individual functions. Within
the factory such attributes as physical
strength, education, and age are all at one
time or another implied by the term “capac-
ity to do work.” To a production engineer
a division of labor is necessary, since, for one
reason, a 200-pound male can perform cer-
tain work more efficiently than a 110-pound
female; a man of thirty is able to perform
certain physical tasks too great for the
strength of the average man of sixty-five;
and a graduate of an engineering school can
perform work involving mathematics quite
beyond a person who left school in the
eighth grade.

Once, however, several candidates are
admitted to possess the technical efficiency
required for performance of the work, other
qualifications become important. And at
Somerset, a New England factory, the most
important of these is the ethnic identifica-
tion of the individuals involved. In this fac-
tory individuals must be ethnically qualified
to hold certain jobs, a circumstance which
has resulted in the development of a pattern
of ethnic job expectations, sponsorship, and
rejection. This paper is an analysis of the
system in operation, with a description of
the maneuvers which accompanied at-
tempted promotions on the part of one
group and those which accompanied suc-
cessful or unsuccessful attempts to reject
these promotions.

I gathered the information which will be
used to demonstrate the presence and func-
tioning of this system during two years
while employed as a workman at Somerset,
a management-owned industry employing
a labor force which varied between 1,800
and 2,000. Officially I was first a moveman
and later a cutting-machine operator. While
these were my formal duties, I was also edi-
tor of the union local’s news-bulletin, secre-
tary of the Labor-Management Committee,
and a member of the contract-negotiating
committee. Thus it was possible for me to
observe the interrelationships of the plant
system at crucial points at which labor in-
teracted with management.
I soon became aware of an ethnic struc-
ture within the factory; among my fellow-
workers expression of this fact was often
made. A Negro friend remarked, “You got
to be a Mason or a Catholic to get anywhere
around here.” When I asked about one of
the Irish foremen, a fellow-worker said,
“With a name like Collins you'll fit with
him all right.” Later it became apparent
that there existed at Somerset a clearly de-
finable system of ethnic sponsorship in mat-
ters of promotion. The proposition here will
be that, whatever other considerations may
have been involved in the promotion of em-
ployees, one of the key issues was always
the ethnic identification of the individual
proposed for promotion. Nationality or race
was almost never explicitly declared to bea
consideration in these situations but was al-
ways present.

Chart I is a representation of the ethnic-
job hierarchy at Somerset. The letters Y, J,
and O have been used to indicate three cate-
gories: Yankees, Irish, and Others. In the
category “Others” are those individuals
included in a labor force recruited from a
community similar in ethnic diversity to
that of “Yankee City.’

It should be pointed out that in such an
urban-ethnic area family names are impor-
tant as one of the most obvious ethnic sym-
bols, but they are not always reliable as
such. A newcomer to any group is immedi-
ately placed by his name. Later other fac-
tors may qualify or even nullify this early
judgment. For this reason anyone who has
lived in a New England urban area learns
a new respect for the adage, “What’s in a
name?’ Shea, for instance, may be the
“handle” of a “lace-curtain” (or, for that
matter, a “shanty”) Irishman, but it was
borne also by an eminent officer of the
American Revolutionary Army. During my
stay at Somerset there were three members
of lower top management whose names
For “Polish” is substituted ‘Yiddish,”
“Guinea” (Italian), “Russian,” “Slovak,”
or the language of whatever ethnic group
the storyteller may be using as his target.
Such a story illustrates the feeling enter-
tained by individuals of English-speaking
stock about the “borrowing” of one of their
most prized symbols by individuals socially
subordinate but upwardly mobile.

But the same Yankees who defend this
name symbol through ridicule at one time
forced English names on newcomers to New
England. Industrial organizations, and Som-
erset was very much among them, went in
heavily during one period for what was
called “hiring off the dock.” Through the
merits of this system the newly arrived Eu-
ropean found himself possessed of (or by, if
you choose) an already prepared lodging, a
job, and a new name pronounceable by Eng-
lish tongues. The employers in turn obtained
a new workman whose peasant soul had not
been besmirched by the Irish heresies of
wages, hours, and working conditions. Tony
Taylor, Joe Brown, and Chris Cook were
typical recipients of such New England
generosity.

For these reasons I have placed a ques-
tion mark after some of the foreman posi-
tions. There were twenty-six foremen, and I
do not feel that I knew enough about some
of them to judge their ethnic identification.

Chart I indicates not only that certain
jobs were held by the ethnically acceptable
but that large areas of the plant hierarchy
are almost completely occupied by members
of one ethnic group. Jobs of managerial
type are held by individuals of native or
Yankee stock, and jobs of supervisory na-
ture are held almost exclusively by Irish.
“He is a foreman, although not Irish,” is a
succinct and commonly made statement of
a Somerset pattern of expectation: the ex-
ception calls forth comment. One can see
also that a member of top management, a
superintendent, for example, can be ex-
pected to be a Yankee and that the person-
nel department is Yankee-monopolized.

If, then, the Irish- and Yankee-held posi-
tions as shown by the chart are separated
by encircling, two sharply defined areas are
set up. These areas quite clearly coincide
with the management and with the super-
visory areas of the factory structure. In the
remaining portion of the chart are the indi-
viduals at the working level. As they are
represented, they appear to be an undiffer-
entiated mass. If, however, it were our pur-
pose here to examine them more closely, we
should find that there also are certain struc-
tures of job occupancy among the worker
tions are upset? It should, I suppose, be
pointed out that, when I speak of “job ex-
pectation,” I have in mind not what the in-
dividual expects for himself (which is the
usual meaning conveyed by the word) but
the fact that a significant number of the
people participating share the expectation
that a person of certain identification will be
promoted to fill a vacancy or a newly cre-
ated job. In other words, this is a social, as
distinct from an individual, expectation.

Since most of the foremen at Somerset
are Irish, both Irish and non-Irish have
come to expect newly appointed members
of supervision to be Irish. This does not
mean that all individuals in this position
must be Irish, but it does mean that, when
management appoints a non-Irish person to
a supervisory job, it should be very sure
that it has an especially good reason for
making the appointment.

Since members of both management and
labor have learned to recognize this system
of ethnic job expectations and know fairly
well how to adapt themselves to it, promo-
tions are made year after year without, in
the majority of cases, conflicts developing.
But, when the pattern is violated, there is
usually trouble.

Management, of course, has the formal
prerogative of selecting whichever individ-
uals it feels are capable of filling openings,
and this is explicitly recognized by the
union. Any action, therefore, which develops
in opposition to a promotion is highly infor-
mal, as the following illustrates.

In the spring of 1942 the subforemen in
charge of one of the special-treating work
groups decided to go into the armed services.
Sullivan had been “Old Country” Irish and
was exceedingly popular with his men.
When he left, the management announced
that a Yankee by the name of Peters was to
replace him. Peters had been in the depart-
ment a considerable length of time and
seems to have been well liked by the other
men. But, when I came to work on the sec-
ond shift, I heard that there had been a
threat of a walkout in the special-treating
department. I do not recall the exact conver-
sation, but most of the discussion was cen-
tered around Donovan, another employee
of the department, who the men seemed
to think should have been given the job.

A walkout materialized and lasted for one
shift. From examination of the grievance
records and through talking, a year later,
with some of the principals involved, I was
able to piece together this story:

When the president of the local heard
that a walkout was threatened in the special-
treating department, he and the business
agent made a tour of the plant and, accord-
ing to the story they told, informed all em-
ployees that the walkout was “wildcat” and
not supported by the local. According to the
president of the company, however, the
labor leaders did not actively discourage
the walkout—but informed the workmen
that the local was “neutral.”

A formal grievance was lodged with
management charging that Donovan had
been discriminated against. Obviously the
local did not have a legal leg to stand on,
since the right of promotion is vested in
management. I do not know that either side
took the grievance statement seriously.
The filing of the grievance merely served
as an excuse for the men to return to work
while the local handled matters through
regular channels. But social pressure within
a tightly integrated work group is terrific.
Several days later Peters, the Yankee, failed
to come to work, the report was circulated
that he was ill, and management selected
a man named Murphy to take over for him.
Peters did not return to work, and Murphy
was later made subforeman.

I was fortunate in having a chance later
to talk over what happened with one of the
members of the special-treating department.
He explained it this way: “Management
went over Conner’s [the foreman’s] head by
making one of his subforemen for him. It
wasn’t right, and Holzer [the plant manager]
knew it; but he did it anyway, and Conner
couldn’t make a peep. No [in answer to a
question], we weren’t backing Conner spe-
cially; we just did what was right.”

The group rationalization seems to have
been: It has always been the duty of the
foreman to help choose his subforemen, but
management appointed a subforeman, a
Yankee, without consulting the foreman
under whom he was to work. If Conner had
not been cheated of this privilege, he would
have insisted upon an Irish assistant. Dono-
van is Irish and the leader of the gang;
therefore, it is up to us to see that Donovan
gets the job by inducing the Yankee, Peters,
to leave. But if Murphy gets the job that’s all
right because he is Irish, too. That is the
sort of situation which arose when manage-
ment failed to promote in accordance with
the expectations of the individuals involved.
In this instance the labor group clearly
demonstrated its ability to reject a promo-
tion which did not fit into the ethnic pat-
tern.

Incidentally, Murphy and Donovan “fit-
ted” and were friendly after this episode.
They were seen together constantly at the
bowling alleys. One inference might be that
Murphy had aided rather than injured Don-
ovan by accepting the job. Another Yankee
chosen to replace Peters would probably
have had a rather rough time of it.

It is significant, however, that no opposi-
tion is given to Yankees promoted to fill jobs
within the area of the hierarchy dominated
by Yankees. At Somerset staff jobs of a cer-
tain type are distinguished by the term “ad-
ministrative.” Personnel jobs are always
spoken of as “administrative,” and jobs of
this sort are pretty well monopolized by
Yankees. Accordingly, when wartime ex-
pansion made necessary a series of new ad-
ministrative posts, the management with-
out exception selected Yankees to fill them.
Fawn, for instance, who had worked several
years in the rubber-treating department asa
clerk, was chosen safety engineer. Stillwell,
who had been a clerk in the container de-
partment, was placed in charge of a fore-
man-training program. And, most signifi-
cant, the man appointed director of the
newly organized personnel department was
an engineer by the name of Ball. Each of
these men had two things in common. They
were not from the labor group and they
were Yankees. For these reasons promotion
through the supervisory structure had been
pretty definitely closed for them. What,
however, was the non-Yankee attitude to-
ward them as recipients of the new jobs?
They accepted the three men because they
were well liked by the foremen and by the
union leaders, the two most important non-
Yankee groups.

Sometimes, when a new job is created, the
people involved are not sure whether it is a
supervisory or an administrative position.
This does not often happen, but I was able
to observe one such incident.

During wartime expansion Somerset had
overlooked the need for improved toilet and
janitorial facilities. In one of the earlier
labor-management meetings a discussion of
these conditions was introduced, and after
several weeks of debate, of “kicking the
thing around,” it was agreed that a new de-
partment should be organized under the
auspices of the safety and health subcom-
mittee of the Labor-Management Commit-
tee. This new department was to be known
as the “Central Janitor Service,” and the
janitors from each department were to be
reassigned to it. Management agreed that
if the safety and health subcommittee (one
of whose members was the vice-president
in charge of production) was to assume re-
sponsibility for plant cleanliness, manage-
ment would not interfere with its running
of the janitor service without the prior ap-
proval of the central group of the Labor-
Management Committee.

This was an explicit but verbal agree-
ment between management and labor. At
first blush it seems impossible that a mis-
understanding could arise. But the project
immediately hit a snag. The labor members
insisted that the choice of a “janitor fore-
man” was in line with the other duties of
the safety and health subcommittee. Man-
agement was indignant: its prerogatives
were being encroached upon. But after sev-
eral caucuses management agreed that if
labor would have candidates submit their
names, management might select the new
janitor foreman from among them. The
labor nominations were, with one exception,
both workingmen and Irish. Management
rejected all of them.

Several days later management posted
notices that applications for “Sanitation
Engineer” would be accepted and immedi-
ately chose Roundtree, who was Yankee
and a plant guard.

The repercussions were violent, but the
appointment “stuck.” By changing the
title of the new job from “foreman” to “en-
gineer,”’ management had removed the job
from supervision to administration. It was
clear that if the job could be placed under
administration, it was entirely different
from what labor had conceived it to be.
Through the mechanism of a change of title,
management had upset the social logic by
which labor had concluded that the job was
supervisory and should be secured for an
Irishman. Labor’s argument had lost its
force.

This analysis of three situations has illus-
trated the functioning of a system of ethnic
sponsorship and rejection in one New Eng-
land factory. The system is part of the social
matrix in which it appears and not an iso-
lated phenomenon. Examination of pro-
motion situations in other factories in which
clearly defined ethnic job stratification
exists should yield information of value to
students of the social structure of industrial
organizations.
