Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
t The first draft of this paper was delivered as a
lecture to the Chicago Anthropological Society in
April, 1950.

2Cf. Godfrey Wilson, “An Introduction to
Nyakyusa Society,” Bantu Studies, Vol. X (1936);
“An African Morality,” Africa, Vol. IX (1936);
The Land Rights of Individuals among the Nyakyusa
(“Rhodes-Livingstone Papers” [1938]); Monica
Wilson, “An African Christian Morality,” Africa,
Vol. X (1937); Good Company: A Study of Nyakyusa
Age-Villages (to be published by Oxford University
Press); and “Nyakyusa Kinship,” in Kinship and
Marriage in Africa, ed. A. R. Radcliffe-Brown
(London: Oxford University Press, 1950).

3Cf. Monica Hunter, Reaction to Conquest
(London: Oxford University Press, 1936).
These peoples are similar in many re-
spects: they are both cattle people and cul-
tivators, traditionally having had a subsist-
ence economy but now drawn into the world
economy, the Pondo as migrant laborers in
the gold mines of South Africa, the Nyakyu-
sa as migrant laborers on the mines and sisal
plantations of Tanganyika and as peasant
producers of coffee and rice. Both peoples
were, and still are, organized under chiefs
and have well-developed legal institutions;
both peoples are patrilineal, and marriage is
legalized by the transfer of cattle from the
groom’s group to that of the bride; both
speak a Bantu language, with all that that
implies in similarity of concepts and cate-
gories of thought; and both have the type of
religion so general in Bantu Africa, viz., an
elaborate ancestor cult, a belief in the power
of medicines (that is, in mystical power re-
siding in certain material substances), and a
belief in witchcraft.

I am using “witchcraft’’ in the sense in
which Professor Evans-Pritchard uses it for
the belief in a mystical power innate in cer-
tain individuals and exercised by them to
harm others, and I distinguish it from sor-
cery, which is the illegal use of medicines to
harm others. In doing so, I follow precisely
the Nyakyusa verbal usage, for they distin-
guish between ubulosi, an innate power used
to work evil, and ubutege, the illegal use of
destructive medicines. The distinction is an
important one; for sorcery, as I have defined
it, is practiced, that is, people use medicines
(which are sometimes poisons) with the ob-
ject of harming others, while few anthropol-
ogists would admit the reality of witchcraft
—the exercise of an innate power to harm
others directly. But, though both Nyakyusa
and Pondo have a lively fear of witchcraft,
there are marked variations in the forms of
their beliefs and in the incidence of accusa-
tions, and it is these differences which I wish
to discuss.

The Nyakyusa believe that witches exist
as pythons in the bellies of certain individu-
als. They are something tangible, discover-
able at an autopsy, and inherited. The in-
centive to witchcraft is said to be the desire
for good food. Witches lust for meat and
milk—the prized foods of the group—and it
is this which drives them to commit witch-
craft. They delight in eating human flesh
and gnaw men inside, causing death to their
victims. The witches also steal milk, sucking
the udders of cows, so that the cows dry up
and later abort. All this happens in dreams.
Nightmares of being throttled, of being
chased, of fighting, and of flying through the
air are taken as evidence of an attack by
witches; and, if a man wakes up suddenly at
night in fear and sweating, he knows that
“they”—the witches—have come to throttle
him. The witches are thought to fly by night
on their pythons or “on the wind”; they at-
tack either singly or in covins; and they
feast on human flesh.

Though the first incentive to witchcraft is
said to be the lust for food, witches select as
their victims those against whom they have
a grudge; they act illegally and immorally
but not without cause. They attack those
with whom they have quarreled, so that the
good man who keeps on friendly terms with
his neighbors has little to fear from the
witches. Children are warned not to be quar-
relsome or boastful or brusque in their man-
ners, lest they arouse the anger of witches.
People also fear to be conspicuously success-
ful, lest, exciting envy, they bring upon
themselves the attack of a witch. One can
show off a bit, but not too much. Thus a
man may safely hoe a garden bigger than
that of his neighbors, but it must not be too
conspicuously bigger, and he must not boast
of its size; a woman may carry home a
heavier load of faggots than her fellow, but
it must not be too conspicuously heavier;
and so on. To be a Don Juan, carrying on
many intrigues, or the favorite wife of one’s
husband is also dangerous, provoking jeal-
ousy. Above all, witches are thought to at-
tack those who are stingy with food, and a
direct connection is made between feeding
potential witches on beef and protecting
one’s self against attack. Well-fed pythons
stay quiet.

The kind of person accused of being a
witch is very like the person thought to be
attacked. He (or she) is proud and boastful,
morose, or aloof and unsympathetic to
neighbors in trouble. The “strong, silent
man” depicted as a hero by Hollywood
would very likely be labeled a witch in Afri-
can society. The unusually successful man,
the go-getter, is also liable to be accused of
practicing witchcraft or sorcery, for it is
argued that his success can only have come
through some mystical power and at the
expense of his fellows.

The Nyakyusa believe that witchcraft is
extremely dangerous but that the danger is
limited in two ways: first, witchcraft rarely
operates beyond the village—a private per-
son can be attacked only from within his
own village—and, second, the good man is
defended by his neighbors. It is thought that
in every village there are “defenders” (aba-
manga) who see the witches in dreams and
fight them and drive them off. The leader of
“the defenders” is the headman of the vil-
lage.

But not only do “the defenders” protect
the innocent, they also punish the guilty.
They bring upon a wrongdoer a chilling
breath which paralyzes him or causes him to
sicken with a fever or some debilitating
disease. The supposed victim of such an at-
tack will complain angrily of ‘“‘witchcraft”
(ubulosi), but other people will speak of his
sin and the just retribution that has fallen
upon him through “the breath of men” or
“the curse.” The source of this power of de-
fense and punishment is almost identical
with that of witchcraft: it comes from py-
thons in men’s bellies, though, curiously,
defenders have only one python, whereas
witches have several, and the defender’s py-
thon is not visible at an autopsy like that of
a witch. The sins which are believed to bring
down the anger of the defenders are many,
but the commonest are failure to provide
feasts on certain specified occasions, dis-
respectful behavior toward parents or by a
woman toward her husband or parents-in-
law, incest, and a breach of conventions re-
garding the limitation of pregnancies. Ill
health in man and beast and field was di-
rectly linked to sin by our informants; Job,
who suffered misfortune, though he was
righteous, is foreign to Nyakyusa thought.
Hence a study of cases of misfortune pro-
vided concrete data on values; it shows
very clearly what was judged good and what
evil.

The categories of people suspected by the
Nyakyusa of practicing witchcraft are, first
and foremost, village neighbors—more than
a third of the cases of witchcraft we col-
lected were of this type—second, fellow-
workers in a mining camp, and, third, wives.
Only very rarely is an accusation of practic-
ing witchcraft lodged against a kinsman.‘

The Pondo ideas about witchcraft are
rather different. First, they think that a
witch always works by means of a familiar—
a fabulous hairy being with exaggerated
sexual characteristics called Tikoloshe, or a
baboon, a wild cat, a snake, or a lightning
bird. The familiar is of opposite sex to that
of the witch and is often spoken of as taking
the form of a beautiful girl or a handsome
man, very light in color, and the witch and
familiar have sexual relations. Usually the
familiar is acquired by inheritance’ The
basis of these beliefs is again dreams, sex
dreams being frequently interpreted in
terms of witchcraft. The Pondo do not dis-
tinguish so sharply between witchcraft and
sorcery as the Nyakyusa do; nevertheless,
they speak of two types of power used il-
legally, viz., familiars and medicines. Famil-
jars are regarded as altogether and utterly
evil, and there is no idea of their being used
in defense or to punish a wrongdoer. A
homestead is defended against witches by
its ancestors and by medicines placed round
about it, not by some of its members who
see and fight the witches in dreams. And the
range of witchcraft is not limited in the way
in which it is among the Nyakyusa; nowa-
days it is even said to be sent by post.

I know much less about the kind of be-
havior thought to excite the attacks of
witches or to lead to an accusation against
one among the Pondo than among the
Nyakyusa, for I was less interested in this
problem when I was in Pondoland than I
became later on and also I was less intimate
with the Pondo than with the Nyakyusa.
I do know, however, that envy, roused by
conspicuous success, is a cause very com-
monly cited. I am inclined to think that mis-
fortune is less closely linked with morality
among the Pondo than among the Nyakyu-
sa, that is, that they conceive of the witches
acting without cause in a way in which the
Nyakyusa do not; but I have not the evi-
dence to substantiate this. Further investi-
gation will be necessary to prove or to dis-
prove such a hypothesis. But, even though
witchcraft and morality may not be so
closely linked by the Pondo as by the
Nyakyusa, a study of Pondo witch beliefs
throws a good deal of light on Pondo moral-
ity.

The typical accusations of witchcraft in
Pondoland are between mother and daugh-
ter-in-law who live in the same homestead
and between fellow-employees in the mines
or elsewhere. Accusations against neighbors,
people of other homesteads, occur but are
less frequent. I have no figures to support
this impression of the incidence of accusa-
tions among the Pondo, but it is largely con-
firmed by the analysis of accusations now
being made by a young anthropologist, Miss
Selma Kaplan, in another Xhosa-speaking
area, the Keiskama Valley, which is cul-
turally very similar to Pondoland.

Now the differences between the Nyakyu-
sa and Pondo ideas about witchcraft are not
absolute; there is some overlapping between
them. There are some hints among the
Nyakyusa of sex associations with witch-
craft, though they have no theory of famil-
iars with whom the owner has sex relations
and do not interpret sex dreams in terms of
witchcraft, and there is some suggestion
among the Pondo of witches seeking food—
the baboon familiar is said sometimes to
milk cows. There is also some overlapping in
the type of behavior thought to anger the
witches in the two societies and in the rela-
tionships within which accusations occur.
But the difference in emphasis is very great.
I went straight to the Nyakyusa after work-
ing with the Pondo, and I was puzzled by
the contrast. What was the reason for it?
Why should the Nyakyusa always talk
about the witches lusting for food and the
Pondo talk about witch lovers? Why do the
Nyakyusa have this theory of a power akin
to witchcraft used in defense and to punish
evildoers, and not the Pondo?

With the reports of the dreams of men in
half-starved prisoner-of-war camps in mind,
I began, first, to reflect on the differences in
Nyakyusa and Pondo diet, but I found no
answer there. The Nyakyusa have long®
been among the best-fed people in Africa,
while the Pondo are nowadays very badly
fed. The Nyakyusa eat only a limited
amount of meat but have a good deal of
milk and ample supplies of bananas and
plantains, maize, beans, finger-millet,
groundnuts, sweet potatoes, pumpkins, and
greens; and many of them get fish and rice.
The Pondo, on the other hand, have no
more meat than the Nyakyusa and almost
certainly less milk, while their supplies of
fruit, grains, pulses, greens, and fish are
much more limited in quantity and variety.
It is true that a century ago the Pondo prob-
ably had much more meat and milk than
they have today; but, if meat hunger really
produces the idea that witches kill to get
flesh, then it would have appeared among
the Pondo long before this. There is no tradi-
tion of cannibalism among either people,
though it may conceivably have been re-
sorted to by both in periods of extreme pri-
vation. Neither people have ever had the
reputation among their neighbors of being
cannibals, as the Azande had.

What, then, are the other conspicuous
differences between Nyakyusa and Pondo
societies? The Nyakyusa are peculiar in that
they live not in kinship villages, like most
African peoples, but in age-villages. A group
of boys build a village when they are still
quite young—about ten or eleven years old
—and they remain together through life,
bringing their wives to this village when
they marry. Tremendous emphasis is laid on
enjoying the company of age-mates, on eat-
ing and drinking with them, and avoiding
quarrels with them. Until he marries, a boy
is fed by his mother, though he sleeps in the
boys’ village and spends his spare time there,
but he does not come home alone for meals.
Instead, a group of boys visits the mother of
each member in turn, and this habit of eat-
ing in a group is ideally maintained all
through life. A man cannot eat with women,
and he cannot eat with his sons; to do so
would imply a familiarity wholly immoral in
Nyakyusa eyes; but he should eat with
neighbors who are age-mates of his own
standing. Generosity with food and hospital-
ity to neighbors is the first virtue and the
basis of prestige in the society. The village
is the landholding group and joins in com-
mon defense under the leadership of the vil-
lage headman in the “war by day and war
by night” (ubwite pa musi nobwite pa kelo),
“war by night’? meaning the war against
witches. Traditionally, also, the members of
a village have certain responsibilities for
torts committed by one of their fellows.

In spite of living and fighting with his
age-set, however, a Nyakyusa man has very
close ties with his kinsmen. He is bound to
them by a supposed mystical interdepend-
ence and the performance of rituals directed
to common ancestors, on which health and
fertility are thought to depend, and by in-
terest in the cattle owned by members of his
agnatic lineage. I have not space now to go
into the very complicated system by which
cattle are acquired and distributed; it must
suffice to say that they circulate within
agnatic lineages and between lineages; a
man acquires cattle primarily through kin-
ship connections, and his kinsmen have cer-
tain claims on the cattle he holds. Fellow-
villagers have no claims on his cattle other
than food; they do not inherit from him or
get cattle from him with which to marry, but
they do expect to receive a share of his milk
and to feast on beef upon certain recognized
occasions, when he should kill cattle for a
ritual. There are no clans or large exogamous
groups. Descendants of a common grand-
parent cannot marry, and those with a com-
mon great-grandparent should not marry;
but, since kinsmen are scattered, the limita-
tion on choice within one neighborhood is
small.

Nyakyusa country has been under Euro-
pean control since 1893, and, as we saw
earlier, some of the men are in European
employment, but relations between Nya-
kyusa and European are still fairly tenuous;
the atmosphere is that of a frontier, and the
caste system has not solidified as it has in
South Africa. Racial segregation is not taken
as an ultimate value by any group.

The Pondo social structure is quite differ-
ent. Among them the local group, the home-
stead (wmzi), is a kinship group, comprising
an agnatic lineage, together with wives and
unmarried daughters. The men of a home-
stead form a close-knit group, commonly
eating in company and formerly being
jointly responsible for each other’s torts and
fighting as a unit in the army of the district.
A number of lineages make up a clan, which,
though not strictly a territorial group, has a
territorial headquarters, a substantial pro-
portion of the men in any one area being of
the same clan, that of the chief of the area.
Tremendous emphasis is laid on clan exog-
amy and not marrying into the clan of one’s
mother or of either grandmother. Clans are
large; they may have three thousand or four
thousand members; and, since they tend to
concentrate in different areas, a great many
girls in one neighborhood are classed as sis-
ters by a young man of the neighborhood.
The emotional content of this taboo on clan
incest is tremendous; it survives even among
urbanized people, and it is one of the main
cultural differences separating the Xhosa-
and Zulu-speaking people from the Sotho,
with whom they mingle in Johannesburg
and other centers of employment.

Second, the Pondo are members of a
color-caste society, in which one of the ulti-
mate values is the exclusion of sex relations
between members of different castes. They
are in much closer contact with whites than
the Nyakyusa are, and the emphasis on
endogamy within each color group is much
greater in South Africa than in Tanganyika.
Sex relations between white and black,
whether marital or extra-marital, are now a
criminal offense in South Africa.

Now my hypothesis is that the differences
between the Nyakyusa and Pondo ideas of
witchcraft are directly connected with these
differences in their social structure. The
Nyakyusa emphasize the virtue of feeding
village neighbors and regard the lust for
meat and milk as the main incentive to
witchcraft because they live not with kins-
men but with neighbors and yet cattle, the
main form of wealth, are controlled by kin-
ship groups. Jealousy of a neighbor’s wealth
is common enough, but it is peculiarly keen
among the Nyakyusa because nonrelatives
live close together in villages and the poor
cannot help being aware when the rich feast
on good food. Our Nyakyusa friends spoke
of the witches smelling meat roasting or
smelling milk, and that, I think, is very sig-
nificant. A share in feasts is the only benefit
a nonrelative can expect to have from the
wealth in cattle of a fellow-villager.

The Pondo setup is quite different.
Among them, only kinsmen live together,
and kinsmen can expect to benefit from the
herd of their wealthy relatives either
through inheritance or by assistance with
marriage cattle, so every man has a per-
sonal interest in the increase of cattle be-
longing to the kinsmen with whom he lives.
Pondo also crave meat feasts, but they speak
of the pressure to kill cattle as coming from
the ancestors, not from neighbors. When a
sacrifice is made on behalf of a kinsman who
is ill, the Pondo say: Balambile, bafuna
ukudla ngaye, meaning “they are hungry,
they want to eat with him,” and “they” re-
fers to the ancestors, not to witches or
neighbors. Neighbors play no necessary part
in the ritual at all, and even if they do not
come to share in the feast the patient will re-
cover, whereas, if a Nyakyusa has been ill
and sacrifices, the neighbors must eat of the
meat of the sacrifice and bless him.

And what of the Pondo emphasis on sex
in witchcraft? Are they a much more inhib-
ited people than the Nyakyusa? At first
sight it appears that they are not. There is,
in fact, much greater freedom of premarital
relations between the sexes among the
Pondo than among the Nyakyusa, for the
marriage age of girls is much higher and the
marriage age of men rather lower. In Pondo-
land there is a large group of nubile girls who
dance and flirt and cuddle with the young
men, whereas among the Nyakyusa there is
no such group. Among the latter most girls
are betrothed well before puberty, and, once
a girl is betrothed, any sex contact with her
(outside the puberty ceremonies) is treated
as adultery. But the Pondo prohibit sex rela-
tions with a much wider group of persons
than do the Nyakyusa. I relate the emphasis
on sex in witchcraft among the Pondo to the
system of clan exogamy, which excludes
large categories of individuals living in the
same neighborhood from marrying or flirting
with one another, and the idea that the
familiar is a light-colored person to the caste
system which almost excludes sex relations
between persons of different colors. In short,
I suggest that the familiar is a symbol of for-
bidden sex attraction and that such attrac-
tion is common in a society in which large
categories of people who live in close contact
with one another are forbidden to marry.

The belief in “the breath of men,” that is,
in a power akin to witchcraft used in defense
and to punish wrongdoers is also, I suggest,
related to the age-village organization. It is
matched in a kinship village by the belief
that the ancestors are a shield against mis-
fortune to the group and that senior living
relatives have a mystical power over their
descendants and juniors. The concept of
“the breath of men” gives a Nyakyusa vil-
lage headman a power over the members of
his village comparable to that of a headman
in a Pondoland village. The fact that the
power of the one is thought to derive from a
python in his belly and the power of the
other from his ancestors does not materially
affect his relationship with members of his
village.

The difference in the incidence of accusa-
tions of witchcraft in Nyakyusa and Pondo
societies is also related to the differences in
the social structure of the two groups. A
Pondo bride joins the homestead of her hus-
band and lives, often for many years, under
the control of her mother-in-law. Friction
between them is very common. Moreover,
she is long regarded as a stranger and so is
suspect because she is a member of another
clan. The Nyakyusa wife, on the other hand,
lives in a different village from her mother-
in-law and does not necessarily see much of
her. Nor is she an outsider in a closely knit
kin group as the Pondo woman is. In
Nyakyusa society friction is most likely be-
tween neighbors who live close together, and
it is between them that accusations of witch-
craft are most frequent. Both societies are
polygynous, and, in both, accusations are
fairly frequent between co-wives. Individ-
uals from both societies work for Europeans,
and accusations are very common between
fellow-workers.

There are indications that, as these two
societies are drawn into closer relationship
with the outside world, there is a change in
the forms of belief, as well as in the incidence
of accusations. Among the Nyakyusa, for
example, the more sophisticated fear sorcery
while denying belief in witchcraft. Sorcery is
felt by them to be compatible with Western
science in a way in which witchcraft is not,
for ubutege, the word I have translated as
“sorcery,” is usually interpreted as “‘poison-
ing” by those Nyakyusa who know some
English. It is quite true that it includes
poisoning, but it also includes burying a
medicine under an enemy’s doorstep or in
the thatch of his hut, and no consistent dis-
tinction is made by the Nyakyusa between
these different types of ubutege.

But, though the forms of belief change,
belief in witchcraft or sorcery of one kind or
another continues, and this, I think, is the
crux of our problem. What are the social
conditions which produce a general belief in
witchcraft and sorcery? Granted that ac-
cusations of practicing witchcraft or sorcery
are an expression of conflict and that they
are likely to be many when conflict is acute,
as in a Johannesburg slum or a mining camp
in Tanganyika, we still have to explain why
such accusations are not common in London
slums or Tyneside collieries. For example,
what were the social conditions in seven-
teenth-century England thatproduced beliefs
so very similar to contemporary beliefs in
Pondoland—the parallels to the Pondo be-
lief in familiars are very close indeed in
seventeenth-century England—and what
were the effective causes of the decline of
these beliefs? I long to read an adequate
analysis of this problem by some social his-
torian aware of anthropological theory. The
decline in belief in witchcraft and sorcery is
not purely a matter of extending scientific
knowledge—our answer must cover the as-
tute Pondo teacher, who said to me: “It may
be quite true that typhus is carried by lice,
but who sent the infected louse? Why did it
bite one man and not another?”

I have suggested elsewhere? that witch
beliefs are general in small-scale societies
with inadequate control of their environ-
ment and dominated by personal relation-
ships, societies in which people think in per-
sonal terms and seek personal causes for
their misfortunes. This hypothesis may or
may not prove to be part of the answer; but,
even if it is true, it does not take us far
enough. Innumerable other questions crop
up. For example, is the close connection
which the Nyakyusa make between witch-
craft and morality, between misfortune and
sin, characteristic of all very small societies
or of all relatively stable societies, or is it
related to other, quite different factors? Sup-
posing that I am right in thinking that the
Pondo tie misfortune less closely to morality
than the Nyakyusa do, what is the reason
for this difference?

And when the belief in witchcraft in the
sense in which I have defined it disappears,
what takes its place? Are the witches but the
primitive form of the scapegoat who is al-
ways with us? Are men with pythons in their
bellies and those who ride baboons by night
indeed a true parallel to the red agents of
McCarthy’s fevered dreams?

Understanding of these problems will, I
think, proceed from a close analysis of the
relation between witch beliefs and other as-
pects of society, such as I have tried to paint
on a very small canvas in this paper. I see
witch beliefs as the standardized nightmare
of a group, and I believe that the compara-
tive analysis of such nightmares is not
merely an antiquarian exercise but one of
the keys to the understanding of society.
