Pale AM ee ee ee at eta
are now only accessible on

the Chicago Journals website at

EVR LeU
Pee ot AR eee ea aaa
are now only accessible on
the Chicago Journals website at

VESTA a
For decades sociologists have made ref-
erence to “taking the role of the other”
(“role-taking” for short) as a basic explan-
atory concept in relating the acts of the
individual to the social contexts of his ac-
tions. In general, the term has been em-
ployed as a broadly “sensitizing concept’?
rather than with precise denotations suit-
able to empirical research. Some years
after these terms had become commonplace
in sociological literature a new school of
social relations appropriated the term “role-
taking” to describe the particular pro-
cedures involved in the psychodrama and
sociodrama.’ On top of this earlier vague-
ness have been superimposed recent dis-
cussions of “role-taking capacity” and “em-
pathic ability.”4 Finally, a new concept of
“reference group,” which has achieved
meteoric prominence, quite obviously over-
laps in some respects the earlier role-taking.

In this paper we shall consider the value
Role-taking in its most general form is
a process of looking at or anticipating an-
other’s behavior by viewing it in the con-
text of a role imputed to that other. It is
thus always more than simply a reaction to
another’s behavior in terms of an arbitrari-
ly understood symbol or gesture.

By role we mean a collection of patterns
of behavior which are thought to constitute
a meaningful unit and deemed appropriate
to a person occupying a particular status
in society (e.g., doctor or father), occupy-
ing an informally defined position in inter-
personal relations (e.g., leader or compro-
miser), or identified with a particular value
in society (e.g., honest man or patriot).®
We shall stress the point that a role con-
sists of behaviors which are regarded as
making up a meaningful unit. The linkage
of behaviors within roles is the source of
our expectations that certain kinds of action
will be found together. When people speak
of trying to “make sense” of someone’s be-
havior or to understand its meaning, they
are typically attempting to find the role
of which the observed actions are a part.

Role will be consistently distinguished
from status or position or value type as re-
ferring to the whole of the behavior which
is felt to belong intrinsically to those sub-
divisions. Role refers to behavior rather
than position, so that one may enact a role
but cannot occupy a role. However, role is
a normative concept. It refers to expected
or appropriate behavior and is distinguished
from the manner in which the role is ac-
tually enacted in a specific situation, which
is role behavior or role performance.® While
a norm is a directive to action, a role is a
set of norms, with the additional normative
element that the individual is expected to
be consistent. The role is made up of all
those norms which are thought to apply to
a person occupying a given position. Thus,
we return to our initial emphasis that the
crucial feature of the concept of role is its
reference to the assumption that certain
different norms are meaningfully related
or “go together.”

With only unimportant qualifications, we
shall accept the delimited meaning of role-
taking proposed by Walter Coutu,” which
distinguishes the imaginative construction
of the other’s role (role-taking) from the
overt enactment of what one conceives to
be one’s own appropriate role in a given

in the definition is purposely left without a fur-
ther referent, since the particular content of the
role (i.e. that which is regarded as appropriate)
will vary depending upon the vantage point of
the person or persons formulating the role con-
ception. Cf. also Theodore R. Sarbin, “Role
Theory,” in Handbook of Social Psychology, ed.
Gardner Lindzey (Cambridge, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley Publishing Co., 1954), I, 223-58.

° Cf. Theodore M. Newcomb, Social Psychology
(New York: Dryden Press, 1950), p. 330.
situation (role-playing) and from the overt
enactment of a role as a form of pretense
(“playing-at” a role). Role-taking may pro-
ceed from identifying a position to infer-
ring its role and in this manner anticipating
the behavior of an individual. Or it may
proceed from observing a segment of be-
havior to identifying the feelings or motives
behind the behavior or to anticipating sub-
sequent behavior. In either case certain
actions are interpreted or anticipated upon
the basis of the entire role of which they
are assumed to be a part.

In the present discussion the manner in
which an individual conceives the role of
another will not be examined as an isolated
form of behavior. The self-other relation-
ship will be viewed as an aspect of a total
social act.8 The actor takes the role of an-
other in carrying out some behavior of his
own; role-taking is an adjunct to the de-
termination or application of one’s own
role in a given situation. Accordingly, for
present purposes we shall disregard the
usage of role-taking as the enactment of
roles in the sociodramatic setting when the
usage detaches the roles from their specific
implications for the way in which the actor
It will help to convey the boundaries of
the concept of role-taking as we are using
it and clarify the major task of this paper
if we first mention two alternative schemes
for classifying role-taking behavior which
we do not plan to emphasize, although we
recognize their great importance. First,
role-taking is frequently used to refer to
an ability or capacity, and attention is ac-
cordingly centered about the accuracy with
which the role of the other is inferred. Stud-
ies dealing with role-taking capacity or
empathic ability!® attempt to measure the
degree to which the other-role as imagi-
natively constructed corresponds to the
actual role as that other experiences it, and
the individual is said to be taking the role
of the other only when he accurately infers
the other’s feelings or anticipates his be-
havior.

From our standpoint, however, the proc-
ess of role-taking is not inherently different
when the inference is accurate from when
it is inaccurate. Furthermore, once the
actor formulates a conception of the role
of the other, the manner in which that con-
ception serves to shape his own behavior
is unaffected by the accuracy or inaccuracy
of the conception. Accordingly, we shall
speak of the actor as taking the role of
the other irrespective of whether his impu-
tation is accurate or not.
Another important basis for classifying
role-taking behavior which will not be
elaborated here has to do with the criteria
which are used to infer the role of the
other. (a) As we have already noted, role-
taking may be a matter of first observing
some behavior of the other and then infer-
ring the total role of which that behavior
is assumed to be a part. In this sense one
responds to the behavior of the other as a
gesture, as an “incomplete act” which one
completes in imagination by supplying the
role of which it is an indication.11 (b) Or
role-taking may take place without any
visible behavior on the part of the other,
the role being inferred from a knowledge
of the situation, from the supposed status
or value. Role-taking of these two types
undoubtedly calls upon somewhat different
skills, so that the individual who has high
facility in identifying the meanings of ges-
tures may not be equally adept at supply-
ing the role from a mere knowledge of the
situation.

The criteria used to infer the role of the
other may also be either projection or
knowledge of the other. (a) In the case of
projection, one constructs the other-role as
he would if he himself were in the situation
or had made the particular gesture. When
role-taking proceeds in this manner, the
particular identity of the other is immate-
rial to the role content, since the role con-
ceptions of the actor are simply imputed
to the other. (b) In contrast to projection
one may interpret the other’s gesture on
the basis of prior experience with that in-
dividual or other individuals assumed to be
like him. Or one infers the other’s role from
prior experience with that other’s behavior
in similar situations or from prior experi-
ence with the behavior of people like him
in comparable situations.

Again, these distinctions are of consider-
able importance. But from our present
standpoint the manner in which the role
of the other is inferred must be distin-
guished from the manner in which the in-
STANDPOINT IN ROLE-TAKING

Taking the role of another may or may
not include adopting the standpoint of the
other as one’s own. The role of the other
may remain an object to the actor, so that
he understands and interprets it without
allowing its point of view to become his
own, or the actor may allow the inferred
attitudes of the other to become his own
and to direct his behavior. Another way of
stating the distinction is to note that an
individual who is taking the role of another
may identify with the role of that other, or
else he may retain a clear separation of
identity between the self-attitudes and the
attitudes of the other. When role-taking
includes adoption of the standpoint of the
other, the role-taking process is an auto-
matic determiner of behavior. One simply
acts from the standpoint of the role. When
the standpoint of the other is not adopted,
some other factor must intervene to de-
termine the kind of influence which the
role imputed to the other will have on the
actor.

An occasional confusion between tak-
ing the role of another and adopting the
standpoint of another is partly responsible
for the view that facility in role-taking nec-
essarily results in altruistic or sympathetic
behavior or eliminates divergence of pur-
pose between opposing factions. Certain
types of exploitation, for example, require
elaborate role-taking behavior on the part
of the exploiter. The “confidence man”
frequently succeeds because of his ability
to identify accurately the feelings and atti-
tudes of the person with whom he is deal-
ing while completely avoiding any involve-
ment or identification with these feelings.

The standpoint is not, of course, some-
thing apart from the role. It is the core of
the role. The difference to which we are re-
ferring concerns the ability to engage in an
imaginative construction of the role of an-
other while maintaining the separation of
personal identities.

The early role-taking activity of the
child does not make such a separation. To
the degree to which he thinks or feels him-
self into a situation of another, he adopts
as his own the attitudes appropriate to that
situation, The more complex behavior in
which the actor is able to see the other’s
role while maintaining a separation of iden-
tities appears to develop through two proc-
esses. First, the individual becomes con-
cerned simultaneously with multiple others.
As he takes the roles of two others simul-
taneously, he cannot simultaneously adopt
the standpoints of each. Thus, in simul-
taneously taking the roles of his mother
and his playmate, he cannot orient him-
self from each standpoint at the same time.
Hence he may take the role of a playmate,
but, in reacting to the imputed role, he
may adopt the standpoint of his mother.
The existence of conflicting standpoints in
the varied roles which the individual has
learned to take forces upon him a separa-
tion between taking the role and adopting
its standpoint.

On the other hand, the presence of
stable purposes or needs gradually leads
the individual to engage in role-taking in
an adaptive context. Such rudimentary un-
derstandings of the roles of others as the
child may achieve are quite early put to
use in the attempted pursuit of his own
objectives. Role-taking makes possible both
the manipulation of others and adjustment
to them, becoming a means to a pre-exist-
ing end of some sort. The attitude and skill
of role-taking which were learned in a re-
lationship of identification become divorced
from that relationship as it is discovered
to be useful in promoting the individual’s
own purposes.

These two ways in which role-taking is
divested of identification remain as two
somewhat different kinds of standpoint
which can be adopted toward the imputed
role of the other. (1) In the former in-
stance the standpoint adopted is that of a
third party. The third-party standpoint in-
dicates what behavior is expected of the
actor, depending upon the inferences made
concerning the role of the other. The point
of view of the mother, for example, may be
that her child should be friends with a
neighbor only if that neighbor conceives
his role as being a decent and respectable
child. The role of the other, when divorced
from adoption of its standpoint, becomes a
datum in carrying out the standpoint of
the third party.

The third-party standpoint may be rec-
ognized as that of a specific person or
group, or it may be depersonalized into a
norm. Such a norm provides the individual
with a directive to action which is contin-
gent upon his placing some construction
on the role of the relevant other. In a study
of college students’ reactions toward a
friend who had committed a hypothetical
breach of the mores, for example, the ma-
jority volunteered some estimate of the role
context in which the friend had committed
the disapproved act. Some respondents
found it appropriate not to report their
friend’s theft to the authorities when it
could be assumed that the general role of
the friend was still that of an honest, law-
abiding person whose inconsistent behavior
reflected unusual stress. For these respond-
ents the norms defining their own respon-
sibility were more dependent upon the role
of the other than on any specific behavior
in which he had engaged.!* Whether the
third-party standpoint is personalized or
not, the actor engages in role-taking in or-
der to determine how he ought to act to-
ward the other.

(2) When role-taking is in the adaptive
context, however, the standpoint consists
of a purpose or objective rather than a
specific directive. The actor must examine
the probable interaction between the self-
role and the other-role in terms of the pro-
motion of a purpose. He lacks a specific or
detailed directive supplied by the stand-
point of a third party and consequently
must shape his own role behavior according
to what he judges to be the probable effect
of interaction between his own role and the
inferred role of the other.

This latter kind of role-taking behavior
may be clarified with George Herbert
Mead’s classic distinction between “play”
and the “game,” as illustrated in baseball.1%
The skilful player in a game such as base-
ball cannot act solely according to a set of
rules. The first baseman can learn in gen-
eral when he is to field the ball, when to
run to first base, etc. But, in order to play
intelligently and to be prepared for less
clearly defined incidents in the game, he
must adjust his role performance to the
roles of all the other players. This adjust-
ment is in terms of the effect of interaction
among roles toward the end of minimizing
the score of the opposing team. Whether
the first baseman fields the ball, runs to
first, throws to home, etc., will depend upon
what he thinks each of the other players
will do and how his action will combine
most effectively with theirs to keep the
score down.

Mead has pointed out that in the “game”
the actor must have in mind the roles of
all the other players. However, there is
more which is distinctive about this kind
of role-taking than merely the simultaneous
attention to multiple other-roles. The man-
ner in which the actor relates his own role
to the others is in terms of their interactive
effect rather than simply in terms of ac-
cepting their direction. It is not so much
what the pitcher wants him to do that de-
termines the first baseman’s action as what
the first baseman judges will be the conse-
quences if each acts in a particular way.!*

This type of role-taking can be even
more clearly illustrated in the case of ex-
ploitation or of salesmanship directed to-
ward a reluctant buyer, in which cases the
actor’s purpose is not shared by the rele-
vant other. In these instances the actor
holds constantly in mind his imaginative
construction of the role of the other and
adjusts his own behavior so as to elicit and
take advantage of behavior in the other
which will enhance his own objectives. He
sensitizes himself to the attitudes of the
other while divesting himself of any iden-
tification with these attitudes. And these
attitudes enter into determination of his
own behavior through the criterion of ef-
fect in interaction with potential self-be-
havior.

Recapitulating this section, we have ob-
served that an individual who in some sense
puts himself in the position of another and
imaginatively constructs that other’s role
may do so from one of three general stand-
points. First, he may adopt the other’s
standpoint as his own, in which case he is
identifying with the other-role and allow-
ing it to become an automatic guide to his
own behavior. Second, the role of the other
may remain an object viewed from the
standpoint of some personalized third party
or depersonalized norm, in which case the
role of the relevant other becomes a datum
necessary in implementing the third-party
directive. Third, the role of the relevant
other may be viewed from the standpoint
of its effect in interaction with potential
self-behavior, as contributing toward some
individual or shared purpose. The stand-
Borrowing a term from George Herbert
Mead, we shall suggest that a second ma-
jor distinction be made between reflexive
and nonreflexive role-taking.5 Mead uses
the term “reflexive” in referring to the
“characteristic of the self as an object to
itself.” When the role of the other is em-
ployed as a mirror, reflecting the expecta-
tions or evaluations of the self as seen in
the other-role,!® we may speak of reflexive
role-taking.

While role-taking is a process of placing
specific behaviors of the other in the con-
text of his total role, the attention of the
actor is never equally focused upon all the
attitudes implied by that role. Rather,
one’s orientation determines that only cer-
tain attitudes of the other-role will be espe-
cially relevant to the determination of his
own behavior. Role-taking in abstraction
is importantly different from role-taking in
a situation which calls for a determination
of how the actor’s role should be played,
for the demands of the actor’s role deter-
mine the selection of aspects of the other-
role for emphasis. In one context one par-
ticular set of attitudes may be relevant to
the determination of the actor’s behavior;
in another context the same set of attitudes
may be irrelevant.

One of the most important distinctions
which can be made among the kinds of
other-attitudes is between those which are
expectations or evaluations or images di-
rected toward the self and those which are
not. When the attention of the role-taker
is focused upon the way in which he ap-
pears to the other, the role-taking is re-
flexive.

Reflexiveness is connected with what we
popularly call “self-consciousness.” When
role-taking is reflexive, the individual is led
not merely to consider the effects of his
action or their compatibility with some
standard or code but to picture himself
specifically as an object of evaluation by
someone else. An additional perspective is
added to his conception of his own be-
havior.

The criteria of reflexiveness and stand-
point placed in combination serve to de-
lineate more sharply the different ways in
which the self-other relationship can de-
termine behavior. We shall examine role-
taking from each of the three standpoints
in order in its nonflexive and reflexive
forms.

1. When the standpoint of the other-
role is adopted, the other may serve as a
model or standard which is accepted with-
out self-consciousness either in the absence
of alternative models or because of pres-
tige or dependence in the relationship. Role-
taking which is nonreflexive and identify-
ing is probably the simplest and earliest
form. The child’s “playing-at” various roles
shifts fairly imperceptibly into such role-
taking in real-life situations. When con-
fronted with situations like those in which
he has seen a parent or older sibling enact
a role, the child adopts as his own the atti-
tudes of the role as he understands them.
For example, a child of three or four who
has been taught in a firm but kindly man-
ner not to touch various objects will sud-
denly adopt as his own the entire role and
standpoint of the parent when he finds
himself in company with a younger and
less responsible child. The behavior of the
younger child calls up in the older the role
which adults have taken toward him. Ac-
cordingly, he naively acts toward the
younger child as he has learned to under-
stand the role of the parent toward himself.

The same pattern of role-taking con-
tinues to be a major source of the values
and attitudes of the individual. Whenever
there is close attachment of one person to
another, there is a tendency for the stand-
point of the other to be adopted. Probably
the attachment need not be positive in
character. An attachment loaded with nega-
tive affect giving rise to intense rivalry
leads each person to take the role of his
rival and unwittingly adopt that rival’s
standpoint in many respects. Whenever
prestige is accorded to someone, there is a
tendency to take the role of the prestige-
ful person without disentangling that
other’s standpoint.

2. In contrast to this nonreflexive rela-
tionship a desire to conform to the other’s
expectations or to appear favorably in the
other’s eyes may shape the self-behavior
into conformity with the other.

When role-taking involves identification
and is reflexive, the self becomes specifi-
cally an object evaluated from the stand-
point of the other. The attitudes of the
other which are adopted as one’s own are
the attitudes toward one’s self rather than
toward external objects and values in the
environment. At this stage a self-image is
beginning to be formed, though it is not
yet independent of the particular other
whose role is being taken. From reflexive
identifying role-taking the individual be-
gins to develop an estimate of his own ade-
quacy and worth. His own self-esteem is
the adoption of the estimate of himself
which he infers from the standpoint of the
role of the other. The bonds of intimacy
and prestige or the absence of alternative
standpoints determine that the evaluations
of relevant others will become the self-
evaluations of the individual.

3. The distinction in self-consciousness
is also important when the standpoint of a
third party or norm is being adopted. Non-
reflexive role-taking of this sort directs at-
tention to attitudes in the role of the other
whose recognition makes it possible to act
according to a pre-existing directive. This
pre-existing directive (incorporated in the
third-party standpoint) may be of two
sorts. It may, as already illustrated, make
the appropriate self-behavior conditional
upon the role of the other. Or it may direct
the actor to employ the roles of certain
others as standards or models to compare
with his own behavior. The third-party
standpoint enables the actor to react dis-
criminatingly toward the aspirations and
attitudes of others in determining which
shall be used as standards for his own as-
pirations and attitudes.

4, When role-taking from a third-party
standpoint is reflexive, the standpoint en-
ables the actor to react selectively to his
audiences. His concern is not merely how
he compares with the other but how he ap-
pears to the other. But his appearance to
the other does not direct his own behavior
in an automatic manner as in the case of
identification. Instead, he can accept the
evaluations of certain others as legitimate
and reject the evaluations and expectations
of different others as lacking legitimacy.17

As the third-party standpoint becomes
stabilized and generalized so as to become
a fairly consistent standpoint in the indi-
vidual, it operates in reflexive role-taking
as a fully evolved self-conception or self-
image. Such a self-conception permits the
actor to react selectively on two bases.
First, it may tell the subject whose ap-
proval is worth seeking and whose is not.
The parent tries to teach his child, for
example, to seek the respect of his teachers
and the children from “good” homes, while
disregarding the opinions that children
“without breeding” have of him. Second, it
may designate the type of image one wishes
to see reflected in the other’s conception of
one’s self. The individual may wish to ap-
year to all as an honest man, as ‘an inde-
yendent person, or as a good fellow. The
self-conception directs the individual to
yehave in a manner which will evoke such
in image of himself in the role of his audi-
mce. The two bases of selection may also
yperate together. Thus, the self-image (or
third-party standpoint) may tell the actor
that he should appear strong and distant
to others in subordinate relations with him-
self, easy to get along with to others who
are his peers and intimates, liked by others
who are loyal citizens, and hated by others
who are not loyal citizens.

5, 6. When role-taking occurs from the
standpoint of interactive effect, it becomes
reflexive when the reflected self-image is
manipulated by the actor as a means of
achieving his ends. The salesman who tries
to create the impression that he would
rather lose the sale than sell a person what
he does not want, the propagandist at-
tempting to appear “folksy,” and the coun-
selor responding nonevaluatively to his
client are all trying to manipulate the
image of themselves held by the other so
as to foster their purposes. On the other
hand, in baseball the role-taking is more
concerned with the attitudes of the others
toward the game than toward each other
and is therefore nonflexive. The difference
between reflexive and nonreflexive role-
taking of this sort appears in two levels of
playing a game such as poker. Each player
will attempt to judge what other players
are likely to do. But the superior player
will also attempt by such techniques as
bluffing, conspicuous misplay, randomized
strategies, or the “poker face” to establish
a false image of himself which will modify
the play of others in anticipated directions.
a) The fundamental source of social
values appears to be the standpoint of the
other. Accordingly, we may speak of role-
taking which involves identification as be-
ing derivative with respect to the values of
the individual. The person derives his
values through adopting others’ stand-
points. In contrast, the other types of role-
taking are implementive or validative with
respect to values. They serve as means
through which the values already acquired
may be validated by reference to some
standard or implemented in practice.
Hence, these types are dependent upon
role-taking with identification in two ways.
They are dependent upon some prior role-
taking as the source of values they express.
And they are dependent upon prior learn-
ing of the skills of role-taking before the
role-taking can be detached from adoption
of the role standpoint.

Validation has to do with determining
the personal relevance of values which one
already accepts. One may adopt a value
without making it a demand upon one’s
self. Or one may adopt a value with vary-
ing levels of aspiration regarding its
achievement. Such validation—setting de-
grees of personal relevance and levels of
aspiration—takes place in part through the
simple laws of effect in learning theory and
in part through role-taking. To the extent
that it occurs through role-taking, it does
so either via the reflexive attention to what
others expect of the individual or through
the comparison of the self with designated
standards.

Part of the particular significance of re-
flexive role-taking lies in its validative
function. When one adopts the other’s
standpoint in reflexive role-taking, he does
more than simply adopt certain values; he
adopts a definition of what is expected of
him regarding that value. The child, for
example, who identifies with the parent and
adopts his attitudes toward others often
does not see the personal relevance of
these attitudes except in limited situations.
The child is typically “hypocritical” and is
distressed when the parent directs attention
to his own behavior. At other times the
child attempts to make every value a direc-
tive to his own behavior and must learn
that what he admires in others is not nec-
essarily required of himself.

The values derived in identification role-
taking also point to certain groups or per-
sons who serve as standards of comparison
in performing the validation function. The
individual takes the role of those to whom
his attention is thus directed in order to
judge what their attitudes are toward the
values they profess, what their aspirations
are, what effort they put forth, so that he
may use these estimates comparatively in
setting his own levels.

The implementive function of role-tak-
ing is carried out, as we have already de-
scribed, either as demanded by a norm
which makes the actor’s behavior condition-
al upon the role of the relevant other or
through the consideration of probable ef-
fects of the interaction of roles in promot-
ing a given objective. Such implementation
is dependent upon both the derivative and
the validative functions. The individual
must have both adopted values and formed
some conception of their personal relevance
before he proceeds to carry them out.

b) The hierarchical relationship among
types of role-taking is important from the
point of view of socialization or the genetic
backgrounds of current attitudes. But,
from the point of view of the act in proc-
ess, the important relationship among
types of role-taking lies in the fact that
they are alternative relationships which the
individual can establish to the role of the
other which will make the effect of that
other’s attitudes quite different. In order
to predict the behavior of a person, it is
not sufficient to know that he will take the
role of another or to know how accurately
he will take that role. A small cue may
change his relationship toward the per-
ceived other-role. The high-pressure sales-
man who is exploiting the attitudes in the
other-role to the full may suddenly begin
to identify with the attitudes of that other
and be rendered incapable of continuing
his sales talk. Or an individual identifying
with the role of another who is in misfor-
tune may suddenly remember a social
norm which leads him to detach himself
and treat the other-role as an object.

The alternative relationships to the
other-role may exist as recognized conflicts
to the individual. The most frequently
noted conflict between standpoints is be-
tween adopting the standpoint of the other
and subjecting the role of the other to the
scrutiny indicated by some norm. For
example, a subject who inferred a set of
attitudes in a friend which would account
for his having committed a theft concluded
that his obligation was to report the friend
to the authorities. By adding that “he will
probably hate me for it,” he gave explicit
recognition to the conflict.18 Important also
is the conflict between derivative and vali-
dative orientations, when the values
adopted as part of a standpoint are not
adequately supported in the indicated vali-
dating relationships. Conflicts also fre-
quently exist between role-taking from the
standpoint of interactive effect and the
other types.

From the distinction among types of
role-taking emerges a major theoretical
problem for the study of role behavior. The
problem is to isolate the variables which
determine what kind of role-taking rela-
tionship the individual will assume with
respect to any specific relevant other. We
have already suggested that strong affect
directed toward the other makes the more
complex forms less likely to take place and
that according prestige to the other has a
similar effect. Another determinant is the
degree to which the roles of different status-
es receive normative sanction from the
standpoint of a generalized other. For
example, the tendency for a parent to iden-
The coexistence of different relationships
in role-taking leads us to the further ques-
tion of whether the concept has been so
broadened in application as to lose its ana-
lytic utility. If we say, as some writers
have, that, whenever an individual experi-
ences an attitude toward some object, he is
taking the role of some relevant other to-
ward that object, then every action has
been made into role-taking. On the other
hand, if we limit role-taking to instances
in which the subject recognizes and can
conceptualize what he is doing, we make a
dividing line which is indefensible in light
of modern psychological understanding.
The criterion of consciousness, then, is too
narrow and the criterion of attitude source
is too broad.

The key to a useful delimitation of the
term becomes clear when we distinguish
between a genetic or socialization frame-
work in which we look into past experiences
for the explanation of present behavior and
an action framework in which we examine
the dynamic interrelations among the ele-
ments contemporarily operating to deter-
mine action. The concept of role-taking be-
longs in the latter framework, designating
a kind of relationship which may be con-
temporarily assumed toward a relevant
other in the context of an act in process.
Within the action framework we may say
that a person is engaged in role-taking
whenever the individual’s conception or
performance of his own role is altered by
modifying his construction of the other-
role.!®
Of the many senses in which empathy
has been used, five can be particularly re-
lated to our current discussion. (1) By
most traditional usage empathy refers to
nonreflexive identifying role-taking, in
which the individual unwittingly puts him-
self in the position of another and adopts
his standpoint. (2) Sometimes empathy is
presented as an ability that is desirable in
personnel relations, in which case it desig-
nates the ability to understand the role of
another while retaining one’s personal de-
tachment. According to this usage, empathy
includes all role-taking except that in which
the standpoint of the other is adopted as
one’s own. (3) Empathy is sometimes used
to designate the process of seeing one’s self
as others see one, the ability to react to
one’s own behavior as others are reacting
to it. This usage makes empathy identical
with reflexive role-taking, regardless of
standpoint. (4) Empathic capacity is some-
times used synonymously with role-taking
capacity, to include all the forms of the
process we have described. (5) When em-

unwittingly respond to different frames of refer-
ence introduced by the experimenter” (Robert K.
Merton and Alice Kitt, “Contributions to the
Theory of Reference Group Behavior,” in Conti-
nuities in Social Research, ed. Robert K. Merton
and Paul F. Lazarsfeld [Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press,
1950], p. 69).
pathy is distinguished from projection, it
refers to one criterion for inferring the
other-role. In this usage all our types
would be included so long as the role-tak-
ing is not based upon projection.

To make a choice among these usages by
fiat would be an empty gesture. However,
there are at least three implications of our
present discussion for the current work
dealing with empathy. First, the tendency
to empathize, in whatever sense this is
meant, is at least as important a variable
as the ability to empathize. Under what
circumstances will a person employ such
empathic abilities as he has rather than
merely enact a rigidly predetermined
role or react to the other’s gestures with
standardized responses? Second, given the
tendency and ability to empathize (using
the term in its broader senses), what rela-
tionship to the inferred other-role will de-
termine its effect on the individual’s be-
havior? The tendency and ability in role-
taking must be seen in combination with
the tendency to assume certain kinds of
relations with relevant others. Third, the
standpoint in role-taking operates to focus
attention selectively on the role being tak-
en. Consequently, certain aspects of the
other-role are seen more clearly or are more
salient than others, depending upon the
standpoint governing the empathic process.
Since empathy or role-taking is not nor-
mally performed in a vacuum, the accuracy
of empathic behavior will vary according
to the focus of attention supplied by the
governing standpoint. Consideration of em-
pathic ability might profit from taking this
observation into account. A quite tentative
suggestion from one study of empathic abil-
ity that empathy is more accurate with re-
spect to reflexive than nonreflexive aspects
of the other-role may tell something about
the focus of attention in the role-taking
process within a clinical counseling situa-
tion.2°
Two commentaries have recently pointed
out different usages of the term “reference
group.” Both have noted that a reference
group may mean a group with which one
compares himself in making a self-judg-
ment. This usage prevails in the original
work of Hyman and the more recent dis-
cussion by Merton and Kitt.2? Both com-
mentaries have also noted an alternative
usage of reference group to mean the
source of an individual’s values (Kelley)
or perspectives (Shibutani). Sherif, New-
comb, and Hartley have employed the con-
cept chiefly in this sense. A third usage
suggested by Shibutani refers to a group
whose acceptance one seeks. In the litera-
ture, however, the desire to be accepted is
depicted as the mechanism which leads to
the adoption of the values and perspectives
of the reference group.24 These are not,
therefore, separate usages of the term but
merely definitions, on the one hand, in
terms of the effect of the reference group
and, on the other hand, in terms of the
mechanism of the reference group.
When a reference group is the source of
values and perspectives, the identity of
meaning with role-taking is apparent. One
takes the role of a member of the group,
which is synonymous with having “a psy-
chologically functioning membership”?> in
the group, and one adopts the group’s
standpoint as one’s own. Thus, except for
emphasizing that the source of values need
not be a group of which the individual is
objectively a member, this use of reference
group corresponds to one traditional usage
of role-taking.

Reference group as a point of compari-
son corresponds partially to certain mean-
ings of role-taking. The self-other relation-
ship is essentially that which we have de-
scribed as role-taking from a third-party
standpoint. Merton and Kitt note the oper-
ation of a third-party standpoint in “the
institutional definitions of the social struc-
ture which may focus the attention of
members of a group or occupants of a so-
cial status upon certain common reference
groups.”2° However, the actor may or may
not take the role of a member of the refer-
ence group. So long as the actor is using
the reference group only as a point of com-
parison in estimating his own social stand-
ing or in deciding whether to be satisfied
or dissatisfied with his lot, external attri-
butes of the other alone are involved. The
role of the relevant other is not being taken.
But when levels of aspiration, degrees of
determination, and the like are being com-
pared, the individual must necessarily take
the role of the other in order to make a
comparison.

In the preceding sense reference group
as a point of comparison is a broader con-
cept than role-taking from a third-party
standpoint. However, in our discussion of
role-taking we recognized that the stand-
point of the third party might direct atten-
tion to the relevant other in more ways
than simple comparison. Comparable rela-
tions of individual to group appear not to
have been included in reference-group
usages.

Dispute over the proper meaning of
“reference group” seems to center about
the acceptable generality of the concept.
The limited usage which Sherif and Shibu-
tani prefer, referring to the source of the
individual’s major perspectives and values,
might well be named the identification
group. The identification group is the
source of values, since the individual takes
the role of a member while adopting the
member’s standpoint as his own.

At the opposite extreme the individual’s
behavior is affected somewhat by groups
whose members constitute merely condi-
tions to his action. The groups are neutrally
toned to the actor; he must merely take
them into account in order to accomplish
his purposes. The manner in which he
takes them into account may or may not
require role-taking, and they may or may
not constitute his membership group. Such
a group might well be designated by some
such neutral term as interaction group.

In between are those groups which ac-
quire value to the individual because the
standpoint of his identification groups des-
ignates them as points of reference. Con-
forming to the standpoint of his identifica-
tion group (or of an autonomous self-image
which has become stabilized independently
of the identification group from which it
was derived), the individual compares him-
self with certain groups or notes the im-
pression he is making on them or in some
other way takes account of them. Again,
whether this relationship does or does not
involve role-taking will depend upon the
directive supplied by the identification
group or self-conception. These groups
might be called valuation groups, since
their effect upon the individual’s behavior
is determined by the valuation which his
more basic orientations lead him to place
upon them.
Finally, if reference-group theory is to
encompass the ways in which individual-
group relationships shape the roles and role
behaviors of the individual, we should note
a dichotomy cross-cutting the preceding
distinctions. Certain reference groups with-
in each of the preceding types might use-
fully be regarded as audience groups to
the individual. These are the groups by
whom the actor sees his role performance
observed and evaluated, and he attends to
the evaluations and expectations which
members of the group hold toward him.
The actor takes the role of his audience
reflexively. An individual’s relations with
his identification groups may place the lat-
ter on some occasions as his audience and
on other occasions not. The reaction to the
audience may be that of uncritical accept-
ance of their evaluations and expectations
toward him, or the responses of his audi-
ence may be interpreted in an interactive
context or as directed by his identification
group or self-conception.

In general, then, it appears that the con-
cepts of reference group and role-taking
are closely related. In the broadest sense
reference-group behavior is somewhat more
inclusive than role-taking, since one may
take account of a reference group without
taking the role of a member. The terms
“reference group” and “relevant other” re-
fer to essentially the same phenomena. The
reference group is a generalized other which
is viewed as possessing member roles and
attributes independently of the specific in-
dividuals who compose it. The same gen-
eral differentiations seem applicable on the
bases of standpoint and reflexiveness (au-
dience). Likewise, the same theoretical
problems apply, and a similar principle re-
garding the boundaries of the concepts
seems applicable.
