The Practical Application of Sociology

Author(s): Walter Webster Argow

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Feb., 1941), pp. 37-40
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 2086340

Accessed: 16-06-2016 04:38 UTC
pyramiding of problems, both social and individual. Therefore, it

seems appropriate that students of social science should ask them-
selves what can be done about social problems. This is not at all a call to
social action in a revolutionary sense; rather, it states a point of view and is
offered in the hope that it will stimulate discussion which may lead to a
definite program.!

The question implied in the title has been asked the writer frequently by
students, laymen, and members of other professions. The student wants to
know point-blank, “What does a major in sociology prepare me for?” The
layman asks in effect, “Can a sociologist give me any help in solving these
problems which threaten my welfare and even my sanity?” The practitioner
of another profession cuttingly and rightfully queries, “How can we work
cooperatively on this pathological condition which lies before us?” What is
the sociologist’s answer?

Sociology, we evasively answer, is a young science. It is just forging the
tools with which it can accomplish its tasks. Already it is supplying the
student with an understanding of how men have lived together through the
ages. This is useful in weighing the ways of other peoples and in recognizing
our own social trends. Some sociologists will even go so far as to say that
it is not our job to supply the impatient student with a handy technique
so that he can go out and peddle his services on the open market. Their
stand is that sociology is not a “technical” but a “‘cultural” subject which
contributes to the richness of one’s education and character and gives
scope to his point of view.

Such replies do not satisfy the present-day student who is either forced
or urged to have his educational investment pay him quicker and more
specific dividends. Unfortunately, with the emphasis on immediacy in the
contemporary scene, it is the subject with a visible pecuniary future which
the student elects and pays for; and it is the student’s fees which often mold
the schedule of courses, whether one finds this state of affairs pleasant or
not. It is only the heavily endowed (and often influenced by donors) college
which can withstand student “curriculum conditioning” and direct them

M oe is confronted on all sides with an apparently ominous

1 Neither is this meant exactly as a reply to Nels Anderson’s challenge in the April 1940,
Amer. Sociol. Rev. [Readers of this article may also be interested in a pamphlet prepared by the
American Sociological Society entitled “Occupations of the Members,” which lists about 250
occupations other than teaching and research. It may be had by writing to the Managing
Editor —R.B.]
38 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

in the pursuit of a more genteel philosophy of education. For sociology’s
future welfare there is—and must be—an adjustment of this conflict; and
that which hurts the sociologist’s ears most is not the babble of inquirers
after his work but the increasing thunder of silence.

Certain sociologists? in the past have offered a compromise in a program
of an “applied” or “clinical” sociology. By borrowing terms from other
fields, sociologists were visualized as the problem setters or the mobilizers of
social forces or social engineers in our culture, but these titles do not appear
on any payroll. Social workers and social researchers were once also con-
sidered as applied sociologists until they turned their backs on their dodder-
ing old parent and even changed their names slightly. Aside from increas-
ingly popular courses in social problems, which offer everything from an
informative investigation of contemporary conditions to a technique for
the intelligent perusal of the daily news, applied sociology seems to be in
that pleasant state known as suspended animation. Nevertheless, it is the
writer’s contention that the academic principles of sociology can be applied
in the clinical arena in a sufficiently technical manner as to satisfy the
requirements of therapeutic practice, and thus likewise assure the pros-
pective student of the economic utility of what he is fast coming to consider
only as a “snap” elective to round out his credits and stimulate his mind.

Precisely what would an applied sociologist do? Bernard and his col-
laborators have indicated clearly in The Fields and Methods of Sociology*
with what specialties sociologists are concerned scholastically. We ask, in
what capacities are they employed professionally? The following six types
of work are suggested as offering opportunities for the professional applica-
tion of sociology.

1. The Social Science Analyst is a title utilized by the Federal Civil
Service Commission to designate those persons with a special sociological
bent who are also trained for research work, whether it be in community
backgrounds, ecology, or family relations. Using various research tech-
niques, the social science analyst applies the principles he has learned in
his chosen field of sociology. He also may be employed under some other
title by social service agencies for survey and evaluation work. The impor-
tant thing to note is that he is an applied sociologist with a specific technique.

2. In the past few years, there has been developed a service for evaluat-
ing the work of social institutions and agencies, museums, philanthropic
foundations, and even businesses, for which the terms Sociometry and
Sociatry® have been suggested. This requires a person who is half sociologist
and half public relations counselor. For example, a person of the writer’s ac-

2 Notably Giddings, Wirth, and Fairchild.

3 To case worker and social science analyst respectively.

4 The Fields and Methods of Sociology, New York, 1934, edited by L. L. Bernard.
5 Terms used by G. A, Lundberg and A. M. Lee respectively.
THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF SOCIOLOGY 39

quaintance, who calls herself a “market analyst,” is employing clinically
the principles of cultural and folk sociology to predict the trend of buying
preference of various social, racial, and geographic groups. Another, a “‘so-
ciatrist,” is trying to cure a sick museum of a bad case of anachronism,
while one more intrepid spirit has hung out his shingle as “consulting
sociologist” with a motley array of clients paying for his analytical services.®

3. The “area projects” in community coordination being carried on no-
tably by Shaw ef a/. in Chicago and Thrasher in New York belong in a
discussion of applied sociology. Such workers might be called community
service coordinators, and have developed special techniques based upon a
firm sociological foundation of community study.

4. In one of the most logical places, one rarely finds a sociologist em-
ployed, but surely our correctional systems have need of sociological serv-
ices. It is sobering to contemplate that the plan sociology’s staunch friend,
William Healy, submitted? for a Youth-Justice Tribunal listed the services
of a psychiatrist, psychologist, educator, and case worker, but no sociologist.
Only Illinois’ and Michigan have places on their correctional staffs today
for a sociologist—and the latter state’s definition of a sociologist’s duties
more accurately describe the province of the social case worker.®

In lamenting this situation, the writer recently was unsympathetically
reminded by a distinguished psychologist that sociology has not offered its
services in the correctional clinic as has psychology. Here certainly is the
testing ground of applied sociology, for the sociologist must appear as
technical in his social diagnosis as the psychiatrist in his statement on men-
tal health. Therefore, the writer suggests that a sociologist could add the
following data to the services of any human behavior clinic:

a. an interpretation of the early racial and cultural antecedents of the
subject and its relation to his present behavior;

b. recent community backgrounds as precipitating factors in the current
behavior;

c. extent to which the subject’s behavior is consonant with the family
behavior pattern;

6 Similar to this are the experiences of a “consulting social worker.” See L. R. Steiner, “Case
Work as a Private Venture,” The Family, Oct. 1938, 188 ff. Not to be confused with the case
cited above.

7In his paper given before the 1939 meeting of the American Sociological Society, but
changed in the article printed in the Amer. Sociol. Rev., Aug. 1940.

8 Illinois’ sociologists have mostly been occupied with actuarial parole prediction studies.
Now that Wisconsin has employed a sociologist as director of the division of correction perhaps
others in the profession will be given an opportunity to prove their worth.

°C, M. Greenstreet, “Sociological Study of the Criminal,” The Treatment of the Criminal,
4, Lansing, Mich., State Dept. of Corrections, 1939.

10 The following types of behavior clinics should find a clinical sociologist useful: (1) child
guidance or mental hygiene clinic; (2) school child behavior clinic (educational sociologist);
(3) hospital for mental diseases; (4) court diagnostic clinic; and (5) training school or prison
classification clinic.
d. social factors to be considered in the differential diagnosis; and

e. social strengths and weaknesses to be utilized or guarded against in
the treatment plan.

5. Although it may precipitate a lengthy dispute, social case workers
should be included among the applied sociologists; however their work
should not be confused with the preceding specialties. Said former Supt.
Howard Gill, of Norfolk (Mass.) Penal Colony:

Should we not distinguish between what is the province of the research workers
and what are the problems of the clinical workers in writing case histories and mak-
ing social diagnoses? The research worker looks for everything in the hope that he

might find something. The clinical worker, if he has developed any technique,
will . . . look for certain information and will recognize symptoms."

The social worker is given the task of recording those social data which have
an immediate bearing on the case, together with the subjects’s personal
reactions to them. His work differs from the clinical sociologist’s mainly in
the degree to which he can analyze the antecedent social conditioning fac-
tors of behavior. His focus is on the more immediate problem and the sub-
ject’s attitudes, while the sociologist’s concern is with the type of social pat-
tern in the background as it bears upon his present behavior.

6. The final member of the applied sociology family to be mentioned
here is what H. P. Fairchild calls the social engineer. The title is not found
in any classified list of occupations and when the newspapers try to describe
such a person they are liable to refer to him as “social reformer,” “social
planner or designer,” or “well-known liberal.” He is the man, usually quite
mature and prominent, who gets either behind or ahead of a group recom-
mending a particular social change and maneuvers it into a reality. He is
not a radical or a visionary or a malcontent, but a scientist well grounded
in the principles of sociology who attempts to apply them so as to improve
our design for living.

These, then, are the workers the writer has in mind if and when he is
called upon to defend the public utility of sociology, although the sociolo-
gists as a group have yet to recognize them professionally. There remains,
after that, the task of organizing a set of courses for training in these special-
ties around a core of sociological fundamentals. It may be possible then for
us to boast quietly that we have finally succeeded in socializing our own
curriculum and contributed more than a cultural background to the con-
temporary collegian’s education.

1 Commons, Yahkub, and Powers, The Development of Penological Treatment at Norfolk
Prison Colony, 126, New York, Bureau of Social Hygiene, 1940.

2 Course given at New York University, 1938-1939.

13 Between the social engineer and the social worker lies the field of the pudlic service ad-
ministrator, who is part of both and distinctly an applied sociologist. For an example of the

use of sociology in public service administration, see articles on the indices of community
“social breakdown” in The Family, Jan. 1941, by E. W. Burgess e¢ a/.
