A New Classification of Culture and a Restatement of the Culture Lag Theory
Author(s): James W. Woodard

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 1, No. 1 (Feb., 1936), pp. 89-102
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2083867

Accessed: 14-06-2016 20:21 UTC
theory, especially in the work of Maclver and Ogburn, but

even in that of Coste, DeRoberty, and Bagehot, partially in
that of Sumner and many others. We have the highest regard for
these contributions and here attempt only a more precise state-
ment.!

We would divide culture into three categories: the inductive (or
empirico-logico-experimental) culture; the aesthetic (or apprecia-
tive-expressive) culture; and the control (or authoritarian) culture.

In the inductive culture, we would include all inductively arrived
at bodies of knowledge and all empirically validated devices. It
would, therefore, include such material objects as tools, devices,
machines, and various utilitarian objects and instruments; but also
such non-material items as crafts, skills, techniques, mathematics,
logic, scientific method, and bodies of scientific knowledge. Thus this
category cuts across the division into material and non-material cul-
ture and infringes somewhat even on the territory of the so-called
adaptive culture. It represents one sub-division of what Alfred
Weber and Maclver have termed civilization by contrast to pure
culture.

The aesthetic or appreciative-expressive culture is almost identical
with what Weber and Maclver have termed pure culture and with
what Ogburn terms the non-material, non-adaptive culture. It con-
sists of such material objects as paintings, sculptures, mystic ritual
symbols and vestments, architectural forms, and the like; and such
non-material items as dance forms, recreational forms, the folkways
of purely social intercourse, and the purely aesthetic aspects of
poetry, literature, music, ceremonial, and the like.

M‘ or what will here be said is implicit in current social

1 See also, James W. Woodard, “Critical Notes on the Culture Lag Concept,” Social
Forces, Vol. 12, March, 1934.
The control culture contains, as its name indicates, all those items
which have a prescriptive force and a controlling or conforming in-
fluence on the members of the group. Thus it includes such non-
material items as usages, conventions, mores, morals, supernatural
sanctions, and laws and institutions (in the Sumnerian sense). It also
includes the rationalizing ideologies and buttressing lores and myths
built up around these. And it includes such material objects as be-
come affiliated with these in a control function—such as patriotic
emblems, the insignia and official vestments of the offices of author-
ity, or coercive or conformative symbols or objects of any kind.
Thus this division constitutes a second subdivision of the Weber-
Maclver civilizational category; cuts across Ogburn’s material and
non-material classification; and bites deeply into his adaptive culture.

It must be evident that the same item may have different causa-
tive significance in different aspects or relationships. An ermine robe,
for example, is in a sense of the inductive order of provability. Cer-
tainly it is demonstrably warm in cold weather. It is also a control
device, however, when restricted, say, to royalty or worn as a badge
by a privileged few in the race for conspicuous consumption. Finally,
it is also an aesthetic object and represents a pure value, an end
rather than a means, justifying its own existence.

These various aspects are in varying degrees true of almost any
object or item in the culture. So that it is only in terms of processual
and causal analyses that our classification becomes useful. In gain-
ing this significance, our classification admittedly loses the objective
ease of identification which the material and non-material categories
afforded. Further, when we examine the sources and processes which
produce the differences here distinguished, we shall find that most
of them are involved, though in varying degrees, in all aspects of
social and cultural living. So that the characteristics of these cate-
gories overlap and merge much as do, say, the distributions of stature
of the three Caucasian sub-races. And we are in a sense reaching out
toward the ideal-typical as a mode of abstraction. With this admis-
sion of their interdependence in mind, let us proceed to a further ex-
amination of the characteristics of these cultural sub-divisions.

We may contrast the three classes of culture in six regards: (a) the
immediate source of beliefs and attitudes relative to them; (b) the
nature of the entailed psychological processes; (c) the ultimate cor-
rective acting upon the involved beliefs and attitudes; (d) the degree
of provability or arbitrariness involved; (e) the rate of change; and
A NEW CLASSIFICATION OF CULTURE gi

(f) flowing from differentials in this last, the direction of probable
dependence—that is, which is the pace setter and which is the resist-
ing element in the culture-lag pattern.

As to the sources of the involved beliefs and attitudes, there are
three: (a) the nature of man, (b) the nature of the social order with
its cultural heritage at the historic moment of its functioning, and
(c) the nature of the natural-order universe (our knowledge of which
only finally comes to include man as well as his social order). These
sources are involved, in complex fashion, in all aspects of the cul-
ture; but each of them is the predominant source for one of our three
divisions. Likewise, there are three types of mental processes in-
volved; (a) inductive (or at least logico-experimental) processes in-
volving inductive and empirical forms of proof; (b) authoritarian
processes, involving “proof” by appeal to authority and a greater
reliance upon pure deduction as such; and (c) Selbstverstindlich-
keiten, involving the self-evident aspect of things which, as aspects,
are neither amenable to authority nor dependent upon inductive
proof. Here too, the inductive method, over a period of time, gradu-
ally eats into authority and divests even the Selbstverstandlichkeiten
of that part which was so only because of illusion, delusion, projec-
tion, or reification.

The aesthetic culture. The immediate source of the beliefs and atti-
tudes involved in the aesthetic or appreciative-expressive culture is
the nature of man as a self-expressing agent and as a responsive
agent to the aspects of his surrounding world. Both these aspects
are evident in such activities as social intercourse, healthy bodily
functioning, recreation, the dance, sex play, love-making, pure re-
ligion, art, literature, music, the joy sometimes found in craftsman-
ship, the sheer joy of discovery in scientific activities, the aesthetic
element in ceremony and ritual, even the beauty which the Greeks
found in geometry; and also to some extent in philosophy, remem-
bering that there are both superficial and profound “‘aspects” of
man’s self, his world, and his relation to it. This takes into account
that human nature itself may change somewhat through natural and
artificial selection; and that personality and temperament are inti-
mately bound up with the given culture, with status in the given so-
cial order, the degree of enlightenment or superstition contained in
the cultural heritage, and with the influence of occupational condi-
tions and institutionalized roles. Thus the social order and the induc-
tive heritage condition this factor.
Also, art (and these other forms) becomes associated with other
cultural and social activities and develops a series of secondary func-
tions, usually of a control character as in the patriotic hymn, the
aphorism, the problem play, and the like. Also inductive knowledge
is reflected in it, as in naturalistic and realistic art, historical nar-
ratives, proverbs and the like which are a mixture of art and science,
and sometimes also of mores.

But, while the ethos is so pervasive that even the most innocent
art objects have 2 control aspect (e.g., the prim samplers and still-
lifes of our grandmothers), it is no less true that, down under the
differences in ethos, culture, social order, and language, such things
as beauty, ugliness, love, hate, friendship, mystic values, and the
great artistic, recreational, appetitive, self-expressive, and socia-
bility motifs are very like. It is this “common-human” or ‘“‘pure”’
aspect which we mean. We admit it is a difficult distinction. With
many, e.g., the aesthetic acceptability of an ermine robe would be
enhanced by the glamour cast round it by its control functions, just
as the crucifix and the flag actually take on ‘“‘unearned increments”
of aesthetic value. In a recent book on reification the writer has
given considerable stress to this factor.? But in the case of any of
these objects it would not be impossible for one who is familiar with
ethnocentrism, the roots of mystic meaning, and reification to sepa-
rate out the sheerly aesthetic or expressive from the spuriously so.
When he has done so, he will find himself in the realm of which we
speak, the realm of Se/bstverstéindlichkeiten independent alike of in-
duction and authority.

For, since certain fundamental aspects of man’s nature do not
change, and since the aspects of both his knowledge systems and his
social orders always contain certain general patterns of relationship
to his own nature, there is always here contained a certain independ-
ence of cultural heritage and of social order. Although art (pure art,
taken as an example) is at once the most individual, culturally and
personally, of all man’s creations, it is also the most universal. An
harmonic triad or a Chopin sonata is what it is, aesthetically, regard-
less of whether the social order is communistic, socialistic, or capi-
talistic, the family institution polygamous or monogamous, and
regardless of whether or not science has analyzed the mathematical
relations of their overtones. Thus, while art, purely social relations,
and expressive forms are in some measure interdependent with both

2 James W. Woodard, Intellectual Realism and Culture Change, Hanover, Sociological Press,
1935.
A NEW CLASSIFICATION OF CULTURE 93

the other sections of the culture, they also contain certain canons of
their own which are subject neither to proof nor to authoritative
command; which neither depend upon nor lay imperatives upon the
social order or the inductive culture; which, in a word, just are to
those who are responsive enough to see them.

The psychological processes involved in the appreciative-expres-
sive culture are those of the order of Se/bstuerstandlichkeiten. One re-
sponds or he doesn’t; and neither logic, inductive proof, nor com-
mand can alter the situation. This part of the culture is transmissible
only to those who are responsive. It does not have the universality
of transmissibility or provability that the inductive culture has.
Neither does this self-evidentness give rise to elaborate systems of
internal logical consistency, as in the inductive culture; nor to a
definitely provable direction of change. Aesthetic tastes, while in
some aspects more universal than any other aspects of the culture,
are subject to non-logical changes, accessions or declines, even to
fads and fashions.

Thus, also, as to any ultimate corrective applicable to beliefs, val-
ues, and attitudes involved in this section of the culture, there is
none, except as the inductive culture presently bites in far enough
so as to undermine reification, ethnocentrism, delusion, illusion, and
hallucinatory factors. This, however, presently assumes considerable
importance.

For these reasons, this whole area of the culture does not enter
into the area of provability; cannot have that accelerative rate of
change which characterizes the inductive culture; nor a readily prov-
able direction of change. At the most, one might posit a slow process
of revealing further and expressing more adequately its basic canons.
But even this would be doubtful. Certainly it is not cumulative in
the sense of the inductive culture; at best it yields an arithmetic
rather than a geometric curve.

Not this section of the culture itself, but the basic canons crystal-
lized in it and the pure values striven for in producing it may carry
implications that the social order is or is not functioning satisfac-
torily in so far as it does or does not, among other things, provide a
maximum opportunity for such expressive, appreciative, and realiza-
tional activity and products. Hence this section of the culture (but
more especially the processes which in their turn have produced it)
enters into social problems and into the functional and evaluative
aspects of science. It is lesscertainly a part of the culture-lag di-
lemma.
The control culture. Of the control culture we may say that the
immediate source of the beliefs and attitudes involved in it is the
given social order; that the characteristic psychological processes are
those of belief in authority and of pure deduction with the status
quo as the major premise; that the ultimate corrective for these be-
liefs and values is the two-fold one of the nature of man and his
needs and the natural-order reality, including the historic situation
of the group; that the inductive culture furnishes the most powerful
effective corrective and the nearest possible approach to the ultimate
corrective; that the forms and beliefs contained in the control culture
are outside the realm of provability; that to the extent to which they
are brought within it, they thereby become a part of the inductive
culture; that the rate of change is very slow, the very nature of this
section of the culture being to resist change, any basic change neces-
sarily meaning replacement of one social form or order by another
rather than having an acceleratingly cumulative aspect as in the case
of the inductive culture; and, therefore, that, while the aesthetic
culture erects standards in terms of which the control culture is
judged, the chief dependence of the latter and its only provable and
measurable forms of lag are those cases where changes called for by
developments in the inductive culture are resisted by the control
culture. Let us examine some of these matters in detail.

There is (1) a contained imperative in the nature of the group
situation requiring (2) that there be a certain minimum of group-
wide uniformity and predictability of behavior within the group in
order (3) for the group to function as such in those aspects in which
it must function as a whole (say in conservation, war, trade or
diplomacy), in order (4) to have internal workability and order,
and in order (5) that the individual within it shall be able to build
up a set of consistent habits and attitudes without which the human
being, lacking specific instinctive patterns, cannot survive. It is also
inescapable, in terms of success in conflict with external groups (and
in terms of retaining the economies just mentioned) that (6) the
areas of conflicting individual and subgroup interests within any
given group become defined, (7) that status relations be regularized
in some way, and (8) that the unusually obstreperous individual
urges and interests—principally property, sex and status (or ego)—
be subordinated. These (9) must be subordinated (i) to this orderly
workability, (ii) to the interests of the group as a whole, and his-
torically also (iii) to the interests of the dominating class or sub-group.
(10) Since this prescribed forsaking of individual interests can
never be validated to strictly individual reason, there grow up
around it (11) rationalizing (rather than rational) validating ideolo-
gies, (12) the moral “ought,” (13) supernatural sanctions, (14) ap-
proving and stigmatizing traditions, and (15) agencies of formal co-
ercive conformity. The vitality of these is augmented by the fact,
already alluded to, that (16) there is a certain immediate utility in
any order and predictability. But there are also at work the con-
servative action of (17) habitistic inertia, (18) reification and ethno-
centric naiveté, (19) the impiety and fear associated with violation
of supposedly intrinsic supernatural taboos, (20) the extremely effec-
tive and sometimes ruthless opposition of the vested interests, them-
selves (21) situational emergents having a definite stake in the re-
tention of any given status quo, (22) the integrative tendencies
which produce mutual interdependences among the major institu-
tions themselves, (23) consistency and interbuttressing of their ra-
tionalizing ideologies, and (24) mutual alliances (in effect) between
the institutions and the other vested interests of the particular cul-
ture, even (25) accommodative mechanisms of rationalization, com-
pensation, repression, displacement, sublimation, and the like that
come to permeate the very personalities of the constituent members.
Through all these factors, (26) the basic organizational mores (to
combine a term of Prof. Waller’s with one of my own) come to be
woven into a firmly-knit integration of considerable internal con-
sistency and workability, exceedingly resistant to change—in a
word, a social order. By another term, the control culture.

To be sure, such an order has so many contained conflicts that it
is never a completely stable equilibrium. But it always attempts to
be. Indeed, since the forces which produced this section of the cul-
ture produced it as a means to order, its historical function has ever
been to produce conformity. That is why we term it the control
culture. Its very raison d’étre, its essential nature, is to resist non-
conformity, that is, to resist change. Since its prescriptions concern
the will of the gods, the moral ought, and the settlement of clashing
interests and desires, none of which is (at least as yet) susceptible
of inductive proof or disproof, these prescriptions are (because of
that default) always authoritarian in character, with the intolerance
of heterodoxy, impiety and rational attempts at analysis which au-
thoritarianism carries with it. And its buttressing ideologies are de-
ductive and rationalizing rather than inductive and rational. It is
the realm of shibboleth, sentiment, stigmatization, idealization, pre-
conception, scholasticism, and authoritarianism. Thus the psycho-
logical sources of attitudes with respect to this part of the culture
and the intellectual validation of them, as well as its effects relative
to social rigidity and social change, are the direct opposite of those
of the inductive culture. Many factors are involved in this, as we
have shown. Perhaps the ultimately diagnostic factor is that the
one realm is subject to inductive proof or disproof; the other is not.
Since there must be am order, the latter cannot (as yet) do otherwise
than to rely on force, authority, or superstitiously emotionalized
preconception.

The inductive culture. We may next examine the inductive culture
—tools, devices, skills, techniques, and bodies of scientific knowl-
edge; even, to a limited but increasing degree, the efficiency, as
means, of social institutions themselves. Here the immediate source
of the values, beliefs, and attitudes involved is observation and ex-
periment on the natural-world reality, the realm of identifiable cause
and effect. And the ultimate corrective is that reality. Further, each
invention or discovery facilitates further gains, so that there is a
steady accumulation of traits and a progressive movement in the
direction of the efficiency of means and at least the reality-contacted-
ness aspect of ends themselves. Not only does change facilitate fur-
ther change; but, because there are logical relationships within the
theoretical systems here involved, new discoveries or corrections in-
volve contradictions and points of strain, and lead to further obser-
vation, or actually demand further changes in the dependent por-
tions of the theoretical structure. And new devices enter into endless
new combinations of provable utility. Thus change is not only ac-
cumulative but acceleratingly so. To this section of the culture, es-
pecially, applies that formula which correctly describes the con-
tained accelerative-accumulative tendency of the culture process.
This yields a geometric rate of change.

For in this section of the culture, further changes that are ‘‘neces-
sitated” can be more readily met than in other sections, are more
readily received, and more readily transmissible; and hence the
whole process of change is here most in evidence. It is in this field
that the group most readily and most confidently accepts the new,
because it is in the realm of the provable or rationally probable. It
does so also for the further reason that this is the realm of means by
contrast with ends, and the efficacy of means is a demonstrable affair.
A NEW CLASSIFICATION OF CULTURE 97

It is the realm of “ends” of delief or certitude, however; and this
fact, coupled with the self-validation of its inductive method, makes
it uniquely a pace-setter among the three sections of the culture as
well as, in a special sense, the arbiter of a// questions of cogency.
This is especially so since, down through time, we come to gain in-
ductive knowledge of, and a certain control over, the nature of man
and the formation of personality themselves; and since we also gain
understanding, predictability, and modes of inductive functional
evaluation of social processes and institutions as well. It is for these
reasons that this is the section of the culture of markedly accentu-
ated cultural acceleration, steadily eating up the control culture and
even in a measure modifying the aesthetic-expressive culture.

Thus the inductive culture proceeds with an inexorableness that
neither authoritative command nor personal preference can stop.
This is because of the nature of the psychological processes which
are involved. These are here predominantly inductive and logical.
Thus, though in a quite different sense from the aesthetic culture,
this section of the culture carries its own proof—in this case, induc-
tive and rational validation. Indeed, there finally emerges here a
high disdain for any other method, a complete disregard of authori-
tarian pronouncements as such.

Further, the content of physics, chemistry, biology, and latterly,
even psychology, sociology, economics, and political science, carries
its own rational proof and is what it is, regardless of what the social
order is. From both the aspects of accumulation and diffusion, this
section of the culture is a rapidly changing and readily transmissible
one, regardless of the participating individuals. Carrying its own ra-
tional validation, it is not tractable to the efforts to conform belief
on the part of the control culture, which flows from the given status
quo, but presently produces such material and psychological changes
that the social order and controlling belief-systems themselves must
undergo the indicated appropriate changes.

- Relations between them. In the past, social-cultural change has been
largely at the hands of one sub-division of the inductive culture, the
economic forms and processes; so that schools of economic determin-
ism have found ample historical evidence to support their conten-
tions. But changes in economic processes, and even in economic in-
stitutions, are beginning to flow from science more and more; so that
it is quite possible that the scientific part of the inductive culture
will one day supersede the changes in economic forms as the pace-
setter of culture change and release the aesthetic culture to a fuller
realization. But certainly the inductive culture as a whole will al-
ways have the pace-setting function. For since it flows from the natu-
ral-order reality as progressively approached by the inductive
method, and since it is slowly extending to scientific knowledge
of man and society themselves, it is at once the pace-setter for,
and the nearest possible approach to a final corrective or criterion
of the other parts of the culture.

In the inductive culture, one can speak with confidence of superior
and inferior as applied to means and agencies and of true and false
as applied to ends, attitudes, and beliefs. Also, there is a “must-ness”
to the march of the inductive culture that is not there in the others.
Thus we do not hesitate to identify this section of the culture as the
major determinant of all social and cultural change. This statement
is made within the qualifications imposed by the fact that the culture
is a complex unity produced by an infinite number of factors inter-
acting in the most devious ways. But although even a biological or-
ganism is an integrated unit, there is established in it a gradient of
metabolic change and control (the physiological gradient of Child
and others) in terms of the dominance of the area of greatest stimula-
tion, responsiveness to outside influences, and rate of metabolic
processes. Such an area, relative to the cultural integration (not,
necessarily the political or economic, or social integration) is the
inductive culture. We are not falling into the particularist fallacy
when we emphasize its major role and its pace-setting action.*

While we have called the rate of growth of the inductive culture a
geometric one, it is admittedly not as precise or as smooth as a true
exponential curve. The actual curve of this section of the culture
would seem to be a series of accelerating curves which decelerate
again as they approach an upper limit of stability, this series itself
seeming to fall within the curvature of a larger curve of the same
type. With some tentativeness, we would say that the upper asym-
tote of this larger quasi-exponential curve is probably determined by
the two-fold category of adjustment and reality-contactedness. The
mediate asymptotes of the smaller curves which occur at historic
points in this larger evolutionary process would seem to be the upper
limit of applicability of the fundamental discoveries and inventions
then in process of discovery, application, and exploitation.

But the functional appropriateness of the control-culture forms is

3 Nor is this to assume that society is an “organism.”
relative to the conditions under which the group lives; and the effec-
tive cogency of its rationalizing ideologies is relative to the induc-
tively established bodies of knowledge accumulated in the inductive
culture. Both these conditions are altered from time to time by the
accelerating inductive culture. At times, changes in the inductive
culture all but completely change the conditions to which the group’s
institutions and mores are supposed to be adapted, and the men-
tal outlook in terms of which both the social order and its rationaliz-
ing ideologies will be judged. But when the corresponding changes
begin to intrude, they disturb the uniformities which it is the very
function of the control culture to maintain. And the historic answer
of most groups to the problem of called-for change has been to but-
tress the status quo still further against the very changes called for,
i.e., against the chaos and unpredictability occasioned by the in-
evitable transition period. Thus the ivitial reaction of the control
culture, when change is called for in it, is to brace its feet the more
vigorously against that very change. This arises out of its own essen-
tial nature.

For there would be no significance in one part of the culture chang-
ing rapidly and another very slowly except that the two are func-
tionally related and interdependent. But the consistency achieved
by the rationalizing ideologies of the control culture is constantly
disturbed by the implications of the accumulating inductive knowl-
edge. And changes in the economic processes after a while demand
changes in the economic institutions. And, still further, correlative
changes in the shifting class interests, the make-up of the group, its
mobility, its realigned interests, needs, and numbers, its individua-
tion, and its complexity, call for changes in the governmental and
familial institutions. At the same time, all of these factors, plus sci-
ence, call for changes in morals and religion. But all of these changes
are resisted out of the complex network of attitudes, ideologies, sanc-
tioning agencies, and vested interests involved in the support and
enforcement of the control culture of the given status quo.

Thus there is a contained tendency in the nature of the psycho-
socio-cultural process (a) for the inductive culture to change at an
ever-increasing rate; (b) for these changes to call for changes in the
control culture; (c) for the latter, because of its very nature, to re-
sist these changes; and (d) for there to be, not merely a tendency,
but a constantly aggravated tendency toward maladjustment and
cultural lag.
This tendency toward more and more aggravated forms of culture
lag as the rate of culture change (in the inductive culture) becomes
more and more rapid is not entirely dismal, however, in its implica-
tions for the future. It can be radically minimized by the self-conscious
abandonment of authoritarianism and traditionalism in favor of the
inductive method wherever the latter is in the least applicable to
the solution of a problem; by minimizing as far as possible the block-
ing action of vested interests (this, of course, is itself a tremendous
task); by subjecting religious belief-systems to the test of scientific
knowledge and analysis and handling religious taboos quite without
gloves when they interfere with humane and rational solution of social
problems; and by replacing moral preconceptions as rapidly as pos-
sible by scientific evaluations, i.e., by inductive appraisals of func-
tional appropriateness.! For these three—vested interests, super-
natural taboo, and authoritarianism as opposed to induction—are
the diagnostic points of difference between the two sections of the
culture; other factors, though varying in degree, are present in all
three sections.

In part, however, this tendency toward culture lag is a self-con-
tained one and results from the fact that the one part of the culture
is susceptible of objective validation while the other (as yet) is not.
Hence the control culture is clung to even in the face of recognized
shortcomings far beyond its time of appropriateness until, often,
only violent revolution brings it closer to conformity with the under-
lying forms and processes upon which its own forms are dependent.
This aggravation, however, is subject to a limited amount of ra-
tional modification. That is, when eugenics and education (both of
which are, of course, obstructed by these same forces) shall have
given us a whole population capable of complex and difficult de-
cisions, we may then be able to accept quite philosophically the view
that there is bound to be a certain amount of chaos and confusion
incident to the process of social-cultural change. We may then see
that it is better, through freedom of speech, freedom of organization,
academic freedom, and the retention of democratic forms, to have a
certain amount of chaos, inefficiency, and pulling at odds constantly
present, rather than, through coercive imposition of the control
mores, to gain the immediate and superficial effects of “law and
order” at the cost, presently, of an explosive form of change. This

4 We have dealt with this matter elsewhere. See James W. Woodard, “Critical Notes on the
Nature of Sociology,” Social Forces, Vol. 11, No. 1, October, 1932.
in turn could be better accomplished if so much did not depend upon
the absence of internal chaos and inefficiency, when the group is
faced with external competition and conflict. Thus the achievement
of a rational social order waits in some measure upon that of a ra-
tional (above all, a peaceful) international order, itself so largely de-
pendent upon already having done away with the contained pressure
of capitalism toward imperialism.

However, there is a further contained tendency in these cultural
processes themselves which of itself tends to lessen with time that
tendency toward lag and maladjustment which, so far as we have
yet traced the process, we have found to tend toward ever-aggra-
vated forms. That is this: the inductive culture tends to increase at
what is roughly describable as a geometric ratio—hundreds of thou-
sands of years in the paleolithic for slight changes; tens of thousands
of years in the neolithic for considerable ones; thousands of years
since the emergence of the great civilizations for a tremendous
accumulation; and, since the firm establishment of disciplined em-
pirical techniques and inductive science (the last century or two),
inconceivably great accretions in a hair’s breadth of time. This ac-
celerating accumulation is in no inconsiderable part at the expense of
the control culture. Down through time, the inductive culture
steadily eats up the control culture—faster and faster. Every indica-
tion is that, projecting this curve into the future, it will continue to
do so—faster and faster. The rain gods fall before empirical tech-
niques and scientific agriculture; food taboos give way to dietetics;
magic is replaced by cause and effect; science undermines belief in
the gods; the social and psychological realm, once regarded as outside
the realm of science, are brought into it; physiology, biology, and psy-
chology begin to replace authoritarian morals with rational prac-
tices; economics, political science, and sociology begin to bring the
social order itself within the circle of rational analysis, predictability,
and control; increase in populational size, in transportation, print-
ing, communication, and mobility, yield individuation and an ever
greater reliance upon objective and impersonally stated analyses of
the social order itself and validations of it. All of which involve the
undermining or the actual replacement of control culture by induc
tive culture. To the extent to which this occurs, of course, culture
lag is obviated, one element in the conflict having been assimilated
quite into the other.

Thus, while there is a transitional tendency for culture lag to be-
DISCUSSION!

Howarp BEecKkER
Smith College

Proressor Wooparp’s proposal to discard (or at least to relegate
to a position of subordinate rank) the antiquated material-non-
material distinction is of real importance. There seems no good
reason why sociological theory should be able to make much use of
a classification of culture based on museum utility. If a culture trait
can be put under glass, it’s material, and everything else is non-
material. This is one of those famous classifications that are true
but useless. The threefold division into inductive, appreciative-
expressive, and control categories seems likely to prove much more
useful while being equally true.

This granted, however, I must raise some problems which, either
because of time limitations or my own inability to offer satisfying
solutions, will not be answered here. (1) Is “inductive” a good term
for what Professor Woodard has in mind? Does it not contribute to
the already great confusion brought about by the utterly fallacious
antithesis, inductive versus deductive? (2) Is there not a certain
epistemological question-begging latent in the assumption that
through the inductive culture, and that alone, we are brought into
closer contact with “‘natural-world reality,” whatever that may be?
Do we not find the most recent work in modern natural science sup-
porting the contention that we now know no more about the nature
of “reality” than in the remotest ages of the past, that technics and
science have merely instrumental validity? (3) Does the so-called
inductive culture carry “its own rational validation?’ What is to
be the criterion of rationality? Is not the inductive culture something
that is simply shere, and over against which we are much in the posi-
tion of Margaret Fuller when she announced that she accepted the
universe? (4) Is there any way whatever of determining which part
of a given culture is the “‘pace-setter” for another part? It seems to

1 The first one-third of Professor Becker’s paper has been omitted for the sake of brevity

(HB).
