Some Reflections on Sociology During a Crisis

Author(s): Robert M. Maclver

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Feb., 1941), pp. 1-8
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 2086336

Accessed: 16-06-2016 04:33 UTC
tions. When a crisis challenges our routines, we are forced to think

back to the values on which they rest. We may cling to these
values more tenaciously or we may break loose from them. In any event, we
must revaluate. This holds for our intellectual values no less than for the
rest. Our scholarship, our learning, our research, how do they look against
the background of a time when small and great states crumble, when across
the seas the skies are filled with death, when profound uncertainties divide
today from tomorrow, when the destinies of peoples everywhere are in the
balance? These mighty issues besiege us on every side. What then of the
issues to which we devote our workday lives, we scholars who have the
peculiar freedom of deciding for ourselves our own intellectual tasks? It
is because we have this freedom that we are troubled. I have heard some
scholars say that in these days their work seems insignificant and futile,
that they have no longer the heart to pursue it. Perhaps we might imperti-
nently ask the further question: what is it worth at any other time if it
loses its worth in times like these?

The question becomes now permissible when the grip of routine is
loosened, so that we dare to look at the value of the things we do. Nothing
is any longer justified by by the sacred habit of doing it. What then are the
values served by our science? How are we pursuing, how far are we achiev-
ing them? There is the knowledge that is illumination, enabling us to under-
stand things; and there is the knowledge that is skill, enabling us to do
things. Learning may not provide either illumination or skill, at least to
any degree that counts. There are refinements of learning that pursue
minutiae of past lores or chart the course of chimaeras bombinating in the

We a storm shakes the house, we grow concerned for the founda-

1 Presidential address to the Thirty-fifth Annual Meeting of the American Sociological
Society, Chicago, Illinois, Dec. 27, 1940.
void. There is laborious research that rediscovers the obvious or discovers
nothing at all. But unless learning gives us the knowledge that is illumina-
tion or the knowledge that is skill, it is vanity or vexation of spirit. We do
not need to choose between these goals. Each has its binding claim upon us.
To understand things is to live in a larger world, to conquer prejudice and
superstition and darkness, to come to terms with the encompassing reality,
to employ the unique gift of conscious being. To achieve skills is to gain
potential mastery over our lot, to attack with hopes of victory the many
problems and ills that beset us. But skills without understanding are blind,
and understanding is impotent without skills.

Since we last met, we have lived through a year of cumulative crisis,
crisis that has come ever nearer to us. None of us can have wholly escaped
the question: how does our subject meet the test? In this time of intense
appraisal, what seems its worth? When all boundaries are changing, are its
boundaries enlarged or narrowed? What are we doing as sociologists? What
values are we upholding or advancing—values that belong to the area of
knowledge we have taken for our own? What are we contributing, as so-
ciologists, either to the intellectual or to the practical needs of this dis-
tracted age? Often during the past year, this question has pierced through
the preoccupations of the hour. In putting before you something of my own
response, I shall confine myself to certain central issues. There are impor-
ant tasks of sociology that it shares with economics and politics and law
and the sciences of the cultural life. With these I shall not here be con-
cerned. There are also important tasks of sociology that link it to the im-
mediate practical problems of a nation arming itself against crisis. These
are now being studied by a special committee of the Society, and I believe
its labors will be fruitful. With these tasks, I shall not here be concerned.

Instead, I want to turn your thoughts to certain areas of sociological
investigation where the crisis convicts us of neglected opportunities, to vast
areas unpossessed by us and unexplored, though our own flag and no other
flies ever them. What is more remarkable about a time of crisis than the
revelations it offers concerning the social nature of man? When men are
detached from their social moorings, when they are subject to catastrophic
changes of fortune, when every hour contains the final alternatives of life
and death, when the young are more mortal than the old, when millions of
males are segregated into unisexual camps, when responsibilities are sud-
denly intensified and abruptly transformed, when many social ties are
broken, when one imperative demand silences all the rest—when such things
happen, the foundations of human society are exposed. We can discern
something of what has happened in man, the cunning herd animal, in the
deep-working processes that have led from the Cyclopean family to this
stage of our civilization. The delusive multicolored play of his surface valu-
ations is swept aside. We watch the testing of the tensile strength of his
social cohesion; we can learn its endurance limits. We discover how his ob-
durate social emotions combine with his fierce egoisms. We discover how
group identification sustains his private being, sustains not only his prouder
loyalties but also his most petty ambitions. We observe how, when these
are together threatened, he retreats in panic back to the herd, abandoning
his individuality, eagerly accepting whatever messiah promises, at whatever
price, the healing of his trauma, the restoration of his solidarity.

These are phenomena of profound sociological significance. To investi-
gate them, to seek to comprehend them, should be a splendid enterprise,
at once illuminating and eminently serviceable. I can imagine no knowl-
edge that, if thoroughly grasped and widely diffused, could offer greater
guidance to the leaders of men. We investigate what happens in the heart
of the atom, we investigate what happens in the heart of distant suns, but
we do so little genuinely to investigate what happens in the heart of man.
Because we do not know or even care to know, our policies, our stratagems,
our treaties, our controls, bring often the most unexpected and disastrous
consequences to ourselves. What a record of miscalculation has been the
political history of the last three decades! How little the guides and ad-
visers foresaw, how little they understood! These decades do not stand
alone. It is the history of political man repeating itself in our age. Men seem
to learn every other lesson more quickly than how to deal intelligently, on
the larger political scale, with their fellowmen. I am not dreaming of any
utopia in which conflict will cease. Iam merely suggesting that much of the
actual conflict is misguided and ruinous, because of a lack of foresight, a
lack of understanding, such as men do not display in the conduct of their
other affairs. And the understanding that is most lacking is the under-
standing that sociology should and can provide. For it is the understanding
of social relationships, of the social values men cherish, of their tribal gods
and idols, of their responses to controls, of their long-run reactions to in-
doctrinations, of the tides of opinion, of the constancy and fickleness of
mass emotions, of the consequences to the ingroup of treating the outgroup
thus and thus.

Here are some of the major problems of sociology, and my reflections dur-
ing the past year have often turned around the question: what are we doing
to investigate them? We are the scientific fiduciaries of a great enterprise.
Are we big enough for the job? Do we realize its greatness and our responsi-
bility? Are we gearing ourselves to it as best we can? Or do we spend too
much time disputing over little things or empty things? Do we vex our-
selves overmuch with methodological quarrels and ignore the major tasks
to which our methods should be applied? Have we enough to show for our
diligent and often expensive researching? What do we do with the piles of
data we collect? Are we asking significant questions and seeking significant
answers? Is there some danger that we sprawl over half the universe of
4 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

knowledge and do not concentrate on our proper and urgent business?

I would bring to your attention some of these neglected tasks, selecting
them because either their character or their practical importance is pe-
culiarly revealed in times of crisis.

At the head of my list is the study of what I shall call social images. The
first great philosopher of science spoke of the invisible idols men erect and
worship. Three of his four orders of idols were socially created, the idols of
the tribe, the idols of the market-place, and the idols of the theater. These
images have frequently been exorcized by the logician and the philosopher,
and more recently they have been described by the historian and in some
part by the psychologist. A few sociologists, like Pareto, Veblen, and Thur-
man Arnold, have dealt with them in some fashion. But little enough has
been done by way of the direct investigation of them. It is the business of
the other sciences to eschew these idols; it is the business of the social
sciences to study them. They are among the most portentous phenomena
of social life. They are so powerful that at this hour, in most lands, men do
not dare to look them in the face, so powerful that they make all science bow
before them and furnish the technological aids they require for their greater
power and glory. In all countries, they are enthroned and command alle-
giance. For these social images are more than idols—they are the projection
of our social values, of our group and national solidarities, of the things
that bind us and divide us also, group from group, nation from nation.

How then should we study them and to what end? The role of science is
not to revaluate or to devaluate our primary values. It is concerned with the
verifiable, the discoverable relations between phenomena and systems of
phenomena. If our primary values lived in a realm of their own and were
content to let science find and follow its own truth, there would be no issue
between them and science. But our dynamic impulses, striving to change
the world, often lead us to misinterpret it, to distort or to deny the veri-
fiable. One remarkable feature of our own times is the manner in which
these controlling value-systems have enlisted the last advances of technology
to make their idols secure against investigation, to suppress all science that
is unfavorable to their claims, to instil scientifically untenable doctrines of
race and nationality and the social order. They take history away from the
historians, anthropology from the anthropologists, social biology from the
biologists, and sociology from the sociologists. Some of the priests who
guard these images are bold enough to tell us that myth and fable are better
than truth, that we live by our sacred illusions, that the darkness is pref-
erable to the light.

Against that faith stands the faith of science, that in the end truth serves
mankind better than does falsehood or ignorance. Perhaps we social
scientists can profess a further article of that simple creed, affirming that it
is the dark and distorted images which nations have created that are a main
cause of the present plight of our civilization. At least, we must raise the
question whether the time is not fully ripe for the turning of the light of
science on our sanctified prejudices, cherished delusions, and obsolete tra-
ditions. What science can do in this regard is not to evaluate our social
images but to bring them into closer correspondence with social realities.
It is a tremendous task, but I shall suggest only one aspect of it.

At the outset, let us distinguish two kinds of social image. Some of our
images are representations, generally skewed by our interests and emotions,
but nevertheless accepted representations of existent things. Others are
nonrepresentative expressions of our dynamic values. The latter do not
mirror, even distortedly, any evidential datum or system of data that the
scientist can investigate. They are in that sense wholly subjective, though
of course none the less important on that account. Both kinds of social
image seem necessary for our social life. To the second order, the non-
representative, belong such concepts as honor, glory, prestige, purity, right,
justice, loyalty, shame, duty. To the first order belong a motley array of
ascriptions, denoted by such words as capitalism, communism, democracy,
the “New Order” in Europe, the Nordic, the Jew, the alien, the rustic,
Hollywood, New York City, the Middle West, Methodism, Roman
Catholicism, the fair sex, and so forth. Each group sets up images of itself
and of the countergroup, and the like-named images of different groups,
though they purport to represent the same actualities, bear not the re-
motest resemblance to one another. Compare, for example, the socialist
images of capitalism and of socialism with the capitalist images of socialism
and of capitalism. Sometimes there would be a remarkable resemblance
between the images of countergroups if we could only change around the
labels attached by one or the other of them. The Republican’s image of a
Democrat used to be mighty like the Democrat’s image of a Republican.
But I shall not enlarge on this interesting theme.

There can be no doubt that these social images play a most powerful role.
That fact of itself should be enough to make them a principal object of
sociological investigation. But there is the further fact that our images of
the second order are often gross misrepresentations of things. When so, they
can properly be called unscientific, a term that has no direct relevance to
our images of the first order. If we have different notions about honor or
duty or shame or the rights of man, there is no decisive appeal; but if we
have different notions about race or nationality or sovereignty or trade
unionism or economic planning, some part of our disagreement can be
settled provided we are willing to look for and to accept the facts. Our
misrepresentations, our distorted images, have increasingly become forces
to tear the world asunder. If sociologists set themselves steadily to the task
of investigating these images, they would be bringing science and human
life together at the place where they are most apart, at the place where the
separation of them appears, in this age of ours, to be most perilous.

It is a progressive task that must be renewed, generation after generation.
In some areas, we dare not yet attempt it. Yet much can even now be done.
In one great field of exploration, that of the assessment and measurement
of the changes of public opinion, there has already been established a suc-
cessful and happy alliance between sociologists and statisticians. I should
like to see that alliance at work on our social images. A few years ago, I had
the opportunity to direct an investigation of the social images the people
of Canada have built up with respect to the United States.” There is scarcely
another international frontier in the wide world over which a similar in-
vestigation could have been carried without occasioning friction or arousing
opposition. Scarcely anywhere else could the social images a people erects
of a neighboring people have been faithfully surveyed as part of a program
for the increase of international understanding. It was possible only because
the two peoples are so closely bound by many ties. Even so, the image of the
American people beheld by Canadians is strikingly different from the kind
of image the American people beholds of itself. Our investigation threw light
on the causes that made the images so different. It also threw light on the
conditions of national image-making and image-changing. In a curious
way, it is because human beings are so like other human beings that they
see other groups and other peoples so differently from the way in which
they see their own. The manner of seeing is similar but the angle of approach
is different. Further international investigation of this sort must wait more
favorable times. Meanwhile, there are other images in plenty for us to
investigate, the counterimages of economic groups, of political parties, of
sects, of class groups, of regional divisions, and so forth. The study of these
would extend the basis of sociology, would contribute to social enlighten-
ment, and would develop the skills with which in due season we could attack
the strongest citadels of social prejudice.

Times of crisis reveal the role of our social images, but they reveal some-
thing more. They reveal the nature of social cohesion. On this knowledge
must our science be built. To advance it is our primary task. Perhaps we
are skirmishing too much along the edges of it and attacking too little at
the center. How strong are the bonds that bind man to his fellowmen?
Which snap first with increasing tension? Which endure longest? To what
appeals are men most responsive, in the long run as well as in the short
run? Under what conditions does ethnocentricity triumph over egocentric-
ity, and vice versa? What social emotions are in control when men are ready
to sacrifice their lives for a cause? How are these emotions strengthened

2 Published under the title, Canada and Her Great Neighbor,ed. H. F. Angus, Toronto, 1938,
being one of a series of Canadian-American studies under the general direction of James T.
Shotwell and sponsored by the Division of Economics and History of the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace.
SOME REFLECTIONS ON SOCIOLOGY DURING A CRISIS 7

and how are they weakened? How is morale fostered and how is it broken?

In times of crisis or of war, these questions are paramount. If we could
grapple with them, the worth and the standing and the service of our science
would be greatly enhanced. For the things we need to know to build the
foundations of our science are also the things men need to know if they are
to find some redemption from the blindness of their impulses, from the
trampling herd spirit that so often overpowers them, from the evil omens
of their distorted social images. Why should we leave these themes to the
novelist and the dramatist, to the descriptive historian or to the philoso-
pher? They have their own missions and we have ours. Ours is to establish,
by sustained investigation and interpretation, a coherent body of knowledge
in which the primary relations of man to man and of man to his groups will
be revealed with amplitude of perception in the clear perspective of science.
Has any science a grander task? Who shall deny its urgency?

Here, as elsewhere, knowledge must clarify need. We are midway between
the guidance of instinct and the guidance of intelligence. Instinct suffices
us no longer and the half-lights of interest mislead. Instinct, if I dare use
the word, must furnish the dynamic while intelligence shows the direction.
Why is it that, both for this generation and for the preceding, all the major
schemes and strategems of statesmen in the international arena have ended
in nothing but disaster and disillusionment? It is because they left out of
their calculations the sociopsychological factors. They calculated resources
and forces, but they did not calculate the resources of defeat or the im-
potence of victory. They calculated economic and territorial gains and
losses, but they did not calculate the consequences of economic privation
or of political suppression. They did not comprehend the tenacity of loyal-
ties and traditions, the resurgence of national unities, the responses of
peoples to crises. Thus, they miscalculated, and today the miscalculations
are proceeding on a yet grander scale. What statesmen and peoples lacked is
social knowledge, the knowledge of the other side of human relationships.
To provide this is the chief among the practical tasks of sociology.

On the whole, we have neglected our opportunities in this field. We have
done but little to study the ways men divide and the ways they unite,
all the long range from the unities men defend to the death to the divisions
in the name of which they destroy one another. Take, for example, the
subject of social stratification. Every group, every village, every city, every
country, has its pattern of stratified relationships. We know something of
the broad lines of stratification, but we have had few investigations of how
they actually work. We have some studies of special problems, such as
racial stratification in the South, but where shall we go if we want to learn
what social class means in a town of New Hampshire or Pennsylvania or
Illinois or Oregon? Where shall we go for intimate studies of the part played
in this matter by churches and lodges and clubs and family groups? Mostly
to the novelists, not to the sociologists. And once again, the mission of the
novelist is different from ours. Ours is to uncover and marshal the evidences,
impartially examine them, patiently organize them, and, with the ceaseless
vigilance of the disciplined imagination, explore and verify and interpret,
reverify, reinterpret, and reexplore.

What I am pointing out is that we still have to make the first serious
exploration of many areas of our proper territory. I could adduce various
other evidences. Take, for example, the whole subject of the sociology of
war which has received scarcely any specific investigation. But, mindful of
my limits, I shall not push the argument further. I shall content myself
instead with two concluding comments.

These great unexplored areas offer us no easy conquest. We have at times
been too prone to think that the receipt for a successful grand-scale investi-
gation consisted of, first, a financial angel to underwrite it, usually in the
form of a foundation or a government agency; second, a director versed in
the art of research organization; and, third, a competent gang of field
workers. I am far from belittling any of these necessary aids. I am, however,
claiming that they are not enough, that they alone will not carry us to our
goal. This campaign calls for all our intellectual resources as well. We need
sustained devotion and we need intellectual sweat. Some of our research
borders too nearly on the mechanical. That kind will never advance this
cause. There are those who say we are not yet ready to approach these
large subjects. We must first devise the special tools, the techniques. But
we have at our command the whole kit-bag of science, and where we need
special tools of our own we must shape them as we proceed with our proper
work. That is the way of science. That, I believe, is the true operationalism.
Let us get on with the job, and in the process we shall make and improve
the tools we need. There are already some fine achievements to our credit;
many more await us.

So I come to my last point. I have been talking less of the things we have
done than of the things we have left undone. The time of crisis reveals the
unseized opportunities. But I present them as opportunities, as auguries of
advance and not as witnesses of failure. It is well that we should recognize
the vastness of our unclaimed heritage. It is well that we should see our
subject in its nobler proportions. If its scale shrinks, it is only because we
are shrunken. It is well that our younger scholars in particular should be
aware of the challenge to achievement. If they realize it, the world will realize
it, too. If they realize it, they will serve the world. The subjects we have been
neglecting vitally concern this civilization of ours. Here is a more rewarding
cause than many of those that engross us. The lively disputes of today be-
come the dead records of tomorrow. But what we do to possess these areas
of social knowledge will not be without effect on the making of tomorrow.
