A Social Science Field Laboratory

Author(s): William Henderson and B. W. Aginsky

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Feb., 1941), pp. 41-44
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 2086341

Accessed: 16-06-2016 04:39 UTC
field, has brought with it the need for a social science laboratory

which would be a converging point for the various disciplines. Many
have felt that such a laboratory should be more than a central coordinating
bureau. It should be located in a cultural area which would provide ade-
quate material for all of the social sciences and yet be small enough to be
studied as a whole. To meet this need, the Social Sciences Field Laboratory
was established in 1939 by B. W. and E. G. Aginsky under the auspices of
New York University.

The Laboratory has three general aims. The first is to make a long-term
study of a culture from the points of view of all of the social sciences. This
involves the historical reconstruction of the past and an historical study of
the “future,” that is, a careful analysis of culture change and culture inte-
gration as these are taking place. It will include all aspects of the area under
study from the standpoint of the various disciplines, such as sociology,
social work, psychology, psychiatry, anthropology, economics, law, medi-
cine, political science, and history. The second aim is to provide supervised
training in field work and research at the predoctoral level, and facilities for
professional social scientists. Third, the Laboratory aims to test established
techniques, methods, theories, and conclusions, with the possibility of re-
fining and developing them, and arriving at new ones.

The Laboratory was located in a northern California community. It is
about forty miles from the coast and a hundred miles north of San Francis-
co. The community is small enough to be comprehended as a whole (popula-
tion, about 8000). The only city in the valley (population, about 4000) is
the county seat. The community is not subsidiary to any large city, though
of course it has many contacts with the outside world. The nearest towns,
which lie to the north and south, are smaller than the county seat; to the
east and west, there are no nearby towns of any size. Though small, the
community contains practically every aspect of contemporary society.
Stratification is rather rigid along social, economic, and racial lines, al-
though the various classes interact rather freely with each other in com-
munity affairs. The presence of several racial and national groupings, par-
ticularly a large group of Pomo Indians, who were aboriginal in the area,
gives rise to caste and class phenomena with various manifestations of

Te development of the social sciences, particularly in the research

1 Based on the paper read by William Henderson at the Eastern Sociological Society meet-
ing, March 1940. E. G. Aginsky also read a similar paper at the meetings of the American
Anthropological Association, at Philadelphia, Dec. 1940. These papers are the work of various
members of the Laboratory.
42 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

discrimination and prejudice. There are first generation Italians, Chinese,
Filipinos, and Mexicans in the community.

Large scale fruit farming and its industrial complements, canneries and
wineries, provide a mixture of the agricultural and industrial. Small busi-
nesses, chain stores, and a wide variety of associations such as trade unions,
business men’s associations, social clubs, national societies, etc., give the
community a high degree of self-sufficiency. It is a fairly self-contained
economic, political, and social unit.

Written sources from the first white settlement to the present are profuse
and various. In addition, there are some individuals alive at the present
time, both Indian and white, who were alive at the first important white
contact. The people, for the most part, are friendly toward the outsider and
welcome participation in their everyday affairs. Like most people close to
pioneer days, they are interested in the history of their community.

Breakdown of the more basic constellations of the Indian culture, com-
petition between the alternative cultural elements, the impotence or absence
of social controls that functioned in the aboriginal culture, and the only
partial assimilation of controls offered by the white culture, provide a
fruitful setting for the study of culture change and conflict. The limited
acceptance of the Indian into the white economy forces a large measure of
dependence upon federal, state, and county relief. The administration of
this relief presents problems that have both theoretical and practical as-
pects. Through the wardship of the Indian, the government is constantly
confronted with pressing problems of both personal and social control.

The social, economic, and political life of the community is closely con-
nected with large scale fruit farming, canning, and wine manufacturing.
The impact of seasonal changes and crop variations upon community life
afford interesting opportunities for studying cyclical and periodic behavior.

In addition to the usual variety in religious organization and practice,
this community offers a fine illustration of what happens when a subordinate
culture has only partially accepted the beliefs and practices of the domi-
nant culture. The result is peculiar or anomalous forms apparently inconsis-
tent with both the white and aboriginal cultures. This conflict between cul-
tures has produced numerous types of behavior in all phases of life which
seem well worth intensive study, e.g., the psychological, educational, and
social problems which develop with bilingual and bicultural groups; the
practical social work problems; medical care and health education; the
study of the organized group, particularly in the form of the Indian ran-
cheria; the psychology of language; and so on. Studies of this bicultural
community, continued over a long period, can be tested for consistency by
comparison with data collected and analyzed in other projects dealing with
this and other communities.

The groundwork for reception of the laboratory workers had been laid
by the prolonged work of the director and associate director who had been
on three previous trips to study this area. They were also familiar with the
other scientific work that had been done in the area and had become per-
sonally acquainted with a large number of Indian and white informants,
Indian agents, and local people, as well as with those anthropologists who
have long been actively interested in the Pomo culture. The first laboratory
group was organized in 1939. It consisted of the Director, B. W. Aginsky,
the Associate Director, E. G. Aginsky, five graduate students, and three
college seniors. The 1940 group consisted of the Director, Associate Direc-
tor, three of the first year students who returned as staff members, three
graduate students, and three college seniors. Of the fourteen students, repre-
senting eleven universities, nine were men and five were women. These
students were drawn from the fields of sociology, anthropology, psychology,
economics, and education. The resulting papers have been used as theses
and dissertations.

The Field Laboratory, which is on a fellowship basis, carries nine semester
credits. The work is now given in an eight weeks’ summer course.? Fellow-
ship grants vary upon the basis of individual merit and need. The field
research expenses, including travel in the field and incidentals, are paid by
the Laboratory. The students select their own projects. Among those al-
ready treated are: the place of women in the culture, the preadolescent
child, ecology, subsistence economy, legal psychology, religion, public
opinion, mobility, the infant, death, aboriginal money, the dance, the devi-
ant, the female migrant. The work so far has been oriented toward the study
of culture change, concentrating particularly upon the modern situation in
the community as it affects the Indian.

In the field, workers are encouraged to gather as much material as pos-
sible on the subject of their own investigation. At the same time, they are
cautioned, in view of the long-term nature of the Laboratory, to consider
all material as relevant. The nature of the field work includes interviews
with Indian and white informants, participation in both Indian and white
social events, visits to different parts of the wider Pomo territory, the ob-
taining of autobiographies, and in general, as much participation as possible
in the daily life of the community. Several members of the group spent
some time in gathering data on the community from records available in
Sacramento, San Francisco, and Berkeley. Besides maps and written data
gathered for the permanent record of the Laboratory, movies and a large
number of still pictures were made of daily events, members of the com-
munity, and physical aspects of the community. All data were immediately
transferred to permanent records ready for the use of all the members of
the Laboratory. Copies were retained for the files of the Laboratory.

2 Cf. Amer. Sociol. Rev., April 1940, 248.
The actual field work is supplemented by two hours of daily lecture and
discussion on the Pomo culture, techniques of research, and methodology.
Besides those of the Director and Associate Director, lectures have been
given by a considerable number of visiting scientists.

The direction taken by the Laboratory depends considerably on the
formulation of future plans. Thus far, the emphasis has been on the Indian
culture. It is thought this is the logical approach for a long-term study of
the community because the Indians are the original inhabitants and have
influenced the community to a great extent, and also because those persons
who had actual contact with the aboriginal setting at the time of the white
contact will soon be dead.

As soon as possible, the Laboratory will be kept functioning fully through-
out the year. In this community, which is highly affected by the seasonal
changes, there are wide differences throughout the year and a continuously
functioning laboratory is essential for observing the continuity of the cul-
ture in its periodic and cyclical phases. A start has been made by main-
taining one member of the Laboratory in the field from June 1939 to August
1940.

While the Laboratory will not be controlled by any single person or group,
there will be sufficient continuity of personnel to guarantee a continuation
of the original aims of the long-term project covering all aspects of a culture.
One of the plans is to obtain a permanent building with living accommoda-
tions for scientists and facilities for study and work. A large library upon
this area, typewriters, files, and camping equipment already have been ac-
cumulated. While the Laboratory is at present serving as a training ground
for students who, in most cases, have had no field experience, it is hoped
that it will soon be used extensively by seasoned professional scholars. The
Laboratory hopes to raise sufficient funds to take care of many expenses
which now must be borne by the individual workers.

A great deal of social research is being done but results are seldom tested
by further research, either by the original investigators or by others. Even
when work is repeated or when it is criticized, the reports are often published
in journals that are obscure or difficult of access. This makes it exceedingly
difficult for interested individuals to consult these reports. With this in
mind, the Laboratory aims to consolidate all of the material already pub-
lished, accumulate notes and manuscript material, and eventually to pub-
lish a monograph series covering all the work done on this area.

It is worth repeating that no relatively unitary community has ever been
under constant correlated observation by all the social sciences over a
long period of time. It is the purpose of the Laboratory to remedy this
defect in social research. We believe that the successful culmination of such
a plan will be of great value to social scientists in all fields.
