A Critical Study of the Criterion of Internal Consistency in Personality Scale
Construction

Author(s): Raymond F. Sletto

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 1, No. 1 (Feb., 1936), pp. 61-68
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2083864

Accessed: 14-06-2016 20:15 UTC
some items that are not sufficiently discriminating to justify

their retention in the final form of the scale. The criterion of
internal consistency is frequently utilized to select the more dis-
criminative items. It is essentially the use of total score on all items
of a scale to evaluate each individual item.

In the application of this criterion all items are scored according
to uniform arbitrary scoring weights, and these total scores are
placed in an array. Next, papers are segregated for persons whose
total scores place them in the extremes of the array. The proportion
included in these extreme segments has varied widely from one study
to another; deciles, quartiles, quintiles and other proportions have
been employed. Whatever the proportion used, the segments drawn
from each extreme of the array are equal in the number of persons
they contain.

Item responses are tabulated separately for the two extreme
segments. The extent to which an item yields response differentiat-
ing between them is the measure of its discriminative value in the
scale. The statistical significance of this discriminative value is
usually determined by computing the critical ratio.!

The criterion of internal consistency was recently employed to
select items for a battery of six scales developed by E. A. Rundquist
and R. F. Sletto.2 These scales were designed to measure morale,
feelings of inferiority, family adjustment, attitude toward law,
economic conservatism, and attitude toward education. Each scale
contained 22 items, and five alternative responses were provided for
each item. Typical items were as follows:

A PERSONALITY scale in its developmental stage usually contains

1 For a discussion of other methods of applying the criterion, see Joseph Zubin, “The
Method of Internal Consistency for Selecting Test Items,” Four. of Educ. Psych., Vol. 25,

May 1934, 345-356. . . .
2 A monograph describing construction of these scales is near completion.

61
The reliability coefficients for these scales have usually been above
.80 for various groups given the scales.’

The five alternative responses ranging from strongly agree to
strongly disagree were taken from O. Milton Hall‘ who utilized them
in a scale to measure occupational morale. These five alternative
responses to each item were scored by means of arbitrary weights
ranging from 1 to 5. One-half of the items were so worded that the
strongly agree response appeared most favorable, and an equal num-
ber were so worded that the strongly disagree response appeared
most favorable. The response judged to be most favorable was con-
sistently assigned the lowest scoring weight.

Table I illustrates how item discriminative values were computed
by the method of internal consistency.

It indicates how persons scoring in the highest and lowest quartiles
on the morale scale responded to the statement: “The future looks
very black.” At the left are the five alternative responses ranging
from strongly agree to strongly disagree. The first column contains

3 Sixty-one of seventy-eight coefficients computed for 13 groups were above .80.
40, Milton Hall, “Attitudes and Unemployment,” Arch. of Psych., 1934, No. 165, pp. 65.
the scoring weights assigned to the various responses. Column 2
shows the number responding in each position for the high total
score quartile. Column 3 contains the products of the frequencies
multiplied by the scoring weights. Columns 4 and 5 contain similar
statistics for the low total score quartile. Summing the frequencies
multiplied by the scoring weights yields a total of 83 scoring points
for those in the highest quartile, and 49 for those in the lowest.
Dividing by 28, the number of cases in each quartile, provides the
item means of 2.96 for the highest quartile and 1.75 for the lowest.
The difference of 1.21 between these quartile means is the item’s
discriminative value. The critical ratio is 5.81.

Tas e I, CALCULATION OF ITEM DISCRIMINATIVE
VALUE ITEM 13: THE FUTURE LOOKS VERY BLACK

N=28 in each quartile

 

 

 

 

Highest Quartile Lowest Quartile
Response Weight

f. fiw. f. f.w.
Strongly Agree 5 3 15 ° °
Agree 4 4 16 ° °
Undecided 3 Io 30 I 3
Disagree 2 ul 22 19 38
Strongly Disagree I ° ° 8 8
Total 28 83 28 49
Mean 2.96 1.75

 

Item Discriminative Value: 2.96—1.75=1.21
Items in the family series yielded an average item discriminative
value of 1.34, when quartiles were selected on the basis of score on
the 11 family items alone. The average value was only .08 for these
family items, when quartiles were selected on the basis of score on
the economic conservatism series. The average value for the 11
family items was 1.03 when extreme quartiles were selected on the
basis of combined score on the two series. The next line in the
table shows the corresponding values for the economic conservatism
items, when quartiles were selected on the three bases. The signi-
ficant point is that the average discriminative value for the 22 com-
bined items was .91, when quartiles were selected on combined score.
The mean critical ratio is 3.36. Seventeen of the 22 items yielded
critical ratios above 2.00. Eight of the family items and five of the
economic conservatism items yielded critical ratios above 3.00. If
one interprets the critical ratio in the usual way, the statistical prob-
ability that a critical ratio of 2.00 indicates a true difference is
approximately 95 to 100. That so many items yield statistically
significant discriminative values under these conditions indicates
CORRELATION CHART

SCORE ON 11 ACCEPTABLE FAMILY ITEMS
vs.
SCORE ON 11 ACCEPTABLE ECONOMIC CONSERVATISM ITEMS.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

r 3.04
Q4 Q ___
4 E I M
e
42)
COLE [
e
39)
ele
36) a
°o | o je ° ei? e e
534 —-
Ec °o | 0 lo ®5 e °.
3
° N
z |c - FIO a,
Fant of888loe| e
° ooo @,°
3 4415/2500] o [e°%]| & °
a A |alOloo qo| |
8 4 lc ASS Ik e i
B A p|A00]/0 0] 0 joe Oo}
2i
a a lal |“,
138} | a
A A a
15)
A Aa ° °
| | H IL P
al 24 27 30. 33 36 39 42 45 48 SI 54 57

SCORE ON 11 ECONOMIC CONSERVATIVISM ITEMS

INDIVIDUALS SCORING IN:
Q, ON 11 F, ITEMS: AREA ABOP.
Q, ON 11 & c ITEMS : AREA ADEH

Q, ON 22 ITEMS COMBINED: &

INDIVIDUALS SCORING IN:
Q, ON 11 F. ITEMS: AREA CDMN
Q, ON 11 ECITEMS : AREA {MLP

Q, ON 22 ITEMS COMBINED: @
uncorrelated series were plotted. Scores on the family series are
read from the Y axis, scores on the economic conservatism series
from the X axis. The solid circles at the upper right show the in-
dividuals who scored in the highest quartile, when scores on the two
series were combined. The triangles at the lower left show those
who scored in the lowest quartile, when scores on the two uncor-
related series were combined. The solid circles and triangles are
far enough apart to yield many differences between quartiles on
single items that are above the level required for statistical signifi-
cance, even though scores on the two series are uncorrelated. In
other words, if each series yields a fairly wide range of scores, dif-
ferences between highest and lowest quartiles may remain large
enough when the series are combined to yield statistically significant
item differences. The influence each series of items exerts on total
score may be sufficient so that its items yield statistically significant
differences between total score segments. Yet, neither series can
influence total score sufficiently to prevent a reduction in the average
discriminative value of its items, when the combination occurs. Hence,
the higher the average item discriminative value, the less likely it is
that many dissimilar variables are being measured by total score.
It may be desirable in a battery of scales that each item be scored
in the scale where its discriminative value is greatest. To what
extent is the apparent ideational content of an item a sufficient basis
for determining the scale in which it will yield maximum discrimina-
tion? A final answer to this question must await the results of future
research. So far as this particular study is concerned, the question
was reformulated as follows: How frequently would an item placed
in one scale yield higher discriminative value, if it were transposed
to another scale in the battery? To answer this question, the dis-
criminative value of each item was computed not merely in the
scale in which it was intended to be scored, but in each of the six
scales. The computations for each item were made in eight groups,
each containing I0o persons. This analysis yielded over 6,000 dis-
criminative values for the 132 items in the battery of six scales.
Considering all groups and scales, it was found that the frequency
with which an item discriminated better in another scale than that
in which it was originally placed was surprisingly small. In only
nine per cent of the instances were items found to yield higher dis-
criminative values more frequently in some other scale. This sug-
gests that the apparent ideational content of an item is a reasonably
safe guide to its placement within a battery of scales.

Certain items, however, which yielded their highest discriminative
values in a given scale for one group were found to yield their high-
est discriminative values in a different scale for another group. Such
an item is the statement, “No one cares much what happens to you.”
This item proved to be discriminating in the morale scale for all
groups, but in three of the eight groups it was more discriminating
in the family scale. It seems probable that each group contained a
considerable number who agreed or disagreed with the statement on
the basis of the degree to which they were adjusted in their family
relationships. Those who care most about a given person’s fate are
in most instances the members of his immediate family. The item,
then, appears to yield responses that reflect family adjustment, as
well as morale in its more generalized aspects.

It appears probable that some items discriminating in more than
a single scale evoke reactions which reflect different attitudinal con-
figurations for different individuals. One item taken from O. Mil-
ton Hall’s scale to measure occupational morale proved to be dis-
criminating in both the morale and economic conservatism scales.
This item reads: ‘There is little chance for advancement in busi-
ness and industry unless a man has unfair pull.” Those who feel
that advancement in business and industry is not based primarily
on merit or achievement may have their estimates colored by dis-
couragement concerning their own personal prospects for advance-
ment. This could account for the discrimination yielded by the item
in the morale scale. Yet many who are not discouraged concerning
personal prospects for advancement may still agree with the state-
ment, if they feel that the prevailing economic system is unjust.
Hence, either poor morale or economic radicalism may lead to agree-
ment with the statement.

The items in our battery of scales were selected on the basis of
their discriminative values for a group of 212 college students. A
few items selected on the basis of experience in this group discrim-
inated well only among college groups given the scales. There is
one item of this sort in the economic conservatism scale. It reads:
“Legislatures are too ready to pass laws curbing business freedom.”
This item yielded very low discriminative values when the scale was
given to employed and unemployed groups containing persons whose
educational training did not go beyond the high-school level. It also
proved to be undiscriminating among groups of high-school seniors
given the scale.

Perhaps university students are more often aware of the historical
conflict between liberals and conservatives as to the role govern-
ment should play in relation to business enterprise. Opposition to
legislative restrictions affecting business has been a traditional policy
of economic conservatives for at least a century and a half. Economic
liberals have demanded regulation of business to prevent continu-
ance of unfair practices. University students who favor a Jaissez-
faire policy may have interpreted this item to be an expression of
their point of view with regard to legislative restrictions on busi-
ness. The item differentiated sharply between college students whose
total scores placed them at opposite extremes on the scale. Failure
of the item to discriminate in other groups indicates that the dis-
criminative merit of an item cannot be adequately determined on
the basis of experience in a single group. When a scale is given to
groups differing in education, the discriminative values for items
cannot be assumed to remain constant.

Differences in the discriminative merit of items from group to
group are manifest when items are ranked in order of discriminative
value for groups of different composition. Items in the morale scale
were ranked in order of magnitude of their discriminative values for
eight different groups, each group containing 100 persons. The rank
order coefficients were then computed between these rankings. The
mean of the 28 rank-order coefficients obtained was .35. The low
magnitude of these coefficients indicates that the rank order of
items in terms of discriminative value varies widely from group
to group. In consequence, some of the items which were eliminated
on the basis of low discriminative values in the college group used
to select items might have proved more discriminating in a wide
variety of groups than some of the items retained. These findings
warrant the conclusion that experience with items in a single group is
definitely not a sufficient guide for item selection. To increase the
probability that retained items will prove to be discriminating in
a wide range of groups, two or more groups varying widely in com-
position should be given all of the items in the preliminary form of
the scale. If items selected for retention discriminate in each group,
the probability that they will prove discriminating in a wide variety
of groups given the final scale is considerably enhanced.
