Some Aspects of a Theory of Social Problems

Author(s): Richard C. Fuller and Richard R. Myers

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Feb., 1941), pp. 24-32
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2086338

Accessed: 16-06-2016 04:36 UTC
sociologists have had no clear understanding of the nature of the social

phenomena out of which problems arise. Because of this lack of under-
standing, courses have been “informational” in character, the teaching lop-
sided and incomplete, and the textbooks primarily compendia of unrelated
facts.

“Social Problems” has been a convenient heading under which a mass of
data pertaining to crime, divorce, immigration, insanity, and the like, has
been assembled and presented to the student in unsystematic and undi-
gested form. In this lumping together, the contribution of the sociologist as
such has been negligible. He has borrowed from the fields of history, eco-
nomics, medicine, psychiatry, penology, and social work and has condensed
findings from these various disciplines into a series of separate courses in
miniature, but has added to the totality very little distinctly sociological
analysis.

What justification is there for preserving in the sociology curriculum a
course which surveys differentiated and discrete problems, catch-as-catch-
can, without a unifying and systematic sociological interpretation? It may
be that there is some place in the college curriculum for a survey course
which considers a variety of social problems from a variety of viewpoints—
biological, medical, economic, political—but a course of that type should be
presented in collaboration by a number of different specialists. There is no
reason why a sociologist should have any special competence to handle so
many varied kinds of data with so many different scientific analyses.

Some may object that social problems do not have enough in common to
be dealt with by one central thread of sociological theory. If such be the
case, then each separate problem must be interpreted with a different set of
sociological concepts and the only excuse for considering a number of prob-
lems together would be that of practical expediency—to satisfy students
who desire a survey course because they have not the time or interest for
more specialized study.

It seems worthwhile, therefore, to inquire whether sociology can work out
a common orientation for the treatment of diverse social problems as
“sociological phenomena,” and whether this central thread of analysis can
be maintained consistently throughout a course or textbook.

Attempts to achieve such common orientation have been made by certain
textbook writers. The most popular climate of theory has been the applica-

Se problems courses have too often fallen into disrepute because
SOME ASPECTS OF A THEORY OF SOCIAL PROBLEMS 25

tion of cultural lag and social disorganization analyses to social problems.1
We find this theory set up in skeleton form in first and last chapters of text-
books, but rarely, if ever, consistently applied throughout the book to all
the problems with regard to which the author presents factual data. The
result is that the theoretical discussion of the concept “social problem” is of
little practical use to the student and is relegated to a minor role in the
introduction or conclusion of the course.

The failure of sociologists to develop a workable sociological orientation
stems from their inability to free themselves from the traditional concept
“social problem” which is unrealistic because it is incomplete. Traditionally,
sociologists have dealt with social problems as ‘‘givens,” rather than as
phenomena to be demonstrated. They have assumed certain conditions as
inevitable social problems, either to suit their own scheme of values, or
because such conditions have historically been discussed as problems in the
textbooks.

A social problem is a condition which is an actual or imagined deviation
from some social norm cherished by a considerable number of persons. But
who is to say whether a condition is such deviation? The sociologist may
say so, but that does not make the condition a social problem from the
point of view of the layman. Sociologists, nonetheless, have been content
to take deviations for granted, without bothering to consult the definitions
of conditions which laymen make.

Every social problem has both an objective and a subjective aspect. The
objective phase consists of a verifiable condition, situation, or event. The
subjective phase is the awareness or definition of certain people that the
condition, situation, or event is inimical to their best interests, and a con-
sciousness that something must be done about it. Conditions do not assume
a prominent place in a social problem until a given people define them as
hostile to their welfare.

This is well illustrated by reference to population data. Mere pressure of
numbers on subsistence in a given area is not enough, in itself, to create a
problem of overpopulation for the people living there. The density of
population per square mile, the availability of food and natural resources
for the people in the area, and the distribution of goods and services among
the population make up the objective conditions. The people may be miser-
able, their standards of living pitifully low, disease and mortality rates
may be high, and yet from their viewpoint, they are not overpopulated
unless they believe themselves to be overpopulated. If the people are not
problem-conscious, they will not behave as if there were any problem. They
will not debate the condition as a problem nor will they organize to do any-
thing about it. Social problems are what people think they are.

1 For a discussion of some of the limitations of the social disorganization theory in the

analysis of social problems, see Richard C. Fuller, “The Problem of Teaching Social Prob-
lems,” Amer. F. Sociol, Nov. 1938, 415-25.
Again, for some time in this country, we have had a falling birth rate.
Though our population is still increasing, it is growing at a diminishing
rate. Population authorities have been aware of this trend for some time
and it has been reported in textbooks and government surveys. We can
reasonably expect that if the trend continues we will have a stationary
population in the not very distant future, and from then on a net decline
in population. Some classes whose interests will be disturbed by this trend
are farmers, manufacturers, school teachers, doctors, and real estate people.
Can we say, therefore, that this objective condition makes the declining
birth rate a social problem to the American people? There seems to be little
public awareness, concern, or discussion of the trend. Even the newspapers,
pulpits, and popular lecture rostrums are surprisingly silent on the subject.
Awareness may come in the future, but until then the people cannot be said
to be problem-conscious on this matter.

It is the same with the so-called labor problem. The objective condition
of a hereditary class of propertyless wage-earners may be necessary but it is
not sufficient for the existence of a labor problem. As Briefs has so con-
vincingly demonstrated, the working class must give their condition the
subjective definition of protest before we can realistically speak of a pro-
letariat or a labor problem.?

So we must distinguish between problems which are problems only to the
scientists, as experts, and problems which are defined as such by the people
because their wants or needs are unsatisfied. It is not enough that people
are being or will be affected by objective conditions. Their behavior must
indicate that they think the condition threatens cherished values.

Not only have sociologists neglected popular definitions of conditions.
They have also overlooked the dual role which value-judgments play in
causing the condition itself, and in obstructing solutions for its alleviation
or eradication. This is unfortunate, because we can learn very little about
social problems by considering only such scientific data as lie outside the
pale of moral judgments. This is precisely why all the scientific information
pertinent to the medical aspects of venereal disease will not solve the social
problem which is venereal disease. A value-scheme which prohibits frank
discussion of sex problems in the home and school is a causal item in the
existence of the condition, venereal disease. The same taboos which con-
tribute to the causation of the condition frustrate public programs which
are designed to eradicate it. Similarly, value-judgments which deny social
acceptance to the mother of a child born out of wedlock not only contribute
causally to such conditions as abortions, infant mortality, and abandoned
children, all of which are socially disapproved, but such value-judgments
also obstruct efforts to solve the illegitimacy problem by impeding free dis-
cussion of it.

2 Goetz Briefs, The Proletariat, New York, 1937.
Doubtless the sociologist has ignored the value-judgments of people
because he feels he cannot be objective about them and hence will lose his
scientific detachment. The danger of subjectivity should not deter him from
studying social values; if he leaves them out, he has not a complete concept
“social problem”’; he is dealing with only fragmentary and partial data. He
must bring these value-judgments into the arena of scientific study before
it can be said he is obeying one of the first rules of science, which is to study
all, not part, of the evidence pertinent to his problem.’

A common sociological orientation for the analysis of all social problems
may thus be found in the conflict of values which characterizes every social
problem. These conflicts are mirrored in the failure of people to agree that
a given condition is a social problem, or assuming such agreement, failure to
reach an accord as to what should be done about it. It is exactly this dis-
agreement in value-judgments that is the root cause of all social problems,
both in the original definition of the condition as a problem and in subse-
quent efforts to solve it. May we suggest, tentatively, a threefold classifica-
tion of social problems on the principle of different levels of relationship to
the value-scheme ?*

At the first level, we have what we may call the physical problem. The
physical problem represents a condition which practically all people regard
as a threat to their welfare, but value-judgments cannot be said to cause the
condition itself. This is perhaps best demonstrated by such catastrophic
problems as earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, droughts, locust plagues, and
so forth. That these are “‘serious” problems from the standpoint of the
people which they affect, we can have no doubt. However, we may raise the
question whether or not they are “social” problems, since they do not
usually occur because of conflicts in the value-scheme of the culture. We
find no public forums debating the question of what do to about preventing
earthquakes and hurricanes. There is no controversy over how to stop
volcanic eruptions and cloudbursts. The causation is thought of as non-
human, resting in natural forces outside the control of man. Perhaps we
may call such causation noncultural or precultural.

Here, we must distinguish between the condition itself and the effects of
the condition. While the earthquake itself may involve no value-judgments,
its consequences inevitably will call for moral judgments and decisions of
policy. People will not agree on how much should be spent in reconstruction,
how it should be spent, or how the funds should be raised. There may be
serious questions as to whether people in other unaffected areas of the same

3 For an interesting prospectus for the study of a social problem, such as housing, which
includes the definitions of laymen and pressure groups as well as the analyses of economists,
engineers, and other scientists, see Louis Wirth (ed.), Contemporary Social Problems, Chicago,
1940.

4 The elements of this classification were stated by Richard C. Fuller in the article, “The
Problem of Teaching Social Problems,” op. cit., 419-20.
society should come to the aid of the stricken area. However, the earth-
quake itself is not a social problem in the same sense as illegitimacy and
unemployment. The latter have cultural elements in their causation.

In the case of the physical problem, there is scientific ignorance of causa-
tion and control, and we cannot say that the value-judgments of the
people are obstructing the solution of the problem. There is no social dis-
organization involved, no clash of social values, no lag between public opin-
ion and scientific opinion. If scientific knowledge has ascertained the causes
of the condition and for some reason the value-judgments of the people
interfere with the acceptance and application of this knowledge, then we
can say that value-judgments are a part of the causal pattern of the prob-
lem and that the problem is truly “social” and no longer belongs at our
first level. Thus, if we may anticipate the time when scientists can tell us
how to prevent earthquakes, control hurricanes, and make rain for drought-
stricken areas, we may imagine some elements of the population who will
oppose the application of scientific techniques on the ground that they are
too costly and threaten budget-balancing, or that they interfere with nature
and God’s will, or for some other reason. At this point in the evolution of
the culture, we do have a man-made problem, since the will of certain groups
is a causal element in the occurrence of the condition itself.

Most diseases have at one time or another consituted physical or medical
problems rather than social problems. Many years ago, the bubonic plague,
small-pox, and syphilis were far beyond medical knowledge of prevention
and control. Today, if the bubonic plague and small-pox should again sweep
the world, they would not be essentially “medical” problems since medicine
now knows how to deal with them. They would be “social problems” since
their recurrence could be traced to the breakdown of our educational tech-
niques, popular resistance against vaccination, confusion as to public policy
in public health matters, or some other man-made situation. Likewise, the
control of syphilis is now definitely a social problem. Medical knowledge
of prevention and control is very nearly perfected, but the problem of
changing social attitudes and removing social inertia is very much with us.
On the other hand, infantile paralysis still remains primarily a problem for
medical rather than social science.

As for locust plagues and floods, it is perhaps debatable whether or not
they belong at this first level of the physical problem. To the degree that
we know how to check boll weevil and grasshopper invasions and avoid
floods, these things are social problems. To the degree that we lack such
knowledge, they are merely technical, engineering, or physical problems.

At the second level, we have the ameliorative problem. Problems of this
type represent conditions which people generally agree are undesirable in
any instance, but they are unable to agree on programs for the ameliora-
tion of the condition. The essence of the ameliorative problem is one of
solution and the administration of reform rather than original agreement
that the condition constitutes a social problem which must be eradicated.
Crime and delinquency fall in this category. Though there are individuals
who offend the dominant community mores by robbing, murdering, raping,
and petty thieving, there are no interest groups who openly in forum and
legislature seek to perpetuate the interests which these individuals represent.
All “right-thinking” people, regardless of race, nationality, religion, or
economic status, look upon the ameliorative problem as intolerable. Among
other problems which we may place in this class are most physical diseases,
mental deficiency and insanity, and industrial and automobile accidents.

In contrast to the physical problem at the first level, the ameliorative
problem is truly “social” in the sense that it is a man-made condition. By
this we mean that value-judgments not only help to create the condition,
but to prevent its solution. In the case of crime, certain moral judgments of
our culture are to a large extent responsible for the criminal act in the first
place. To the degree that our mores of conspicuous consumption enter into
the motivation of crimes for pecuniary gain, there is a cultural responsibility
for such criminal acts. Or again, traditional prison policies based on our
belief in severity of punishment may become part of the causal pattern of
further criminal behavior in the prisoner after his liberation. These same
cherished notions of retribution in punishment of criminals operate to dis-
suade legislatures from adequately financing probation and parole systems,
juvenile delinquency clinics, and the schools for problem children.

At this level, also, we have those physical and mental diseases where
traditional beliefs obstruct the application of medical and psychiatric
knowledge to the prevention and treatment of individual deficiencies.
Certainly illness, disease, and industrial accidents among the low income
groups reflect the failure of our culture both in preventing high incidences
of risk to these people and in adequately insuring them against the costs of
such risks. Specifically, the uneven distribution of wealth and income
throughout our various social classes serves both to expose wage-earners
and their families to malnutrition, disease, and accident, and to deprive
them of the means to meet the economic costs of such disasters.

Even in the case of the insanities, especially those of the functional type,
there is a cultural source. Preventive psychiatry functioning through the
mental hygiene movement has had hard sledding because insanities have
long been regarded as conditions taboo to public discussion. The stigma
placed on a schizophrenia victim often results in retarded treatment which,
if sought earlier, would reduce the difficulties in the way of an effective
cure. Many of our people have not yet come to regard mental disease in the
same light as they do pneumonia or tuberculosis—as just another type of
illness which can be prevented or cured if treatment is given in time.

It is true that all our ameliorative problems have their technical, medical,
or engineering aspects similar to those involved in the physical problem.
Venereal disease, tuberculosis, insanity, and automobile accidents all neces-
sitate investigation by scientific specialists. The point is, of course, that in
the case of such problems, even when the specialists have isolated the causes
and are agreed upon programs of control, laymen still are hopelessly di-
vided over questions of policy.

At the third level we have what we will call the mora/ problem. The moral
problem represents a condition on which there is no unanimity of opinion
throughout the society that the condition is undesirable in every instance.
There is no general agreement that the condition is a problem and thus
many people do not feel that anything should be done about it. With the
moral problem, we have a basic and primary confusion in social values
which goes much deeper than the questions of solution which trouble us in
the ameliorative problem.5 Of course, the ameliorative problem reflects
confusion in the value-scheme and thus contains real elements of moral con-
flict, but such conflict centers more around techniques and means of reform
than around fundamental agreement on objectives and ultimate values.
Hence, though all “right-thinking” people regard such conditions as crime,
insanity, and disease as bad, there are interest groups openly defending and
perpetuating the conditions classified as moral problems. Witness the prob-
lems of child labor and low wage and hour standards. We have only to read
the record of newspaper and Congressional debate on the recently enacted
Fair Labor Standards Act to learn that many individuals and groups not
only objected to the specific solution attempted in the legislation, but also
refused to admit that the conditions themselves were problems over which
we should be concerned. In one of the first cases heard under the child labor
legislation, one Michigan judge defended the labor of a newsboy on the
ground that when he was a boy such work was regarded as excellent char-
acter development and training in individual qualities of initiative and
self-discipline. Certainly employers in the beet sugar fields of the middle-
western states who rely heavily on the labor of children do not define the
condition, insofar as it pertains to them, in terms of a social problem. In
those families where the labor of children is considered necessary to the
maintenance of the family budget, parents and children alike have a stake
in the continuance of the condition so abhorred by others. Religious groups
have even frowned on government control of child labor as an unjustifiable
invasion of the home and a threat to the prerogatives of the church. As to
long hours and low wages, the opposition of some dominant groups in the
southern states to the enactment of the federal legislation indicated no
“problem-conscious” attitude on their part. Classical economists and em-

5 The term “moral problem” is used by Stuart A. Queen and Jennette R. Gruener in their
Social Pathology, 38-42, New York, 1940. The moral problem, as they define it, pertains to
questions of fundamental right and wrong.
ployers have been known to look upon unemployment and low wage and
hours standards as the inevitable, if not the necessary, mechanics of com-
petition in the labor market.

The same logic applies to the condition of unorganized wage earners.
Organized opposition to the enforcement of the National Labor Relations
Act indicated not only objection to certain provisions of the law and to
abuses in its administration, but also antagonism to the basic policy of the
law itself which was to guarantee to workers the right to bargain collectively
through representatives of their own choosing without hindrance from the
employer. Though collective bargaining has come a long way toward public
acceptance, there is still widespread denial of that fundamental right in the
attitudes of many employers and community officials. We have not as yet
any consensus of opinion in evaluating the condition of unorganized labor.

Other problems which have less of the economic in their make-up than
those mentioned above, but which also occupy the same position in relation
to the value-scheme, are divorce, race prejudice, and war. Feminists, free-
love advocates, and even less “‘modern” individuals look upon divorce as a
necessary and logical release from matings which have turned out unfor-
tunately. The fact that our forty-nine legal jurisdictions demonstrate such a
wide variety of legal grounds for divorce is a rough index of the great dis-
crepancy in moral judgments on divorce the country over. Race prejudice
in many sections of our country does not disturb many individuals at all.
We can take a point here from Fascist persecution of the Jews. Race preju-
dice is defended by totalitarian authorities as a natural phenomenon—
essential to the survival of the “pure” racial strains. Even less need be said
as to the absence of any clear national or world consensus which defines
war as something wrong and in need of eradication at all costs.

The utility of this classification is in its relativity. The purpose is not to
pigeonhole the different problems with finality at any one level, but rather
to give us a working basis for observing the position of each problem relative
to other problems, and to the value-scheme as a whole. Note that prob-
lems will move from one category to another with changes in the state
of scientific knowledge and with shifts in the value-scheme. When the
physical problems cease to be essentially problems of engineering and medi-
cal knowledge, and come to involve questions of social policy, they will move
over into alignment with the ameliorative problems at the second level. As
indicated, venereal disease has seemingly made this transition though in-
fantile paralysis has not. When problems now classed as moral come to
have wide disapproval throughout our culture as conditions which must
in every instance be done away with, they will become essentially problems
of solution rather than agreement on basic values and will be dealt with as
ameliorative problems. Some day child labor may be looked upon as crimi-
nal in the same sense that robbery and murder are now regarded as criminal.
32 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

Conceivably, war may sometime be defined as wrong as venereal disease.

Nor is there any finality about the problems tentatively classified as
ameliorative. Many crimes, such as political corruption, gambling, liquor of-
fenses, and traffic violations are condoned, tolerated, and even participated
in by respected and otherwise responsible members of the community.
White-collar crimes are conspicuous in this category. Crimes of this sort
reflect the same fundamental confusion of values as the problems which we
discussed as moral. Before such offenses can be said to be merely problems of
police detection and judicial enforcement, the citizens of the community
must get together and agree that something should be done.

It may well be that there are very few contemporary problems which can
be said to be purely ameliorative in nature, since most of them reflect no
underlying clarity of definition and moral evaluation. If such be the case, it
is a revealing commentary on the absence of any firm tissue of cultural inte-
gration in the value-scheme. Cultural integration itself is a matter of degree.
There is always more or less, but never complete integration. A complete
homogeneity of social values would mean we would have no social problems
at all unless we include only the purely physical problems discussed at the
first level.

Whether or not the point of view suggested in this paper can be success-
fully applied to a text or course in contemporary social problems remains
to be demonstrated. The classification indicated may have some important
theoretical implications for an orientation of discrete social problems to a
central thread of sociological analysis, but there may be real difficulties in
the way of adapting it to teaching purposes.

Conventional textbook classifications of social problems have followed
the rule of expediency rather than systematic theoretical analysis. Thus,
problems have been given such common sense classifications as: conserva-
tion of natural resources, population, physical and mental health, economic
security, crime and delinquency, family disorganization, war, propaganda
and social control.

Conceivably, however, a course in social problems could consider prob-
lems somewhat in the order of the classification we have suggested. Physical
problems need not be treated in detail for they are not truly “social prob-
lems.” Some discussion of them, nonetheless, would perhaps clarify the point
of view as a whole. Ameliorative problems, where there is a basic agreement
on the wrongfulness of the condition, would be considered from the stand-
point of policies for solution. Moral problems would be approached only
secondarily from the angle of solution policies, primarily with respect to
cleavages of opinion over questions of fundamental right and wrong.
