Some Contributions of Sociology to the Guidance of Society

Author(s): E. A. Ross

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 1, No. 1 (Feb., 1936), pp. 29-32
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 2083861

Accessed: 14-06-2016 20:12 UTC
as to the makeup of the social population. By this I mean: com-

position in respect to race, sex, age and national origin; propor-
tion of adults single, married, widowed or divorced; ratio of the ur-
ban population to the rural; rates of births, deaths, marriages and
divorces; literacy; religious affiliation; proportion in school; distri-
bution among the occupations; inmates of disciplinary and penal
institutions; distribution of income, of property, of taxes. In some
cases the mere injecting of precise unquestionable data on these
matters puts an end to controversies which otherwise might drag on
forever. Change of certain of these measurements in the wrong direc-
tion will rouse thinking people like an alarm bell. Just as change in
temperature, pulse, blood pressure or white-corpuscle count may
be highly significant as to a man’s prospect of health or disease, so
change in marriedness, tenancy, proportion of infants, or crime rate
may disclose the existence in society of a pathological trend which
calls for prompt remedial measures. Every advanced society should
be provided with a statistical bureau to furnish reliable measure-
ments of all social facts and quantities to which sociologists attach
great significance.

Gee should be able to provide full and reliable information
By unbiased description of all the important social experiments
which bear upon the difficulties encountered in contemporary society
the sociologist should be able to disclose unexpected reactions and
behavior tendencies, which the would-be reformer will have to take
into account. Review of the outcome of a great variety of social ex-
periments shows that nowadays lack of original and appealing ideas
is the last thing our society suffers from. What it needs is new and
beneficent ideas which will really work, which will actually fulfill
expectations. Many social experiments which at first excited glowing
hopes have turned out disappointingly because people did not react
to them as had been anticipated; other experiments, e.g., consumers’
codperatives, have succeeded and spread. Since proposals which have
a record of consistent failure after repeated tests crop up again and
again, owing to general ignorance of the facts, sociology should be
prepared to report upon the results of all manner of significant social
experiments. It goes without saying that experiments should be ob-
served and evaluated not by their enemies, but by their well-wishers;
but they must not be so enamored of a particular remedy that they
are unable to perceive its failure in case it turns out badly.
v

Sociology does not see the future of society as predestined. It
rejects the argument of Karl Marx that, seeing that the bourgeois
class overthrew the feudal social order, the working class is bound to
overthrow in turn the bourgeois social order. To Marx it seemed to be
“‘written in the stars” that the proletariat will triumph and bring an
altogether different social order; the only room he recognized for
the operation of the human will is in the date of this overthrow. It
the proletariat should develop a will-to-power and be well led, the
new social order would arrive so much the earlier.

Sociologists reject such assumptions. As we see it, the feudal order
disappeared because the forces supporting it came to be much weaker
than the forces assailing it. Capitalism will be superseded, if it is
superseded, for the same reason. The forces supporting and the forces
assailing capitalism by no means match up, point to point, with those
which supported and those which assailed feudalism. In some re-
spects the defenders of capitalism are weaker, in other respects they
are stronger, than the defenders of feudalism. Likewise, the assail-
ants of capitalism are not made up of the same elements nor do they
wield the same weapons as those who overthrew feudalism.

Therefore the issue of this latter-day conflict is by no means a
foregone conclusion. The Marxian leader cheers on his followers with
the slogan, “Our victory is written in the book of Fate. We are bound
to win.” The sociologist observes, on the other hand, that the out-
come of the duel between private capitalism and communism depends
upon the balance between the contending forces, and these in turn
depend upon developments, many of which have not yet taken place.
The eventual collapse of the feudal social order was visible to some
as much as two hundred years before it actually took place. Now,
granting the inevitability of collectivism, is its triumph a matter
of two or three decades only? Or are we in the presence of a social
system which will not become utterly effete for two or three genera-
tions? How this question is answered makes an immense difference
in our attitude toward Communism regarded as a contemporary
political movement.

The sociologist may be able to discern that certain forces are gath-
ering momentum while others are getting weaker, that one side is
winning ground whereas the other side is losing ground, but, until he
knows more than he knows now, he cannot be sure that these tend-
encies will continue. He cannot but feel that prophecy as to the
Sociology takes the dispassionate, scientific view of tradition.
Through most of the past there were conservatives praising tradition
as the chief guide of life and norm of social policy, while progressives
denounced it as the greatest obstacle to social progress. We now see
that each of the two is right some of the time, and that both are
wrong in some respects. Before the rise of psychology and social
science, tradition, embodying the fruits of the experience of bygone
generations, had some guiding value so long as the underlying social
conditions had not greatly changed. But, in a time like ours, when
new inventions, new techniques and new insights are making many
“lessons from the past” inapplicable, the thoughtful will prefer to
look to science for guidance rather than to tradition.

Since, in a time like ours, tradition cannot afford safe guidance,
because much of what it has to offer really has no bearing on the
matter in hand, the only thing we can fall back upon is popular
intelligence. Since this, once it recognizes the futility of tradition,
finds nothing it can put its trust in save education, I echo the say-
ing of H. G. Wells “The future depends upon the outcome of a race
between education and catastrophe.”
