Quantitative Methods in Social Psychology

Author(s): George A. Lundberg

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 1, No. 1 (Feb., 1936), pp. 38-60
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2083863

Accessed: 14-06-2016 20:14 UTC
the subtlest problems in the field of sociology, namely, the na-

ture of the symbolic mechanisms through which man deals to an
increasing degree with his universe. These mechanisms consist of
neuro-muscular sets of some kind in the human organism. When these
sets, namely our verbal mechanisms, correspond closely to the con-
ditions to which we must adjust, they greatly facilitate our adjust-
ments. For example, a map is a highly valuable symbolic represen-
tation provided its pattern, order, and sequences correspond to the
actual terrain over which we must travel.! It is a corresponding handi-
cap, if it fails to indicate where the rivers and the mountains are, if
it confuses the order in which they occur, or otherwise fails to corre-
spond to the conditions to which we must adjust. Sometimes a local
map which may be adequate for most kinds of travel within its own
borders turns out to be very misleading in the light of a larger per-
spective. In the same way the verbal systems and orientations of a
primitive primary group society may turn out to be grossly inade-
quate in a national or world society of secondary group relationships.
The best illustration of this phenomenon is the successive intel-
lectual revolutions that mark the epochs of science. Each resulted
from the difficulty of forcing increasingly adequate observations
into the then existing verbal schemes. The new orientations, such as
those of Copernicus, Newton, and Einstein, provided a more ade-
quate intellectual chart according to which mental operations could
proceed without contradicting the concrete observations of life. As
Poincaré says: “All the scientist creates in a fact is the language in
which he enunciates it.’ Now social psychology is the branch of
sociology which is increasingly concerned with the linguistic behavior
of man. The present paper deals with one type of this linguistic be-

Te TITLE of this paper represents a small subdivision of one of

1Cf., A. Korzybski, Science and Sanity, N. Y., Science Press, 1933, p- 58-
2H. Poincaré, The Foundations of Science, N. Y., Science Press, 1913, p- 332+

38
I

One interesting by-product of this transition is the necessity of
relying increasingly on written rather than spoken symbols. Many
of the things that scientists wish to communicate simply cannot be
adequately transmitted through oral language. The structure of the
idea which scientists must communicate is so complex that it cannot
be matched in a succession of acoustic stimuli. Consequently, the
language of science must increasingly consist of written graphic
symbols, which provide an enduring instead of an immediately van-
ishing stimulus, and offer possibilities of arrangement (tabulation,
etc.) that cannot be communicated in oral language.? Largely for
this reason, you will find the solid material underlying the present
paper referred to in the footnotes.

The dominating intellectual chart according to which Western
man has attempted to orient himself in the social world is the Aris-
totelian laws of thought laid down some 2300 years ago.‘ Physical
science has gradually abandoned these rules of mental procedure but
the social sciences still hold to them. One of the reasons for their
popularity is the clean-cut dichotomies which they set up.5 Proposi-
tions are either true or false, things are either right or wrong, and
so forth in all matters. This principle resulted in dichotomizing nicely
the facts of experience into mutually exclusive compartments, which
have for centuries handicapped thinking by setting up categories
assumed to be inherent in the universe and holding to them regard-
less of how badly they served the solution of the problems at hand.®

Illustrations of the prominent but mischievous role which these
dichotomies have played in the history of human thought are too
well-known to require more than mention. For example: (1) The
induction-deduction controversy is, in the light of modern psychol-
ogy, simply obsolete. (2) The heredity-environment controversy is

3 Cf., Leonard Bloomfield, “Linguistic Aspects of Science,” Philosophy of Science, October

1935, PP- 499-517.

4 For a good brief discussion of this subject see E. T. Bell, The Search for Truth, N. Y.,
Reynal and Hitchcock, 1923, Chap. VII. For extended discussion see Korzybski, op. cit.

5 The arbitrariness of this system has been exposed in the epoch-making work of Luca-
siewicz and Tarski; see C. I. Lewis and C. H. Langford, Symbolic Logic, New York, 19325
also A. F. Bentley, Linguistic Analysis of Mathematics, Bloomington, Ind., Principia Press,
1932.

6 Curiously enough, quantitative techniques are suspected of being guilty of just this short-
coming, though the history of mathematics and statistics clearly demonstrates the opposite,
another case in point.” (3) Further illustrations are found in many
of the arguments regarding structure versus function, organization
versus process, form versus activity, etc. What is overlooked is that
a structure is merely a persistent function, while a function is merely
a series of changing structures.® (4) The arguments about case studies
versus statistical method, to which this Society has given much at-
tention, likewise disappears upon the reflection that all statistics
necessarily consist of cases and that therefore there can be no an-
tithesis or mutual exclusiveness between the two methods. The
scientific import of the most thorough genetic or case or configura-
tion analysis, on the other hand, lies in the demonstrability of its
generality. The attempt to contrast quantitative techniques with
theory is likewise fallacious, because quantitative approaches may
be as theoretical as any others. (5) Other dichotomies of the same
kind must simply be attributed to rhetorical rambling, which even
the guilty authors would disavow if confronted with them. Take for
example this statement of a prominent sociologist in a recent book:
“The social sciences,”’ he says, “... must be established through
critical thinking rather than through physical science methods.”?®
The implication is that critical thinking is less necessary in the phys-
ical sciences. As long as we obfuscate our thinking by such contrasts,
no progress toward the solution of real problems is possible.

I

The futility of the antitheses mentioned above is so obvious that
very few informed people are interested in the further discussion of
them. In short, they are in process of being relegated to the same
limbo of human interest to which we have consigned other famous
specimens of scholastic argument. One or two others of these antith-
eses which are still rather prominent in sociology should be tagged
with the same label of scholastic verbalization. I refer to the current
attempt to contrast statistical, quantitative, and mathematical
methods on the one hand and a method called the method of insight
on the other. Sometimes such terms as understanding or intuition
are substituted for insight. The error lies in overlooking that insight

7 For elaboration of this point see G. A. Lundberg, ‘““The Biology of Population Cycles,”
Social Forces, March 1931, pp. 405-408.

8L. K. Frank, “Structure, Function and Growth,” Philosophy of Science, April 1935,
Pp. 2133 also Alexis Carrel, “The New Cytology,” Science, Vol. 73, March 20, 1931, p. 298;
also G. E. Coghill, “The Neuro-Embryologic Study of Behavior: Principles, Perspective, and

Aim,” Science, Vol. 78, August 18, 1933, p. 137-
°C. A. Ellwood, Methods in Sociology, Duke University Press, 1933, p. 5-
and understanding are the ends at which all methods aim, rather
than methods in themselves. Quantitative techniques are merely
the more refined, easily-used tools by which we gain insight and un-
derstanding.!° No one has to my knowledge ever questioned their
importance in all scientific endeavor. Eloquent defenses of insight
and understanding, therefore, merely draw a red herring across the
trail of the real question, namely, What are the methods of attaining
understanding and insight?! We want an objective description of
the technique. The answer to this demand in some quarters is to wear
one’s collar backwards, to gaze into crystals or tea cups, or to go
into a trance. While being duly impressed with the remarkable re-
sults of these techniques, the hardier minds in every field have always
demanded a more detailed description of the steps in the procedure.
Some of the abler magicians, such as Houdini, have acceded to this
demand by describing their techniques in verifiable terms. Since
verification by other qualified minds is the essence of scientific knowl-
edge, the progress of science has been characterized by increasingly
searching demands that the author of a generalization specify the
steps by which he reached it. Because of the essentially quantitative
nature of all scientific generalization (I shall return to this point later),
an honest description of the technique by which any understanding
or insight is achieved will either involve quantitative procedures
(formal or informal) or be of no general scientific import.

Take, for example, the phenomenon of prediction. In prescientific
terminology it is called prevision and is generally conceded to rep-
resent the highest measure of insight. Is there any scientifically
accredited way of predicting, except in terms of probability based on
past observations? The whole argument is a confusion of language.
Statisticians themselves fall into the confusion when they point out
that the technique of correlation must be used with understanding,
logic, reason, etc. They overlook that the understanding, reason, and
logic which they properly advocate is itself a method, a technique,
of some kind. In fact, the insight and the understanding which we

10 Even crude and inadequate quantitative techniques sometimes reveal relationships
which are not otherwise perceptible. Cf. L. L. Thurstone, The Vectors of Mind, University
Chicago Press, 1935, p. 206. I am here accepting the conventional usage of these terms as de-
scribing an adjustment achieved, namely, when our curiosity for some reason comes to rest.
Later I shall show that from the operational viewpoint understanding and insight must them-
selves be regarded as techniques. See footnotes 16 and 29.

u “The gestalters have made much of the notion of insight, but, unfortunately, this idea
has become enveloped with a kind of mysticism. It appears to me that insight is only another
name for a process which has long been familiar to us.” O. L. Reiser, “The Logic of Gestalt
Psychology,” Psych. Rep., Vol. 38, No. 4, July 1931, p. 360.
seek is to be achieved only by further correlation—formal or infor-
mal. Correlation is not merely the name of a certain statistical oper-
ation invented by Karl Pearson. It is, as the dictionary says, “the
act of bringing under relations of union, correspondence or interac-
tion; also, the conceiving of two or more things as related.”!? As
such, it is a method used as frequently by other people as by statis-
ticians. Misuse of certain specific correlation techniques for purposes
for which they are not adapted is, of course, common, and nobody
defends such errors, least of all the statisticians. At the same time,
formal correlation is no more frequently erroneous than the informal
correlations which everyone practices. To attack correlation and
quantitative techniques in general, because of numerous faulty ex-
amples of their application, is a flagrant case of throwing out the
baby with the bath.

At this point my analysis will be challenged on the ground that I
interpret the meaning of statistics and quantitative methods too
broadly. The current idea seems to be that if one uses pencil and
paper, especially squared paper, and if one uses numerical symbols,
especially Arabic notation, one is using quantitative methods. If,
however, one discusses masses of data with concepts of more or less
instead of formal numbers, and if one indulges in the most compli-
cated correlations but without algebraic symbols, then one is vot
using quantitative methods.

A striking illustration from a recent book by a prominent sociolo-
gist will make the point clear. After a discussion of the lamentable
limitations of statistical methods, the author appends this remark-
able footnote: ‘‘Wherever the statistical method definitely gains the
ascendency, the number of students of a high intellectual level who
are attracted to sociology tends to fall off considerably.”

In short, the author finally reverts to a statistical proof that statis-
tics don’t prove anything. It must be clear that the only operations
as a result of which one could make the statement that, as statistical
methods gain ascendency, high-caliber students decrease in num-
bers, would be (1) to measure the degrees of relative intelligence of
students; (2) to measure the quantitative variations in registrations
of the better students in different sociology departments; (3) to
measure the degree to which quantitative methods dominate the

¥ Funk and Wagnall’s New Standard Dictionary, 1931.
18 Florian Znaniecki, [The Method of Sociology, N. Y., Farrar and Rinehart, Inc., 1934,
Pp. 235.
departments; and (4) to correlate the last two factors. The state-
ment is an excellent example of so-called non-quantitative techniques
and suggests the reason for their popularity. The measurement of
the factors here involved is a serious and difficult business. The
generalization as quoted was the result of a few strokes of the pen.
In short, what the critics of the better quantitative methods seem to
prefer is informal, impressionistic, and imaginary statistics support-
ing their pre udices.

The surprising implication by other sociologists that Darwin did
not use quantitative methods seems to rest on a somewhat similar
misunderstanding. The assumption seems to be that because the
Origin of Species contains no tables, therefore Darwin did not use
quantitative methods. The patient accumulation of thousands of
cases, the painstaking classification of them, the recording of the
proportion of cases supporting an hypothesis and the proportion con-
tradicting it—all this apparently does not come within the definition
of quantitative methods as understood by these writers. I am not
here interested in entering into a dispute about the correctness of
this definition or of my own, which is much broader. I am interested
only in making the point that, if such limitations exist in the defini-
tion of quantitative methods on the part of those who find the meth-
ods of little value, I am not surprised at their conclusion. But it
must be clear that, if the distinction between quantitative and non-
quantitative techniques is to have any significance, we must take
the position that a procedure is none the less quantitative or statis-
tical if the operation is carried on without algebraic symbols or with
concepts of more and /ess instead of with formal or exact numbers.
It may be alleged that this is an attempt to break down the distinc-
tion between the quantitative and the non-quantitative. That is
precisely what I am interested in doing, so far as it is attempted to
distinguish them solely on the basis of the formality with which they
are carried out.

Objectification of the technique of generalization invariably re-
sults in quantification.

14 E.g., Herbert Blumer, Amer. Four. Sociol., Vol. 35, No. 6, 1930, p. 1102.

45 “There can be no doubt,” says Professor Morris R. Cohen, “that it is of the essence of
scientific method that vague terms like /arge and small, far and near, hot and cold, etc., shall be
replaced by terms made definite by measurement.” M. R. Cohen, Reason and Nature, N. Y.,
Harcourt Brace and Co., 1931, p. 89. See also L. L. Bernard, “The Evolution of Social
Consciousness and of the Social Sciences,” Psychological Review, Mar. 1932; “The Develop-
ment of Methods in Sociology,” The Monist, April, 1928, pp. 292-320.
The above conclusion directly raises the question as to whether
scientific generalization is always and necessarily quantitative. I
contend that it is. Those who find otherwise must mean something
different by the term generalization, and they have failed to explain
in operational terms what they do mean by it. I mean by the verb
generalize the process of determining the probable prevalence in a
universe of a given datum or configuration of data. I mean by the
noun generalization a statement arrived at by the above process.
That is, I define the concept in terms of the operations by which I
arrive at it, in conformity with the accepted requirement of science.1
Is this or is it not what every scientist today means by generaliza-
tion? If you accept this definition, the question as to whether all
scientific generalization is necessarily quantitative at once disap-
pears, for quantification is implicit in the definition. If you do not
accept this definition, let us have your substitute. But let us have
it in operational terms, i.e., in terms of the steps involved in arriving
at it. If you cannot so define it, all argument as to its nature again

36 “Tet anyone examine in operational terms any popular present-day discussion of re-
ligious or moral questions to realize the magnitude of the reformation awaiting us (p. 32).
.. +I believe that many of the questions asked about social and philosophical subjects will be
found to be meaningless when examined from the point of view of operations. It would doubt-
less conduce greatly to clarity of thought if the operational mode of thinking were adopted
in all fields of inquiry as well as in the physical.” P. W. Bridgman, The Logic of Modern Phys-
ics, N.Y., The Macmillan Co., 1932, p. 30.

“The only justification for our concepts is that they serve to represent the complex of our
experiences; beyond this they have no legitimacy. I am convinced that philosophers have had a
harmful effect upon the progress of scientific thinking in removing certain fundamental con-
cepts from the domain of empiricism, where they are under our control, to the intangible
heights of the a priori.” A. Einstein, The Meaning of Relativity, Princeton University Press,
1923, p. 2.

The statement “‘no virtuosity of technique can compensate for want of understanding”
(Waller [cited below] p. 290) uses the word “understanding” in precisely the way attacked by
Einstein. Understanding is a “‘virtuosity of technique,” from the operational point of view.

“The older elementalistic linguistic problems of ‘matter,’ ‘space,’ and ‘time’ were in such a
mess, due to the objectification of verbal structures, that it was useless to talk any more in the
old way. He [Einstein] decided to describe what a physicist does when he measures ‘space’
and ‘time’ and to abandon, perhaps unconsciously, the ‘is’ of identity.”” Korzybski, op. cit.,
p. 648.

My restricted use of the term science in this section has been made the object of attack on
the ground that “‘all science is a search for truth.” The implied on sequitur is that therefore
all search for truth is science. I have elsewhere fully recognized the value of pre-scientific, non-
scientific, and non-quantitative techniques. (See G. A. Lundberg, “Is Sociology too Scientific?”
Sociologus, Sept. 1933, PP. 301, 302, 316-317.) I use the term science to describe a method and
its results, not to exalt that method or depreciate others. Also, I am dealing here only with the
type of response known as generalization, i.e., the extrapolation of propositions from the
known to the unknown. Such extrapolations may be made from single cases, but if so, there is
no basis upon which to estimate the probable validity of such extrapolation.
disappears, as anything you say regarding your private mental oper-
ations must necessarily be accepted as final and not subject to check,
and therefore outside the pale of science.

As a matter of fact, I think the definition of generalization I have
given above is what everyone means by the term. Those who fail to
recognize it as such are simply misled by the informality with which
the process is carried out, as I have illustrated above. The delusion
that a scientific generalization may be drawn from a single case
seems to be due to the fact that sometimes a single case happens to
illustrate, typify, or coincide with the facts as stated in a generaliza-
tion. This is apparently at the root of such a statement as appeared
recently in a leading article of the American Fournal of Sociology.
“Tf one perceives a single case correctly,” says the author, “he can
generalize from that instance.’”!” We are left without any operational
clue as to how to perceive correctly or how to determine the correct-
ness of a perception. Actually, of course, we say a perception is
“correct” when other qualified observers confirm our report on an
observation. But even when this agreement of perceptions of a
single case has been established, on what possible logical grounds
may one postulate that the datum or configuration of data is present
more generally in the universe? There are no grounds whatever for
such an assumption in the absence of further observations of addi-
tional instances.

The use of the word “‘correctly”’ above is a striking illustration of
how terms of this kind frustrate thinking in the social sciences. The
author clearly uses it to mean an observation which (1) has been
confirmed by other qualified observers and (2) would be found to hold
for the whole universe under consideration. In short, he jumps over
the operational steps implied in the words “perceiving correctly”
and thus reaches the conclusion that there are no such describable
steps, but that the conclusion is “directly” revealed through the
alchemy of the mind. It is this kind of verbal necromancy which has

17 W. Waller, “Insight and Scientific Method,” Amer. Four. Sociol., Vol. 40, No. 3, Novem-
ber 1934, p. 287. I refer to this article chiefly because it furnishes illustrations from recent
literature of the points I wish to make. It should not be inferred, therefore, that this article
is especially hostile to quantitative methods, but rather the contrary. Since much of the
controversial literature in sociology consists of heroic demolitions of positions nobody holds
or defends, I have tried to avoid this time-honored technique of scholastic discussion in the
present paper by citing in each case proponents of the views I attack. For other illustrations
see J. F. Brown, “Towards a Theory of Social Dynamics,” Four. Soc. Psych., Vol. 6, 1935,
pp. 188-189; and K. Lewin, 4 Dynamic Theory of Personality, N. Y., McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
1935, PP- 12, 14, 31.
compelled science to insist on the operational definition of its con-
cepts. Of course, I distinguish between what I have defined as a
scientific generalization and an hypothesis, although they differ only
with respect to the adequacy of the data on which they rest. Thus,
the statement criticized above and such contentions as Brown’s
that laws precede their demonstration confuse hypothesis with
scientific law.18

While the author quoted above avoids giving any instructions as
to how to perceive with that “correctness” which will permit us to
generalize from a single case, he does essay directions as to how “we
may proceed to obtain insight,” and Karl Pearson himself could not
improve upon them. For here it is set down categorically that “in
order to perceive with insight,” we must engage in (1) “direct study of
human and nterhuman behavior,” (2) study of symbols supposed to
stand for such behavior, and (3) “sympathetic penetration.”!® In
short, insight is not itself the method or even the beginning of the
process but the result of some very mundane procedures many of the
details of which in their more refined and systematic form may be
found in any good text on statistics. This is what I mean by an
operational definition of insight as compared with such exhortations
as “try to see how data arrange themselves’’; “experience pheno-
mena with insight”; ‘“‘we must look at events until they become
luminous.’”° For commentary on these verbal gyrations, it would be
impossible to improve on the same author’s own remarks two pages
later on some other matter. “‘An unfortunate circumstance,” he says,
“4s that communication often breaks down, so that one acquires
names without their attendant perceptual patterns. There is abun-
dant evidence in sociological literature that many of our colleagues
have learned words without perceiving processes, so that they liter-
ally do not know what they are talking about.’ To which I append
a fervent “Amen!”

I conclude that the notion that a scientific generalization can be
drawn from a single case arises from a failure to define concepts in
operational terms. Further illustration of the same confusion is
found in certain current discussions of causation. Thus Kohler says:
“Once more I must point out that our feeling of something naturally

18 J, F. Brown, “A Methodological Consideration of the Problem of Psychometrics,”
Erkenntnis, 1934, No. 4, pp. 46-61.

19 W. Waller, op. cit., p. 288.

20 Tbid., pp. 287, 288.

2 Tbid., p. 290.
dependent upon something else does not refer to a correlation, or a
highly constant togetherness as such, stated in terms of the external
observations of a great many cases. It refers rather to an evident
dynamical dependence as experienced hic et nunc, in one actual
case.”? The “feeling of something naturally dependent” and the
“evident dynamic dependence” of two things as “felt” by an indi-
vidual in “one actual case” is precisely what has led to some of the
most preposterous generalizations in history. The fact that at other
times such “feelings” from a single case have later been confirmed
and found to hold generally in no way justifies us in confusing the
hypothesis with the verified generalization. The latter is exactly
what distinguishes science from other types of knowledge. Nor is
this distinction any less clear or important because hypotheses are
a proper part of the scientific method.

The above quotation from KGéhler is an example of one of the pos-
tulates of Gestalt psychology. It seems to be the dismal destiny of
sociology to fight the battles of psychology over again a decade or
so after the issue has been settled or abandoned in the latter science.
Thus, some of the questions regarding behaviorism which had their
inning twenty years ago in psychology are still in the foreground of
sociological discussion. It is not surprising, therefore, that sociologists
have now discovered Gestaltism and with it they are hoping to stave
off both behaviorism and quantitative methods. In the meantime
alas, the Gestalters in psychology (especially the younger workers
in the field) declare Gestaltism to be a form of behaviorism and
frankly avow their adherence to quantitative and mathematical
techniques.” Thus Koffka says in his recent book: “In my opinion
this famous antithesis of quantity and quality is not a true antithesis
at all. It owes its popularity largely to a regrettable ignorance of the
essence of quantity as used in physical science (p. 13) .. . the quan-
titative, mathematical description of physical science, far from being
opposed to quality, is but a particularly accurate way of representing
quality (p. 14)... It (psychology) may be perfectly quantitative
without losing its character as a qualitative science, and on the other
hand... it may be unblushingly qualitative, knowing that if its

2 W. Kohler, Gestalt Psychology, N.Y., H. Liveright, 1929, p. 361. Waller takes a similar
position, op. cit., pp. 285-90. Regarding the notion of “immediate experience” see E. C.
Tolman, “Psychology versus Immediate Experience,” Philosophy of Science, July 1935, pp-
356-380.

23 See J. F. Brown, The Mathematical Conceptions Underlying the Theory of Psychological and
Social Fields, Ann Arbor, Edwards Bros., Inc., 1935.
qualitative descriptions are correct, it will sometime be possible to
translate them into quantitative terms (p. 15).”% (Italics mine.)
This concedes, of course, the point I have made above as to the quan-
titative test of the correctness of a generalization.

Even more striking is the declaration of J. F. Brown. “It may well
be,” he says, ‘“‘in fact I think it very likely, that at best psychological
analysis may only be statistical.”

Yet in the face of these declarations by accredited Gestaltists a
recent article in the American Fournal of Sociology purporting to be
“some methodological implications of the Gesta/t principle of insight”
has this passage: ‘““The relationship of cause and effect usually as-
sumes the form of a configuration in time. This theory enables us to
avoid the ultimate nonsense of Pearsonian methodology, the doc-
trine that a statement of a causal relation is really only a statement
of relative probabilities.’ As to whether cause, as science under-
stands it, is an “elementary datum of experience” which has nothing
to do with relative probabilities I am content to refer you to a bibliog-
raphy on the subject including such names as Bohr,” Bertalanffy,”
Bridgman,”® Heisenberg,?° Hecht,*! and Schroedinger*® in science,
and others of equal repute in philosophy.® If the author of the above
quotation will provide you with an equally adequate bibliography
of the other view, you may study the two positions at your leisure

% K, Koffka, Principles of Gestalt Psychology, N.Y., Harcourt Brace and Co., 1935. Ina
footnote Koffka attributes a similar idea to Wertheimer.

% Brown, op. cit., p. 4.

26 Waller, op. cit., p. 287.

27 N. Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature, N.Y., The Macmillan Co., 1934,
Chap. IV, pp. 106, 109, 110.

28 L. Bertalanffy, “Uber die Bedeutungen der Umwalzungen in der Physik fir die Bi-
ologie,” Biologisches Zentralblatt, Vol. 47, 1927, pp. 653-662. See also on this subject Hans
Miller, et a/., Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, Vol. I1, Biological Labora-
tory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., 1934.

29 P, W. Bridgman, The Logic of Modern Physics, p. 37: “I believe that examination will
show that the essence of an explanation consists in reducing a situation to elements with which
we are so familiar that we accept them as a matter of course so that our curiosity rests. Reduc-
ing a situation to elements means, from the operational point of view, discovering familiar
correlations between them.”

30 W. Heisenberg, The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, University of Chicago
Press, 1930, Chap. IV, pp. 58-59, 63-

31§. Hecht, “The Uncertainty Principle and Human Behavior,” Harper's Magazine,
January 1935, pp. 237-249-

32 E. Schroedinger, Science and the Human Temperament, N.Y., W. W. Norton Co., 1935,
Chaps. II, III, and V, especially pp. 59, 64, 66, 131-32.

% B. Russell, The Analysis of Matter, N.Y., Harcourt, Brace and Co., 1927, Chaps. XVI,
XX, XXX, XXKI, XXXV, XXXVIIIL.

J. Dewey, The Quest for Certainty, London, Allen and Unwin, 1930, pp. 28, 191-192, 194,
198, 276.
I have criticized above the interpretation which some sociologists
have made of Gestalt theory as bearing upon the importance of
quantitative methods in sociology. I believe that the position I have
criticized is not only invalid in itself but that it is a misinterpretation
of the true position of Gestalt theorists, especially of the younger
workers in the field. It is a pleasure in this connection to recognize the
importance of the Gestaltists’ contribution in their theory of fields
and topology.** The theory of fields is an attempt to provide a more
adequate frame of reference for psychological and social dynamics.
By dynamics we understand that aspect of science which deals with
systems undergoing change. Implicit in dynamics is the idea of
force. Behavior in all science is assumed to take place in space. The
basic postulates of behavior are accordingly a force (or forces) and a
field within which forces operate.3? When there is a difference in poten-
tial within a field, change or behavior occurs. In the symbolic descrip-
tion of this behavior situation, especially in its earlier or theoretical
stages, geometry has been found most useful. In fact, geometry is in
modern times perhaps the chief mathematical tool for the construc-
tion of scientific theory.?* The special branch of geometry developed

* L. K. Frank, “Causation: An Episode in the History of Thought,” The Fournal of Phi-
losophy, Vol. 31, No. 16, August 2, 1934, pp. 421-428.

5 Operationally speaking, cause is imputed to the independent variable or combination of
variables when it shows a high probability-expectation in its concomitant variations with other
factors or combinations of factors, other supposedly relevant conditions held constant.

36 J. F. Brown, op. cit., p. 7. See also Philip Franklin, “What is Topology?,” Philosophy of
Science, January 1935, Pp. 39-47-

37 ““All dynamical theory tends to be field theory. The whole trend of modern science is
away from theories which consider the behavior of objects determined by the class to which
they belong, to theories which consider the behavior of objects to be determined by the field
structure.” Brown, of. cit., p. 10. I have taken a similar position in my paper ‘Public Opinion
from a Behavioristic Viewpoint,” Amer. Four. Sociol., Vol. 36, Nov. 1930, pp. 387-405.
Iam unable to see any conflict or contradiction between the above position and contemporary
behaviorism. Behaviorists recognize as fully as any group the configurational nature of social
situations. Their alleged atomistic methods are merely a recognition of the necessity to reduce
a complex problem to manageable proportions and to solve one problem at a time. For further
discussion of this point see G. A. Lundberg, “Is Sociology Too Scientific?,” Sociologus, Vol. 9,
No. 3, September 1933, p. 307, ef seq.

38 Cf., Brown, op. cit., p. §. There is, however, an important difference of opinion on this
subject among scientists and mathematicians.
to serve this need is topology, which deals with the non-metrical as-
pects of space, such as relationships of connection and position.*?
Forces directing movement may be represented by vectors.’ ““The
strength and direction of these vectors is determined by the distri-
bution of the objects in space and not within the object... The
parts cannot be separately considered as activating forces but what
happens at any individual point within the field is a function of the
whole field structure.”“! “Since rational thinking tends to structure
itself in terms of special relationships, topology gives us the mathe-
matics necessary to set up theories about psychological and socio-
logical problems where fundamental measurement is impossible at
the present time.’ Thus the concept of social fields and forces
geometrically representing social situations may be of the greatest
importance as the theoretical framework within which meaningful
quantitative description of processes may be carried out. The ulti-
mate goal is to describe these processes in functional equations.

The significance of this approach in sociology has been most ade-
quately illustrated by Chapin. He has shown how the graphic
symbolic representation of structural configurations succeeds in
breaking down a whole into measurable parts, in identifying the
part-whole relationships, and in helping to visualize the subtler pat-
terns of intangible relations. The refined analysis of the configura-
tional elements rests upon the development of quantitative indices
of behavior for which both verbal and graphic symbols ultimately
stand. Here again Chapin has pointed the way by defining opera-

39 Cf., Brown, op. cit., p. 7.

40 “The tensor calculus is an extension of the vector calculus, which has become famous
since Einstein. It gives us formulations independent of any special frame of reference. In using
it we are automatically prevented from ascribing to the events around us characteristics
which do not belong to them. The tensor equations give us absolute formulations, absolute be-
ing understood as relative no matter to what.” A. Korzybski, Science and Sanity, p. 619.

“The essence of Einstein’s generalization is its final disentanglement of that part of any
physical event which is contributed by the observer from that which is inherent in the nature of
things and independent of all observers.” E.T. Bell, The Principle of General Relativity (quoted
in Korzybski, op. cit. p. 635).

41 Brown, op. cit., p. 10. This does not change the fact that the original definition of the field
is a construct of convenience relevant to and determined by the problem pursued, rather than a
definition inherent in the universe, as is implied in much philosophical discussion of the
whole-part relationship. E.g., Korzybski, op. cit., p. 91; Waller, op. cit., p. 287; Lewin, op. cit.,
pp. 21, 31. In a forthcoming paper I shall deal in greater detail with some of the subtler fal-
lacies of Lewin’s plausible and in many respects valid analysis. Basic questions of language
and knowledge are involved, for a general treatment of which see A. F. Bentley, Behavior,
Knowledge, Fact, Part 11. Bloomington, Ind., Principia Press, Inc., 1935.

“ Brown, op. cit., pp. 7, 8.

4 B.S. Chapin, Contemporary American Institutions, N.Y., Harper and Bros., 1935, Chap.
16.
QUANTITATIVE METHODS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 51

tionally the concept of social status by a three-dimensional vector.
A good deal of the quantitative work that has been done in sociology
and social psychology, however unorganized and uncoérdinated with
reference to basic theory, represents a movement toward this end.
In addition to the work of Chapin, special attention must be called
to the notable work of Thurstone,“* Woolston,“ and Dodd‘ in the
development of vectorial techniques, Kirkpatrick’s‘” approach to the
problem of attitude configurations, and the studies of Moreno,‘? and
Thomas, Loomis and Arrington’ of fundamental group dynamics.
These methods represent pioneer attempts to metricize data and
fields which have up to the present been regarded as least amenable
to quantitative methods.

It is my considered judgment that these very recent contributions
by the authors mentioned represent most significant methodological
developments in the field of social psychology. A full understanding
and appreciation of them requires a careful study of the sources
cited, where the techniques and the underlying theory are fully set
forth. An adequate review of a single one of these studies would be
beyond the space limits of the present paper. Furthermore, it has
not been my purpose in this paper to discuss technical details or to
catalog the large number of significant quantitative contributions to
social psychology. Such reviews have recently been published, and
I refer you to them. I have preferred to confine myself instead to
what I consider the crucial issues regarding quantitative techniques.

While the studies which I have just now estimated so highly are
too recent to have received much discussion as yet, I should in con-

4L. L. Thurstone, The Vectors of Mind, University of Chicago Press, 1935. See also under
the same title his article in the Psychological Review, January 1934. pp. 1-32.

45H. Woolston, “American Intellectuals and Social Reform,” forthcoming in American
Sociological Review, June, 1936; “Discrimination: A Study of Social Determinants,” Journal
of Social Psychology, Vol. 5, 1934, pp. 248-254. See also his article “Stepbrothers,” Social
Forces, Vol. 6, 1928, pp. 368-375.

48S. C. Dodd, “A Theory for the Measurement of Some Social Forces,” Scientific Monthly
(forthcoming). Also his “4 Controlled Experiment in Rural Hygiene in Syria,’ American
University of Beirut, 1934, Part IV. See also on this subject: N. Rashevsky, “Outline of a
Mathematical Theory of Human Relations,” Philosophy of Science, October 1935, Pp. 413-
430.
47 C, Kirkpatrick, “Attitude Measurement and the Comparison of Generations,” Your.
App. Psych. (forthcoming).

48 J. L. Moreno, Who Shall Survive? A New Approach to the Problem of Human Interrelations,
Washington, D. C., Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Co., 1934.

49D. S. Thomas, A. M. Loomis, and R. E. Arrington, Observational Studies of Social Be-
havior, Yale University, Institute of Human Relations, 1933.

60 Handbook of Social Psychology, Ed. by C. Murchison, Clark University Press, 1935.
See especially Chap. XVII, “Attitudes,” by G. W. Allport; also G. and L. Murphy, Experi-
mental Social Psychology, N.Y., Harper and Bros., 1931.
52 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

clusion like to anticipate the two principal objections which they
are sure to arouse: First, they represent a departure from the cus-
tomary terminology and concepts of sociology and will therefore
incur the hostility with which everything new and strange is met,
especially when it threatens the status quo. Secondly, these new
methods, as a result of their novelty, do not lend themselves at the
present time to the kind of ready verification through common sense
upon which even scholars are inclined to insist in the social sciences.
Both objections are really correlative and can be considered together.

The literature of sociology has been until recent years couched
almost exclusively in the literary style of oratory, homiletics, and
the novel. Any departure from this style is likely to cause suspicion
and resentment. The point is best illustrated from current reviews
of some of the better sociological monographs. ‘““The author has
leaned over backward,” says one reviewer, “in his attempt to be
scientific and as a result his presentation leaves much to be desired”
(italics mine). The implication is that in proportion as a sociological
monograph lapses into scientific style or terminology it is objection-
able to sociologists regardless of what its merits may be. There is no
criticism more common in sociological reviews than that the research
under review lacks “the human touch,” “one encounters no real
human beings in these pages,” “the pages do not ‘live’,” etc., etc.
Now we all like it if our work turns out to be also entertaining. I, too,
appreciate the sadistic and the Freudian satisfactions which the
literature of sociology provides for large numbers within and out-
side the field. Nor am I defending obscurity, pedantry, or scientific
camouflage. I merely venture to question whether conformity to
antique style, concepts, and logic are legitimate criteria for the evalu-
ation of sociological contributions. I appreciate as highly as anyone
the sociological novel, poetry, and the movies. But to confuse them
with scientific contributions seems to me to be a step to which both
scientists and novelists may properly object.

Underlying the above confusion is the appeal to common sense,
which in spite of its history and present status in the other sciences,
still has tremendous prestige in sociology. Sociologists have over-
looked that the only legitimate regard to which common sense is
entitled is that which it may deserve when contrasted to no sense at
all, and not as contrasted to the uncommon sense which is science.
The place of common sense in the other sciences has been well de-

51 Review of S. C. Dodd, op. cit. in Sociol. and Soc. Res., Sept.-Oct. 1935, p. 86.
QUANTITATIVE METHODS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 53

scribed by Bell: “That is precisely what common sense is for,” he
says, “to be jarred into uncommon sense. One of the chief services
which mathematics has rendered to the human race is to put com-
mon sense where it belongs, on the topmost shelf next to the dusty
canister labeled ‘discarded nonsense’.’’*

In short, we cannot accept as valid criteria of the scientific value
of sociological research its power to entertain or the degree to which
it coincides with the stereotypes we have inherited from primitive
folklore, or which we have formed from contemporary journalism
and cartoons. There has been some consternation in recent years
over the fact that the anthropologist’s Indians do not resemble very
closely the Indians found in the books of James Fenimore Cooper
and Longfellow. Shall we therefore set aside the anthropologist’s
findings on the ground that they are less “‘real,” “live,” “human”
and true to “common sense” than our stereotypes of Indian culture
drawn from novels and poetry? Germany today provides a fine ex-
ample of what the glorification of folklore in preference to scientific
anthropology will do for a nation. Sociologists still have to decide
apparently as to whether they prefer the pronouncements of the
cracker-box philosopher or the graphs of Ogburn and his collabora-
tors as to what are social facts and trends. The techniques by which
conclusions in social psychology will be reached will, I predict, be-
come increasingly strange to the common man. Sociologists will have
to decide whether on this ground alone they wish to set aside the
increasing body of quantitative sociological knowledge which flatly
contradicts the conclusions of “common sense.” In the meantime
we shall no doubt have increasing lamentation over the necessity for
this choice. For as Santayana has said: ““The philosophy of the com-
mon man is an old wife that gives him no pleasure, yet he cannot
live without her, and resents any aspersions that strangers may
cast on her character.”
54 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

selves that by the mere grandeur of the undertaking we can avoid
rendering account of our methods in operational terms.

The transition to quantitative methods in the social sciences is
increasingly evident. The Econometric Society is firmly established.
A Psychometric Society has been organized within the last year. A
Sociometric group already meets informally within the Sociological
Society. These developments are only the first reverberations in the
social sciences of the main intellectual battle of the present genera-
tion, namely, the battle against the shackles of Aristotelian verbal-
isms, logic, and laws of thought. The simple fact is that the con-
ceptual tools of primitive folklore are totally inadequate for a co-
herent orientation in the new world which science has revealed to
us. We cannot deal with the physical world with the tools of 1935
and at the same time confront social problems with the tools of
the Middle Ages, or of 5000 B.C., without the most serious schizo-
phrenic consequences to social behavior. The pronounced trend of
the last ten years toward quantitative and mathematical techniques
in sociology is only a prelude to the transition in that direction which
is impending.
QUANTITATIVE METHODS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 55

supplement. They are essentially different in function. The formal
definition is qualitative; it enables us to identify an instance of a
given concept. The operational definition is not a statement of the
qualitative nature of the concept under consideration, but rather a
description of the processes involved in determining its measure. i.e.,
its quantitative correlate. . .. Measurement is no doubt important,
but it is well to know just what it is that we are measuring.’ As I
see it, it does not matter at the present time whether quality will
sometime be resolved into quantity or not. Disputes resting upon
the assumption of perfect knowledge are less important to us than
the question what we should do with imperfect knowledge, and in
the present stage of our knowledge the quality-quantity antithesis
still retains some significance.

Dr. Lundberg’s use of this contribution from the field of physics
raises the question of the advisability of importing the methodology
of the physical sciences into social science. The physical scientists
have progressed further than we have, and we are in a position to
learn from them. One of the most important lessons the physical
scientists can teach us is that method must always be flexibly
adapted to subject matter. As data change, procedures and assump-
tions must change. The physical scientist will be the first to chide us
for making his tentative pronouncements into hard and fast rules
and applying them in a different field. No one questions that physical
science methods can be employed in social science to a certain extent,
but it is also clear that literalism in the application of physical science
rules can lead only to a parody of science. It is my notion that our
knowledge of human beings is nearly always mixed, being composed
in part of external, behavioristic observations and in part of an inner,
imaginative knowledge, so that it will probably be necessary for
social science to modify physical science methods considerably.? But
much remains to be done before we can be at all certain just what
method or combination of methods is likely to be useful. Until we
know a great deal more than we do now, we ought to avoid a rigid,
aprioristic limitation of our field and methods, and I must add that
it seems to me that Dr. Lundberg’s paper tends in that direction.

To take up a few specific criticisms, I feel that Dr. Lundberg might

1A. C. Benjamin, Review of P. W. Bridgman, “The Logic of Modern Physics,” Journal of
Philosophy, Vol. 24, pp. 663-665.

2 T have attempted to differentiate and show the interrelations of different kinds of social
knowledge in a paper entitled “Insight and Scientific Method”: Amer. Four. Sociol., Vol. 40,
Nov. 1934, 285-297.
56 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

have expressed himself more clearly in certain portions of his paper.
Thad particular difficulty in making out his position on the following
points:

1. How does he use the word insight? On pp. 40-41 he says, ““The
error lies in overlooking that insight and understanding are the ends
at which all methods aim, rather than methods in themselves.”’ And
on p. 40 we read, “They overlook that the understanding, reason,
and logic which they properly advocate is itself a method, a tech-
nique, of some kind.” And, in a footnote on p. 44 we are told, “But
understanding is a virtuosity of technique.” Later we gather that in-
sight, understanding, etc. may be viewed as a method or an end, but
Dr. Lundberg does not offer an operational description of the tech-
niques involved. I do not suggest that anything more than apparent
contradiction caused by unfortunate use of language is involved
here. What worries me is that some unfriendly critic may conclude
that this apparent self-contradiction betrays the absence of that
specificity of denotation which is so widely regarded as desirable in
scientific writing. There were other examples of this sort of self-
contradiction in the paper.

2. Just how much does the case for the informal statistical
method depend upon “‘word-magic’? You will recall the follow-
ing passage: “In fact, the insight and understanding which they seek
is to be achieved only by further correlation—formal or informal.
Correlation is not merely the name of a certain statistical operation
invented by Karl Pearson. It is, as the dictionary says, ‘the act of
bringing under relations of union or interaction.’ As such, it is a
method used as frequently by other people as by statisticians.” This
other meaning of the word, correlation, which is not very clearly
quantitative in its denotation, seems to have been introduced for the
purpose of making a play on words. The underlying formula is this:
Thinking is correlation, and therefore correlation, and therefore
quantitative. Otherwise, what could be established by showing that
the word correlation has another meaning? What does it matter how
many meanings the word has or what they are? It is certainly very
unusual to derive scientific methods from dictionary definitions. It
is perfectly legitimate to introduce variant definitions in order to
establish and maintain a distinction. That is one means of refining
concepts. Here we are faced with the opposite procedure. A second-
ary meaning is established with a view to showing that the second
thing is the same as the first, because they are called by the same
QUANTITATIVE METHODS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 57

name. The result is that at many points in the paper one cannot tell
what kind of correlation Dr. Lundberg is talking about.

The verbal confusion noted above was wholly unnecessary. I do
not believe that Dr. Lundberg bases his case upon it to any consider-
able extent. There are plenty of instances of informal statistical
method, and I am sure that he had those in mind when discussing
the category. I believe that there are also mental operations of a
scientific nature for which this is not an apt description. Possibly
he has fallen into this unfortunate use of language in the effort to
reduce these exceptional cases to his formula.

I skip over several other criticisms of the sort, which I regard as
secondary, if not trivial, in order to come more quickly to my princi-
pal point. For I must confess that I believe that the paper was in the
wrong vein entirely and completely off the subject.

I agree heartily with Dr. Lundberg’s statement concerning the
real harmony of methods. And yet it did not seem to me that his
paper was exactly conciliatory in tone or that it would bring the
practitioners of different methods closer together. Disagreement be-
tween statisticians and practitioners of the so-called insight methods
is by no means inevitable. It seems to arise in large part from the
fact that one group concentrates attention upon procedures partly
extra-mental, upon the manipulation of external symbols, whereas
the other group is interested in internal behavior. There is a basis
for this contrast in Dr. Lundberg’s paper. These procedures are dif-
ferent aspects of the same thing, and cannot even be sharply con-
trasted. Naturally, in developing our methodology, we must pay at-
tention to all phases of the knowing process.

I believe that we might very well have expected of Dr. Lundberg
a paper of a different kind. The best and most convincing argument
in favor of any method is to show how it may be used productively.
It will be a great service to us all, if someone will think through the
problems involved in quantifying the difficult field of social psychol-
ogy, and make suggestions as to procedures. A promising beginning
has been made, but there are still problems which must be faced and
solved.

We must remember that the movement of thought known as so-
cial psychology has been stimulated from the first by a discontent
with the results of the more formal methods of physiological psy-
chology. Social psychology as it exists today comprises a very broad
and general attack upon problems of human nature which are not
adequately treated elsewhere. Probably its methods must continue
to be varied, but I feel sure that as quantitative and experimental
methods are developed they will attain a ready reception.

A good many different kinds of knowledge are comprised in the
field of social psychology, and they are amenable to statistical treat-
ment in varying degrees. Some fragments of the field have already
been subjected to statistical investigation, others to statistical state-
ment, and a respectable body of experimental knowledge has also
grown up. Other knowledge may adequately be described as infor-
mally statistical. For other bits of knowledge this description does
not seem suitable to me; I somehow cannot think of Mead’s analysis
of communication or of Cooley’s looking-glass self in quite those
terms. One may say that the Mead-Cooley type of thing is not
science. I confess that I have been granted no special revelation as to
the proper use of the word science, and I am willing to conform to
any established usage. If the illuminations of Mead and Cooley are
not science, they are at least important knowledge concerning human
nature, and they must somehow be dealt with by any science which
is to penetrate deeply into human life.

The view which I should like to see established is that artistic and
quantitative methods are interlinked in such a way that progress in
the one necessarily involves corresponding progress in the other.?
There is no real conflict, but an inter-dependence between these
methods. The association of quantitative study in social psychology
with the narrower sort of behaviorism has been unfortunate, largely
because it has obscured this connection. While fervently denouncing
introspection, early workers had to depend largely upon introspec-
tive data as gathered from a schedule or a questionnaire; and yet
because introspection was a bad method anyhow these workers re-
fused to learn how to use it effectively. It is now recognized that a
certain amount of artistry in framing and arranging questions on a
schedule, in eliciting responses, and in interpreting data greatly en-
hances the value of such studies. Questions should elicit real opin-
ions, not pretended or merely theoretical or non-existent opinions.
Where possible, they should call out opinions that are important in
one’s scheme of life. Responses should not be stereotyped too much;
here the case study or the life history is an admirable corrective.
Where possible, a statement as to behavior in an actual situation
should be called for. In many studies, artistic technique in inter-
viewing is desirable. Interpretation is always artistic and imagina-
tive on one level or another.

A few sociologists have been able to study behavior quantitatively,
very often with valuable results. The difficulty here is that there are
different levels of interpretation of human behavior, and the artistic
element involved in the recognition of the unit increases as one pro-
gresses to those interpretations which give meaning to the largest
number of facts; Woodard analyzed this very ably a few years ago.!
Progress in artistic methods must here keep pace with quantifica-
tion.

The degradation of concepts presents a real problem. In stating a
concept statistically, changes are made in it in order to make meas-
urement possible. Sometimes these changes are improvements. In
other cases a concept is so simplified as to be almost unrecognizable.
I am afraid some of the famous studies on social distance illustrate
this mechanism rather well.

Some writers are very confident that they are able actually to
measure attitudes. As Kirkpatrick has recently pointed out, these
measurements are in fact classifications, and rest upon certain as-
sumptions which deserve to be recognized.®

A good deal has been said about the use of case studies, life his-
tories, and other materials relating to personality in quantitative
treatments. There are great possibilities here, but the matter re-

4 Op. cit.
5 Clifford Kirkpatrick and Sarah Stone, “Attitude Measurement and the Comparison of
Generations,” Four. App. Psych., Vol. 29, pp. 564-582, October, 1935.
quires study. It is necessary to define and identify significant units
and to get some uniformity of records without destroying the es-
sential value of the case study.

In solving these problems, it seems to me that the best results will
be attained by a combination of techniques. For the present, the
best general procedure for the quantitative worker will possibly be
to work in those fields which are already informally statistical. In
other fields, numerous exploratory studies are probably necessary
before any effective quantification can be attained. In numerous
instances, quantification will come first. I should like to suggest that
no one method or set of procedures in the field will be stronger be-
cause the others are weak.
