Sealing Experience by a Multiple-Response Technique: A Study of White-Negro Contacts
Author(s): Robert N. Ford

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Feb., 1941), pp. 9-23

Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2086337

Accessed: 16-06-2016 04:35 UTC
Rosert N. Forp
University of Alabama

paper.! In testing this hypothesis, the word experience has suffered

certain restrictions: (I) we refer to the experiences which white
Americans have had with Negroes; (2) we refer to experiences which evoke
variable responses, depending upon the individual and his life situation;
(3) we avoid references to experiences of a tabooed nature; and (4) we refer
to the pencil marks placed upon paper by our subjects. Such pencil marks
are not white-Negro experiences of course. Whether they symbolize such
contacts, which is the problem of validity, will receive considerable atten-
tion here.

Three subsidiary hypotheses are examined in this paper: (1) the experi-
ences which an individual reports as his own are generally the same as
those he reports for his community; (2) attitude and experience are inter-
dependent; and (3) lectures on race relations will not shift the mean experi-
ence scores of students, but they will shift attitude scores. In this work,
attitude and experience will refer to scores assigned individuals as the result
of their having selected answers on certain scales which purport to quantify
these variables. Epistemological doubts, such as, “How accurate are recalls
of experience,” will be omitted from consideration here. Methodological
doubts, such as the propriety of summing scores, will be omitted likewise
from consideration at this time. Instead, available space will be devoted to
describing, (I) the instrument designed to scale experience, (II) its re-
liability, (III) its validity, and (IV) the extent to which the hypotheses are
sustained. The attitude scales employed are those of E. D. Hinckley? and
E. S. Bogardus,? and the experience scales constructed by the author which
appear here for the first time.

Uses for Experience Scales. The chief value of such scales of experience,
should they prove reliable and valid, lies in the opportunities afforded for
checking our theories of the origins of attitude and for checking the inter-
relation between experience and attitude. Findings reported later show that
experience and attitude are indeed positively correlated, in so far as we have

Gs experience can be scaled. That is the major hypothesis of this

11 am greatly indebted to many people for aid in this research: at the University of Pitts-
burgh, to Alfred G. Dietze, Harold A. Phelps, M. C. Elmer, Verne C. Wright, D. B. Rogers,
W. A. Lunden, and R. J. Munce; at Tulane University, to Harlan W. Gilmore; and at the
University of Mississippi, to Paul B. Foreman. Parts of this research appear here for the first
time. Other parts in extended form are on file as a Ph.D. thesis at the University of Pittsburgh.

2 Attitude Toward the Negro, University of Chicago Press, L. L. Thurstone, Editor.

3 “A Social Distance Scale,” Sociol. and Soc. Res., 1933, 17: 265-271.

9
examined white-Negro contacts in our particular way. New scales could
then be created to measure other areas of experience, such as religious ex-
perience, experience with intoxicants, etc., to determine whether the rela-
tion between attitude and experience is generally positive, whether it varies
from social object to social object, whether direct experiences are more or
less weighty than the indirect or community mediated experiences in de-
termining attitude, whether there are sex differences involved, socioeco-
nomic differences, etc. In this work, we may discover that careful case
analyses of individuals whose experience scores differ widely from their
attitude scores will be of especial value for developing sociological theory
of the attitudes.

I. Constructing Experience Scales. The Experience Variable. Our experi-
ences are, as every one knows, extremely variable. When one notices that
Negroes have legs and arms and that they are dark in color, he probably
feels no sharp emotional affect at all, but when Negroes greet us as “‘Boss,”
or when one “gets out of his place,” we are likely to experience heightened
emotion. We may interpret such contacts as more or less friendly in affect.
If such emotional tone or affect is not discriminable in social situations,
then the task of our judges, described later, is hopeless and the problem is
insoluble in the manner proposed here.

In constructing experience scales, we become aware of the fact that there
are many categories of experience. Thus, one may have had personal con-
tacts with Negroes. He may have tormented Negro children in his youth.
He may have lived in a community which treated Negroes in a friendly or
unfriendly manner. Again, one’s contacts may have been almost entirely
secondary because no Negroes lived where he was reared. That person’s
knowledge of the Negro may have been gleaned chiefly from books, movies,
and newspapers. Therefore, at least two experience scales appear to be
necessary, one for estimating the friendliness or unfriendliness of personal
contacts, and another for community mediated experiences. Within each
scale, the individual must be given full opportunity to respond that he does
not know the answers to certain questions because of lack of experience.

Methods for Scaling. In scaling brief statements of attitude, to which this
problem is closely related, Thurstone’s method of equal-appearing-intervals*
has proved of great value. That method was followed in this research.
Although the scales which resulted proved reliable and valid according to
usual criteria, certain difficulties arose which caused the researcher to turn
to Likert’s method,® recently called the method of summated ratings.®

 

4L.L. Thurstone, and E. J. Chave, The Measurement of Attitude, Chicago, 1929.

5 Rensis Likert, “A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes,” Arch. Psychol., June,
1932, no. 140. The Thurstone type scales and a discussion of the difficulties encountered
appear in a companion article, “Scaling White-Negro Experiences by the Method of Equal-
Appearing Intervals,” Sociometry, 1941, 4, no. 1.

6 Charles Bird, Social Psychology, 159, New York, 1940.
Preparing the Items. Many books and articles were read and notes were
kept on situations involving Negroes and whites which seemed to indicate
some emotional affect upon the part of the whites, such as, “I never shake
hands with a Negro,” and “In our community, Negro and white children
often play together.”” Many friends were interviewed informally about their
actual contacts with Negroes and how they felt toward the Negro asa result
of those contacts. About 800 short written statements of contact like the
above two were secured by this procedure.

In order to eliminate worthless items, the following criteria were set up.
Items must (1) refer to social experience, (2) not be universally acceptable
as experience, (3) be stated in generalized terms, (4) avoid tabooed subjects,
and (5) avoid subjects which might be interpreted as damaging admissions.
So far as the problems coincide, the criteria set up by Wang’ are helpful in
the culling process.

All of the items were subjected to the above criteria. They were then
divided into two groups on the basis of whether the experience was a direct
personal one or was mediated through the community. Items which were
duplicating in content, or nearly so, were eliminated. Those which remained
were cast into question form and a variety of responses was provided for
each question. At this point, we insert the completed scales so that further
remarks will have greater meaning.

EXPERIENCES WITH NEGROES
A Study in the Measurement of White-Negro Relationships

By Roserr N. Forp, University of Pittsburgh

This is a study of the experiences which you, your friends, and your relatives have
had with Negroes. Below, you will find 26 situations indicating possible experiences
you may have had.

Each situation has five possible responses. Pick the one which most nearly corre-
sponds with your personal experiences and place a check mark (4/) on the dotted
line in front of it. Try to answer every item.

There is no need to sign your name. This is not an examination. However, your
experiences are of great interest to social scientists. Therefore, it is important that
you select the items carefully and thoughtfully.

Community Conracts®
Please begin here, placing a check (4/) in front of one response:

1. Are there separate arrangements for Negroes who travel in the areawhereyou were reared?

1. — Always; a fixed custom.
2, — Usually separate arrangements.
3. — Never noticed.

7C.K. A. Wang, “Suggested Criteria for Writing Attitude Statements,” ¥. Social Psychol.,
1932, 3: 367-373- . .

8 Scale values which appear here before each response, did not appear in forms indorsed by
subjects.
+

4. — Negroes not required to sit apart, but they usually do so voluntarily.

5. — Same privileges as whites; sit where they like.

When do whites address a Negro as Mr. or Mrs. in the community where you were reared?
1. — Never; a fixed custom.

2. — Rarely, as in addressing a famous Negro.

3. — Never noticed.

4. — When the occasion demands it.

5. — Same as in addressing whites.

Were Negroes allowed to use public buildings, such as libraries and museums, in the area
where you were reared?

5. — Yes, whites and Negroes used buildings at same time.

4. — Same privileges as whites, but Negroes generally stayed away.

3. — No chance to observe.

2, — Limited privileges.

1. — Not allowed.

How are the Negro children educated in the community where you were reared?
5. — Never noticed any difference in treatment of white and Negro children.
4. — Same schools and teachers as white children had.

3. — Can’t say; Negroes lived in another part of area.

2. — Separate schools, but same amount of education provided.

1. — Separate schools which were not as good as the white schools.

How do whites in the area where you were reared look upon other whites who treat
Negroes as equals?

1. — Severely criticized for such conduct.

2. — Disliked.

3- — No set community attitude on the matter.

4. — Seldom anything said.

5. — Such conduct is never questioned.

May a Negro enter the front door of a white man’s house in the area where you were
reared?

1. — Under no circumstances.

2, — Only if invited.

3. — No set custom in the community.

4. — Yes, but they seldom use the privilege.

5. — Same as for whites in similar circumstances.

Do whites call Negroes “‘niggers”’ to their faces in the community where you were reared?
1. — Yes, that is a common term of address.

2. — Quite often, but usually in anger or disgust.

3. — Too few opportunities for me to observe.

4. — Rarely used.
5. — No, the term is carefully avoided when Negroes are near.

How is the Negro who wants to vote treated at the polls in the community where you were
reared?

5. — Same privileges as whites, which they exercise freely.

4. — Same privileges as whites.

3. — Don’t know.

2. — Permitted to vote but not wanted.

1. — Not allowed to vote.

Do whites in the area where you were reared favor educating Negroes?

1. — No; spoils the Negro.
2. — Not beyond learning to read and write.
3. — Never heard the subject discussed enough to know.
PersonaL Contacts

This group of situations refers to you, personally, and is to be marked in the same
way as those above:

1. Have you ever walked with a Negro for other than business reasons?
5. — Yes, just as I do with whites,
4. — When I though it suitable.
3. — Situation calling for a decision never arose.
2. — Yes, but I was uncomfortable while doing it.
1. — Never under any circumstances.

2. Under what conditions have you shaken hands with a Negro?

5. — Follow same rules that I follow for whites.

4. — When I meet a Negro friend who would expect me to.

3. — Situation calling for a decision never arose.

2. — To show friendship for a Negro, provided he knew his place.
1. — Under no circumstances.

3. Have you ever been annoyed by white people who were acting too friendly toward Ne-

groes?

1. — Yes, on many occasions.

2. — Yes, a few times.

3. — Haven’t had much chance to observe.
4.— No.

5. — Never; my observation has been that whites are too unfriendly.

4. Have you warned whites to be more strict in handling Negroes?
1, — Several times.
2. — No, but there have been times when I should have.
3. — Never had reason to.
4. — My experience has been that whites are generally too strict.
5. — No, I have advised them to be less strict.
5. Have you ever noticed that Negroes have a disagreeable body odor?
1. — Many times,
~

10.

Il.

12.

13

2. — A few times.

3- — Never noticed.

4. — Yes, but under circumstances where whites smell just as disagreeable.
5. — The Negroes whom I have met are as clean or cleaner than whites.

Have you ever approved of quick justice, as sometimes dealt by white men outside of
court, to a Negro who has been accused of a crime against a white person?

5. — Never under any circumstances.

4. — Yes, but I no longer would approve.

3- — Don’t know of such a case at first hand.

2. — Yes, but only when the offense was a very serious one.
1. — Yes.

Can you recall actual cases where Negroes in public places seemed to be looking for
trouble?

1. — Many of them.

2. — A few.

3. — Few chances to observe such situations.

4. — Yes, but under circumstances where whites would have done the same.

5. — None.

Under what circumstances have you gone to the home of a Negro?

5. — For a friendly visit.

4. — Usually on business, but sometimes for other reasons.

3. — Never had reason to.

2. — On business or to show friendship, provided the Negro knew his place.
1. — Under no circumstances,

Think of the Negro who has the finest qualities of character of all the Negroes whom you
know. Where would you rate him in comparison with the whites whom you know?

5. — Above any whites I know, outside of my family.

4. — Equal to my white acquaintances.

3. — Cannot answer: don’t know any Negroes well enough.
2, — Below whites in general.

1. — Below the meanest of white people.

What has been your policy in the past when a Negro came into a public place, such as
theatre, railroad waiting room or restaurant?

1. — Let the Negro know he wasn’t wanted.

2. — Let him alone so long as he knew his place.

3- — Situation never arose.

4. — Tried to pay no attention to the situation.

5. — Treated him as I did whites in similar circumstances.

 

Have you ever had trouble with Negroes because you thought that they were getting out
of their place?

5. — On the contrary, I have defended Negroes who were being put in their place.

4. — No trouble.

3. — Have seldom been in position where this might have happened.

2. On a few occasions.

1. Many times.

Have you ever permitted Negroes to come into your home for friendly visits?

1. — Positively never.

2. — Yes, if they knew their place.

3. — Situation calling for a decision never arose.
4. — On a few occasions.

5. — Yes, frequently.

Have you ever called Negroes “‘niggers’”’ when talking to them?
5. — Never.
4. — Yes, but I have since regretted it.
3. — Never had reason to.

2. — Yes, when sufficiently aroused.

1. Many times.

14. Which of the following descriptions most accurately represents Negro workers whom you
have seen?

1. — Very poor workers; did the least possible amount of work.
2. — Poor workers even when directed.

3. — Not enough opportunity to make such a judgment.

4. — Good workers when directed.

5. — Very good workers; even showed initiative.

In preparing such items as the above, one feels compelled to state situa-
tions in the simplest possible terms. A practice was followed here to insure
statement simplicity which may prove generally useful. The Thorndike-
Century Funior Dictionary was used as a criterion. No word appears in the
above items or in the instructions which falls outside the 10,000 most
frequently used words in the English language, and most of the words used
fall inside the first 5,000. However, this is not a sufficient guarantee that the
items will be unambiguous, and therefore we take other steps.

When the items and the five responses allowed in each were in a form
which satisfied the writer, he took a step beyond the Likert procedure,
combining with it part of Thurstone’s procedure. He presented the items
and the five responses to seven judges (all college graduates), after dis-
arranging the responses from the order in which they appear above. The
judges were asked to read the question and then place the responses to the
items in the following order: response showing greatest unfriendliness to-
ward the Negro first; response showing the greatest friendliness toward the
Negro fifth; neutral response third; with the other two responses filling in
the proper gaps to the left or right of the neutral position. This is a critical
point in the research. Can judges arrange responses to questions along a
scale of friendliness-unfriendliness?

The seven judges and the author agreed remarkably well. Of 27 items
under consideration, the responses for 12 questions (60 responses) were
ranked in exactly the same order by all of the judges, and the responses for
ten more of the questions (50 responses) were ranked exactly alike by seven
of the eight judges. The responses for four more questions were ranked alike
by six of the eight judges, and the remaining item was hopelessly ambiguous
by this test. This is a relatively simple check for item ambiguity and has the
additional value of objectivity which has made the Thurstone procedure
noteworthy. Furthermore, the procedure as modified here is highly flexible,
permitting the revamping of items upon advice of the judges who disagree.
An interesting observation of one judge is that the responses can be ranked

® Based on the work of E. L. Thorndike, Thorndike-Century Junior Dictionary, New York,
1935, see pp. iii ff. Half title: 4 Child’s Dictionary of the English Language. Contains 30,000

most frequently used words; first 20,000 marked off in successive thousands in terms of fre-
quency of use.
along the friendliness-unfriendliness scale without bothering to read the
question, provided that the judge go through the process completely two or
three times in order to understand the task fully. The small number of
judges used in this research is justified by the findings of Rosander’ and
Ferguson.

Weighting the Items. The items were weighted simply and consecutively
from one to five, on the basis of research results published by Likert, Rund-
quist and Sletto, and Guilford. The most unfriendly item response was
assigned arbitrarily the value of one and the most friendly, the value of five.
Such simple weighting is satisfactory so long as one does not wish an item
to item analysis of the variations in response for some particular individual.
In that case, sigma or standard scoring is necessary. Each item in the scales
has as much total weight as any other. Undoubtedly certain experiences are
more weighty than others, in terms of measurable emotional disturbance.
How to weight such experiences is beyond the scope of this paper.

Scoring the Scales. The individual’s score on the two scales is determined
by adding the simple weights of the responses which he has checked for the
various questions. Two scores result, one for personal items and one for
community mediated items. Approximately half of the items are printed
with the most friendly response first and the other half of the items have
the most unfriendly response printed first. This precaution may not be
necessary. However, on a priori grounds, the practice of alternating oc-
casionally the friendly with the unfriendly ends of the scaled responses aids
in eliminating those papers from further consideration where the respon-
dents hastily check, let us say, the first response each time in order to be
done with the task. Such a paper will receive scores near the midpoints of
the two scales, and such scores carry with them the interpretation, “no
definite experience.”

If the individual selects one response each time, as he is requested to do,
the following ranges and midpoints indicate the least and greatest scores
obtainable on each scale:

Scale Least Score Midpoint Greatest Score
I. Community Contacts 12 36 60
II. Person Contacts 14 42 70

Preliminary Trial to Determine Internal Consistency. A preliminary form
was administered to 55 undergraduate students in sociology at Tulane Uni-
versity and to 56 at the University of Pittsburgh. Internal consistency of

10 A. C. Rosander, “The Spearman-Brown Formula in Attitude Scale Construction,”
F. Exper. Psychol., 1936, 19: 486-495.

uL, W. Ferguson, “Influence of Individual Attitude on Construction of an Attitude
Scale,” ¥. Social Psychol., 1935, 6: 115-117.

12 Rensis Likert, op cit., 25 ff. Rundquist and Sletto, Personality in the Depression, Minne-
apolis, 1936, 102. J. P. Guilford, Psychometric Methods, 448, New York, 1936.
the items was first determined by Likert’s suggested high-low method,®
using the upper and lower ten percent of papers as determined by total
score. From this, one learns which items in the series are most discriminat-
ing in producing high and low scores. This test fails to tell decisively how
undiscriminating the poorest items are. Consequently, in the present re-
search, we started again with the least discriminating item as determined
above and computed product-moment correlations between the individual’s
response to the item under analysis and the total score on his paper for all of
the items in that scale. As one works up the list from the least to the most
discriminating items, he soon passes the point where coefficients of .30 re-

Taste 1. Opp-EveN Rewiasitity CoEFricieNTs OBTAINED FRoM Community Contact
AND Personar Contact Scates, CorRECTED ror DousLe LENGTH

 

 

 

Scale Group! Number Correlation Probable
Pp Cases r Error
Community Contact A 177 +92 Or
Community Contact B 100 84 +02
Personal Contact A 177 +86 OL
Personal Contact B 100 82 +02

 

1 Group A. Students, Univ. of Miss. and Univ. of Pittsburgh combined.
Group B. Students, Tulane Univ. and Univ. of Pittsburgh, combined.
are separated. A random arrangement of 12 or 14 items would be less satis-
factory. As printed above, the items are in descending order of merit.

The reliability coefficients, ranging from .82 to .92, indicate that the
scales have good reliability when administered to college classes. The coefli-
cient of .92 is higher than those generally obtained in studies of this kind.
It is interesting to note that the students answer the questions about their
communities more consistently than they do those about their personal con-
tacts with Negroes. This becomes more interesting when we recall that the
community scale contains only 12 items, as compared to 14 items about
personal contacts. Ordinarily, greater length produces greater reliability.
One can only conjecture what produces this greater consistency. An hypoth-
esis which recurred constantly to this writer is that the students have a
tendency to stereotype responses about their community. That is, they are
quite certain that they know how their community behaves toward the
Negro. Their own experiences are more variable. However, this is an open
question so far as this research is concerned.

III. Validity of the Scales. We judge the validity of the scales created here
by certain criteria outside of the scales themselves: (A) the scales should
enable us to differentiate between groups whose experiences are known be-
fore hand to differ; (B) if the scales are fit tools, they should also enable us
to differentiate within groups which are homogeneous in certain other re-
spects, later specified.

A. Differentiating between Known Groups. It is common knowledge that
Northerners and Southerners of the United States have different attitudes
toward the Negro, and that the experiences one has with Negroes in the
North vary from the experiences of Southerners. To test the validity of our
scales, we administered them in final form, as printed above, to several large
groups of white students in sociology classes at the University of Pittsburgh
and at the University of Mississippi. Table 2 shows that the mean score of
77 students, both male and female, who reported their legal residence as
Mississippi differs significantly from the mean score of 71 students from the
University of Pittsburgh who reported their legal residence as Pennsyl-
vania. The mean score of the Southerners is well below the theoretical mid-
point of the scales, and that of the Northerners is above it. The critical
ratios (Diff. /caitt.; means assumed to be uncorrelated) are well above the
usually accepted standard for high significance of 3.0. Merton has shown
that selected groups from Pennsylvainia vary less from Southerners in
attitude toward the Negro than do New Englanders.'® Consequently, we
may judge that the results shown here are conservative.

Comparison of the mean scores for a given sex in the South with the same
sex in the North indicates the same fact; these scales elicit responses re-

1 R. K. Merton, “Fact and Factitiousness in Ethnic Opinionnaires,” Amer. Sociol. Rev.,
1940, 5: 27.
fell below 7.3 and the highest was 14.4. The fifth and sixth groups were
separated, by sex as well as by residence. Caution is needed here because
subanalysis reduces greatly the number of cases. The results seem to indi-
cate, however, that the scales are able to elicit differentiating responses in
groups which are homogeneous with respect to state of legal residence, by
sex, and by fact of university enrollment. Such findings are evidence of
validity because we assume on good grounds beforehand that individuals
have varying experiences with Negroes, even though they are white, mem-
bers of a given sex, residents of a certain state, and students at a certain
university.

IV. Checking Some Original Hypotheses: The following paragraphs indi-
cate the degree to which test findings sustain the original notions about
white-Negro contacts. It so happens that each hypothesis is supported by
the findings of this research. Insofar as test results support our preliminary
notions, the scales are further validated.

1. The major thesis of this paper, that social experiences can be scaled,
is sustained within the limits set by the questions asked and so far as usual
statistical tests of reliability and validity are employed, as indicated pre-
viously.

2. A subsidiary hypothesis is that the experiences one reports for himself
are generally the same as those which he reports for his community. We
have indicated above that there is a significantly wide range of experiences
related with the score assigned them on the Personal Contacts scale, we
obtain a product-moment correlation of +.64+.03, which becomes a .72
when corrected for attenuation. We may consider the hypothesis sustained
insofar as this research touches upon the problem raised.

3. Attitude and experience are interrelated. Attitudes determine the
interpretation an individual places upon experience, and the experience
further intrenches or modifies the attitude held. Many case studies have
borne out this theory. If we test it here by means of certain scales, we find
the theory upheld. Table 3 shows the relevant correlations. One’s attitude
toward the Negro as determined by the Thurstone-Hinckley Scale!® and by
the Bogardus Social Distance Scale!’ is rather highly correlated with the
report one makes of his own experiences with Negroes, as determined by the
Personal Contacts Scale. If one’s attitude score on the Thurstone-Hickley
Scale is correlated with the report one makes for his community, the coeffi-
cient is somewhat lower than the others obtained, but the correlation is still
significant.

The students used in the tests were the same students indicated above.

16 Op cit.

17 Op. cit.
In computing correlations which have been corrected for attenuation, a
reliability of .80 was granted the Thurstone-Hinckley Scale!8 and the Bo-
gardus Scale. For this reason, the uncorrected figures are more dependable.

There is a point of view not mentioned previously from which we may
indeed expect to obtain high correlations between experience and attitude.
In this research, the items in the scales refer to past conduct called “ex-
periences.” The judges were asked to rank the responses to the questions
upon the basis of the friendliness or the unfriendliness indicated by the
response. We may logically expect, therfore, that a measure of this friend-
liness of contact will correlate positively with tests of attitude such as the
Thurstone-Hinckley or the Bogardus scales, where the opinions which one
may indorse are likewise ranked on a scale of friendliness and unfriendliness.

From this point of view, one may say that the scales for estimating the
friendliness or unfriendliness of experience are really attitude scales in
disguise. That may indeed be correct. Thurstone has struck at the problem
of attitude by asking essentially, “What are your opinions?” Bogardus
and Dodd" strike at attitude by asking, “What social relations are you
willing to tolerate with these people?” C. R. Pace®® has struck at the prob-
lem of attitude by creating a Situations-Response scale in which he asks,
“What would you do under these circumstances?” He uses the Likert type
scale. Rosander® asks the same kind of question, using the Thurstone type
scale. In the present research, which was suggested by Rosander, we ask
essentially, “What has happened to you?” and “What are the relationships
maintained in your home community with these people?’ From this, we
assign scores of friendliness or unfriendliness upon the basis of the consen-
sus of eight judges. If the scales as prepared here are indeed attitude scales
in disguise (and this seems to be a fruitless point to labor further), the dis-
guise may be a virtue rather than a vice. The next section has bearing upon
the question raised here.

4. A final hypothesis concerns the possibility of shifting scores on these
experience scales through a series of lectures and class discussions about
race relations. We hold, hypothetically, that the scores on experience scales
should shift insignificantly as a result of the lectures if the scales presented
here are valid, unless such items as the following appear in the scales; “Did
you ever study race relations?” or “Have you been influenced by a teacher
in the matter of race relations?” No such items appear in the scales. There-
fore, experience scores should not shift significantly.

18 Personal letter from E. D. Hinckley reporting such coefficients for college groups.
19 Stuart C. Dodd, “A Social Distance Test in the Near East,” Amer. 7. Sociol., Sept.
1935, 41: 195.
20 “A Situations Test to Measure Social-Political-Economic Attitudes,” 7. Social Psychol.,
aca 10: 331-344.
. C. Rosander, “An Attitude Scale Based upon Behavior Situations,” 7. Social
Piychol, 1937, 8: 3-15.
To check this hypothesis, we administered the following four scales as
a battery; Personal Contacts, Community Contacts, Bogardus Social Dis-
tance, and the Thurstone-Hinckley Negro scale. The 26 students who
served as subjects were all members of a class studying “Immigration and
Race” at the University of Kentucky. Thereafter, for 18 sessions the class
listened to materials about racial problems and relations, such as parts of
Otto Klineberg’s Race Differences and F. H. Hankins’ Racial Basis of Civi-
lization. The class interrupted freely and frequently to discuss the material.
The bias of the subject matter selected and of the lecturer (myself) was
that race differences are much exaggerated, that we must be careful to
avoid imputing inferiority to out-groups on racial grounds, and, in general,

TaBLe 4. Test Scores on ExpERIENCE AND ATTITUDE TOWARD THE NEGRO BEFORE
AND AFTER EIGHTEEN Lecrures aBouT RACES OVER A Firty-Four-Day INTERVAL

 

 

 

Mean Score Standard Diff.
Scales Number Deviation ri — >
aiff.
Before | After | Before | After
Community Contacts 23 33-0 33-7 6.7 6.5 “79 0.72
Personal Contacts 23 39-5 41.3 6.8 6.8 72 1.68
Bogardus Social
Distance 22 5.3 4.53 0.5 reg +70 3-36
Thurstone-Hinckley
Attitude 23 5-7 6.3 1.2 1.3 75 3-49

 

1 Product-moment correlation between scores before and after, corrected for attenuation

(reliabilities indicated previously).
? Means assumed to be correlated.
3 Smaller score indicates greater friendliness on Bogardus scale.
SCALING EXPERIENCE 23

The interesting fact is that the students did change significantly in their
attitude toward the Negro, as measured by both the Thurstone-Hinckley
and the Bogardus scales. With due regard to the small number of cases, we
may call the change highly significant, as judged by Fisher’s test. This ex-
periment is not conclusive in that the number of cases is small and in as
much as no formal control group was used. However, the hypothesis which
was set up is uncontradicted, namely, that the lectures would not change
the experience scores. In passing, we might add that it was also an hypoth-
esis that the attitude scores would shift significantly, which accounts for
the fact that the two attitude scales were included in the battery.

V. Conclusion. Social experiences can be scaled. Two such scales are pre-
sented, one for Community Contacts with Negroes and another for Per-
sonal Contacts with Negroes. The scales are reliable and valid according to
usually accepted standards.

The experiences an individual reports for himself are generally the same
as those he reports for his community. Furthermore, his experiences and his
attitudes are positively related. Evidence indicates that the scales are not
disguised opinionnaires of the Thurstone or Bogardus type, because attitude
shifted when experience as measured here did not. This must be strictly
interpreted in terms of the procedures involved, the questions asked, and
the individuals who responded. Generalizations beyond these points are
hazardous.

Further research along several lines is suggested in the section Uses for
Experience Scales above. In addition, we might profitably take people who
live in a given community and apply both scales to them. We also might
inquire into the relatively greater variability of response on the Personal
Contacts with Negroes scale. As suggested, we might find there is a tend-
ency to stereotype the home community. No analysis is made here of item
by item responses, which may have interesting results. Also, now that over
a half dozen varieties of scales about Negroes are available, partial correla-
tional analysis may prove valuable.
