A Qualification of the Marginal Man Theory

Author(s): Milton M. Goldberg

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Feb., 1941), pp. 52-58
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 2086343

Accessed: 16-06-2016 04:40 UTC
man” as conceived by Park! and elaborated by Stonequist.? The con-
cept around which this qualification is oriented is that of the “mar-
ginal culture.” Anthropologists have sometimes used this term to refer to a
distant or border culture, but it will be used in this discussion as a nongeo-
graphical equivalent of the anthropological concept of “marginal area.” The
“marginal area” is conceived as a region where two cultures overlap and
where the occupying group partakes of the traits of both cultures. The es-
sence of our qualification is contained in the following statement by Golden-
weiser: “Psychologically, the marginal area is but a type of culture area, for
its cultural content is as much of a unit and has the same value to its human
carriers as the content of a full-fledged culture area.’”’ Stonequist, in con-
sidering this statement, disposes of it all too briefly with the remark that
“Such marginal areas may or may not involve cultural conflict. When they
do, we may also expect to find marginal men.’ His only other reference to
the concept is an indirect one to the effect that ‘“‘Again, the intermediate
group—say of mixed-bloods—may be large enough to afford a moderately
satisfying life.’’®
Here we may review briefly the Park and Stonequist exposition of the
theory of the marginal man. When an individual shaped and moulded by
one culture is brought by migration, education, marriage, or other influence
into permanent contact with a culture of a different content, or when an
individual from birth is initiated into two or more historic traditions, lan-
guages, political loyalties, moral codes, or religions, then he is likely to find
himself on the margin of each culture, but a member of neither. Thus Park
speaks of

T= paper suggests a qualification of the theory of the “marginal

...a cultural hybrid, a man living and sharing intimately in the cultural life and
traditions of two distinct peoples; never quite willing to break, even if he were per-
mitted to do so, with his past and his traditions, and not quite accepted, because of
racial prejudice, in the new society in which he now sought to find a place. He was
aman on the margin of two cultures and two societies which never completely inter-
penetrated and fused.®

1R. E. Park, “Human Migration and the Marginal Man,” Amer. F. Sociol., May 1928,
881-893.

2 Everett V. Stonequist, “The Problem of the Marginal Man,” Amer. F. Sociol., July 1935,
1-12. The Marginal Man, New York, 1937.

3 A. Goldenweiser, “Cultural Anthropology,” 245, in History and Prospects of the Social
Sciences, H. E. Barnes, ed., New York, 1925.

4 Stonequist, op. cit., 213.

5 Stonequist, Joc. cit., 11.

6 Park, loc. cit., 892.

a
And Stonequist defines the marginal man as one who is

... poised in psychological uncertainty between two (or more) social worlds; re-
flecting in his soul the discords and harmonies, repulsions and attractions of these
worlds, one of which is often “dominant” over the other; within which membership is
implicitly if not explicitly based upon birth or ancestry (race or nationality); and
where exclusion removes the individual from a system of group relations.”

The marginal man, it is pointed out, may be a racial (and cultural) hy-
brid, i.e., he may be a person of mixed racial ancestry, or he may be racially
pure (relatively speaking) and yet participant in two cultures. In either case
he is a “marginal” individual possessed of characteristic feelings and atti-
tudes of insecurity, ambivalence excessive self-consciousness, and chronic
nervous strain.

The qualification of this theory here suggested may be stated as follows.
If (1) the so-called “marginal” individual is conditioned to his existence on
the borders of two cultures from birth, if (2) he shares this existence and
conditioning process with a large number of individuals in his primary
groups, if (3) his years of early growth, maturation, and even adulthood find
him participating in institutional activities manned largely by other
“marginal” individuals like himself, and finally, if (4) his marginal position
results in no major blockages or frustrations of his learned expectations and
desires, then he is not a true “marginal’’ individual in the defined sense, but
a participant member of a marginal culture, every bit as real and complete
to him as is the nonmarginal culture to the nonmarginal man. This trans-
poses Goldenweiser’s remarks about the “unity” and “value” of the mar-
ginal culture area to a nongeographically based situation, for, beyond the
family and the early play group, the concept of the marginal culture does
not depend on geographical but rather on institutional and associational
proximity.

The presentation of the first three conditions postulated as prerequisite
for the realization of the revised marginal man concept is based on a func-
tional analysis of culture. The function of a culture is to provide the in-
dividual with norms, standardized behavior patterns, or in Thomas’
phraseology, definitions of his situation. Although the marginal individual,
then, may be aware of the immediate existence of one or more cultures other
than his own to which he will be forced to react, if his own reaction patterns
to these cultures are provided or defined by his own group, if he is not forced
to define the situation by himself, and moreover, if these definitions have been
instilled in him from birth onward so that he knows no others, then he is
likely to be a stable and normal person participating in an integrated man-
ner in the activities of a unitary culture. A point somewhat of this nature
was made by Kurt Lewin, in an article dealing with the subject of the im-
position of culture patterns on Jewish children:

7 Stonequist, Joc. cit., 8.
54 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

In judging the importance of experiences related to our belonging to, or our status
in, a social group, or related to any other constituents of the ground on which we
stand, one should not give much weight to the frequency or the unpleasantness of
those experiences themselves. Instead, one should consider the meaning of those
experiences in terms of how much the structure of the life-space of the individual
is changed. ... It is of first importance that a stable social ground be laid very
early... . The variety of social structures to which a growing child can adapt him-
self in a relatively stable way is astonishingly great. It seems, however, extremely
difficult to establish a new stable social ground after one has broken down.®

It is evident then that the concept of the marginal culture does not apply
very well to the typical immigrant, even when he proceeds immediately to a
ghetto and there finds solace and comfort among his compatriots. For the
norms and behavior patterns which he has absorbed and made a part of him-
self over a long period of years are inadequate to meet the new situation,
and although the ghetto group hastily devises new definitions, these are im-
positions on a mature personality and can never erase the old perspective,
and thus the immigrant usually remains for the rest of his life a marginal
man.

The fourth prerequisite, namely, that of nonfrustration of acquired expec-
tations and desires, is based on observation of the fact that a subordinate or
marginal culture may give the individual definitions of his situation which
are inadequate—inadequate in the sense that they conflict or are in contrast
with definitions provided him by the other culture or cultures in which he is
participating. Thus the northern reasonably well-educated Negro has been
conditioned by his own Negro culture to a realization of his position as a
member of a subordinate caste, but formally in the schools, and informally
in the wider white culture around him, he has been taught to avaluate the
concepts of human equality, democracy, and freedom. Thus, the definitions
of his situation made by the primary Negro culture are rejected, although
the wishes generated by his contact with the dominant culture remain un-
satisfied, and thus, in many instances, he becomes insecure and emotionally
unstable, a typical marginal man.

One of the best illustrations of a true marginal culture—a situation which
meets all the conditions referred to above—is the second or third generation
Jewish immigrants residing in the United States, the sons, or grandsons of
Jews who have come to America from European lands. The author of this
paper, as a result of observation of the activities of members of this group
and participation in them, is convinced that, although Stonequist’s state-
ment that “The Jew is likely to be a marginal man,” and his reference to the
Jew as “‘the classic illustration of this problem [of the marginal man]? may
be historically valid, a valuable sociological focus on the situation of the
Jew in America will be ignored if an analysis is not made in terms of the
marginal culture concept. Stonequist makes use of many case-histories of

® Kurt Lewin, “Bringing up the Child,” The Menorah Fournal, Jan.-March 1940, 35-36.
Jews in illustrating his theory of the marginal man, but most of these are
case-histories of a selected nonmodal group, fairly high on the distribution
curves of intelligence and sensitivity. Moreover, it is not necessary to prove
that the marginal culture concept is applicable to all second-generation
Jews in the United States, or even to a majority (a real possibility, however)
in order to substantiate our thesis; it is sufficient to show that it is valid
with regard to a definitely significant portion of the Jewish population.

The marginal culture of the second-generation Jew is a mixture of the cul-
tural elements of immigrant Judaism provided by his family situation and of
the elements contained in the wider Gentile culture in which he must func-
tion. A paragraph by Konrad Bercovici in the Nation some years ago de-
scribes certain aspects of the situation in New York City. His statement,
although perhaps not an objective or fair one, at least shows a keen aware-
ness of the phenomenon:

There is now a generation of Bronx Jews, quite distinct from the East Side Jew.
It’s the second-generation Jew with all the outward characteristics minus beard and
mustache, playing baseball, great fight fans, commercial travelers, clean-shirted,
white-collared, derby-hatted, creased-trousered. The women are stylish and stout,
white-skinned, long-nosed, bediamoned; social workers, actresses, stumpspeakers,
jazz dancers, with none of the color and the virtues of their erstwhile bearded, be-
wigged parents, and a few vices of their own acquisition. But they bathe frequently.®

The validity of the marginal culture concept is, of course, most obvious
with regard to the Jewish populations of the large metropolises such as New
York, Chicago, and Boston. Moreover, within the metropolitan situation,
because of the large numbers involved and the wide range of statuses to be
found, it is even possible to distinguish the existence of subcultures within
the greater marginal culture (but not “‘submarginal cultures,” please!),
based on social and economic position. However, it may be pointed out that
in spite of the heavy urban concentration of the Jewish population, all Jews
do not live in metropolitan areas. This is quite true and we must therefore
take account of the situation as it exists in the medium-sized city. The au-
thor, from observing and participating in Jewish activities in three medium-
sized New England cities, will now outline briefly the life history of a modal
native-born Jew residing in such a community.

X was born in Urbana, population 100,000, His parents (or possibly merely his
grandparents who reside with the family) came to the United States some years ago
from a country in Eastern Europe. His father now owns a clothing store in the city’s
business section and has a moderate but comfortable income. There are possibly
1200 Jewish families in Urbana.

X’s family lives in one of the better residential sections of Urbana. It is not a pre-
dominantly Jewish section (there are no predominantly Jewish residential areas in
Urbana), but there are many Jewish neighbors interspersed among the Gentiles. His
early play group probably contains a few Gentile children, but also many native-

® Konrad Bercovici, “The Greatest Jewish City in the World,” Nation, Sept. 12, 1923, 261.
56 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

born Jewish children like himself. In his home, he rarely encounters a Gentile except
for a brief moment on a symbiotic level (the insurance man, the ice-man, the grocer’s
delivery boy, etc.). When he begins school he finds himself in the company of a large
number of Gentile children, but other institutional activities will now begin to make
his more intimate playgroup a closed affair. He will probably begin the study of
Hebrew at a local Hebrew school and will go there after the public school session is
over in the company of other Jewish children. His parents may also urge and en-
courage his association with members of his own “race.” At this time, any former
Gentile companions whom he might have had will begin to feel slightly uncomfor-
table when they follow him into the Jewish group, and, in complementary fashion,
he will find hinself ill at ease when alone in the Gentile group. Thus, by a gradual and
unconscious process of mutual consent, the two groups are defined and from this
time on X functions as a member of a Jewish playgroup.

As he grows older, X will play pingpong and basketball at the Urbana Young
Men’s Hebrew Association building or at the Jewish Community Center. If there
are none of these in Urbana, there will be a Jewish club for young adolescents with
clubrooms and gymnasium facilities. His regular attendance at the Synagogue will
also begin now. At this time, he may be conscious of the existence of two cultures in
his life-situation, the Jewish immigrant culture of his home and the Gentile culture
of the outside world. He may even be somewhat ashamed of certain aspects of the
former culture, as, for instance, the fact that his mother speaks broken English, but
this feeling of shame arises only when he sees it brought to the attention of a Gentile.
His Jewish friends, he knows, are more or less in the same situation, and they may
freely observe the functioning of non-Gentile behavior patterns in his home without
causing him any embarrassment. Vaguely, he realizes that his is not a purely per-
sonal problem but one that he shares with other members of his group.

In the high school, X may find a Jewish fraternity or club which he will join, or he
may simply advance to the young men’s branch of the Y.M.H.A., or Center, activi-
ties. Any of these organizations will now direct his newly awakened interest in the
opposite sex along lines considered appropriate by the Jewish community. This
means dating with Jewish girls!® only. Most of the girls he already knows, and to-
gether with the other members of his male group, he readily follows along the indi-
cated path. If he ever dates a Gentile girl, later on in his school days, he does so
usually alone, and may find it an unsatisfactory experience for it never becomes
integrated into his group activity; he finds that he cannot share the experience with
other members of the group except possibly as he relates it as an exploit. This is not
to say that he has no contact with Gentiles, male and female, in school. Obviously
he does, and he may even become prominent in, or participate in, the broad activities
of the school, athletic or otherwise, thus mingling freely with the members of the
non-Jewish group. These relationships, although usually friendly, are never intimate
ones, and at all times his integrated group background is recognized by the Gentiles,
and he, in turn, views his broader activities with his group focus.

If X goes to college, he finds the high school patterns present merely in more rigid
form. He will join a Jewish fraternity, and either date only Jewish co-eds or invite to
the college dances Jewish girls from Urbana. He will by this time have encountered
aspects of anti-Semitic behavior, but his secure position in an integrated group, the
other members of which he knows have encountered the same phenomenon, prevent
him from viewing the matter as a peculiarly personal problem. Moreover, he will
have participated in various discussions and bull-sessions with his Jewish intimates
on the problem of anti-Semitism and thus has a general conception of the group

10 The growth and maturation of the Jewish girl follows the same general pattern.
A QUALIFICATION OF THE MARGINAL MAN THEORY 57

definition of the situation and the accepted methods of response. Also, it must be
remembered that anti-Semitism has as yet caused him little inconvenience. His
major needs have found readily available institutional mechanisms for fulfillment,
and even his desire for extragroup response is reasonably well met since his Jewish
group has, both in high school and in college, been accorded full recognition and has
been allowed to participate in all the activities of the school. Thus, although the
definitions handed down to him by his Jewish group do not square precisely with the
definitions provided him by the broader Gentile culture (the ideals of equality,
democracy, etc.), the difference is not so great that X will not be able to make a
satisfactory adjustment. Of course, if he encounters severe difficulty in entering a
professional school or in securing a job because of the fact that he is a Jew, then he
may begin to question the Jewish definitions, but even should he meet with such an
experience, he still may be able to make an adjustment by securing work in a Jewish
firm or through Jewish connections.

Upon graduation, then, X marries a Jewish girl and comes back to take up a
business career, or practice a profession, and make his home in Urbana. There he is
now recognized as an adult member of the Jewish community and continues to
function as a member of the group. He will join the adult section of the Center and
contribute to its upkeep. His wife will become a member of the Ladies Auxiliary to
the Center and will help in selling tickets for the annual bazaar. If she has any dra-
matic ability, she may coach the Jewish Community Center Theater Group in put-
ting on a play by Clifford Odets. There will be a Winter formal and a Spring dinner
party at Urbana’s leading hotel at which all Urbana Jewry, including X and his
wife, will turn out. All the intimate friends of the young couple will be other Jews
of their own age and status. The pattern is now fixed. For the rest of his life, X, as
he always has been, will be a member of a geographically dispersed, but thoroughly
integrated group which is well equipped to take care of his major social needs.

This theoretical case history prepared by the author is believed to be a
fairly typical one. Meeting the four requirements suggested earlier, i.e.,
early indoctrination and habituation as to status, intimate sharing of status
with members of primary groups, participation in major institutional activi-
ties provided, ordered, and arranged by individuals of like status, and rea-
sonable satisfaction of learned wishes and desires, it indicates the existence
of a complete and unitary culture poised between two other cultures, and
for that reason described as marginal. For the individual concerned, how-
ever, we must remember that it is not marginal but normal. He knows noth-
ing else. It defines his relationship with the older immigrant group and with
the wider Gentile culture. Within the confines of his own group, the native-
born Jew is completely at home and at ease and it is here that he carries
on the major part of his actitities.

The sociological significance of the marginal culture, with special refer-
ence to the Jew, may be stated as follows. On the one hand, it allows him a
normal form of participation in group activities, an opportunity for the ex-
pression of his own cultural interests, and, finally, a sense of security which
the marginal individual who calls no culture his own ever has. On the other
hand, in so far as the Jewish marginal culture produces a “type” individual
definitely distinguishable from the members of the dominant Gentile cul-
ture by appearance (not necessarily physiological), mannerisms, and inflec-
tion of speech, it is a contributing cause of anti-Semitism. For, in the words
of Park, “... race prejudice is a function of visibility. The races of high
visibility, to speak in naval parlance, are the natural and inevitable objects
of race prejudice.” This latter point the author believes to be particularly
valid in a situation where the “visible” group (in this case the native-born
Jews) operates on a competitive rather than on an accomodative basis in the
total culture. The problem of the marginal culture, then, as long as its exist-
ence is conceived as necessary or desirable, would seem to be one of fulfilling
its major goals of providing its members security, adequate facilities for par-
ticipation in group life, and the opportunity to express their own cultural
interests, without at the same time making them in appearance and behav-
ior distinguishable from the members of the dominant culture.

UR. E. Park, “Behind Our Masks,” Survey Graphic, May, 1926, 136. Quoted in Louis
Wirth, The Ghetto, Chicago, 1928.
