Social Theory and Social Action

Author(s): F. Stuart Chapin

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 1, No. 1 (Feb., 1936), pp. 1-11
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2083858

Accessed: 14-06-2016 20:05 UTC
do not act on biological motivations of hunger, fear and sex

alone, but are guided by their underlying philosophy of eco-
nomic, political and social relations, it is worth while to inquire into
the connections between contemporary social theory and contem-
porary social action.

Clarification of thought about the complexities of contemporary
social action may be promoted by the simplifying device of a two-
fold division. We may mark off two different but over-lapping fields
of social action. The first consists of planned social action directed
toward goals. This is the area of decisive leadership, of legalistic po-
litical action in law-making and law enforcement, and of impulsive
social reform movements. These forms of social action are interre-
lated and from them emerge the more personal social forces. The
second field of social action consists of the unintended consequences
that follow from the interrelationships among the personal social
forces. Let us consider a few illustrations of unplanned consequences.

The unsettling effects upon the silver currencies of China and
Mexico of the present silver purchase policy of the United States
Government is an unplanned result of the relations between planned
actions set up by the silver bloc in Congress and the plans of those

Ws: HAS social theory to say about social action? Since men

1 Presidential address, Thirtieth Annual Meeting, American Sociological Society, New
York City, December 30, 1935. The papers following this address in this number of the
Review were all read at the same Annual Meeting, December 27-30, 1935.
who believe in a special monetary theory. In this field we observe
the unplanned results of the interrelations of independently planned
social actions. Thus unplanned combinations of blocs of interrelated
human behaviors set up impersonal social forces not intended by the
authors of particular plans. But unplanned results flow also from the
combinations of individual acts. Thus we observe that a run on a
bank leads to its closing and this to the failure of a creditor of the
bank. We see the phenomena of hoarding contribute to a govern-
ment’s decision to go off gold.

These activities of hoarding or dishoarding of money are all the
results of innumerable individual decisions. But since these decisions
occur in a society equipped with a marvelously efficient network of
communication agencies, the individual acts do not remain inde-
pendent. They are cumulated, combined and transmitted with ever-
increasing potential to remote areas, and there they may lead to re-
sults that are unplanned. We note that the crowd psychology of a
panic undermines the basis of essentially sound business enterprises
located in areas distant from the crisis.

All these cases illustrate how impersonal social forces may be set
in motion by the unplanned combinations of independent individual
behaviors. We call these phenomena impersonal social forces because
the chain of cause and effect may be so long and complicated that
the consequences cannot be interpreted as the realization of plans of
particular persons. Furthermore, this type of phenomenon seems to
be both more extended and more intense today than ever before.
The reason appears to be found in the channels of transmission which
are provided by modern mechanical agencies of communication and
transportation. For centuries the interdependence of different re-
gions and different nations was expressed in the structure of slow-
moving foreign commerce. Today the telegraph, telephone, radio,
newspaper, motion picture, airplane, automobile, railway and steam-
ship line radiate information in a flash or move articles with speed.
Consequently the formerly stable structure of social interdependence
is subject to rude shocks and sudden pressures. This comes about be-
cause of the marvelously efficient network over which information
and goods may be collected from widely separated sources and then
move with increasing force through channels that converge on im-
portant centers.

Let us consider an example of planned and unplanned social action
in combination. The Social Security Act represents a compromise be-
tween many forces each driving toward ends that different leaders
regarded as socially-desirable goals. Experts on insurance, actuaries,
economists, labor leaders and social workers, all led different fac-
tions who disagreed about the means to attain the goal of social
security for the masses. Then there was the pressure of the Townsend
old-age pension movement. This impulsive social reform gathered
unto itself the spontaneous but unexpressed wish fantasies of that
bewildered generation, the contemporary aged. Its panacea spread
like wild-fire through the dry grass of hopeless yearning for security.
Modern communication agencies facilitated its organization into a
social movement. Congress and the executive were deluged with peti-
tions. Political considerations of different sorts interfered with the
Simon-pure expression of the plans of special groups and the Social
Security Act came as the most practicable compromise of conflicting
views. But out of the patch-work combination there may emerge cer-
tain unplanned results. The consequences of investing the huge re-
serves to be accumulated under the procedures of Federal Old-Age
Benefits seem not to have been fully considered by those who were
responsible for the final formulation. If the reserves? are to be in-
vested in government bonds purchased during a boom period and
hence stimulating to the investment market, what of the depreciat-
ing effects from the sale of bonds during a depression? Is this sort of
investment of reserves not more likely to intensify the liquidation
process at just the time when it needs checking?

We may now ask the question: Is there in social theory any coun-
terpart to this rough dichotomy of the field of social action? It seems
to me that there is. I would mark off an area to be called normative
social theory from another area to be called non-normative social
theory. Actually there is some over-lap but the dichotomy is useful
because it leads to further distinctions, insights and meanings.

Under normative social theory I would include all utopian ideolo-
gies such as evangelical religious systems, the theory of social re-
form, the theory of state socialism, the theory of the communistic
dictatorship of the proletariat, the theory of the codperative com-
monwealth, etc. It is characteristic of all of these theories that they
are concerned with formulating the principles that should guide so-
cial action in the use of appropriate means to the attainment of de-

2 “The investment of unemployment reserves and business stability,” Part IV, in A. H.
Hansen, M. G. Murray, R. A. Stevenson, and B. M. Stewart, 4 Program for Unemployment

Insurance and Relief in the United States, University of Minnesota Press, 1934, especially
Pp. 184-185, 194-195.
4 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

sired ends. In contrast, the non-normative theories include theories
of interest, theories of profits, theories of monopoly, theories of busi-
ness cycles, theories of crowd psychology, theories of the culture lag,
theories of state functions, etc. It is a characteristic of these theories
that they are concerned with formulating the principles of relation-
ship that seem to explain the-consequences that follow from certain
sequences of social action. They occasionally try to do more than
state how these occur; they sometimes attempt to explain why these
occur.

In the area of overlap between the normative and the non-norma-
tive theories, there lie theories of sovereignty, theories of social prog-
ress, theories of social control, theories of value, etc. All these areas
involve opinions.

In normative social theories we encounter value judgments that
stress differences in kind. In the non-normative social theories we
more frequently encounter quantity judgments that stress differ-
ences in degree within each kind. As a result of these differences,
normative social theory is able to explain planned social action bet-
ter than it can explain the unplanned results of the interrelated but
independently planned social actions. The reason is that the mental
set of the normative theorist is to explain results by treating im-
personal consequences as if they were ends or goals. On the other
hand, the non-normative social theorists are more successful in ex-
plaining why certain unplanned results follow from the interrelations
of independently planned actions than they are in formulating the
socially acceptable procedures that should be followed to attain a
popularly desired goal. The reason is that the mental set of the non-
normative social theorist is to abstract impersonal principles from
social situations that were essentially personal in origin. This is part
of his effort to be objective. But in so doing he may underweigh the
role of human motivation, desire, mores, public opinion and value
judgments. Out of these differences in mental set there arise the
familiar controversies’ that rage about the topic: What is the proper
scientific method in sociology? The generalizing and synthesizing
type tends to construct normative social theories and the analytical
and investigative type tends to construct non-normative social theo-
ries. From the inter-play of criticisms between these two opposing
groups of students there arise clarified ideas about the possible rela-
tionship of social theory to social action. In attempting to distinguish

3 Bernard, L. L. “The Great Contraversy,” Social Forces, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 64-72.
these two different trends in thought, I have no desire to offer a
basis of reconciliation between them. Far be it from me to attempt
to resolve a conflict in views which continues to be socially useful,
because it forces the two sides to restate and clarify their concepts
and theories.

The field of unplanned social action has been greatly extended and
intensified by modern technological devices in communication and
in transportation. Consider the consequences of conflict among gov-
ernment functions that follow when new government agencies are
set up to attain ends described by utopian ideologies. Reflection upon
this situation indicates the need of adjusting normative social theory
to the facts of our mechanical age, so that we do not continue to plan
social action as if single goals could be simply attained without set-
ting up dangerous social and economic reverberations. Here non-
normative social theory needs reformulation, so that it can be used
to check expansive social action based upon inadequate theoretical
assumptions. Too often these assumptions ignore the clear implica-
tions for social theory of the new mechanical devices of communica-
tion, which make almost too easy the establishment of new social
structures. Right here it seems clear to me that the chief implication
for social theory is that non-normative explanations must receive
more consideration than hitherto, if we are to have a realistic social
theory that squares with the expanding field of mass phenomena.
The increase of mass phenomena of crowd psychology is greatly
facilitated by machine communication used for propaganda; and the
mass phenomena of specialization of economic function by social
classes is promoted by the use of power machinery for quantity com-
modity production. Hence we need more widespread study of non-
normative social theories. On the other hand, it is true that the ex-
pansion of the functions of government, local, state and national,
requires that the narrow type of non-normative social theory be ac-
commodated to the facts of human behavior. For, as social action is
discharged through the social machinery of legalized political insti-
tutions, the role of opinion, desire and emotion, must be reckoned
with.

All social theory must rely heavily upon concepts. In the early
stages of formulation, purely verbal concepts that describe undisci-
plined impressions naturally play a major role. But if social theory
is to advance beyond the dangers of verbalism of emotion and attain
the stability given by objective experience, it is necessary that a
larger and larger proportion of social concepts be operationally de-
fined. That is to say, social concepts should be more and more de-
fined in terms of the operations and processes used in attempts to
measure them or to test them by experiment. Now the significance
of the operational definition of social concepts is only beginning to
be appreciated. There are two reasons for this. First, it was necessary
for sufficient time to elapse before the inadequacy of purely specula-
tive social theory could be demonstrated. And this has certainly been
done in a most decisive fashion during the present depression. Sec-
ond, it required time and repeated experiment to construct dependa-
ble instruments of social measurement. In fact, this latter develop-
ment is very slow to come, due to the absence of basic scientific train-
ing of young students in the social sciences, and due to the actual
opposition of social scientists with interests that were primarily phil-
osophical or normative. Nevertheless, there are a few indications of
a beginning at the operational definition of social concepts. Ex-
amples of this development are the studies of public opinion by
S. A. Rice and M. M. Willey, the more recent scales to measure
social attitudes invented by C. Kirkpatrick and R. F. Sletto, the
mores scales of C. C. Peters, the social status scales of Mary J.
McCormick, F. S. Chapin and Alice Leahy, the studies in the defini-
tion of social contact or group contact by Dorothy Thomas and her
associates, and the experimental studies of S. C. Dodd. In these we
find illustrations of the operational definition of such social concepts
as public opinion, social attitudes, mores, social status, social con-
tact, and social experiment. So far as these concepts are involved in
the formulation of social theory, operational definitions of them are
now at hand.

The operational definition of the concepts of normative social
theory, such as social class, wage slaves, proletariat, bourgeoise, so-
cialite, aristocrat, plutocrat, etc., is difficult. On the other hand, the
concepts of non-normative social theory, such as income velocity of
money, transaction velocity of money, social change, invention, dif-
fusion, social attitudes, social status and mores, are not so difficult
to define operationally.

Since the mores are among the most widely used of concepts in
social theory, let us examine more closely the operational definition
of mores developed by C. C. Peters‘ in his attempt to measure the
ways in which and the degree to which motion picture plays violate

*C. C. Peters, Motion Pictures and Standards of Morality, The Macmillan Co., 1933
the mores and thus perhaps undermine the morals of American
youth. Peters performed the following operations in the construc-
tion of two of his many scales: one to measure the mores of socially
democratic attitudes, and one to measure the mores of parental
treatment of children. Starting with the hypothesis that the extent
of badness or goodness could be measured “‘by the degree of shock
indicated by the proportion of members of the group aroused to re-
sentment by it,’’® it was possible to get “these intangible and elusive
social phenomena into quantitative form so that they could be sub-
jected to statistical investigation.”” Thus there were collected from
the observation of motion-picture scenes, and other sources, a large
number of fragments of conduct. These were carefully written up
and classified by pattern to discover gaps and to fill them with new
scenes. In this way 82 scenes were found for democratic attitudes
and 78 scenes of the treatment of children by parents. Next, these
scenes were carefully calibrated, that is, given quantitative values
for degree of ‘‘badness” after having five different groups of persons
sort out the descriptions of movie-scene behavior into three piles.
In one pile were those scenes felt intuitively to be more or less wrong,
in another pile were those approved or admired, and an intermediate
pile consisted of matter-of-course behavior. Thus the extent to which
the scenes shocked members of society, and hence violated the mores,
was indicated by the proportion of these readers in whom they
aroused resentment or admiration. It is evident that when mores are
defined in this way they are described in terms of the physical proc-
esses of behavior actually performed. Hence, to paraphrase Bridg-
man, the whole description reduces to an account of an actual physi-
cal experience, and must have the same validity as that of all direct
observation of physical fact. It relies on sensory responses to clarify
abstract thought. Moreover, such concepts, being framed in terms
of operations actually performed in physical experience, must lead,
at any stage of the research, to “conclusions in which room is left
for future refinements within the uncertainties and approximations
of our present physical operations.’”®

But before the importance of the operational definition of social
concepts can be really understood, it is necessary to resolve a confu-
sion in thought that is present in many discussions of the procedures
of experiment and of measurement. The opinion that experiment can

5 Ibid., p. 8.
6 P. W. Bridgman in Scripta Mathematica, Vol. 2, 1934, p- I.
~~ Rh ESR NDE DDE ANAND LANA AE NDE RDA NB ND Det ST

not be used in social research is an erroneous judgment. It is wrong
because it is based upon a misconception of the real nature of experi-
ment in the physical sciences. Now it is generally agreed that experi-
ment is observation under conditions of control. This being so, the
misconception creeps in when control is identified with or limited to
the processes of physical manipulation. It is true, of course, that in
the physical laboratory the scientist obtains control by manipulating
devices that increase or reduce air pressure, or which raise or lower
temperature, etc., but the real essence of this process is not the ma-
nipulation, it is the reading on the pressure gauge and on the ther-
mometer scale. If the scientist went to the top of Pike’s Peak he
could find there already existing in nature a lowered air pressure and
a lowered temperature identical with the laboratory readings on his
pressure gauge and thermometer. As a matter of convenience and
efficiency he reproduces artificially in the laboratory the conditions
which he could have found in distant places, but the point is that
control is attained when the measurements are the same.

In contrast to this advantageous laboratory situation, the argu-
ment runs that, because you can not physically manipulate human
beings as you do materials in the physical laboratory, therefore you
can not have experiment in social research. It is true that you can
not produce an I.Q. of §0 in the laboratory by taking a normal person
and subjecting him to such a degree of pressure that he becomes an
imbecile, or produce a manic-depressive case by heating up a normal
person. But this is not the point of the problem. You can go out and
discover in society or in institutions individuals whose I.Q.’s meas-
ure 50. No social scientist wants to obtain control by physical ma-
nipulation of persons. He does not need to do this, for as soon as he
has a valid scale to measure intelligence, social status, public opin-
ion, social attitudes, etc., all that he has to do is to get measurements
of representative groups of population on each of these scales. Then
he can control intelligence, social status, social attitudes, etc., for pur-
poses of experiment, dy selecting a control group and an experimental
group whose members have the same distribution of measurement
on these scales. Having secured control by the device of selecting
those individuals who show the same measurement on different vari-
ables, he may then proceed to the study of the way in which two
uncontrolled variables are related. Thus while identical measure-
ments indicative of control are obtained in the natural sciences by
physical manipulation of the things studied, in social research the
similar measurements that are indicative of control are obtained by
selection. In the one case there is physical manipulation of materials,
in the other case there is selection of materials, but in both cases the
final test of control is in the identity or eguivalence of measurements.
This being the case it is evident that the possibility of measurement
determines the possibility of experiment, and the possibility of both
measurement and experiment determines the possibility of getting
an operational definition of concepts. Now measurement is merely
quantitative description and is especially difficult to develop in the
study of social relations. Nevertheless, the scales mentioned illus-
trate beginnings and as time passes there will no doubt be evidence of
additional advances of this sort.

The most thoroughgoing illustration of the experimental method
in sociology is the recent report of S. C. Dodd? of an experiment in
rural hygiene in Syria. After some years of painstaking research in
preparation and testing, he developed a scale to measure personal
hygiene in terms of the behavior of native Syrians. Two samples
were selected for study: an experimental village in which a hygiene
program was to be put on; and equated control villages, without such
a program. Before the program was put on in any of the villages,
all were measured with the hygiene scale. After two years all the
villages were again measured. Differences in the second scale position
of the two samples was taken as a measure of the effects of the pro-
gram, other things being as nearly as possible equal in terms of the
precautions taken. This really important study is not widely known.
Most reviewers of the book display an astonishing ignorance of sci-
entific procedures. In fact, their reviews are little more than so many
examples of indecent intellectual exposure.

Before leaving this point, however, we may clarify it a bit further
by quoting a recent statement of Murchison. “Perhaps the chief
characteristic of experimental science is that its ideas are simply
names for certain series of operations that are highly reproducible.
It is this quality of reproducibility that sets the operations of experi-
mental science apart from the general operations of nature.’

What then is a ¢rve social theory? I have been careful to phrase the
question in this way so that there may be no doubt about the point
at issue. As phrased, the question implies that there is a true social

7$.C. Dodd, 4 Controlled Experiment on Rural Hygiene in Syria, American Press, Beirut,

1934.
8 C. Murchison, “Pareto and Experimental Social Psychology,” Journal of Social Philos-

ophy, Vol. 1, No. 1, Oct. 1935.
theory which is evident in its finality, infallibility, or immutability.
The question so phrased is without scientific meaning, because it
implies the possibility of absolute formulations to describe and ex-
plain relational phenomena. We should, therefore, re-state the ques-
tion, What are the criteria of a good or a sound social theory? Many
answers could be made to this question. J. F. Brown? has suggested
four criteria of a good theory: “(1) It should be economical in that
it should be based on the fewest and simplest postulates, which will
adequately integrate the experimental data. But economy must not
be purchased at the price of neglect of facts; the best theories of to-
day are not those most easily understood by sophomores. . . . (2)
The best theory should be the only possible theory, i.e., the facts
will not be as adequately explained by any other, and any other will
contain contradictions. . . . (3) The best theory should be fruitful in
the sense of leading to an accumulation of integrated facts... .
(4) The theory must yield postulates to which universal assent may
be obtained... .”

The rough dichotomy we have drawn among the patterns of social
suggests a somewhat different set of conditions for a sound social
theory. We contend, therefore, that sound social theory avoids con-
notations of any absolutistic categories. Sound social theory needs
to be relativistic in the sense of being a statement of probabilities
in the situation. It utilizes the tentative formulations of working
hypotheses. Nevertheless it does postulate an arbitrarily selected but
explicitly stated frame of reference to supply the points of departure
for research. It utilizes concepts that are defined as far as possible
by the operational method. That is, every social situation is to be
described in terms of concepts which themselves are defined in terms
of physical processes of experiment and measurement actually per-
formed. Thus the use of the operational method to define concepts
avoids the verbalism of emotional attitude, which embraces utopian
ideologies that are serving as unconscious mechanisms of escape or
of personal identification, and it substitutes for these a verbalism
that is descriptive of objective experience. Then mathematical equa-
tions are fitted to observations and not used to symbolize a new word
which is substituted for another word, which in turn merely ex-

9 J. F. Brown, The Mathematical Conceptions Underlying the Theory of Psychological and
Social Fields, Edwards Bros., 1935, pp. 25-26. For an example of the use of mathematical

conceptions by implicit rather than explicit procedures and without the forbidding terminol-
ogy of Brown, see F. Stuart Chapin’s Contemporary American Institutions, Harper and Bros.,

1935, especially pp. 319-352.
presses emotional attitude. A sound theory constitutes a logical sys-
tem of relations among concepts, postulates and hypotheses, all of
which taken singly are so many provisional tools used to interpret
experience in a meaningful manner. It scrutinizes the discrepancies
between levels of symbols: levels that begin with the more concrete
symbolic substitutes for social reality and ascend to the more ab-
stract symbolic substitutes. It examines such systems to insure that
the transitions from evel to level are logically made and do not de-
part from representations of reality to a degree that creates invali-
dating errors.

In conclusion, how may this sound social theory be applied as a
guide to social action? The first application of sound social theory is
to examine critically all utopian ideologies that underlie planned so-
cial action. The second application is to forecast consequences arising
out of the unplanned combinations of those social actions that are
independently planned. Hitherto the social scientist trained to do
this work with competence has not been able to bring his technical
knowledge to bear upon the problem in concrete cases. He has ex-
pressed his views in articles of a scholarly sort which probably never
come to the attention of the public administrator or the business
leader because they are tucked away in journals unknown to the
public and couched in technical language unintelligible to most read-
ers. He has been casually consulted, it is true, but in a purely chance
contact.

But a change has come. State planning boards now exist as the
needed social machinery to implement the function of the technical
adviser. All projected legislation designed to achieve social and eco-
nomic objectives by initiating changes in the existing structure of
social organization should be referred to such planning boards for
comment. There should be attached to such boards, as technical con-
sultants, persons who are trained social scientists. Such persons
should be actually advisory in the sense of being consulted defore
and not after administrative decision is made. They should render
an expert opinion by stating the alternatives of social action and/or
the probable consequences, and submit this statement to the proper
public official or leader. Finally, this expert opinion should be con-
sidered and studied by administrators before the decision is an-
nounced publicly.
