Assumptions and Methods in Attitude Measurements

Author(s): Clifford Kirkpatrick

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 1, No. 1 (Feb., 1936), pp. 75-88
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 2083866

Accessed: 14-06-2016 20:20 UTC
measurement. Bain, Droba, Roback, Sherman, Watson and

others have prepared useful summaries of recent develop-
ments.! It is to be hoped that sociologists will continue to investi-
gate this fertile field with open minds, with due precautions against
stereotyped procedures and with a sense of perspective.

There is reason to think that a genuine antithesis exists between
certitude and meaningfulness. The transmissibility and verifi-
ability of the quantitative-analytical approach can be purchased at
too great a sacrifice of the meaning and insight associated with the
intuitive-configurational approach. There does seem danger at times
that the range of scientific implications may be sacrificed to refine-
ments of statistical technique. Frequently the use of one formula as
compared with another in sociological research would have less
effect upon ultimate implications than positing a different con-
ceptual framework or a new definition of units.

In the interest of provoking discussion, eight questions are here
raised concerning the basic assumptions of attitude measurement.
Answers based on the writer’s own thinking and research are given
only to illustrate one possible approach to the problem.

Te Has been increasing interest in the problems of attitude
76 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

for an arbitrary definition, providing it is rigorously applied in sub-
sequent analysis and testing. The general term attitudinal behavior
may be applied to behavior having the quality of favorableness or
unfavorableness toward some situation. Such behavior involves (a)
gross somatic behavior, (b) overt verbal behavior and (c) internal
somato-psychic patterns of thought and emotion. An attitude may
be defined as internal somato-psychic behavior, the essential feature
of which is an emotional-ideo-verbal system favorable or unfavorable
to some situation. An emotional-ideo-verbal system then, as one
component of attitudinal behavior, implies, on the psychic side,
certain feeling states which diffuse through a train of ideas and
images and, on the somatic side complex, physiological disturbances
which accompany subvocal verbal responses. From this point of view
attitudes are identical with sentiments, prejudices, wishes and emo-
tionalized stereotypes. The dualistic terminology is adopted merely
to aid in precise description.

A social attitude may be defined as an emotional-ideo-verbal sys-
tem favorable or unfavorable to some social situation. A dislike of
spinach is an attitude but a hatred of Communists as a menace to
the social order is more specifically a social attitude. The essence of
the anti-Communist attitude is a pattern of images, ideas, reveries,
and perhaps half muttered invective accompanying somato-psychic
reactions usually designated as anger, fear and disgust.?

If such a point of view is adopted certain implications follow. (1)
Knowledge of an attitude or any other somato-psychic process in
another person is always indirect and based upon inferences from
various types of data. An attitude, however defined, is essentially
a hypothesis, and the scientist should be willing to guide his critics
back to the primary data and along the paths of inference which he
has pursued.

(2) Attributing the quality of favorableness or unfavorableness to
the emotional-ideo-verbal systems of another should not preclude
recognition in the observation technique of ambivalence in the sense
of rapid alternation of favorableness and unfavorableness com-
ponents in the emotional pattern. There should also be recognition
of what might be called “‘no attitude,” namely, an absence of either
favorableness or unfavorableness. A subject should not be forced

2C. Kirkpatrick, “Content of a Scale for Measuring Attitudes Toward Feminism.”
To be published in Sociol, and Soc. Res. See D. D. Droba, “The Nature of Attitude,” Your.
Soc. Psych., Vol. 4, 19335 PP. 444-463.
METHODS IN ATTITUDE MEASUREMENTS 7

by suggestion or by the nature of the measuring instrument to
record a conviction which he does not feel.

(3) If it be held that an attitude implies favorableness-unfavor-
ableness toward a specific situation it follows that items on an atti-
tude scale should express favorable or unfavorable emotional reac-
tions rather than factual relationships.*

Question II: Are AtrirupEs ConTINUA OR PATTERNS?

It has frequently been assumed that attitudes toward complex
social movements such as Communism, Birth Control or Feminism
may be described by simple favorableness-unfavorableness con-
tinua. By definition favorableness or its opposite is an essential
quality of attitudes as abstracted from a total configuration. It is
questionable, however, whether an individual can be meaningfully
placed on a unilateral continuum with reference to an unanalyzed
and heterogeneous pattern of issues. It is true that an individual
could be asked to express on a five-point scale his favorableness or
unfavorableness toward life. But his standing on such a favorable-
ness continuum with reference to such a general concept would tell
very little. The most that could be learned would be his favorable-
ness to that which he understood by the abstraction “life.” A
favorableness self-rating toward Feminism might be a reaction to a
misunderstanding of Feminism as a historical movement. There is
much to be said for preliminary conception of specific attitudes in
relation to a pattern of related issues. These specific attitudes may
have themselves a pattern which includes “‘no attitude” components
and ambivalent components with respect to certain issues.

Question III: Are Attirupes Part or CuLtrure?

It would seem that patterns of social attitudes are personality
counterparts of culture patterns evolved in connection with his-
torical movements. Feminism, for example, consists essentially of
attitudes on various issues in the minds of a number of people. A
Feminist on the other hand is one who has emotionalized-ideo-

3 Elsewhere the writer has pointed out that items used in attitude scales have not all been
worded in evaluational form. See C. Kirkpatrick and S. Stone, “Attitude Measurement and
the Comparison of Generations,” Your Appl. Psych., Oct., 1935. The statement, “Birth
Control Increases the Happiness of Married Life” in the scale prepared by Wang and Thur-
stone might be checked by one who accepted the fact but who was unfavorable to birth
control as a sinful means of attaining happiness. Dr. Wang has himself made penetrating
suggestions in regard to the form of items. See “Suggested Criteria for Writing Attitude
Statements,” Your. Soc. Psych., Vol. 3, 1932, pp. 367-373. See also D. H. Kulp, “The Form
of Statements in Attitude Tests,” Sociol. and Soc. Res., Vol. 18, 1933, pp. 18-25.
verbal reactions favorable to the values or culture traits which are
components of the Feminist pattern. The attitudes that an indi-
vidual possesses are best designated by the name that culturally and
historically has been applied to such attitudes. It may be con-
tended that in the case of many tests of social attitudes there is
validity in proportion as the test reflects accurately the issues that
constitute the cultural components of an emergent culture pattern.
To select propositions at random for an attitude test, trusting
statistical techniques to establish reliability and validity, may mean
that the test becomes merely a test of what the experimenter thinks
is Feminism, Communism or Pacifism. If the problem is evaded by
focusing each proposition on the key word (Feminism, Communism
or Pacifism) then the test may be a test of the subject’s attitude
toward what the subject thinks is Feminism, Communism or
Pacifism.*

This general point of view assumes that it is important to deter-
mine in the first place just what is being measured and to strive for
validity through the original selection of an item pattern, rather
than to prepare a shot-gun charge of items and then try to find out
what they measure by giving the scale to a variety of groups. Much
validation in attitude research seems to consist of correlating un-
known with unknown, and then demanding consistency, where in-
consistency may exist by virtue of inconsistent traits that have been
brought into the same complex by historical circumstances.

With these considerations in mind the writer attempted to pre-
pare a “‘belief-pattern” scale that would accurately reflect Feminism
as a culture pattern together with the opposing anti-Feminist or
patriarchal pattern. From an extensive examination of the issues
expressed in the literature of Feminism and from resolutions of
Feminist organizations a semi-objective outline of forty Feminist
issues was prepared, and divided into four categories each contain-
ing ten issues. Some 386 evaluational propositions, pro and con, were
prepared on cards. These cards were classified as to categories and
issues. From the statements whose classification met certain stand-
ards of agreement on the part of judges, three forms of the scale
were prepared.5 Each form consisted of eighty items including a

4 It is true of course that in the Thurstone method faults of inclusion are corrected by the
criteria of irrelevance and ambiguity but the same cannot be said for faults of omission. See

Thurstone, “Attitudes Can Be Measured,” Amer. Four. of Soc., Vol. XXXIII: 4, Jan. 1928,

PP. 529-554. .
5 C. Kirkpatrick, “Construction of a Belief-Pattern Scale for Measuring Attitudes
Toward Feminism,” to appear in Your. Soc. Psych.
Question IV: Wuat Is MEASUREMENT?

It is somewhat presumptuous to attempt a discussion of such a
vast topic within the limits of this analysis. It has previously been
suggested that a useful distinction can be drawn between quantita-
tive variables expressing amount and what might be called qualita-
tive variables expressing degree. This distinction, if granted, implies
that there is an important difference between measurement and
rating, or perhaps between counting-measurement and rating-meas-
urement.

A quantitative variable may be defined as a number derived by a
counting process, which expresses a multiple or sub-multiple of units
which are conceptually equal and interchangeable without effect
upon the relevant implications of the derived expression.® It may be
argued that the term measurement, or at least the term counting-
measurement, could usefully be restricted to the derivation of
quantitative variables by the process of counting units which are
equal and interchangeable with reference to the purpose at hand and
which are added to yield multiples of such units. Measuring the
population of a room to determine the number of chairs required is
measurement in the above sense. The people in the room differ, but
they are essentially interchangeable from the point of view of the
seating problem. A body weight of 150 pounds is essentially a mul-
tiple expressing the number of pound weights that would balance a

°C. Kirkpatrick, “‘Statistical Studies of Personality and Personality Maladjustment,”

in Statistics in Social Studies, Stuart Rice, Editor, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1930,
pp. 197-216.
particular human body. Pound weights exist to standardize and
make interchangeable the conceptual pounds in the minds of differ-
ent persons.

It should be noted that measurement, in the sense of the deriva-
tion of a quantitative variable, may be direct, or indirect by means
of an index. Counting of people is measuring population directly by
deriving multiples of units which are themselves parts of the thing
measured. The person of 150 pounds weight may push a spring
scale to a point marked 150 pounds. Here the movement of a needle
on a dial is an index of weight and the measurement is indirect. A
death rate, to cite one more example, may be an index of the health
conditions in a particular locality. It should be recognized that all
attitude measurement is indirect measurement in terms of an at-
titude index. There is no way in which attitudes as here defined can
be directly counted by persons other than the introspective self-
observer.

The unit counted whether used in direct or indirect measurement
may be either natural or artificial. A person is a natural unit in
measuring population. An industrial accident, on the other hand
may be artificially defined as an injury necessitating the loss of at
least a day’s work. A ton-mile is more definitely artificial. A degree,
a calorie or an erg are artificial units of temperature, heat and
energy. Here effects produced constitute units in the indices of the
thing to be measured.

It may also be noted that, in the process of measurement as here
defined, scales may or may not be used. If used, a scale may be em-
ployed (1) as a conceptual instrument of classification, or (2) as a
physical instrument of observation. In the former sense a scale is
a continuum used in the classification of observations. Measure-
ments of stature, for example, may be grouped in a frequency curve
with reference to a scale or continuum of height. The use of a scale
as an instrument of observation consists essentially in counting units
in groups rather than individually. The use of a foot rule makes it
unnecessary to turn an inch end over end to count out a multiple
of the inch unit. Mile per hour units could be counted on a speed-
ometer but the numbers on the dial group the units into convenient
multiples with numerical labels.” The use of a scale, then, as an in-

7 For a somewhat different point of view see: Chapin, F. S., “The Meaning of Measurement
in Sociology,” Pub. Amer. Sociol. Soc., Vol. XXIV, No. 2, May, 1930, pp. 89-91. See also

Kirkpatrick, C., and Stone, S., “The Measurement of Attitudes and the Comparison of
Generations,” Four. App. Psych., Oct., 1935.
strument of observation is simply a means of counting units by
groups rather than singly. Another way of expressing the distinc-
tion between the use and the non-use of scales is to contrast counting
by matching and counting in the sense of enumeration. This is the
distinction which Professor Chapin apparently has in mind in con-
trasting measurement and enumeration.® As we have seen matching
with a scale which is a quantitative variable is merely counting
by multiples. It will be argued that matching with a scale which
is not a quantitative variable is not measurement at all, or is at
least rating-measurement rather than counting-measurement. To
identify a micrometer scale and a social distance scale, and to con-
trast the weighing of sugar with gram weights as compared with
gram weight multiples, seems to identify the dissimilar and to con-
trast processes which are essentially similar.

A qualitative variable may be defined as a numerical expression of
a classification, in terms of degree, of qualities that are not expressed
in interchangeable units. Rating or rating-measurement (if the term
measurement is admitted in the sense of numerical description) may
be regarded as numerical classification in terms of degree, rather
than amount, so as to obtain qualitative variables expressing degree
relationships. Person A is more beautiful than person B or more
hostile to the New Deal. A certain operation X may be described
as hurting less than operation Z but more than operation Y. An
article of furniture may be rated as intermediate between a chair and
a table. In all of these instances degree variation and degree rela-
tionships are implied by numbers or by adjectives.

Qualitative rather than quantitative variables are derived under
two conditions. (1) Psychic conditions and processes are numerically
described by qualitative variables, when multiples of external and
interchangeable units are not derived as indices by an objective
counting process. When the pain of a dental extraction is expressed
as a qualitative variable in a rating of four on a scale of five, it is
probable that no psychic units were counted by the subject. Inter-
changeability of such units, if they existed, would be questionable
in the absence of observable external counterparts of the psychic
units. A gram is a conceptual unit of measurement but the existence
of external physical counterparts in the form of gram weights in-
sures the comparability of grams as conceived by different persons.
The number of screams of an obstetrical patient is a quantitative

8 FS. Chapin, op. cit.
82 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

variable which is a rough index of pain. Screams can be added to
yield a multiple and are relatively interchangeable in view of their
existence as stimuli to the senses of more than one observer.

(2) In the second place, qualitative variables come into existence
when a comparison is made between unanalyzed configurations.
Persons may be rated or classified as to degrees of physical maturity
without analysis in terms of reference to quantitative variables such
as age, height, weight, and the like. Classification and counting are
not unconnected, for classification, in the sense of definition of
units, is often a preliminary to counting. Nevertheless, expression
by rating of degrees of more-or-less tends historically to precede ex-
pression of amount. In one sense the progress of science consists in
translating qualitative variables into quantitative variables, al-
though for purposes of condensation the process may be reversed.

It is contended, therefore, that a useful distinction may be drawn
between quantitative and qualitative variables and between count-
ing-measurement and rating. The criteria of distinction are (1) the
counting process, (2) interchangeability of units, and (3) the pres-
ence in counting-measurement of an external objective unit, which is
manipulated in the counting process to obtain a multiple rather than
to express a numerical classification in terms of degree of more-or-
lessness. It is fully granted that all units are perceptually or con-
ceptually defined by human beings and have only relative inter-
changeability.®

There remain, however, the criterion of counting and the criterion
of external units which standardize personal conceptual units and
render them conceptually interchangeable. Such units tend to be
interchangeable in proportion as they are themselves defined by
counting processes and by antecedent quantitative variables. A
gram, for example, may be defined in terms of the gravitational pull
of a mass of water of certain dimensions at a certain temperature.
The most important single criterion of distinction between measure-
ment and rating is the ultimate referability of measurement back
to a counting process which can be carried on by more than one
person. Rating might conceivably, in certain cases, be more accurate
than counting-measurement, in the sense of obtaining constant re-
sults and correlating with other variables, but significant differences
in the two methods of numerical description would still exist. This
general discussion raises a specific question.

® S. Rice, “Units and Their Definition in Social Science,” Social Forces, Vol. IX, No. 4,
June, 1931, pp. 475-478.
Question V: Wuat Do THE Units oF aN ATTITUDE
ScaLte Mean?

It has been previously suggested that the widely used and valuable
Thurstone scales yield qualitative variables which are ultimately
derived from rating rather than counting.!° The judges’ ratings of
the Thurstone scale items as to favorableness constitute a numerical
classification in terms of degree. Numbers are used instead of ad-
jectives, but have little more meaning than if adjectives such as
“favorable” or “very favorable” were used. The proposition, “I do
not receive any benefit from attending church services, but I think
it helps some people” has a numerical name (scale value) of 5.7.4
The number 5.7 is not a multiple of any objective unit. It means
little more than that the proposition is regarded in general as more
or less hostile toward the Church than certain other propositions
with different numerical names. A person who takes a Thurstone
test accepts certain propositions and thus receives a numerical name
for his attitude or degree of attitude. The numerical name is not a
product of counting and could be replaced by adjectives.”

Wherever a rating process is used the question arises as to whether
the interval units are conceptually interchangeable. There seems no
reason to think that the interval between three and four constitutes
a unit which is conceptually interchangeable with the interval be-
tween nine and ten, even for a particular judge. The interval of the
so-called continuum between proposition A and proposition B is
not necessarily equal-appearing to ail of the judges. The equal-ap-
pearing interval as a psychic unit, if unit it may be called, is not
ordinarily counted in the rating process. Most judges assisting in
the preparation of an attitude scale by the Thurstone method would
probably give an introspective report of comparison rather than of
counting. Even if the intervals of a favorableness continuum were
counted by a rater in a way analogous to estimating length by
imagining a ruler turned end over end, the intervals in the minds
of different persons could not be regarded as interchangeable in view
of the lack of any physical counterpart of the psychic unit. A person
might count throbs of pain and thus approach a quantitative vari-
able, but inter-person interchangeability would be lacking.

10 C, Kirkpatrick and S. Stone, op. cit.

uL. L. Thurstone, and E. J. Chave, The Measurement of Attitude, University of Chicago
Press, 1929, p. 33; also p. 61.

12 The same comment may be made with reference to the Likert method of test construc-

tion. See Rensis Likert, “A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes,” Arch. of Psych.,
No. 140, 1932.
Does the writer’s method of constructing “‘belief-pattern scales”
have any greater validity than attitude-testing procedures based
on the rating principle? It will be recalled that the scores of the
Feminism test previously mentioned consisted of the algebraic sums
of Feminist and anti-Feminist items. Certain contrasts with the
Thurstone method may be noted which may or may not be ad-
vantages.

(1) Items were selected and classified with reference to a pattern
rather than a continuum. This process tends to keep qualitative
differences in mind and to facilitate analysis with reference to an
issue pattern.

(2) There is some reason to think that the fitting of the test items
to acultural pattern gives the instrument a certain inherent validity.

(3) The scores on the “‘belief-pattern” scale were derived by count-
ing proposition acceptances as units having objective existence. This
procedure is more consistent with the theory of measurement here
set forth than the Thurstone method. The scoring of a Thurstone
scale involves a counting not of units but of values which are es-
sentially numerical names rather than unit multiples derived by a
counting process. A sigma item scale value is more directly referable
to an ultimate counting process, but a very large and heterogeneous
standard group is needed for validity.

(4) While the “‘belief-pattern” scores are quantitative variables
derived by counting, it cannot be argued that they are necessarily
made up of equal units. The 80 items expressed 40 issues pro and con.
They resembled each other only in that they all bore positively or
negatively upon Feminist issues according to the uniform opinions
of judges. That they were on the average interchangeable with
reference to the purpose at hand was suggested by the fact that three
forms with differently worded propositions bearing on the same is-
sues correlated about .go. It is true that scales constructed by rating
methods yield similar reliabilities. It may be contended, however
that a “‘belief-pattern” scale score has a more clear-cut meaning
than a score based on rating. Let it be assumed that a score on a
Thurstone scale is five. The question arises ‘Five what?” The
answer is five intervals on an eleven-point scale which were sup-
posedly equal-appearing to judges reared in a particular culture. The
equal-appearing unit had no direct physical counterpart in the sense
that a brass gram weight corresponds to the idea of a gram as a
unit rather than as a symbol like the word “gram.” A score of five
on the “‘belief-pattern” scale for measuring attitudes toward Fem-
inism means that five Feminist propositions have been checked in
excess of whatever anti-Feministic evaluational propositions may
have been checked. The score has a common-sense meaning as a
multiple of things having an objective existence and having in
common the quality which is being investigated.

(5) Finally, a principle of extensiveness of response was substi-
tuted for the principle of intensiveness of response. An attempt was
made to obtain the range of response to a more complete sampling of
issues rather than to investigate intensity of response to a generality.
It was assumed that intensity of conviction in regard to a configura-
tion finds expression in lowered thresholds and an irradiation of
receptivity. The acceptance of each proposition counted as one, in
spite of possible differences in intensity of response to various specific
issues. This procedure, which was consistent with the theory of
measurement here expressed, seemed to yield average interchange-
ability of units. When sigma weights were assigned to the items a
correlation of .94 was obtained with the simple test scores.

There is even reason to think that the use of rating scales may
artificially suggest more the extreme reactions on the part of judges
and subjects. When students were asked to double-check proposi-
tions about which they felt strongly, sixty per cent of the students
double-checked less than three Feminist propositions out of forty.”
It is not claimed that there is any general superiority in the “‘belief-
pattern” method of scale construction, but at least questions are
raised which seem worthy of further thought and investigation.
consistency between the three components is not to be expected.
The attitude (as here defined), the word and the deed rarely con-
stitute a perfectly integrated trinity. All these components are
realities and each is an index of the other two in the sense that some
inference or prediction can be made from one variable to another.
Action, however, is not necessarily more important than attitude or
opinion.

(2) Verbal inconsistency is another form of inconsistency fre-
quently found. Opinions expressed or endorsed by a person at the
same or different times may seem inconsistent to an outside observer
because of choice of words while there is, nevertheless, consistency
in terms of attitude, i.e., internal emotionalized meaning reactions.

(3) Logical inconsistency may be regarded as a form of inconsist-
ency in which there is an expression of inconsistent meanings. The
acceptance or expression of propositions which are logically incon-
sistent may be due to stupidity, carelessness and perhaps to sug-
gestion. A person could not logically report himself as both male and
female, report children older than himself or knowingly be both
favorable and unfavorable at the same time toward a specific issue.

(4) Inconsistency of attitudes may be distinguished from logical or
verbal inconsistency in that there is a genuine internal inconsistency
of thought and feeling. This internal attitude inconsistency may be
of three types: (a) In the first place, the internal emotionalized ideo-
verbal process or system may be subjected to temporal variation.
(b) In the second place, there may be incomplete endorsement of
the various issues, which by virtue of historical association are gen-
erally assumed to belong together as part of a social movement.
(c) In the third place, there may be inconsistency of attitude when a
person endorses issues which are component parts of culture patterns
which historically have been in opposition to each other.
ae a #

A test of a variable attitude which yielded constant retest scores
would be not a good but a bad test.

(2) It is possible that there is danger in eliminating propositions
because of their failure to discriminate between high total score and
low total score groups. For example, to assume an extreme case, if
Feminism were confused with femininity in preparing a collection
of propositions, the high score and low score groups might differ
chiefly with reference to feminity; and items bearing on Feminism
might be eliminated because of their lower discriminating value until
the scale lost its validity and approached a test of femininity.

(3) When scales are artificially given an internal consistency
through selection and rejection of items, there is danger that genu-
ine inconsistencies of attitude on the part of subjects may be
concealed. The writer attempted to avoid this danger by retaining
all items that fitted the pattern of Feminist issues. Furthermore, a
device known as an inconsistency ratio was worked out to measure
the proportion of all items checked (in relation to a particular total
score) which were balanced by a checking in the same category on
the opposite side of the Feminist, anti-Feminist dichotomy. The
inconsistency ratio may prove to be a valuable research tool for
investigating ‘‘marginal cultural status.”

It is perhaps an advantage of the belief-pattern method of scale
construction that an opportunity is given for the endorsing of issues
in contrasted cultural patterns and that a means for measuring such
inconsistency is provided.!® The method forces no inconsistencies
since no propositions need be checked save those which the subject
himself regards as expressing his pattern of attitudes. On the other
hand, lack of any definite attitude is expressed both by non-checking
and by contradictory checking of both propositions bearing on an
issue.

(4) In the fourth place, there is the fairly obvious danger that
standardization by item selection would bias subsequent studies of
attitude integration. Rather low partial correlations were found be-
tween the sub-scores for the economic, domestic, political-legal, and

¥ Sletto has evidence, however, suggesting that this process would not go beyond a certain
point. It was found, however, again and again by Sletto and Rundquist that items in certain
scales, as for example a morale scale, discriminated better in other scales, as for example an
attitude toward education scale. When items of various scales are shifted around, what does a
particular scale measure and how many items from other scales can be added before its title
should be changed? See R. Sletto, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Minnesota (in preparation).

4 Kirkpatrick, C., “Inconsistency in Attitudinal Behavior with Special Reference to At-
titudes Toward Feminism,” to appear in the Four. App. Psych.
Question VIII: WHat ARE THE CRITERIA OF
Artirupe Test Vauipity?

If there is cogency in the suggestion that reliability may be ob-
tained at the expense of validity, the problem of attaining validity
takes on new importance. According to the preceding analysis, at-
titude indices should correspond as closely as possible to the emo-
tionalized ideo-verbal patterns themselves, even to the point of
recording ambivalence, inconsistency and modification of attitudes.

There is probably more value in comparison of scores of groups of
fairly well-known attitudinal status than in methods based on in-
terval consistency. Analysis of item discrimination with reference
to validating groups seems appropriate and desirable in many cases.
It is probable, where interest is focussed more on the so-called per-
sonality traits, such as morale, inferiority feeling and generalized
radicalism-conservatism, that correlation of test scores with case
history data is desirable.1” Where the attitudes refer to fairly definite
culture patterns, such as Communism and Feminism, the method
here described of fitting the pattern of test items to a pattern of
cultural issues seems to have advantages, although detailed discus-
sion is not possible.

It is admitted that the eight questions here raised have not been
adequately answered. Problems such as these here presented need
to receive much open-minded thought, discussion and experimental
investigation before attitude measurement can be established on a
strictly scientific basis.

16 The writer found significant changes in score on the part of students following discussion
of Feminist issues with a student of the opposite sex. See C. Kirkpatrick, “An Experimental
Study of the Modification of Social Attitudes,” to appear in the American Fournal of Sociology
for March, 1936.

17 Professor Stouffer has done important pioneering work in this direction. See S. Stouffer,

An Experimental Comparison of Statistical and Case History Methods of Attitude Research,
University of Chicago, 1930.
