Fascism and the Church

Author(s): Roland L. Warren

Source: American Sociological Review, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Feb., 1941), pp. 45-51
Published by: American Sociological Association

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2086342

Accessed: 16-06-2016 04:40 UTC
of church and state. Ultimately, there is not room for the ideals of

fascism and those of the church in any given country, for each is
set up as a creed and an institution designed to demand complete submis-
sion from the individual. One logically supersedes the other, for however
their beliefs may vary, their structure and methods are similar in many
important respects, and they appear therefore mutually exclusive. Fascism
in Germany, for instance, may well fear the power of the church, for it has
learned the methods by which that power has been held for centuries.

I am going to compare the implementation of fascism with that of the
Roman Catholic Church, because the latter has, in my opinion, the most
effective organization of any European religion.t In making such a compari-
son, I shall not attempt to evaluate goals, nor to contrast ideologies, but
rather to show a noteworthy similarity in structure and methods which
has been neglected by current students of sociology. Nor do I assert that
such similarities represent conscious borrowing by the fascists, but a com-
parison of these similarities reveals problems of fundamental importance.”

Structure. First, democratic control is foreign to the hierarchy of the
Church and also to that of fascism. Authority does not come from the great
masses of people, but rather flows down from above. In the Church, the
Pope is responsible only to God. All authority flows from him. Responsi-
bility is upward to the few rather than downward to the many. Important
matters of doctrine are decided by the upper few, and the great mass of
members is given no voice in the decision. In the words of the Catechism of
the Council of Trent, “To some it belongs to govern and to teach; to others,
to be subject and to obey.”

With the rise of nationalism, the doctrine of the divine right of kings
afforded a secular parallel. All were responsible to the king, but the king
only to God. The practice, as it is established in fascism, is even stronger.
In the words of Adolf Hitler: “Everywhere is dominant the idea of per-
sonality—its authority downwards and its responsibility upwards to the
higher persons.” Fascists protest that the highest leader is indeed respon-

T: growth of fascism has given new meaning to the age-old struggle

1 Hereafter “‘Church” will be capitalized and will refer to the Roman Catholic Church.

2 All institutions show a characteristic structure of ideology, implementation, and emo-
tional support. Indeed, it is only through the use of such terms that the word “institution” can
be meaningfully defined. Similarities could be found to exist between fascism and many other
institutions in Western culture, such as capitalism, democracy, the family, etc. Each has its
theoretical justification, social implementation, and methods of maintaining popular support.
In many respects institutions may overlap in one or all of these three factors. The similarity
between any institutions should hence be taken as a matter of degree.

45
sible to the people, but we find here an abstraction to the extent that an
analysis of the German concept of Volk will show that it is divorced from
any mere summation of the citizens of the state. The Volk does not repre-
sent a people of flesh and blood, but rather it is a highly abstract concept
with little meaning in it. Furthermore, any such responsibility to the
people is, in effect, a responsibility to do what the leader thinks or says is
good for the people. No free expression of the opinion of the people as to
their own good is allowed.

Now, the striking thing about this comparison of hierarchical structures
is that within each the people are given to understand that they are not
qualified to determine their own good. In the case of the Church, of course,
we have the establishment of beliefs and practices based on the Word of
God by His own representatives. In fascism, we have what is proclaimed
to be the mission and destiny of a people, something which here, also, is not
entrusted to the people’s own discrimination.

Strict and unquestioning obedience is necessary in both cases. All purely
personal wishes must be sacrificed for the good of the institutional order,
whether of Church or of state. Such submissiveness needs to be carefully
fostered. The methods employed to do this will be discussed later. One other
point might be mentioned in connection with obedience to an undemocratic
hierarchical structure. In both cases, they are based upon a doctrinal system
which justifies them. Just as the Bible is used as the source and verification
of all authority in the Church, and just as its fundamental truths may not
be questioned nor ignored, so, too, with German Nazism’s bible, Mein
Kampf. The one justifies the basic structure of the Church; the other, of
national socialism. They are competing for a place which only one of them
can maintain: the revelation and source of absolute authority.

Unquestioned obedience and submission to those in authority is made
particularly plausible in fascism, as in the Church, by pointing to enemies
within and enemies without. Both institutions are organized on a fighting
basis. It has long been realized that fascism must create scapegoats and
“causes” if its rigid control is to survive. The great danger which threatens
the people and the victorious fight of the state over adverse and insidious
forces are constantly being emphasized. In fascism, we have such Quixotian
windmills as Jews, Communists, signers of the Versailles Treaty, and the
Church. The Church, too, has its threatening forces such as communism,
fascism (but of course, less in Italy and Spain than in Germany), the Devil,
and the temptations of this world. The Devil has been a convenient per-
sonification of those forces which work for the overthrow of the Church and
its principles. He represents evil. Without trying to push the analogy too
far, it might be asserted that where Nazi fascism in Europe has gained as-
cendancy over the Church, the Jew replaces the Devil as the source of all evil.

The Church is more interested in saving the soul than in making it happy.
The attitude, therefore, is not so much, Look how we have improved your
earthly status!, as, Look what we have saved you from! Likewise, the neces-
sity for something-to-be-saved-from early made itself apparent in fascism.
Indeed, many people believe that once the people begin to ask the question,
Where is it getting us?, rather than, What is it saving us from?, the col-
lapse of fascism will be at hand. Fascism is a fighting philosophy. It must
have battles and triumphs. We also have the Church Militant and the
Church Triumphant.

Both Church and fascistic state are organized for constant combat with
purely material values. In the case of the Church, they are combatted as
instruments of the Devil, too likely to divert the faithful from the truly
spiritual path. In fascistic countries, they are minimized as a product of a
democracy ravishing itself on personal material pleasure at the expense of
the nation and its fate. It is contrary to the higher values of loyalty, love of
country, sacrifice, etc. Students of fascism have not been remiss in recogniz-
ing the fact that a deemphasis of the material pleasures and comforts of a
people is particularly convenient to a regime which is diverting a large pro-
portion of the nation’s income into armaments and propaganda.

One other comparison of a tendency which is basic to the structure of
both Church and fascism will be mentioned. Fascism is born of a rampant
nationalism. It has constantly fought all internationalism not dominated by
it. Cosmopolitanism is taboo. Absolute loyalty to one’s own national unit
and absolute conviction that all nonfascist internationalism must be com-
batted are inherent in its very foundation. Adolf Hitler could not long coop-
erate with other political leaders in a League of Nations. Internationalism
was for him intimately connected with communism, and the whole thing was
somehow a plot of Jewish bankers. Yet, with the Nazi-made opportunity
for a fascist Europe at hand, Hitler is only too anxious to be its unifier. His-
torians have long recognized this policy in the Church. Divide et impera
has always been the Church policy where it feared that it could not domi-
nate the coalition. The Holy Roman Empire, representing a strong inter-
national order in its dominant period, was perfectly justifiable so long as the
subordination of the emperor to the Pope was established. With the rise of
nation states, however, the Church found nationalism more in keeping with
its aims. In recent years, the Church has frowned upon any international-
ism which it might not dominate, and, indeed, political and economic
internationalists have been numbered among its foremost enemies.

Fascism has adopted the same basic policies, and this fact, if nothing else,
makes it clear that fascism and the Church can not both exist permanently
in the same continental area unless they somehow adjust their differences
and combine. Neither loathes internationalism per se; but both will fight it
so long as they cannot dominate the international order.?

Methods. No sharp division can be made between structure and method,

__ _* Here we rapidly approach the borderline between structure and method. This character-
istic might easily be considered under the latter heading.
48 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

for an institution has methods as a basic part of its structure. In abstrac-
tion, ideas may be dissociated from their implementation, but the more effi-
cient the organization, the more difficult it is to separate them. For purposes
of analysis, the division has been made here between characteristics con-
sidered basic to institutions and those which are mere expedients.

An expedient which has for centuries been used by the Church to assure
the continuity of its existence is the early indoctrinating of youth with its
tenets. Fascists adopted the same procedure. Indeed, the contest for Ger-
man youth which temporarily at least must be conceded to the Nazis is
more fully appreciated when a proper realization is obtained of the tendency
of the two institutions to be, through their similar methods, mutually exclu-
sive. In Nazi Germany, there is no room for the parochial education of
youth. It is as inimical to Nazism as its opposite is to the Church. Young
Germans can be educated to serve Hitler or to serve God, but ultimately
not both, unless the institutions merge and the Church proclaims unquali-
fiedly that to serve Hitler is to serve God. Then we would, indeed, be
witnessing a streamlining of the divine right of kings doctrine, a contingency
which has much less probability in Germany than in Spain or Italy.

The indoctrination of youth takes the form, not merely of a simple teach-
ing of beliefs and doctrines, but becomes more active in youth organizations,
designed to afford opportunity for further teaching and also to give children
a feeling of “togetherness” in the common cause.

This latter instrument finds its more mature counterpart in adult organi-
zations. Monasticism has for centuries served the purpose of providing or-
ganized groups working for the furtherance of the Church. Fascism made an
even more widespread and militant organization of adult activities, with the
state and its aims and doctrines the chief focal point. Characteristically, the
fascists soon learned the value of clothing the groups in special uniforms, to
promote a greater esprit de corps. Fascism also learned that martyrs are a
great help to any cause and so it soon had its Horst Wessels to absorb some
of the admiration and sympathy which formerly were given to the saints.

A word might be added about rituals and feast days. The Germans, with
their encouragement of neopaganism, have made the celebration of the
summer solstice into a ritual of massive proportions. In new stadia, such as
the Heidelberg Thingstétte, such celebrations assume impressive propor-
tions. Those who are familiar with the Niirnberger Parteitag know that it
leaves little to the imagination in adopting every possible means of ritual
and decoration to achieve its desired effect, a phenomenon comparable in
many respects to the Church’s Ecumenical Congresses. The interminable
Chorgespréche of the German radio stations have much in common with re-
sponsive readings. Ritual and celebrations give German Nazism its counter-
part for masses and feast days.

Finally, we come to the expediency of forbidding the faithful to read
books and articles hostile to the cause. The Church has maintained its Index
since as long ago as 1559, a list of forbidden writings containing editions of
original texts and old translations of the Bible by non-Catholics, books de-
fending heresy and schism, books attacking religion, books defending di-
vorce, etc. Nazis, too, have their Index. The “burning of the books” kindled
a fire of intellectual disgust which has spread to all parts of the democratic
world. Books by Jews, “unpatriotic” books, pacifistic writings, communist
literature—all are suppressed. Considered particularly dangerous is any de-
scription of Hitler’s early life which does not agree with Mein Kampf.

Questions. Other parallels could be drawn. Sufficient has been given to
demonstrate a fundamental similarity of basic structure and implementa-
tion. Further study might be directed toward the following questions.

Are the two systems mutually exclusive, as has been maintained, and does
the increasing vigor of one point toward the downfall of the other?

Will the Church therefore find itself forced to make peace with fascism, a
peace which would mean the renunciation of whatever the Church has to
say in favor of democracy?

In that case, has the nightmare of a fascistic domination of Europe with
the Church as its most effective cohort and apologist become a possibility?

The last question is momentous. The demand of both institutions for un-
wavering loyalty in spheres which overlap, and the necessity for each to
eliminate the other if it is to hold full sway, make conflicts inevitable. So
long as the Church succeeds, fascism will fail; the reverse, however, is also
true, and the Church cannot be making the error of ignoring it.

Temporarily in Germany and more recently in Italy, fascism has succeed-
ed in taking precedence over the Church in actual sway of the people. It is
well known that the Church stood oppossed to Italy’s entrance into the pres-
ent war, and that through the Osservatore Romano it did much to clarify the
issues which supported Italy’s neutrality at a time when the controlled Ital-
ian press was in the fury of its prowar campaign. The great increase in the
circulation of the Osservatore Romano was a gauge of the influence which the
Church was still exercising. But this influence was not sufficient, and the
Church little by little has had to give in.

I have shown that the place where the two institutions overlap is that of
structure and method. Their disparity, however, is one of idealism. It is here
that the Church, in order to maintain its institutional strength, may have to
reinterpret its ideals in accordance with those of fascism. It would thus be-
come the complete implement of the state, with a hierarchy and an imple-
mentation particularly suited to the needs of fascistic dictatorship. Such a
coalition could dominate occidental culture, but only at great cost to the
fundamental principles for which the Church has stood. Its power would be
increased, but its power to do good and fearlessly to proclaim and defend
the right would be dissolved.
50 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

Comparison oF THE INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION OF
THE CuurcH, GERMAN FascisM, AND THE UNITED StaTEs GOVERNMENT

 

 

 

Institutional The German U.S.
Characteristics Church Fascism Government
1. Structure aristocratic aristocratic democratic
2. Direction of flow | downward downward upward
of power
3. Revelation Bible Mein Kampf | Declaration of
Independence
Constitution
Real or imagined | communism communism “Unamerican-
foes the Devil Jews ism”
physical physical “radicals”
things things
5. Attitude toward | squarely op- | squarely op- | amenable, with
internationalism posed posed qualifica-
which it does not tions
dominate
6. Degree of indoctri- | full full partial

nation of youth,
where possible

7. Disciplined monks armed forces | armed forces
“orders” nuns S.S., S.A. Am. Legion,
clergy Hitler Youth D.A.R., Boy
a host of a host of Scouts, etc.
others others
8. Chief symbol cross swastika flag
g. Ritual mass, etc. holiday cele- | holiday  cele-
Ecumenical brations brations
Congress party confer- | legislative and
ence judicial rit-
ual, party
conventions
Io. Attitude toward | rigid censor- | rigid censor- | modified free-
expression of ship ship dom

 

 

opinion
pian conquest, in the failure of the Church to come out more strongly against
governmental abuses, a step further in this direction. They point to a
further step already taken in Spain, the affiliation of the Church with the
fascists as an expediency against the alleged threat of communism. The rise
of antisemitism in America under the leadership of such men as Father
Coughlin gives many Americans cause for alarm.

There are two viewpoints as to the tactics the Church might employ, if it
is to take a definite stand against fascism. The one would be that which
maintains the Church can best cope with fascism by “‘beating it at its own
game,” that is, by striving through its similarly authoritarian structure and
implementation to win its followers away from those ideals of fascism to
which it is opposed. The assumption would be that if the basic psychological
and sociological needs which fascism plays upon can be fulfilled by the
Church toward socially constructive goals, fascism will be but a poor com-
petitor. Opposition to this viewpoint is based on two arguments: first, that
the Church has had little success in Germany and Italy by the use of such
tactics; and second, that ideals are so closely interwoven with implementa-
tion that the Church would have to become increasingly fascistic to do it.

This leads to the second alternative. Many students believe that the
Church, in order to be a bulwark against fascism, must modify those phases
of its activities which are least amenable to the democratic spirit, and all
those aspects which tend to make it a state within a state. The question here
is, can the Church do this and still maintain its avowed mission of calling
men to a better life than that which we have, and of preserving a loyalty to
ultramundane values based on revelation? If not, which is to take precedence?

The accompanying chart will help throw light on this question. The in-
clusion of the United States government in the comparison helps point out
how it, as an institution, has many things in common with the other two. It
is significant, however, that on those factors which Americans consider de-
cisive in differentiating democracy from fascsim, responsibility of govern-
ment to those governed (1, 2), and attitude toward the free expression of
opinion (10), the Church’s position is much closer to that of fascism. How-
ever dissimilar the underlying causes may be, both apparently agree that
the people are not capable of determining their own good, and that decisions
handed down from above must be unquestioningly accepted.

In Europe, the rise of fascism was so sudden as to be overwhelming. Some
capitulation or compromise by the Church was necessary. In America, the
Church still has time to take its stand and to dig its spiritual trenches.
Either of the two viewpoints analyzed above may be chosen.
