Class and Marriage in Africa and Eurasia

Author(s): Jack Goody

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Jan., 1971), pp. 585-603
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776430

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:01 UTC
In this paper I try to answer a question about West Africa raised a hun-
dred years ago by Richard Burton in the description of his Mission to
Gelele, king of the state of Dahomey. “Truely it is said that whilst the
poor man in the North is the son of a pauper, the poor man in the Trop-
ies is the son of a prince” (1864, pp. 40-41). It is a problem that was
taken up fifty years later in another form by the Gold Coast lawyer from
Cape Coast, John Mensah Sarbah, when he wrote that “in the African
social system the formation of a pauper class is unknown, nor is there
antagonism of class against class” (Redwar 1909, p. vi). And it is a prob-
lem that. has been central to current controversies between Marxist-
Leninists, on the one hand, and African socialists, on the other, about the
nature of the systems of stratification in that continent (Grundy 1964).
Each of these statements involves some contrast, implicit or explicit,
between the class structure of African and Eurasian states, especially
if one understands the north (in Burton’s characteristic aphorism) to
mean Eurasia and the south, Africa. It is the implications for the com-
parative analysis of stratification, or more specifically for status groups,
that I want to pursue by considering the relationship between class and
marriage.
1 This paper was first read to the Department of Sociology, University of Chicago, in
May 1969. I am grateful to the members of that department both for their invitation
and for their comments. The theme is one that has been touched upon by other
writers on Africa and Eurasia, too numerous to mention. I am particularly indebted

to L. A. Fallers, M. Gluckman, W. J. Goode, E. R. Leach, E. Peters, and N. O. Yal-
man for conversations and clarifications.
CLASS

In all the major continents of the world, the more technologically ad-
vanced societies are marked by their unequal distribution of power and
status. It is this power bank, Parsons suggests, that, among other things,
provides the mechanism for the mobilization of resources in the interest
of the collective action needed for the running of complex societies (Par-
sons 1964, p. 51). The terms we use to analyze the major groups in this
wide range of stratified systems, in whatever part of the world they are
found, derive directly from the Eurasian experience. Three main con-
cepts are employed: class, as typified by the modern Western world;
caste, characteristic of India; and the estate (or stdnde) of feudal Europe.
In sociological discussions the major difference between class and caste
turns upon the openness or closure of a series of horizontally juxtaposed
groups or strata, that is, upon whether or not mobility is allowed be-
tween them.?

In visual terms, such systems are often diagrammed as a kind of layer
cake, one element spread on top of the next like a series of deposits in a
well-conducted archaeological dig, the different units being arranged in
a single hierarchy in which each group is defined as being above, below,
or in between. Or alternatively, to use another culinary metaphor, as a
jam sandwich, with most of the jam at the top.

I am concerned with these models, verbal and visual, because they may
lead us to neglect certain basic differences between such groups as they
are found in the major societies of Eurasia (which are in some ways closer
together than the categorization allows) and in the state systems of
Africa (which in certain respects stand opposed both to class and caste).
This is not simply a matter of setting right the historical record. A good
deal more is at stake. From the standpoint of social theory, the adoption
of a particular model affects the categories and measures of sociological
inquiry. From the standpoint of social practice, it affects (or could
affect) social policy in developing and developed nations alike. At the
very least, it influences one’s understanding of the role of the new elites.*

First of all, analytic categories of this degree of abstraction are of
limited use for many, possibly most, scientific purposes. The very fact
that they are drained of content, of “culture,” to such an extent has
obscured the important differences. For example, the term “feudal” has
frequently been applied both to medieval Europe and to precolonial

2? Other writers have stressed the cultural factors which they suggest make caste spe-
cific to Hindu India (e.g., Leach 1960).

3 See, e.g., Folson’s comment on the statement Bing made on p. 62 of his autobio-
graphical account of the Nkrumah regime: ‘‘It is equally nonsensical to include mem-
bers of the National Liberation Council among the aristocratic class, whatever that
means in the Ghanaian context’ (Folson 1969, p. 37).
Africa, giving insufficient attention to differences in the economy as well
as other spheres.*

But, in respect to status groups, there are more specific reasons why
these general concepts have given rise to misunderstanding. Clearly,
precolonial African states had no caste system (though some had castes) ;
neither did they have classes in the modern European sense, if mobility
is a central feature.’ How is their type of status group best described?
In his excellent account of the Nupe of Nigeria, Nadel concludes that
this state is above all a class system (1942, pp. 127-35). However, his
study, which is significantly entitled A Black Byzantium, is replete with
feudal comparisons, implicit as well as explicit. This would suggest that
the model of sténde might be more appropriate. Many other authors
have pursued this feudal analogy. But, here too, there is the built-in
assumption that these units were of a type found in Europe at an earlier
date. I want to suggest that even if we are forced to use such terms be-
cause of the poverty of our analytic vocabulary and a natural reluctance
to proliferate neologisms, we should bear in mind the basic differences
between status groups in the two continental areas and beware of general
statements based (often unconsciously) upon Eurasian experience alone.

Let us examine a particular case where this difference has been over-
looked. In most discussions, classes, castes, and estates are seen as having
certain basic features in common. One widespread idea is that the social
distance between classes is maintained by various blocks in the system
of intergroup communication, that is, by restrictions upon marrying out,
upon eating together, and upon other forms of social intercourse. While
these restrictions do not always have the obligatory character that is
found in caste systems, and while formal freedom often exists, they are
still effective in maintaining and building barriers between the status
groups in a particular society.

Clearly the most effective such barrier is that on intermarriage, since
such a tie would bring the two groups into close conjugal, affinal, and
other social relationships. It is therefore upon the marital arrangements
between the different strata that I want to concentrate first.
social classes but also of all social relations between them that could lead
to marriage” (1957, p. 123). Even in a relatively open-class society like
the United States, social class endogamy is the rule. According to Hol-
lingshead, 83 percent of all New Haven marriages were between people
who had been living in neighborhoods of the same or adjacent social
class position (1950, p. 625).®

Some years earlier, Kingsley Davis presented a theoretical paper dis-
cussing why this should be. He maintained that “a cardinal principle of
every stratified social order is that the majority of those marrying shall
marry equals’; endogamy, or at least preferential in-marriage, is the rule
of class, caste, or stdnde. The reason, he claims, is that marriage implies
equality. “If some persons are ‘untouchable,’ they must also be unmar-
riageable, and if food which they cook is ‘uneatable,’ they must also be
‘unusable’ in the kitchen.”’ He goes on to say that “a wife reared in a
social stratum widely different from her husband’s is apt to inculeate
ideas and behaviour incompatible with the position the children will
inherit from their father, thus creating a hiatus between their status
and their role” (1941, pp. 337-38). In other words, intermarriage would
make it impossible to maintain extensive differences in behavior between
individuals and groups, since it would lead to a merging of the subcul-
tures that distinguish them.

In another contribution to the subject published in the same year,
Robert Merton stresses the same point, though in a somewhat wider
social context. ‘Intermarriage between persons of radically different
social status thus conflicts with the existing organization of cliques and
friendship groups involving the spouses and their kin. Rules of avoidance
or social distance and rules of accessibility are brought into open con-
flict”’ (1964, p. 142). Merton’s discussion deals mainly with ethnic caste,
since he is trying to account for the predominance, among black-white
marriages in the United States, of unions between male blacks and fe-
male whites. But the wider concern is with the close relationship be-
tween marriage policy and stratification.

As far as this situation goes, the general argument is a sound one. But
it is not in fact the case that all stratified systems demand a high degree
of in-marriage. Status endogamy and related forms of in-marriage are
certainly characteristic of the major Eurasian societies. In Africa, on the
other hand, endogamy is rarely found except in ethnic situations, in par-
ticular those where ruling groups of northern origin have established
themselves over black agriculturalists, as happened in South Africa,
Ethiopia, the East African coast, certain Interlacustrine states, and on
6 On homogamy in contemporary France, see Girard (1964) who writes, ‘“L’homo-

gamie apparattrait en quelque sorte comme une corollaire de la conscience de groupe”
(p. 31). This monograph also includes a useful bibliography on the subject.
Class and Marriage in Africa and Eurasia

the Saharan fringes (e.g., in Timbuktu). In the major states of West
Africa, ruling groups were rarely if ever endogamous. Indeed, where the
ruling dynasty consisted of an exogamous clan or lineage (i.e., where
there is a “corporate’’ claim to chiefship), both male and female mem-
bers were obliged to take their spouses from outside the ruling estate;
conubium was not merely formally open, as in a class system, but obliga-
torily so. However, even where the ruling estate does not consist of a
single exogamous clan, intermarriage is widespread. Take the kingdom
of Gonja in northern Ghana.’ Originally a conquest state established by
Mande horsemen in the seventeenth century, it comprises four major
sociopolitical categories, the ruling Gbanya (who claim agnatic descent
from the leader of the conquest), the Muslims (who mainly descend from
those attached to the ruling house), the commoners (largely the de-
scendants of conquered autochthones and specialist service groups), and
finally the slaves (who were constantly absorbed into the commoner
estate and who were continually recruited by raiding and purchase).
In addition there was a sizable body of strangers whose activities cen-
tered upon the great trading town of Salaga, where forest products were
exchanged for northern livestock, minerals, and manufactures. Examina-
tion of spouses’ estates in 515 Gonja marriages® shows that men of all
groups take a large proportion of wives from estates other than their
own. This is very pronounced among Muslim men (two-thirds of whose
marriages are outside the estate) and for men of the ruling group (four-
fifths of whose marriages are outside). Even one-quarter of the men
from the numerically dominant commoner estate married women from
other estates. Much the same picture emerges from a study of the mar-
riages of the previous generation, indicating that the situation we find in
this hierarchical society is not a new one. Indeed, things were probably
like this from the beginning. It was presumably because of intermarriage
that, as so often occurs in Africa, the ruling estate lost its original lan-
guage and adopted the speech of one of the groups it had conquered. It re-
mains true today that, while marriages of alliance are sometimes made be-
tween friends in the ruling group, many royals express a preference for
the daughters of commoners, who are said to be less work shy and more
faithful than their own sisters. In the nearby kingdom of Bariba, in
north Dahomey, similar preferences for “low” marriage were openly
expressed by male members of the ruling group,® and it was said that
the princesses of the matrilineal Ashanti, through whom royal blood
and claims to office were transmitted, preferred the lighter-skinned males
7 For further information on this kingdom, see E. N. Goody (1962, 1969) and J. Goody
(1967, 1968, 1969c).

8 A study of these marriages is being prepared by Dr. Esther Goody.

® According to Lombard (see Cornevin 1962, pp. 163-64).
COOKING

Given the practice of heterogamy (or open conubium), it is clearly diffi-
cult to maintain or institutionalize class differences, that is, internal
differences of culture distinct from those based upon expenditure alone.
When husbands and wives come from different groups, the women can
hardly be expected to raise children in the ways of their affines rather
than their own—unless their role is largely replaced by domestic servants
of one kind or another. If societies are polygynous as well as heteroga-
mous, the situation becomes yet more complex. The women living in a
common household will be of different origins and their ways of acting
are likely to move toward a common mean. Indeed, there is some evi-
dence for the emergence of new norms out of this kind of mutual accom-
modation in the multitribal dwelling groups of lower-status migrants in
West African cities, and this process is certainly reflected in their ten-
dency to adopt a standardized repertoire of recipes.* Under circum-
stances such as these—the large heterogeneous dwelling, where a favor-
able climate allows women and children to work mainly in the open
10 Though, as Merton has pointed out, in black-white marriages in the United States

caste hypogamy may be crosscut by class hypergamy, as when upper black male
marries lower white female.

4 Hiller (1933, p. 24) uses isolation device to denote arrangements and symbols which
mark off in-groups from out-groups. Merton distinguishes between the isolation de-
vices employed by subordinate groups and the exclusion devices employed by domi-
nant groups.

12 These observations were made by Dr. Enid Schildkrout in the course of her inten-
sive investigation of urban processes in Kumasi.
common space of the courtyard rather than be confined to the closed
private space of the room—the pressures are likely to be toward cultural
homogeneity and political identification.

Contrast the Eurasian situation: The difference between the central-
ized societies of Africa and Eurasia are highlighted in the household
economy. While Eurasia had a haute cuisine as well as a lower, basse
cuisine, Africa had neither; its cooking was demotic. Or rather, what
cultural differentiation existed did so in those societies like Ruanda,
where the strata were in-marrying and did not mix at the domestic level.
Otherwise it was largely a matter of quantitative rather than qualita-
tive differences.

There is, of course, a danger in drawing too stark a contrast. One of
the great drawbacks of contemporary structural analysis is its devotion
to crude oppositions rather than more subtle measurements. Clearly, in
the mercantile and warrior states of West Africa, ways of acting de-
pended upon one’s social status. Burton wrote of the king in Dahomey
that he would not allow the peasants to cultivate certain cash crops
around the port of Whydah; a chief could not alter his house without
the king’s permission; and so on (1864, pp. i, 180-81). But such distine-
tions did not lie in the traditional patterns of culture; they tended to be
attached to specific roles rather than to general classes and to derive
from the authority of the king rather than from internal differentiation.
Moreover, intermarriage prevented too great a separation, too complete
an isolation, to develop between the strata. There was broad homogeneity
in marriage, cooking, and other aspects of culture, even though the
strata had differential access to political office.
part of them; where numerical material is available, the extent of that
part is shown by the coefficient of association. And by drawing attention
to the role of certain economic variables in Eurasian societies, I do not
intend to reduce class and caste to epiphenomena of the economy. Re-
ligious and other aspects of such hierarchies exist in their own right."
But I am pointing to what I consider to be the necessary preconditions
for the development of certain major aspects of these institutions and
to the social implications of this fact.

It is important to remember that the in-marrying tendency of Euro-
pean and Asian societies was not simply a feature of the major social
categories known as castes or classes. Bloch insists that the marriages
of like to like (or to above) occurred at all levels and for all roles. A serf
was not allowed to marry outside the group of serfs dependent on the
same lord (1966, p. 88). Duby quotes a medieval source as stating:
“Les hommes de la terre de Saint-Pierre ne prendront pas des femmes
étrangéres, tant qu’ils pourront trouver dans la cour des femmes qu’ils
puissent épouser. Qu’il en soit de méme pour les femmes” (1962, p. 451).
The “small world of seigneurial sergeants,” writes Bloch, developed a
“class solidarity”? by inheritance and by in-marriage. In the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, ‘the sons and daughters of bailiffs preferred to
choose their marriage partners from among their opposite numbers on
other seigneurtes. When people are concerned to marry ‘within their
own circle,’ there is tangible proof that the ‘circle’ is on its way to be-
coming a class” (1966, p. 192). In the towns the same tendency occurred
among merchants’ daughters, even when they were orphans. A four-
teenth-century record from London shows fifty-three out of sixty-three
such girls (84 percent) marrying merchants. Of the other ten, five were
married to gentlemen and five to citizens of lesser companies. A yet
higher proportion of widows remarried in their own sphere (Thrupp
1948, p. 26). As for the great landed families, the position here is well
known from the recent work of Holmes (1957) for the medieval period,
of Stone (1960-61, 1967) for Tudor and Stuart England, and Habbakuk
(1950) for the eighteenth century. Habbakuk describes the attempts of
the gentry to secure proper marriages for their daughters: “The mar-
riages between landed families in the eighteenth century were more like
treaties of alliance between sovereign states than love matches; they
involved hard bargaining in which the size of the bride’s fortune was
carefully matched against the income which the bridegroom’s father
Class and Marriage in Africa and Eurasia

was prepared to settle on him” (1955, p. 158). Similar kinds of arrange-
ments were made at the marriages of modern Irish peasants (Arensberg
and Kimball 1940), Greek villagers (Fried1 1962), and in Indian castes
(Kapadia 1966, p. 137). In all these cases, it is not simply a question
of the absence of marriage between the groups (though this fact is of
great significance in caste systems) but of matching like for like, or get-
ting an even better bargain. And the usual mechanism by which this
matching is achieved is the matching of property, often by means of the
dowry, whereby a woman acquired her portion upon marriage (or a
jointure upon widowhood) rather than at the death of her father or
mother. Dowry systems, and indeed the whole process by which property
is passed to the offspring of both sexes by what I have called diverging
devolution, is characteristic of the centralized societies of Eurasia (J.
Goody 1962, pp. 307-20; 19690), those very societies that are also marked
by the tendency to marry-in.

The contrast between Eurasia and Africa in terms of openness of mar-
riage (in-marriage and out-marriage) is paralleled by a contrast in mar-
riage transactions (dowry and bridewealth). In Africa there is no dowry,
except in areas directly influenced by Mediterranean practice, nor is
there any transmission of property between males and females, either
at death or at marriage. What then is the connection between Eurasia,
dowry, and in-marriage, on the one hand, and Africa, bridewealth, and
out-marriage, on the other? If we see in-marriage and dowry as methods
of preserving differences of property and status in contrast to bride-
wealth and out-marriage which diffuse them, why then should these
features be associated with Eurasia rather than Africa?

In explaining the difference, I want to begin by recalling Bloch’s ac-
count of French Rural History (1966) where he traces the social develop-
ments associated with the use of the plough and the rise of an increas-
ingly intensive agriculture in Europe. In another outstanding study,
Homans (1941) also relates differences in social structure to differences
in agricultural practice.

It is reasonable to look for such differences in the present case. As
distinct from the major societies of Eurasia, African states have simple
systems of farming, since the continent lacks the plough, the wheel, and
often a good soil. Frequently the exploitation of the land takes the form
of shifting agriculture. Where population densities increase land may
be more permanently cultivated, as in the Fra-fra region of northern
Ghana, but productivity still remains at a low level. In this particular
area, Llyn (1942) found the average area farmed per man was 2.49 acres
(0.66 per person). While the cereal grown in the small fertilized plot
around the compound yielded 2,000 pounds per acre, the yield of un-
manured land dropped to one-tenth of this amount. On these yields he
claimed it was difficult for a family to subsist without exchanging their
livestock for the grain from less-crowded areas (1942, pp. 78-83). The
west of Ghana’s Upper Region is less populated than this central part.
In that area, three groups cultivated the following average acreages per
person: LoWiile 0.9; LoDagaba 1.5; Dagaba 1.8. The rough acreage for
an elementary family (i.e., per man) was therefore 3.6; 5; and 6.2 acres,
respectively. Internal variation within these groups was small. Of the
three, the Dagaba had access to as much bushland as they could farm
(J. Goody 1956, p. 30; 1958, p. 64); their acreage probably represents
about the limit a man could cultivate by the hoe under these conditions.
Consequently farmers could produce relatively little by way of surplus,
at least in terms of cereal.!* While a chief could employ the labor of free-
men or slaves to work the land, it would bring him a very small reward
when compared with the situation that existed in medieval England and
in other parts of Eurasia under plough cultivation. Figures are difficult
to come by for medieval Europe, but the details of the Glastonbury Man-
ors are sufficiently precise to make a limited point. Here 260 holdings
were half a virgate (30 acres) or more and 350 were of 5 acres or less
(Postan 1950, p. 242). In comparing these acreages we must make al-
lowances for differences in the farming system, since in the medieval
case fallow land is included in the measurement of the holding. On the
other hand, we must remember that the virgate was only a quarter of
the acreage a family could, in theory, farm in one year, namely, a hide.
What is remarkable if viewed from the African standpoint is not so much
the overlap between the larger farms under hoe cultivation and the
smaller farms under plough, but the immensely greater potential of
plough farming and the massive inequalities of holdings in land which
it allowed.

The figures I have given are for western Europe, but elsewhere, too,
the animal-drawn plow meant a very significant leap forward in pro-
ductive capacity. Its critical role has been discussed by many writers.
Generalists like Childe (1954) and McNeill (1963) have stressed its role
in the growth of human civilization; more specifically, Hole and Flan-
nery (1967) have argued for a close relationship between the nature of
the productive system and the character of the social organization. Leach
(1947, pp. 239 ff.) has examined the difference between Shan and Kachin
in terms of the contrast between plough and shifting agriculture. The
position in Africa, whether in the savannas or the forest, is somewhat
different. But the increase in land a man can bring under cultivation
by the use of the plough is apparent in reports from northern Nigeria.
Grove noted that in the Dan Yusufu district the average holding of a hoe

16 The situation is somewhat different with forest crops such as bananas and taro,
and with intermediary crops such as yams.
Class and Marriage in Africa and Eurasia

work unit was about 8 acres, whereas a mixed farmer using a plough
“requires at least 20 acres of land if he is to make full use of his pair of
working cattle” (1957, pp. 40-41). The fact that the amount of good
farmland is limited means that only relatively few can adopt this new
technique, giving rise to considerable differences in the holding of land.
More recently Anthony and Johnston have shown the mean acreage cul-
tivated by plough farmers in this same area was three times as great as
that of hoe farmers (1968, p. 47), though the former also had somewhat
larger families.

The increase in productivity that the plough allows has two implica-
tions for stratification: It enables a ruling group to develop a much great-
er standard of living out of the agricultural surplus (to which, of course,
it makes some contribution by way of investment in machinery and
protection from interference), but it also means that the producers them-
selves are ranked on the basis of their command of the means of produc-
tion, that is, their differential access to land and equipment. Good land
for ploughing is now short; not everyone can have as much as he wants.
And here we have the basis for the difference between richer and poorer
peasants, indeed even landed and landless peasants, that characterizes
Eurasian village life.

Contrast this kulak situation with the very different rural system
described by Burton in one of the most centralized, the most highly or-
ganized states in Africa, Dahomey: “Not a tenth of the land is culti-
vated; the fallow system is universal, and when a man wants fresh
ground he merely brings a little dash to the caboceer” (1864, p. 40). Un-
der these conditions, the whole system of stratification, national as well
as local, must be very different from the kind of regime where the ruling
group has effective control of usufructuary as well as alloidal rights. If
there is a plentiful supply of land, no man need bend his knee to a lord
simply in order to get a living. It is critical to my thesis that in Africa
there were no landlord-tenant relationships, nor any institution one can
legitimately call “serfdom” or ‘“peonage.” Slavery was widespread,
though the payoff was limited. Clientship also existed, but the rewards
for voluntary subjection were either in cattle (as in Ruanda) or in politi-
cal rights over land, that is, the right to collect tax. But it was taxes
over trade goods rather than rent or tribute from agricultural produce
that contributed to the economy of the ruling class (what Marx called
“state feudal land ownership”), though income from raiding was often
the most important single source of wealth.

Relations between man and man were rarely based on differences in
landholding, either on the state or community level. Indeed, at the com-
munity level, land tended to be owned corporately by a lineage group,
though exploited by much smaller family units: The lineage might hold
American Journal of Sociology

fallow land in reserve to be distributed among its members according to
need rather than by next-of-kin inheritance (e.g., J. Goody 1956, pp.
34 ff.). While there were differences between rich and poor farmers, these
tended to be based upon the strength of one’s arm or the number of one’s
sons, rather than upon the inheritance of landed property. Broadly speak-
ing, poverty was related to labor rather than capital. Indeed many
groups conceptualize differences of wealth in terms of strength rather
than accumulation. Among the LoDagaa of northern Ghana a poor man
is a weak one (nibaalo) and a rich man is a strong one (gandaa, nikpiung),
though the phrase ‘chief of money” or “cowries” (libie na) is also used.

Since the social status and living standard of the family groups that
exploited the land were little affected by the transmission of the means
of production, there was less pressure either to individualize those rights
or to channel them to one’s offspring. In the centralized states, what
counted was the transmission of rights to hold office, where relationship
to a particular group (e.g., the ruling Gbanya in Gonja) was often as
important as a relationship to a particular person. As far as marriage
was concerned, one’s daughters were going to get a roughly similar deal
(similar to what they had experienced at home) wherever they married,
so that selection of mates by property control was less significant. Be-
cause of the absence of the plough and other capital investment in land
one man’s holding was much like another. An individual did not have to
pursue a policy of marrying people of the same socioeconomic class in
order to retain differential status because the differences (other than
political ones) were not that great. The relative cultural homogeneity we
have observed went hand in hand with the relative economic homo-
geneity.

Contrast the marriage situation in Europe. To maintain the socio-
economic standing of his sons and daughters, a man had to provide them
both with part of his property, that is, he had to practice diverging devo-
lution. In the case of a girl, her portion enabled her to acquire a husband
who would, in the well-worn phrase, “maintain her in the standard of
life to which she was accustomed”’; it also enabled her to support herself
in her widowhood through the medium of the dower. It is clear that such
a system of property distribution, which involves the establishment of
some type of conjugal fund, is difficult to operate unless marriage (mar-
riage with property) is monogamous, and it is highly significant that
monogamy is firmly associated with this Eurasian mode of transmitting
property (J. Goody 1969b, p. 63).

I have tried to associate certain kinds of marriage arrangements
(namely in-marriage)—which have a fundamental significance for con-
temporary as well as preindustrial social structure—with specific ways
of passing property between the generations (diverging devolution) and,
ETHIOPIA

The nature of the marriage transaction and the relationship to land ten-
ure are well illustrated in this country, which is African physically but
not socially.

As the Amhara had the plough,!” land had a considerable economic
value. In his account of the area around Dabra Berhan, Workneh shows
how the differences in the standard of living are related to the ownership
of land. While most farmers are poor and ‘“‘own only very small pieces
of land,” there are “great differences in the amounts of land possessed.
Some farmers have many pieces of land for farming while others have
only two or three massa, an area which may not exceed 30,000 square
metres,” that is, about 7.5 acres (1961, p. 82).

His account suggests how these differences in landholdings are related
to marriage. Sex plays “‘a great part in determining the ownership of
land and, in consequence, the standard of living and the type of educa-
tion people get. . . . [MJale children get a greater share of the land than
female children” (1961, p. 85). In most of Africa a daughter gets no
property at all from her father (who controls the productive surplus);
here at least she gets a substantial share, even though, according to the
author, a woman’s descendants are poorer than the descendants of sons.
At this point, he seems to disregard a woman’s paternal heritage. Her
status is maintained if she marries well, for then her daughter willin
turn be well provided for by the husband. It is perhaps for this reason
that “parents spend more money and care on their daughters than on
their sons. During childhood the girls are well dressed while the boys
only get enough clothes to protect themselves from the bitter weather.”
The money a parent spends on a girl clearly affects her ability to at-
tract a husband of the proper socioeconomic standing, although “even
after marriage their parents face many difficulties and spend much
money in supporting their daughters whenever they quarrel with their
husbands.”

17 Other mechanical devices used in Europe were not encouraged. Indeed they were
often actively discouraged. In 1844 Harris recorded the fact that two Greeks had
built a water mill for the king, but it was not used because of opposition from the
priests. A generation later, a French traveler reported that the king’s confessor called
the mill the work of the demon and ordered it to be burned in order to destroy the
spirit responsible. He excommunicated not only the builders but also anyone who
had brought grain to it for milling or had eaten bread produced from its flour (Pank-
hurst 1961a, p. 31).
Amhara society is differentiated not only in landholding and in stan-
dard of living but also culturally. Rich farmers have different attitudes
toward education and religion than the poor, generally being more con-
servative. But the village community is only one level of Amharic life.
Above it is a massive secular and religious hierarchy, which is again
highly differentiated in terms of landholding, standard of living, and
behavior. “The social hierarchy in traditional Ethiopia,” writes Pank-
hurst, ‘‘was very clearly defined and left its mark on many facets of
everyday life. It could be seen in class relations, in the use of different
forms of speech in addressing or referring to persons of different rank,
in different ways of dressing in the presence of superiors, equals and in-
feriors, in a series of prohibitions designed to exclude the lower orders
from certain privileges in one way or another associated with status, and
in the existence of so-called depressed classes” (196la, p. 7). These
features of the social structure were associated with extreme respect and
reticence of the inferior toward the superior and with a large number
of sumptuary laws about the wearing of colored dresses and gold jewelry,
the use of umbrellas, as well as more specifically economic privileges
like the noble’s monopoly of brewing honey wine (tej) and the prohibi-
tion upon anyone killing a cow ‘without leave from the lord of the
country” (Alvarez 1881, pp. 408-9). ‘In the time of our fathers and
grandfathers,” the Tigre nobles declared when giving judgment in a
case of this kind, “persons found with tej in their houses were deprived
of their land, persons discovered sleeping on leather beds had their
riches taken away from them’”’ (Pankhurst 1961a; see also Pankhurst
1961b; Levine 1965).

Differences between statuses and restrictions upon the behavior of
social groups occurred in other centralized states in Africa, particularly
where their economies were based upon the coastal trade or upon military
supremacy. My argument is not that such restrictions were absent but
that, despite these rules, the African hierarchy, whether of persons or
groups, was less highly differentiated in a qualitative sense, even though
the number of steps in that hierarchy might be the same as in Eurasia.
One reason was the limited amount that upper-status groups were able
to remove from the system of agricultural production and the conse-
quent restrictions on the development of economically based subcultures.
be too abstract and too Eurasian to account for the facts at our com-
mand, especially those about Africa where the social groupings in a
politically differentiated society are not necessarily in-marrying groups,
though many sociologists have seen these as a universal feature of strati-
fied systems. A realization of this fact will make general statements less
general but more valid. However, I am not simply concerned with social
theory in the abstract, nor yet with social history in a more concrete
sense, but also with understanding the modern situation (though I
would argue that the dichotomy between modern and traditional does
not take us very far). The realization that marriage policy is a variable
has important implications for the relationship within and between so-
cieties; where integration is desired, exogamy or at least “preferential
out-marriage” (the mixed marriage, in fact) is clearly the most effec-
tive way of achieving that end. But here I am primarily concerned with
the implications for African societies. There has been a lot of discussion
by politicians as well as sociologists as to the role of classes in the emer-
gent political systems of Africa, much of it dogmatic, ideological, and
uninspired. Broadly speaking, African politicians, especially those ad-
vocating African socialism, have argued against the existence of a class
system in traditional society. For Nkrumah, at least before 1964, Africa
was classless; so too for Senghor, Touré, and Nyerere, the last of whom
wrote: “I doubt if the equivalent for the word ‘class’ exists in an in-
digenous African language; for language describes the ideas of those who
speak it, and the idea of ‘class’ and ‘caste’ was non-existent in African
society” (1962; 1968, p. ii). In making such statements, the writers did
not mean that there were no status groups in the earlier period, nor that
classes (in the European sense) were not now emerging under present
conditions. But while European Marxists and non-Marxists alike were
attempting to fit Africa into their own developmental schema, these
Africans claimed there was an important difference in the socioeconomic
structure, though they were unable to state clearly what this was. Look-
ing at this whole problem, Grundy has suggested that “the denial of
social classes is a device utilised by ruling elites to bolster their regimes”
(1964, p, 392). As far as the emergent sector goes, this statement un-
doubtedly holds some truth; our current terminology enables new elites
to enjoy high office and high living if their superior position is not stigma-
tized as “class.” But there is more to the question than this. As I have
tried to show, the traditional system of status groups in African states
did in fact differ in certain major respects from the Eurasian model.
African politicians hint at this when they speak of the socialist or com-
munal aspects of land tenure. The Soviet Africanist, I. Potekhin, touched
upon the same point when he abandoned his earlier view that Africa dis-
played a “patriarchal type of feudalism” and realized that ‘in the great
majority of African countries the class differentiation of the peasantry
is still insignificant” (1963, p. 39). But much obscurity still remains be-
cause the analysis has not been pushed far enough, and neither sociolo-
gists nor politicians have tried to answer the crucial question of why
such differences existed. When they think about it, some writers (e.g.,
Abraham 1962) resort to unsatisfactory types of explanations (because
they are circular) which are phrased in terms of the African personality
or pan-African culture. Or, like Marx and Weber, they introduce a series
of further subdivisions in their types of (for example) feudal or tradi-
tional societies, which, if more useful, is still somewhat limiting, since it
drowns the attempt to discover correlations in a flood of descriptive cate-
gorizations.

There is one other concrete aspect of the change connected with the
new political, economic, and educational systems in Africa that has re-
ceived little attention and which is seen particularly clearly when we take
up the contrast with Europe. When there is a change in the relative
political and economic position of a Eurasian aristocracy, whether be-
cause of conquest, democracy, industrialization, or the rise of new skills,
the families involved still have their land and other possessions on which
to fall back—providing that the change stops short of complete dis-
possession. This property gives them a lever on the new dispensation and
helps them preserve a privileged position, even if this has been modified
by events. Many European writers have tended to see African chiefships
in just such a “feudal” mode and ask the same sort of question about
the relation between traditional and modern elites as would be appro-
priate for the post-Reformation period in Europe. As a result, they are
anxious to perceive and describe the situation in terms of class conflict.
But, except in exceptional cases, African chiefs were sustained by tem-
porary political dominion rather than by persisting economic power (if
we can make a crude distinction), and so could put up little resistance
to the changes brought about first by colonial rule and then by indepen-
dent governments. In any case, chiefs are now a set of individuals, an
interest group, rather than a class in the socioeconomic sense. Their kin
share in their preeminence only to a limited extent and easily fit into the
modern system, for they have little to gain from sticking to the old. In
such a situation, the system of elites and of stratification generally is
likely to be much more fluid than in Eurasia, and the educational ladder
is likely to receive more emphasis as the road to success. “Africa’s golden
road,” to use Kwesi Armah’s less-than-fortunate phrase, lies in the
fluidity of its system of stratification, which in turn is related to pat-
terns of marriage and of agricultural production. It is critical to note
that in all the postindependence upheaval that has taken place on that
continent, little violence has been directed toward superior strata, apart
from the colonial rulers themselves. The peasants have revolted against
indigenous rulers in two places, Ruanda and Zanzibar, exactly those
places where the marriage system stresses the isolation of the political
elite. In other parts, the stress on open conubium has tended to produce
considerable vertical homogeneity within any area, though this in
turn has perhaps increased the differentiation between tribes. Thus
the greater fluidity of status is counterbalanced by greater rigidity of
tribe; the political results of one are as apparent as the other.

The immediate reason lies in the marriage system. Beyond that lies
the basic differences in the nature of agricultural production. Under
Eurasian conditions, there is a tendency toward close rather than distant
marriages, toward in-marriage and endogamy rather than out-marriage
and exogamy. In Africa, on the other hand, the ownership of land was
not the main key to economic achievement. The agricultural output of
work groups varied within fairly confined limits and in this respect the
society was relatively homogeneous. Marriage policy was therefore less
firmly directed toward the matching of like with like.

Tylor pointed out that exogamy created ties between groups, thus
increasing interaction, whereas endogamy was a policy of isolation. When
differences in landholding are a major factor in the social hierarchy and
when property is conveyed through marriage and inheritance, a premium
is placed upon in-marriage rather than out-marriage, upon endogamy
rather than exogamy. This is particularly the case where, to preserve
the standing of daughters as well as sons, property is distributed bilater-
ally (that is, to both sexes) by the process of diverging devolution. This
policy of isolation leads to variations of behavior within the culture
which tend to crystallize out in gentry subcultures or in differences be-
tween richer peasants, poorer peasants, and those with no land at all,
a rural proletariat.
Duby, G. 1962. L’économie rurale et la vie des campagnes dans l’occident médiéval—
France, Angleterre, Empire IX°-XV° siécles: essai de synthése et perspectives de re-
cherches. 2 vols. Paris: Aubier, Editions Montaigne.

Folson, K. 1969. ‘‘An African Tragedy.” Encounter 33:35-43.

Friedl, E. 1962. Vasilika: A Village in Modern Greece. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.

Girard, A. 1964. Le choix du conjoint. Institute national d’études démographiques.
Travaux et documents no. 44. Paris: Presses Universitaires.

Goody, E. N. 1962. ‘“‘Conjugal Separation and Divorce among the Gonja of Northern
Ghana.” In Marriage in Tribal Societies, edited by M. Fortes. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

. 1969. “Kinship Fostering in Gonja: Deprivation or Advantage.” In Socializa-
tion: The Approach from Social Anthropology, edited by P. Mayer. London: Tavi-
stock.

Goody, J. 1956. The Social Organisation of the LoWiili. London: Her Majesty’s Sta-
tionery Office.

. 1958. “Fission of Domestic Groups among the LoDagaba.” In The Develop-

ment Cycle in Domestic Groups, edited by J. Goody. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-

versity Press.

. 1962. Death, Property and the Ancestors. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University

Press.

. 1963. ‘Feudalism in Africa?” Journal of African History 4:1-18.

. 1967. “The Over-Kingdom of Gonja.”’ In West African Kingdoms, edited by

D. Forde and P. M. Kaberry. London: Oxford University Press.

. 1968. ‘Rotational Succession among the Gonja.”’ In Succession to High Office,

edited by J. Goody. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

. 1969a. “Feudalism and Technology in Africa.” Economic History Review 22:

393-405.

. 1969b. “Inheritance, Property, and Marriage in Africa and Eurasia.” Sociol-

ogy 3:55-76.

. 1969c. “Marriage Policy and Incorporation in Northern Ghana.” In Com-
parative Studies in Kinship. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Goody, J., B. Irvine, and N. Tahany. ‘Causal Implications concerning Property.”
Human. Relations (forthcoming).

Grove, A. T. 1957. Land and Population in Katsina Province. Kaduna: Government
Printer.

Grundy, K. W. 1964. “The Class Struggle in Africa: An Examination of Conflicting
Theories.” Journal of Modern African Studies 2:379-93.

Habbakuk, H. J., 1950. “Marriage Settlement in the Eighteenth Century.” Transac-
tions of the Royal Historical Society 32: 15-30.

. 1955. “Daniel Finch, Second Earl of Nottingham: His House and Estate.”
In Studies in Social History, edited by J. H. Plumb. London: Longmans, Green.

Hiller, E. T. 1933. Principles of Sociology. New York: Harper.

Hole, F., and K. V. Flannery. 1967. “The Pre-History of Southwestern Iran: A Pre-
liminary Report.” Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 33: 147-206.

Hollingshead, A. B. 1950. “Cultural Factors in the Selection of Marriage Mates.”
American Sociological Review 15:619-27.

Holmes, G. A. 1957. The Estates of the Higher Nobility in Fourteenth Century England.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Homans, G. C. 1941. English Villagers of the Thirteenth Century. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

Kapadia, K. M. 1966. Marriage and the Family in India. 3d ed. Bombay: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Leach, E. 1947. “Cultural Change with Special Reference to the Hill Tribes of Burma
and Assam.” Ph.D. thesis, University of London.

, ed. 1960. Aspects of Caste in South India, Ceylon, and Northwest Pakistan.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levine, D. N. 1965. Wax and Gold. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Llyn, C. W. 1942. “Agriculture in North Mamprussi: A Review of a Decade’s Prog-
ress.” Farm and Forest 3:78-83.

McNeill, W. H. 1963. The Rise of the West. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Merton, R. 1941. “Intermarriage and the Social Structure: Fact and Theory.” Psy-
chiatry 4:361-74. Reprinted in R. L. Coser, ed. The Family: Its Structure and Its
Functions. New York: St. Martin’s, 1964.

Mousnier, Roland. 1969. Les hiérarchies sociales de 1450 & nos jours. Paris: Presses
Universitaires.

Nadel, 8. F. 1942. A Black Byzantium. London: Oxford University Press.

Nyerere, J., 1962. ““Ujamaa”’: The Basis of African Socialism. Reprinted in ‘Ujamaa.’
Essays on Socialism (1968). Dar es Salaam: Oxford University Press.

Pankhurst, R. 1961a. “Status, Division of Labour and Employment in Nineteenth
Century and Early Twentieth Century Ethiopia.” Ethnological Society Bulletin
(University College of Addis Ababa) 2:6-58.

. 1961b. An Introduction to the Economic History of Ethiopia. London: La-
libela House.

Parsons, T. 1964. ‘‘The Place of Force in Social Process.” In Internal War, edited by
H. Eckstein). New York: Free Press.

Pauvert, J-C. 1955. ‘Le probléme des classes sociales en Afrique équatoriale.’”’ Ca-
hiers internationaux de sociologie 19:76-91.

Postan, M. 1950. “‘“Some Economic Evidence of Declining Population in the Latter
Middle Ages.” Economic History Review, n.s. 2:221-246.

Potekhin, I. I. 1963. ‘“Suand Relations in African Countries.”’ Journal of Modern Afri-
can Studies 1:39-59.

Redwar, H. W. H. 1909. Comments on Some Ordinances of the Gold Coast Colony. Lon-
don: Sweet & Maxwell.

Stone, L. 1960-61. “Marriage among the English Nobility in the 16th and 17th Cen-
turies.’”’ Comparative Studies in Society and History 3: 182-206.

. 1967. The Crisis of the Aristocracy, 1658-1641. London: Oxford University
Press.

Thrupp, S. L. 1948. The Merchant Class of Medieval London, 1300-1500. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Workneh, Y. 1961. “‘An Essay on Community Life.” Ethnological Society Bulletin
(University College of Addis Ababa) 2:82-91.
