Politics and Markets: Dual Transformations

Author(s): William L. Parish and Ethan Michelson

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Tan., 1996), pp. 1042-1059
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782238

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:16 UTC
SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES

The articles in this issue deal with different parts of an A > B > C
causal chain, where A includes background conditions that shape market
outcomes, B includes market outcomes, and C includes the power and
income consequences of markets. Stark emphasizes the A — B transition.
Nee emphasizes the B — C transition. In the A — B transition, Stark
stresses that there are multiple types of market outcomes. In Hungary
there is a special type of network intensive, part-public, part-private,
recombinant property relations that are in some ways analogous to the
network-based economic networks in the East Asia periphery. For Stark
(1992), these outcomes vary from place to place and are determined in
large part by the path dependence established by the ruins of the old
order and by early decisions in the reform process. Nee, as well, in laying
out multiple regions in China, implies that there are multiple types of
market outcomes. Thus, for both authors, there is not a single B but
multiple B’s (B,, B,, B;, etc.). Despite noting multiple market outcomes,
Nee appears to assume convergence on a single set of consequences.
There is but one C. This strong assertion is potentially problematic and
seemingly at odds with the attempt to introduce a more institutionalist
account of the consequences of different market structures.
Political Markets

What are our suggestions for making further progress concerning either
the determinants or consequences of different market and quasi-market
solutions? They include, first, building on some of Stark’s earlier themes
about bargaining and path dependence (Sabel and Stark 1982; Stark
1992). Prior to reform, some groups of workers and industries were privi-
leged in bargaining with management and the state bureaucracy. Particu-
larly in China, this bargaining was assisted by shared residence of work-
ers and managers in work-unit-owned housing and by long years of work
in the same job uninterrupted by interfirm or residential mobility. The
dense networks that resulted, assisted in China by many kin being ap-
pointed to the same firm, helped create social solidarity mechanisms that
could be used against managers and the state bureaucrats that were
supposed to monitor firms (see, e.g., Tidrick and Chen 1987; Parish 1979;
Walder 1987, 1989). In China, with a loosening of central top-down
control in the mid-1980s, these kinds of informal bargaining mechanisms
could be brought into full play. The result was that, after the mid-1980s,
workers’ incomes again began to rise, even while central planners were
saying that incomes should be contained. Facing informal worker resis-
tance, state firms had difficulty moving to merit salary schemes, and
old seniority-based payment schemes supplemented by hidden subsidies
remained in place. Urban incomes again began to rise compared to in-
comes in the countryside (SSB 1994). Though the details vary, and
though more firms were failing or being sold off, similar patterns of
bargaining were occurring in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Eu-
rope (see, e.g., Blanchard et al. 1993; Burawoy and Krotov 1992).

What these patterns illustrate is that a simple story of economic mar-
ketization will not do. In the transition, the liberalization of political
markets is often as important as the liberalization of economic markets.
The discussion of newly liberalized political markets must attend to three
types of politics. One type that must be included involves formal and
informal bargaining between workers and managers and between manag-
ers and the state bureaucracy. Once central control is loosened, informal
bargaining among formal and informal groups comes to the fore. It is
this bargaining that helps explain major parts of the finding of continuity
in the Xie and Hannum paper in this issue of AJS. In China, through
the early 1990s, workers and managers were so tied together and so
well organized that major parts of the state reform program could be
resisted.

Thus, the types of market compromises that will be arrived at depends
as much on bargaining in more participatory political systems as it does
on some underlying economic dynamic. This echoes themes from writers
on market societies. In developing market societies, inequality in income
and social services between city and village and between different seg-
ments of the population depends less on the market than on the bar-
gaining power of different social groups. In more participatory systems,
that bargaining power can be more easily expressed, leading to a tension
between participatory and egalitarian goals in society (e.g., Huntington
and Nelson 1976; Bates 1981; Lipton 1977; see also North 1981; Olson
1982; Rubinson and Browne 1994.). Since reforming socialist societies
are not only introducing more market principles but also becoming more
participatory, the consequences of new space for political mobilization
cannot be ignored.”

A second type of politics involves the continuing need to have linkages
with state bureaucrats and state-run enterprises. As Stark suggests
above, one way to spread risks in an uncertain environment with few
well-specified property rights is to include current and former state offi-
cials in one’s economic network. Once established, these networks may
well have a life of their own that provides a kind of path dependence.
There is an ample literature on East Asia about continuing government
roles in the economy. Though rancorously divided over the productive
versus nonproductive role of state involvement, this literature suggests
that mixed solutions with ample government involvement have great
staying power (e.g., Wade 1990; Evans 1995; Amsden 1989; Johnson
1982; Friedman 1988; Ramseyer and Rosenbuth 1993). Similarly, Shirk
(1993) argues that Chinese political arrangements are slow to evolve from
their initial forms despite potentially perverse economic consequences.
This continuity, or path dependence, suggests that entrepreneurs with
strong network ties to state firms and state bureaucrats as sources of
raw materials, marketing outlets, and official protection will be greatly
advantaged.* The rising levels of patronage, corruption, and so on, sug-
gest that many economic actors in China recognize these advantages
(Yang 1994; Rocca 1992). Similarly, the history of critical junctures and
stable arrangements in Latin America, where governments early assumed
a major role in economic regulation, suggests that one should expect
continuity rather than rapid shifts in current arrangements (e.g., Collier
and Collier 1991; de Soto 1989). In short, we want to reinforce Stark’s dual
messages about the attractiveness of mixed public/private arrangements
and the staying power of these arrangements once they are in place.

A third type of political market involves electoral politics. These elec-
toral politics are more rudimentary in China than in Europe. But even
in China, regional elections since the mid-1980s and village council elec-
tions since 1988 provide the potential for new electoral politics that could
enhance rather than retard local clientelism (O’Brien 1994; Lawrence
1994). In other developing societies, marketization often causes clientel-
ism not to disappear but only to mutate from traditional to modern forms.
In these societies, during autarkic premarket conditions, patron-client
relations are essentially patrimonial, and are rooted in dependence and
vertical asymmetrical exchange. Then, with increased national-level eco-
nomic integration and state intervention, local elites come to assume the
role of bridge ties and mediators. And it is this economic and political
mediation between still-segmented and separated locales that gives rise
to a new kind of clientelism: government-based political patronage (Ei-
senstadt and Roniger 1984, pp. 204-5; Weingrod 1977, p. 326; Graziano
1977, 367—72). These tendencies are often exacerbated by electoral poli-
tics, as it is in the interest of the local politician to dispense favors in
return for votes (Scott 1977, p. 140; Weingrod 1977, p. 328; Eisenstadt
and Roniger 1984, pp. 66-68; Putnam 1993). In these situations, local
politicians become part of a pattern of generalized exchange that has
considerable staying power.

In contemporary rural China, several of these mechanisms potentially
affect the power base of local administrators. First, economic liberaliza-
tion coupled with local fiscal autonomy—where surplus profits from local
government-owned ventures are retained locally after submitting prefixed
(not sliding-scale) tax payments to higher levels—has given rise to tre-
mendous local state economic initiative and activity, often dubbed “local
state corporatism” (Oi 1992; also see Wong 1992). The economically
valuable social ties to outside locales possessed in relative abundance by
local cadres makes these elites particularly well suited to play their new
brokerage roles (see Huang [1989, pp. 143-45] for a vivid illustration).
Under these types of conditions, new local elections could easily stimulate
political patronage networks centered around locally elected officials and
councilors.

In short, we are trying to promote the idea that, in contrast to the
economistic approach adopted by Nee in this issue, institutional forms
under marketizing conditions often follow a political logic. Our somewhat
revisionist “market transition” perspective suggests that, for at least as
much political as economic reasons, local administrators may well con-
tinue to hold onto considerable local power—not only despite, but be-
cause of marketization.
Other Developing Societies

Next, we turn to the suggestion that one should include more middle-level
generalizations from other developing economies. This theme is already
implicit in the suggestion to pay attention to the path dependence of state
involvement in the economies of Latin America (Collier and Collier 1991)
and the role of electoral politics in supporting political clientelism. We
need to extend these themes.

It is commonplace to suggest that markets weaken traditional political
authority at both the national and local level. Authors such as Barrington
Moore (1966) and Charles Tilly (1990) make marketization the center-
piece of their explanations of why some societies turned early democratic.
For sociologists familiar with American social history, Doug McAdam
(1982) makes the expansion of labor markets and the movement of tenant
farmers away from the farm to cities central in explaining how the civil
rights movement had more space for mobilization after the 1930s. For
social scientists with a broader comparative scope, Joel Migdal (1974)
provides an excellent summary of a comparative literature on peasant
societies, including pre-1949 China and the periphery of China. In that
summary, Migdal notes that the expansion of markets beyond village
bounds allows peasants to escape the thumb of local authority figures.
That escape is mediated by state intervention. When the state chooses
to use the village as an administrative unit, the escape is sometimes
slowed. And even when peasants escape local village authority, they may
find themselves newly tied to local township and county officials.

These types of observations suggest several paths for further analysis
of rural power. One, already implicit in the discussion of clientelism, is
to make the consideration of local power broader. Income is but one very
indirect indicator of local power. Villagers may remain beholden to power
holders in multiple ways that are unreflected in the take-home pay of
administrators. One indicator, already in the Nee health-based data set,
is to observe whether frequent invitations to banquets and gifts of food
and liquor have added to the alcohol and food consumption and subse-
quent body weight of local officials (CCO 1989, questionnaire D). Other
studies could use more ethnographic methods to access the means by
which villagers may still be tied to local administrators, including the
presence of administrators on boards of directors of new private endeav-
ors, frequent visits and gifts to local administrators, and so on. The
works by Wank (1995) and Yan (1995) suggest that this pattern is com-
mon in both coastal and interior regions of China.

A second path of potential analysis, based on Migdal’s observations,
is to attend to whether local village administrators are simply being re-
placed by a greater panoply of township and county administrators that
intervene in many economic and daily affairs. In reform China, the mas-
sive expansion of middle- and lower-level state bureaucracies suggest
that this may be exactly what is occurring (Lee 1991, pp. 271-72). Be-
tween 1978 and 1993, the total number of government bureaucrats as a
percentage of the total labor force increased by about 50%, from 1.1%
to 1.7% (SSB 1994, pp. 86-89). Most of this expansion was at lower
levels, including enlarged county and township governments. Thus, gov-
ernment administrators are not disappearing with marketization but
growing in number and diversity of functions. The issue for ethnographic
research would be to see how often villagers must interact with this
increasing diversity of regional bureaucrats.

A third path for research is to make more explicit the mechanisms that
are already implicit in the Nee data analysis. There are at least three
measures that resonate with the Migdal/McAdam discussion of local au-
thority control of resources and access to external markets. These include
nonfarm jobs in extravillage labor markets (labeled “labor market”),
administrator control of access to these jobs (“government finds nonfarm
jobs”), and village/township ownership of local enterprises (“production
markets”). One can complain about some of these measures—for exam-
ple, the last measure is for number of enterprises, while it is the size of
these enterprises that must be more important for local labor markets.
Nevertheless, when explicitly related to middle-level propositions drawn
from an earlier comparative literature, the measures provide additional
possibilities for analysis. In villages with few locally owned enterprises
and with many outside jobs to which villagers have free access uncon-
strained by local administrator approvals, local administrators should
have less power. If the familiar external-market-access ideas are correct,
then, when these measures interact with administrator income, consump-
tion, and body weight in new equations, the resulting coefficients should
be negative and significant. Thus, many old ideas can be tested with
data that is already in hand.
resulting stability in findings for high and low growth cities are unsurpris-
ing. Nevertheless, to expect that change would occur for all age groups
and in all sectors—both state and nonstate—is to impose a demanding
test. One expects that change will occur much more slowly among mid-
career state workers than among new hires. Similarly, one expects change
to occur much more slowly in the state sector, with its entrenched bar-
gaining groups, than in the expanding nonstate sector, where these
groups have not yet formed or where they have fewer solidaristic or
other bargaining resources. It is this nonstate sector—including urban
collective, private, self-employed, and joint ventures—that was growing
the most rapidly in the late 1980s.

Finally, comparative standards must be set straight. Returns to educa-
tion vary radically by type of market economy. The market economy
that in many ways most closely resembles China’s nonstate sector is
that of Taiwan. There too, small firms dominate in a highly competitive
environment with few internal labor markets that might allow high re-
turns to high school and college education. In that environment, returns
to education are among the lowest in the world—approximately 4% for
each year of education in the private, nonfarm sector (see Psacharopoulos
[1994] for other countries). Fortunately, there is already an analysis which
takes all these considerations into account (Maurer-Fazio 1994; also see
Zaks 1994). This analysis shows that, much as in the Xie and Hannum
analysis, there is very little regional variation—fast-growing, coastal,
laissez-faire regions have no perceptibly higher return to education. How-
ever, in great contrast to Xie and Hannum, Maurer-Fazio demonstrates
that nationwide there are increasing returns to education among new
hires (workers younger than age 30) and particularly among those in the
unprotected, bargaining-weak nonstate sector. Moreover, the returns for
young workers are highly parallel to rates of return to young workers in
Taiwan. This suggests, contra Xie and Hannum, that labor markets
have begun to emerge in Chinese cities and that these markets are not
confined to coastal, fast-growing cities but are much more widespread.*
late 1980s timing is the same as in the Nee analysis, only the data set is
different and there are a few changes in measurement. In order to ensure
stable estimates of county-level employment rates and county-level mean
household income (an important control variable), counties with fewer
than 20 households or fewer than 20 laborers were dropped from the
analysis. After these exclusions, the individual-level data set includes
27,367 laborers, while the household-level data set includes 9,062 house-
holds. Both sample populations span 244 counties in 27 provinces.

We assume that most rural labor markets continue to be confined to a
single county. Accordingly, we classify the 244 sample counties by the
average characteristics of labor in each county. Though we allow for
county-level variation within provinces while Nee assumes uniformity
within provinces, our classification parallels in many ways his original
designation of regions.° Counties where nonfarm workers constitute no
more than one-fifth of the total labor force are classified as premarket
or, in Nee’s terminology, “inland,” which indeed most of them are.

Counties with more than one-fifth of the labor force in nonfarm em-
ployment are classified as “marketized,” or “coastal,” and these are
then subdivided into three groups. The first, “laissez-faire” group in-
cludes counties where more nonfarm labor is employed in the private
sector than in collective or local state-owned enterprises. Though some
of these counties cluster along the southern coast, as in Nee, there is a
scattering of these counties in other parts of China as well. In many of
these areas, there is what we have elsewhere called a “backing-into-the-
future” pattern, with people lacking other opportunities taking to small-
scale self-employed activities (Parish et al. 1995). The second, “corporat-
ist” group of “coastal” counties includes nonsuburban counties where
more nonfarm labor is in collective or local state work units than in
private-sector work units. As in Nee’s study, these are concentrated in
the eastern coastal provinces. The third, “suburban” group includes
counties abutting major cities. This is our substitution for Nee’s “redis-
tributive” region. It consists mostly of the hinterland of the three mega-
cities of Shanghai, Beijing, and Tianjin as well as the hinterland of a
few inland cities. These places are special not only in high levels of
collective and state ownership but also in opportunities for villagers to
commute to work in cities.

Arrayed in four groups—one inland and three coastal—these regions
follow a regular order. As one moves from the “inland” to the suburban
regions, there is a steady increase in both income and in the chances for
nonfarm employment (table 1, parts A and B). This suggests much higher
levels of labor demand in the final regions and much lower levels of labor
demand in the initial regions. Thus, somewhat at variance with Nee, we
expect the most open market for labor not in the laissez-faire but in the
suburban regions.

Also in contrast to Nee, we use a somewhat different and more restric-
tive definition of “administrator.” The debate about power transfers and
lingering positional advantage refers not to run-of-the-mill civil servants,
a category that seems to dominate the very high 13% of all families with
administrator connections in the Nee data set. Rather it refers to the top
leaders of townships and villages, who may or may not reap additional
rewards from their control of new rural industry. Accordingly, we restrict
our attention to administrators, leaving aside the many other folk who
have jobs as postal clerks and as other kinds of government clerical and
service workers.

Even the administrator’s role needs a slightly different imagery. Much
of the debate seems centered around the image of the “local despot.”
Just as often, we suggest, the proper image is that of the local “volunteer
fireman.” Most of the communities these administrators lead are quite
small—administrative villages (cun) average only 280 households and
townships (xiang) average only 5,000 households. The village leaders are
not on a state salary but only on local subsidies. The result is much as for
fire departments in small U.S. hamlets and towns. Most small American
communities with few fires and a weak tax base neither need nor can
afford full-time, professional fire fighters. They make do with volunteers.

Consistent with the firefighter metaphor, most Chinese rural adminis-
trators fill this capacity only part-time. Nationally, they are split almost
equally into three groups—the full-timers, the part-timers who consider
administration their first job, and the part-timers who consider adminis-
tration only their second job (table 1, part C, right column). Much like
volunteer firefighters, the distribution of local leaders follows a regular
pattern. The number of administrators increases steadily with the in-
creasing income, economic diversity, and, by inference, size of local com-
munities—ranging from a low of 1.3% to a high of 3.5% of all laborers
in the community (part B).’ Also, as income and size increase, adminis-
trators tend to move from part-time to full-time work (part C). Similarly,
in other analysis, in corporatist and suburban regions, with many collec-
tively owned enterprises that are easily taxed, administrator income in-
ely 9¢ O2T by 717 sioyer}sIUIUIpe JO “ON,
TOOT 0°O0T 0°00T 0°00T 000T * % [ROL
vse oss” 8st Ss62 ory * uonednoso Arepuodas sv JoyeI}sTUTUIpy
0°82 68°8¢ 19°9€ cele 6r'61 uonyednas0 Areuttid se soyexystUTUpy
1-98 9s'ss OsLe £L°27 £0°9¢ “* uonednss0 alos se 10yeNsTUTUIpy
1(%) sdoyestutupe Jo sadAy, “-
L9e‘Lz ¥20'T £L0b sto'z $$z‘0z s1ax0qe] JO “ON
at se 67 ve eT “"* (%) sloyex}sIUIWIpY *Z
vor vor Le ae 68 (%) YOM waeyuou Auy *T
ceyep jeuoryedns909 “g
290'6 88e vert £69 Lss‘9 * spjoyasnoy jo “ony
o0z‘e o0s‘r 000‘r ooe‘e (00) St (wong) awoour jenuue ueIpey
raurooUT pjoyasnoyy “y
dIOHM V ueqingng ysterodi0_, alte q-zasste’y GNVIN]
sv NOLLVN
‘IVLSVOD

 

 

VLIVQ NOILVdND90 GNV ANOONT

T OTaViL
creases along with community income.® In inland and laissez-faire re-
gions, where taxation is more problematic, community income is
unrelated to administrator income (details not shown).

These volunteer firemen types of relationships suggest a potentially
benign link between leadership and income. Incomes are determined by
shared community and leader needs. In larger, more complex, and more
affluent communities, it is not only the community that needs more
“fires” put out. Local leaders, busy with more tasks, find less time for
second jobs and, hence, need more income from their first, administrator
job. When adequate taxing ability exists, the community responds with
higher payments. This “natural” relation between type of community
and income calls into question the use of income as a measure of adminis-
trator power. The most despotic or arbitrary leaders may well be those
in small, poor communities who have few economic resources to use as a
carrot to induce compliance. In poor communities, the coercive stick—or
resignation from office—may be the leader’s only recourse (see O’Brien
1994, p. 53; Rozelle 1994, p. 123).

Resignations (and retirement) are common, it would seem. The average
age for village and town administrators remained at only 41 in 1988,
suggesting little increase over the decade. Over the same time period,
education levels rose steadily, suggesting that administrators were in-
creasingly not old-style local despots but part of an emerging technocratic
leadership core.’ In short, the community leaders in place at the end of
the 1980s were a quite different lot from those who went before them.
Though the group remained mostly male, they were a new, more highly
educated group.

Even if a “different lot” and even if there is a community need for
highly professionalized leaders with better incomes, there could still be
special returns to authority. Local leaders could have an array of adminis-
trative ties that would advantage themselves and their family members.
We can examine two potential advantages that would provide additional
returns to authority. The first potential return is the ability to secure
a better nonfarm job for family members. The exact kind of “power
transference” attempted might well vary by region. In inland regions,
with few nonfarm work opportunities, a job as a manual worker might
seem extremely desirable. In corporatist regions, with many collectively
run enterprises, and with unskilled labor shortages filled by in-migrating
external workers, the most desirable jobs might be found in enterprise
management.

In the late 1980s job results largely followed this pattern (table 2).
Using the CHIP data set, we ask whether having a local leader in one’s
family helped one avoid farming in favor of a more desirable nonfarm
jobs. There are four job alternatives: (1) managers and technical workers,
with the latter including technicians, teachers, and other professionals,
(2) administrators and clerical workers, with both groups including peo-
ple who worked for county as well as local government, (3) entrepreneurs
and the self-employed (geti hu), and (4) manual workers, both temporary
and permanent in places ranging from state enterprises to local collective
enterprises. Though we report only the coefficients for having a local
leader in one’s household, the underlying equations also included controls
for age, age squared, education, gender, and mean household income of
the county.’°

The issue is whether having an administrator in the household advan-
tages an individual household member in the labor market.'! The an-
swer, contra Nee, is that it does (table 2).? And, that advantage, though
differing in specific content, is present in all regions. In inland regions,
manual work seems to be the choice for administrator families. In laissez-
faire regions, both administrative and entrepreneurial roles are chosen.
As expected, in corporatist regions, with many collectively run enter-
prises, both managerial and administrative type jobs are popular among
administrator families. In suburban regions, managerial and technical
jobs predominate among administrator families. In short, the major story
for local leaders seems to be one not so much of getting ahead or falling
behind but one of selective adaptation. Members of administrator fami-
lies drift towards the best jobs available in their region.
‘TO > d xx
“SO > dx
*(eWOOUT Ployasnoy uveUT JaAe]-AJUNOD pa8Zo]) awooUT AWTUNUITOD
pue ‘Japue ‘uoreonpe ‘,a8e ‘a8e apnpour suonenbe Zurdjepun ayy Ur Suis} UMOYsUOU ‘1ayIO “a[qnop saduRY> S,9U0 SazBIPUT 0O'Z JO amsy Y “suo}2eUUOD aIped Jo
asneoaq asvaisep Jou aseaJU! JeyzoU Gof Jenoted v BuIyIe3 Jo saoueyo S,aU0 Jey} SayeoIpuT OO'T Jo any y “seULILy v BurUIOIaq 0} paredurod ‘249 ‘Joyersturwpe ‘“Jaseueul
 Surwmoseq jo ,.YSU 2ANPIAI,, ay} MOYS saINZy ay} ‘Jaquisur axpes v YM Aprueyz e wlosy apdoad 10.4 ‘siséTeue WOT [etWoUNNUT v WOIy paAtiap st UUUNIOD YIe|—"ALON

 

 

 

  

 

 

LOC‘ LZ y20'T £L0'r st0‘z ssz‘oz SqaI0qe] JO “ON
%69°T 19'T ell 80°T x9 L'T sree JaxzOM TENUBYAL
#4907 rh LT xx6b'Z LT * pakoydura-sjas/mauaidanug
axfl€ oz2 x89°7 #988 ELT rr xaxdoas TeoLT9DD /AoyeHSTUTUPY
xa fh'Z «16°S aex08"E vs LST oe" Jay1OM TesTUYyI}/1IseUe AL
TIOHM V ueqinqns ysnesodio_ ‘aare q-Zasste'T aNVINI
SV NOILYN

‘TwLsvoD.

 

 

(soney ASty PANeEY) SNOLLIINNOD FAAVD ANV SNOLLVdNI9O TWACIAIGN

@ ATaVL
The second possible return to administrative position is in total house-
hold income. Much as in Nee’s table 2, we examine logged household
income in 1988. Potential determinants that are used as controls include
mean age and education of all household labor, logged county-level
household income, and household farm and nonfarm labor. Our principal
interest, of course, is in the influence of cadre connections on household
income. And, given the weak hypothesis that cadre income suffers not
in absolute amount but only in relation to other forms of nonfarm employ-
ment, we also compare the family’s advantages from having a cadre to
those from having an extra nonfarm worker. The results show positive
returns to cadre administrative position in all regions (table 3). In net
returns (row 1), cadre households do almost 40% better than the average
farm household. Thus, in absolute amount, the administrator’s income
advantage had not disappeared by 1988.'* Nor had the absolute amount
of the administrator’s income begun to decline in more marketized
regions. '*

This still leaves the issue of whether families with nonfarm workers
were gaining on administrator families. This is the new, more modest,
Nee proposal. The answer is no. (table 3, row 2). Even in the highest
labor demand areas with highest incomes, a major gap remains between
administrator income and that of the average nonfarm worker.'> To be
sure, some nonfarm workers are fabulously successful, and the envy of
administrators and everyone else around them. Also, in the suburbs,
government clerical workers (probably included in Nee’s “cadre” cate-
gory) fall behind other nonfarm workers, which explains reports of grow-
ing discontent among run-of-the-mill civil servants (details not shown).
Nevertheless, when one restricts one’s attention to a comparison between
local leaders and the average nonfarm worker, the leaders still remain
far in the lead.

This full set of findings is so at variance with the Nee findings that
surely more analysis on a variety of data sets will have to be done.
Though some of the specific conclusions from our tentative analysis may
fall, we think some things will stand. These will include observations
that run-of-the-mill civil servants and local leaders have quite different
fates in the new order, observations that local leaders engage in selective
adaptation fitted to their region, and observations that the leaders them-
selves are changing as the new order evolves. The final conclusion to
this reanalysis may well have a “both... and...” character. That is, in
the Chinese countryside there is both considerable market and politically
induced flux, with many new individuals seeking fame and fortune
through nonadministrative channels and new types of administrators ris-
ing to the top; at the same time local administrators have considerable
opportunity, particularly in more marketized and corporatized areas, to
reap additional benefits for themselves and their families.
REFERENCES

Amsden, Alice H. 1989. Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Bates, Robert H. 1981. Markets and States in Tropical Africa. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.

Blanchard, Olivier, et al. 1993. Post-Communist Reform: Pain and Progress. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Burawoy, Michael, and Pavel Krotov. 1992. “The Soviet Transition from Socialism
to Capitalism: Worker Control and Economic Bargaining in the Wood Industry.”
American Sociological Review 57:16-38.

Burns, John P. 1988. Political Participation in Rural China. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.

CCO (China-Cornell-Oxford). 1989. China-Cornell-Oxford Program on Health and
Nutrition in China: Questionnaire. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Collier, Ruth Berins, and David Collier. 1991. Shaping the Political Arena: Critical
Junctures, the Labor Movement, and Regime Dynamics in Latin America.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

De Soto, Hernando. 1989. The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third
World. New York: Harper & Row.

Eisenstadt, S. N., and L. Roniger. 1984. Patrons, Clients and Friends: Interpersonal
Relations and the Structure of Trust in Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Evans, Peter. 1995. Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Friedman, David. 1988. The Misunderstood Miracle: Industrial Development and
Political Change in Japan. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Graziano, Luigi. 1977. “Patron-Client Relationships in Southern Italy.” Pp. 360-77
in Friends, Followers, and Factions: A Reader in Political Clientelism, edited by
Steffen W. Schmidt, Laura Guasti, Carl H. Landé, and James C. Scott. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Griffin, Keith, and Zhao Renwei. 1992. Chinese Household Income Project, 1988
(MRDF). New York, N.Y.: Hunter College Academic Computing Services (pro-
ducer). Distributed by Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Re-
search, Ann Arbor, Mich.

Haggard, Stephan, and Robert R. Kaufman. 1992. The Politics of Economic Adjust-
ment. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Huang, Shu-min. 1989. The Spiral Road: Change in a Chinese Village through the
Eyes of a Communist Party Leader. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Huntington, Samuel P., and Joan M. Nelson. 1976. No Easy Choice: Political Partici-
pation in Developing Countries. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Johnson, Chalmers. 1982. MITI and the Japanese Miracle. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press.

Lawrence, Susan. 1994. “Democracy, Chinese Style.” Australian Journal of Chinese
Affairs 32:61—70.
Lee, Hong Yung. 1991. From Revolutionary Cadres to Party Technocrats in Socialist
China. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Liang, Zai, and Michael J. White. 1997. “Market Transition, Government Policies,
and Interprovincial Migration in China, 1983-88.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change, in press.

Lipton, Michael. 1977. Why Poor People Stay Poor: Urban Bias in World Develop-
ment, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Maurer-Fazio, Margaret. 1994. “An Analysis of the Emerging Labor Market in the
People’s Republic of China and Its Effect on Rates of Return to Investments in
Education.” Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Pittsburgh, Department of Eco-
nomics.

Ma, Zhongdong, and Kao-Lee Liaw. 1996. “Explaining Hierarchical and Interpro-
vincial Migrations of Chinese Young Adults by Personal Factors and Place Attri-
butes.” Mathematical Population Studies, in press.

Madsen, Richard. 1984. Morality and Power in a Chinese Village. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.

McAdam, Doug. 1982. Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency,
1930-1970. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Migdal, Joel S. 1974. Peasants, Politics, and Revolution: Pressures toward Political
and Social Change in the Third World. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Moore, Barrington. 1966. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and
Peasant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon.

Nelson, Joan. 1984. “The Political Economy of Stabilization: Commitment, Capacity,
and Public Response.” World Development 12:983—1006.

. 1990. Economic Crisis and Policy Choice: The Politics of Adjustment in the
Third World. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York:
Norton.

O’Brien, Kevin. 1994. “Implementing Political Reform in China’s Villages.” Austra-
lian Journal of Chinese Affairs 32:33-60.

Oi, Jean C. 1992. “Fiscal Reform and the Economic Foundations of Local State
Corporatism in China.” World Politics 45 (1): 99-126.

Olson, Mancur. 1982. The Rise and Decline of Nations. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.

Parish, William L. 1979. “The View from the Factory.” Pp. 119-40 in The China
Difference, edited by Ross Terrill. New York: Harper.

. 1994. “Rural Industrialization in Fujian and Taiwan.” In The Economic
Transformation of South China, edited by Thomas P. Lyons and Victor Nee. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University, East Asia Program.

Parish, William L., Xiaoye Zhe, and Fang Li. 1995. “Nonfarm Work and Marketiza-
tion of the Chinese Countryside.” China Quarterly 143:1-29.

Pereira, Luiz Carlos, Jose M. Maravall, and Adam Przeworski. 1993. Economic
Reforms in New Democracies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1994. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Up-
date.” World Development 22:1325-1343.

Putnam, Robert D. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern
Italy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Ramseyer, J. Mark, and Frances M. Rosenbluth. 1993. Japan’s Political Marketplace.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Rocca, Jean-Louis. 1992. “Corruption and Its Shadow.” China Quarterly 130:402—
16.

Rubinson, Richard, and Irene Brown. 1994. “Education and the Economy.” Pp.
581-99 in The Handbook of Economic Sociology, edited by Neil J. Smelser and
Richard Swedberg. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Sabel, Charles F., and David Stark. 1982. “Planning, Politics and Shop-Floor Power:
Hidden Forms of Bargaining in Soviet-imposed State-socialist Societies.” Politics
and Society 11:439-75.

Scott, James C. 1977. “Patron-Client Politics and Political Change in Southeast
Asia.” Pp. 123-46 in Friends, Followers, and Factions: A Reader in Political Cli-
entelism, edited by Steffen W. Schmidt, Laura Guasti, Carl H. Landé, and James C.
Scott. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Shirk, Susan L. 1993. The Political Logic of Economic Reform in China. Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press.-

SSB (People’s Republic of China, State Statistical Bureau). 1994. Zhongguo Tongji
Nianjian 1994 (Statistical Yearbook of China, 1994). Beijing: China Statistical
Publishing House.

Stark, David. 1992. “Path Dependence and Privatization Strategies in East Central
Europe.” East European Politics and Societies 6:17-54.

Tidrick, Gene, and Jiyuan Chen, eds. 1987. China’s Industrial Reform. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Tilly, Charles. 1990. Coercion, Capital, and European States, A.D. 990-1990. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Basil Blackwell.

Wade, Robert. 1990. Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of Govern-
ment in East Asian Industrialization. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Walder, Andrew. 1987. “Wage Reform and the Web of Factory Interests.” China
Quarterly 109:22—41.

. 1989. “Factory and Manager in an Era of Reform.” China Quarterly 118:
242-64.

Wank, David L. 1995. “Symbiotic Alliance of Entrepreneurs and Officials: The Log-
ics of Private Sector Expansion in a South China City.” In The Waning of the
Communist State: Economic Origins of Political Decline in China and Hungary,
edited by A. G. Walder. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Weingrod, Alex. 1977. “Patrons, Patronage, and Political Parties.” Pp. 323-36 in
Friends, Followers, and Factions: A Reader in Political Clientelism, edited by
Steffen W. Schmidt, Laura Guasti, Carl H. Landé, and James C. Scott. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Wong, Christine P. W. 1992. “Fiscal Reform and Local Industrialization: The Prob-
lematic Sequencing of Reform in Post-Mao China.” Modern China 18 (2): 197-227.

Yan, Yun-Xiang. 1995. “Changes in Everyday Power Relations: A View from a
North China Village.” In The Waning of the Communist State: Economic Origins
of Political Decline in China and Hungary, edited by A. G. Walder. Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Yang, Mayfair Mei-Hui. 1994. Gifts, Favors, and Banquets: The Art of Social Rela-
tionships in China. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Zaks, Jeffrey S. 1994. “Human Capital in a Worker’s Paradise: Returns to Education
in Urban China.” Working Paper 94-7. University of Colorado, Department of
Economics.
