Opinion Polarization: Important Contributions, Necessary Limitations

Author(s): John H. Evans, Bethany Bryson and Paul DiMaggio

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 106, No. 4 (January 2001), pp. 944-959
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/320297

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:24 UTC
In our 1996 article “Have Americans’ Social Attitudes Become More Po-
larized?” (AJS 102 [3]: 690-755) we addressed the substantive question
of whether or not polarization on 18 morally charged social issues had
increased over a period of approximately two decades. That article ex-
amined all of the then-available years of data from the General Social
Survey (GSS) and the National Election Study (NES). The approach was
necessarily broad, entailing more than 200 separate analyses of polari-
zation within the population as a whole, within subgroups of the popu-
lation and between groups. Moreover, each examination in turn required
the use of three or four statistical models.

Our major conclusion was that little polarization had occurred over
these years and that the American public was by many criteria more
unified in its views in the 1990s than it had been in the 1970s. The most
important exception to this generalization, based on analyses of data from
both the NES and the GSS, was that the population’s attitudes toward
abortion had been polarizing. The results of Mouw and Sobel’s analysis
of the NES data suggest that attitudes toward abortion had not been
polarizing, thus challenging the one qualification we made to our central
argument that polarization had not increased. Thus, although Mouw and
Sobel challenge the methods we used in 1996, their analysis supports our
central finding that widespread polarization of public opinion had not
occured.

Other scholars working in parallel have developed analogous methods
for measuring attitude polarization in the senses of dispersion (Gay, El-
lison, and Powers 1996) and consolidation (Hout 1999). Hoffmann and
Miller (1998) expanded on our 1996 article to create a method for adjusting
variance and kurtosis measures that would control for changes in dem-
ographic variables.

According to Mouw and Sobel, we and other scholars who have ex-
amined polarization have erred in treating ordinal scales as if they were
interval scales. Statisticians have many concerns about this practice, but
the major problem, as Mouw and Sobel note, is that we do not know if
the distance between 1 and 2 on the scale is the same as the distance
between 3 and 4. Mouw and Sobel offer a solution to this problem for
one of the four dimensions of polarization we discussed, dispersion, and
analyze one of the 18 issues we examined, abortion (based on one of the
two scales we used to examine it). Additionally, they criticize us for com-
bining two different abortion questions in the NES into one time series,
and they make the substantive claim that polarization over abortion at-
titudes in the general population has remained unchanged from 1980 to
1993, the last year in our time series. We respond to their methodological
and substantive claims separately.

To anticipate the essence of our comments, we welcome Mouw and
Sobel’s approach as a valuable new tool for students of polarization. We
raise some cautionary points of interpretation, but even in pointing to
limitations in the application of the method we call attention to and
provide examples of additional ways in which it can be valuable. At the
same time, we emphasize that the method only addresses one of our four
indicators of polarization in attitudes toward abortion. Moreover, using
Mouw and Sobel’s method and additional years of NES data, we find
support for our substantive conclusions about even this one measure of
polarization with evidence indicating that polarization in responses to the
NES abortion item increased between 1980 and 1998.
Before we begin that longer discussion, we will address briefly a less
complex methodological issue. Mouw and Sobel argue that we should not
have combined the two abortion questions into one time series. Using an
appropriate adjustment formula they reveal that our conclusions about
the change in the mean and variance are unaffected by the change in
wording, but that the decreasing kurtosis identified in our analysis may
have been an artifact of the wording change.

Faced with the 1980 wording change, we compared responses before
and after the change and found (as Mouw and Sobel did) that slightly
fewer respondents chose middling responses with the new wording. We
had two choices. First, we could shorten the time span of the data series
(as Mouw and Sobel do), thus reducing the chance of finding significant
results, both by decreasing the number of cases and by reducing the
chronological scope of our analysis. Or we could combine the questions
and report in our article that the change in question wording could inflate
estimates of polarization. We chose the latter course, reporting the limi-
tations of the data and the risk inherent in our decision in table 1 and
footnote 13 (pp. 700, 702). If we had been testing polarization on this one
issue with one population and one data set, we would have taken Mouw
and Sobel’s approach. But ours was a broad analysis of many issues and,
because we were skeptical of finding polarization, we tried in every case
to give the polarization hypothesis the benefit of the doubt. Moreover, we
were confident that analysis of the longer and better-constructed time
series on abortion attitudes from the GSS would prevent us from drawing
the wrong conclusions about polarization in abortion attitudes. We accept
Mouw and Sobel’s point in the context of their single-issue analysis. To
test whether there has been polarization over abortion, the best course of
action is to separate the two questions.
Let us now turn to the heart of Mouw and Sobel’s methodological critique
and contribution. Our 1996 article identified four dimensions of polari-
zation: dispersion, bimodality, constraint, and consolidation. Mouw and
Sobel only attempt to measure dispersion (variance). They dismiss the
value of identifying bimodality (kurtosis) on the grounds that their mea-
sure of dispersion also taps bimodal trends (see our 1996 article, pp.
695-96, for a critique of this view). Although they do not mention the
constraint of opinion across issue domains (Cronbach’s alpha) or the con-
solidation of opinion parameters with structural parameters (group-level
differences in means), they do discuss changes in means for one gruop
over time. Such changes in a single group, however, do not indicate po-
larization. Finally, although they do not make this argument, Mouw and
Sobel’s general critique could extend to our method of measuring con-
solidation by comparing group-level differences in means calculated from
ordinal data.

In recent work on polarization between and within religious traditions
in the United States, Evans (2000) used a method that addresses Mouw
and Sobel’s implicit critique of the consolidation measure. Instead of
estimating the mean for each year for each group under comparison, he
used an ordered logistic regression model, with the abortion scale as the
dependent variable. A group x year interaction term tested whether
changes in response to the abortion question were significantly different
for the two groups. This approach also made it possible to control for
covariates that may shape opinions over time, as advocated by Hoffman
and Miller (1998). He found that polarization in abortion attitudes (in the
sense of consolidation) has occurred between mainline and evangelical
Protestants since 1972.
omous dependent variables by transforming the observed data into a
variable that meets the assumptions of regression. Whereas logistic re-
gression—the most commonly used solution to this problem—turns the
dependent variable into the log of the odds of an event, probit regression
addresses the problem by taking the z-score of the probability to produce
an unconstrained continuous variable. (Specifically, it calculates the cu-
mulative normal probability of choosing the next higher category of Y.)
It happens that a z-score includes the mean and standard deviation of
the (now continuous) variable in question: (x — mean)/SD. The important
point here is that z-scores contain estimates of variance for the new de-
pendent variable. This is the reason to choose probit rather than some
other transformation.

Mouw and Sobel’s adapted probit procedure has the useful feature of
making it possible to ascertain how well the model fits with prescribed
changes in the variance across time (x). It does not focus our attention,
as do most probit analyses, on the effect of x on y. Instead, Mouw and
Sobel assess the fit of a model that posits increasing variance over time,
and compares the fit of that model to the fit of other models that hold
variance constant. Alvarez and Brehm (1995) use this method (derived
from Harvey 1976) to demonstrate that respondents who hold conflicting
values on the role of women and the sanctity of human life vary more
in their responses to abortion questions than respondents who hold con-
sistent positions on those issues.

Mouw and Sobel estimate several of these probit models in order to
test such assumptions as constant variance, increasing variance, increasing
mean, and several combinations thereof, on the premise that the model
with the best fit describes the data most accurately. If the best model were
one that specified a linear change in variance, Mouw and Sobel would
conclude that there had been a linear polarizing trend in underlying opin-
ions. To better understand this point, consider the example of the NES
abortion scale.

The observed variable, here called ABLAW, has four possible values:
1, 2, 3, and 4. The probit transformation begins with the probability of
choosing each response category (represented by the percentage of re-
spondents in each category). For example, the observed proportions of
respondents in each category for 1980 were .115, .327, .190, and .368,
respectively. To predict responses to multiple categories in one equation,
the method standardizes the cumulative probability for each category, in
this case, .115, .442, .632, and 1.00. Because such probabilities cannot
range below 0 or above 1, probit standardizes the (cumulative) probability
for reach category using a z-score: (x — mean)/SD.

Think of the area under a normal curve as a histogram of sorts. A line
down the middle of a normal curve would divide the area into two equal
parts (50% in each category). Adding two more lines would divide the
distribution into four categories, but equally spaced lines do not fit the
observed data. The left two categories together only account for 44.2%
of responses, so the middle line should go to the left of center. Figure 1
represents the 1980 data as areas under a normal curve (mean = 0; SD
= 1). We divide the bell into four unequal pieces of 11.5%, 32.7%, 19.0%,
and 36.8%. To make the proportions match the 1980 data, we must draw
the lines (hereafter, “cutpoints”) dividing that bell in specific locations that
can be mathematically derived using the probability density function. This
is the sense in which the analysis fits parameters to match the data. Every
time the procedure “fits” a parameter, we lose a degree of freedom. In
this example, we specified two parameters (the mean and SD). Those two
parameters defined the scale and shape of the curve and the other three
parameters (the cutpoints) emerged to fit the data as proportional divisions
of the area under the curve. We could, however, choose to specify one
cutpoint and the mean. Then the other three parameters (two cutpoints
and the SD) could be identified from the data. This is the crux of Mouw
and Sobel’s approach. It allows probit to identify a meaningful standard
deviation from the observed data. Together, the five parameters inform
the equation that estimates latent opinion on abortion law.
Shifting Cutpoints Absorb Changes in Bimodality

Probit defines the new variable as normal, forcing its shape to have zero
skew and zero kurtosis. That transformation is usually acceptable, but it
is fatal if the goal of an analysis is to identify change in kurtosis over
time. The transformation is, furthermore, problematic for cases where the
distribution has large tails or where the action occurs in the endpoints of
an ordinal scale because the model’s assumptions do not fit the observed
data as well as they might otherwise. The result would be a poorly fitting
model that cannot identify changes in the skew or bimodality of a dis-
tribution across the independent variable. This issue is particularly salient
for the survey question that Mouw and Sobel reexamine. Figure 2 presents
a histogram of responses to the abortion question in 1980 and again in
1994. This is where Mouw and Sobel’s discussion of cutpoints becomes
important.

As indicated above, Mouw and Sobel’s figure 1 can be interpreted as
a bell-shaped histogram divided with three “cutpoints” into four portions
matching the frequency distribution in the observed variable—11% of
the area in the first section, 32% in the second, and so on. Mouw and
Sobel’s cutpoints are not evenly spaced and symmetrical because the
observed variable does not have a normal distribution. We may think of
this procedure as, in effect, absorbing bimodality into a normal curve.

Over the course of the survey period, however, the proportion of re-
sponses in category 4 increased, making the observed distribution even
less appropriate for standardization. Mouw and Sobel’s method accom-
modates this change by allowing the third cutpoint to move toward the
center of the distribution after 1990—making room in the right tail for
more pro-choice responses in the later part of the time period and thereby
absorbing the change that produced decreasing kurtosis (increased bi-
modality) in our 1996 models. Indeed, the large improvement in fit that
Mouw and Sobel report as a result of allowing cutpoint 3 to move toward
the mean constitutes evidence of this polarization. Following the logic
that an improvement in fit indicates a significant effect of changes in the
model’s parameters, we conclude that there has been a significant shift
in abortion opinion from category 3 (a middling opinion) to category 4
(an endpoint). Given that the leftmost category has not lost ground, we
argue that the shift toward category 4 constitutes polarization of the sort
measured by kurtosis.

When the leftmost or rightmost cutpoint moves toward the center, an
endpoint of that distribution increases, and polarization may result if the
opposite pole maintains its strength. If both tails increase, we can be more
certain that the shift is not a shift toward agreement on a polar position
(as would be the case for opinion on women’s rights over time; see fig. 3
1980

 

50% —

 

45%

 

40% + -

 

35% 4—

 

30%

 

25% -- —

 

20% ——-

 

15%
10% +.

 

5% -

 

 

0% T Tt
Never Danger Need Choice

1994

50%

 

45%

 

40%

 

35%

 

30%

 

25% — =

 

 

 

 

 

 

20% a a

 

15% —+—— ee

10%

 

5%

 

 

0% +
Never Danger Need Choice

Fic. 2.—Opinion on abortion law, 1980 and 1994
in our 1996 article). If both tails increase at the same rate, however, there
may be no need to allow cutpoints to shift. A small or moderate evenly
balanced shift toward the tails would merely produce increasing variance
and can be modeled that way with Mouw and Sobel’s method. Unfor-
tunately, a strong polarizing trend has the potential to empty the middle
beyond the constraints of normality. That is, there could be so few re-
sponses in the middle category that 68% could not lie within one standard
deviation of the mean at the same time that only 95% lie within two
standard deviations of the mean. Therefore, the result of a strong trend
toward the tails of a distribution would be a poorly fitting model rather
than a significant increase in variance. This is not the case for the example
at hand, but it is an unfortunate characteristic of the method that reduces
its usefulness as a measure of polarization.

Although scholars of the pro-choice movement might debate the merits
of Mouw and Sobel’s historical claim that a new abortion discourse ap-
peared in the early 1990s, the observed shift in survey responses does
appear suddenly and in conjunction with political changes rather than in
a long gradual trend of eroding middle ground. It appears, then, that
Mouw and Sobel have documented the same shift that we found in our
1996 article while offering an alternative explanation that fits the evidence
more closely than does the linear view implicit in the culture wars
hypothesis.

On the other hand, we cannot know whether their interpretation is
correct. Mouw and Sobel state that it would be inappropriate to allow
for a cutpoint shift unless the researcher is fairly certain that there has
been a shift (using the current example) in the way respondents interpret
the question. Their decision to allow a cutpoint shift thus assumes that
the hypothetical respondents who would answer category 3 in earlier years
but switch to category 4 after 1992 would do so not because their un-
derlying opinion had changed but because their interpretation of the ques-
tion had changed such that they felt a different category better matched
their unchanging opinion. In short, they argue that the relevant indicators
changed because people changed the way they expressed a given attitude
without necessarily changing the attitude itself.

For our question, however, the theoretical interpretation of that change
is irrelevant. We did not ask whether interpretations had changed over
time, we asked whether the pattern of responses had changed, regardless
of the meaning one might attach to survey questions or their response
categories. It is entirely possible that political contexts changed the way
respondents interpreted questions about abortion, producing an “artificial”
polarization. But it is also possible that people changed their opinions
and that a deeper moral rift appeared in attitudes toward abortion law.
The data and methods before us cannot determine whether either of these
assumptions is true. We can only know that more people chose category
4 in later years than in earlier years and that there had not been any
erosion in the popularity of the opposite pole.

We suggest, however, that there is an important unremarked benefit to
modeling cutpoint shifts and changes in the mean of a dependent variable
as Mouw and Sobel do. If cutpoint changes can be interpreted as indicators
of polarization, Mouw and Sobel’s method offers the useful feature of
making it possible to distinguish the trend in dispersion from the trends
in both means and kurtosis we observed in our 1996 article. In their
analysis, an improved fit with changing cutpoints indicates and, in effect,
controls for the change that produced decreasing kurtosis. From this per-
spective, then, the comparison of their M@, and M, demonstrates that
defining a linear change in variance does not significantly improve the fit
of the model, when controlling for the shift from category 3 to category
4 (e.g., an increase in bimodality). This method, furthermore, allows the
researcher to test for changes in variance under other assumptions such
as constant, fitted, or linear trends in the mean (another by-product of
the increased size of category 4). Because the increasing proportion of
respondents selecting the pro-choice category is clearly specified, tested
and controlled, the result is a clearer view of changes in the NES measure
of opinion toward abortion law between 1980 and 1994 than the one we
presented in “Have Americans’ Attitudes Become More Polarized?”
the NES variable is an ordinal measure and the GSS scale may fail to
meet even this standard. The problem of using what appears to be an
ordinal dependent variable is resolved in the operationalization used in
our article. Rather than treating response categories as meaningful po-
sitions “in relation to some theoretical maxim” (p. 693), we asked whether
the distribution of responses had changed over time. For that purpose,
meaningful estimates of mean, variance, and kurtosis only require that
the data be unidimensional. Although we did not consider the meanings
that survey respondents may have attached to response categories, schol-
ars who wish to do so would find our methods inappropriate, as Mouw
and Sobel indicate, which is one of many reasons that we consider their
approach a useful complement to our own.

Furthermore, there is a long and well-documented debate over whether
the Rossi abortion scale in the GSS is bidimensional (e.g. whether three
questions represent a latent attitude toward “hard” cases, and three toward
“easy” cases of abortion morality decisions; see, e.g., Clogg and Sawyer
1981; Duncan, Sloane, and Brody 1982; Muthen 1982; Gillespie, Vergert,
and Kingma 1987, 1988). Whereas in the past many scholars used the six
questions to create a Guttman scale, more recently researchers have cre-
ated additive scales as we did (see, e.g., Hout 1999). Adjudicating this
debate over scaling goes beyond the scope of this comment, but the re-
search indicates that the Rossi scale is indeed unidimensional and, while
not a Likert scale, that it is appropriate for use in the conventional manner
(Gillespie et al. 1987, 1988). In other words, the most important evidence
that we presented for the polarization of abortion attitudes, evidence from
the GSS, remains compelling.

Second, Mouw and Sobel have not challenged our conclusions about
two of the four dimensions on which we measured (and found) opinion
polarization over abortion. We have demonstrated, as have other re-
searchers (Hout 1999), that intergroup differences in attitudes toward
abortion have increased over time, indicating a form of polarization we
called consolidation. Similarly, we found a significant increase in ideo-
logical cohesion among the items used to form the GSS abortion scale,
indicating an increase in the aspect of polarization we called constraint.

Third, although we accept Mouw and Sobel’s conclusion that there
was no linear trend in the dispersion of NES abortion attitudes from 1980
to 1994, we have applied Mouw and Sobel’s method to the NES abortion
question from 1980 to 1998, bringing the data series up to date and
separating the effects of changes in variance from the pro-choice shift
that produced declining kurtosis in our article. Because Ted Mouw gra-
ciously shared his Stata code with us, we were able to apply their method
precisely and find evidence of an increase in variance even when con-
trolling for the cutpoint shift.
We first ran a model (EBD1, reported in table 1) with constant variance,
constant cutpoints, and fitted means as a baseline comparison. This model
does not fit the data well. What about change in dispersion (variance)
without a shifting cutpoint? We fit EBD2, which holds the cutpoints
constant, but allows the variance to change linearly (their M,). EBD2 fits
much better than EBD1, but not well enough for further consideration.
We concur with Mouw and Sobel that there does not appear to be any
linear increase in variance without also modeling a change in cutpoint.

Has there been a nonlinear change in variance? One of the important
innovations in Mouw and Sobel’s method is the ease with which nonlinear
changes in variance can be modeled. In our article, we hypothesized
increasing polarization as linear and monotonic not for any theoretical
reason, but due to limitations of available data and methods. After re-
jecting the hypothesis of a linear change in variance, Mouw and Sobel
examined the variance in each year individually in their model 1 (/,),
which suggested that there were three distinct variances: 0° = 1980, 1984,
and 1988; o = 1986; and o = 1990, 1992, and 1994. The result was
their M,,, where the variance from 1990 to 1994 differed from the variance
in the 1980s (excepting 1986). Mouw and Sobel reported that while the
coefficient for the difference in variance in the 1990s is highly significant,
suggesting polarization, they dismiss the model because it fits the data
poorly.

Adding the 1996 and 1998 data to the series changes the perception of
where the distinct variance eras begin and end. Our equivalent to Mouw
and Sobel’s M, (available upon request) suggested that the discontinuous
change in variance occurred in 1992, not 1990. We ran model EBD3 to
determine whether there was a nonlinear increase in variance when not
modeling the shifting cutpoint. Although the model improved upon EBD1,
it does not fit within conventional standards. Thus, our findings support
Mouw and Sobel’s conclusion that there has been no overall trend in
dispersion without modeling the change in cutpoint.

However, another strength of their method is the ability to disentangle
generalized dispersion from a specific move toward one end of a distri-
bution. Assuming that Mouw and Sobel are correct that the cutpoint shift
occurred in 1990 we fit the equivalent of their model M, (EBD4), which
allows for a change in cutpoint after 1990 but holds variance constant.
This fit significantly better than EBD1, suggesting that after 1990 there
was a move from the center to the most liberal category. This finding is
also consistent with that of Mouw and Sobel.

To approximate the linear methods that we used in our 1996 article,
we can also ask whether variance increases in a linear fashion after mod-
eling, and thus controlling for, the shifting cutpoint. Examining EBD5
reveals that the answer is no.

Finally, we ask whether or not there is a nonlinear change in variance,
given the change in cutpoint. We created a model (EBD6) with fitted
means, a cutpoint shift in 1990, and a nonlinear increase in variance from
1992 on. The data fit the model adequately, using the same fit standard
as Mouw and Sobel, and the change in variance is almost significant at
the .10 level we used in our original paper (P = .105) (see table 2). This
is weak evidence of increased dispersion in attitudes over abortion from
1992 to present, assuming a change in cutpoint after 1990.

In an effort to be as fair as possible to our earlier thesis, Mouw and
Sobel created a model with the slightly weaker claim that dispersion is
greater after 1990 than in earlier years except 1986 (M,,). When we control
for 1986 in EBD6, the result is EBD7 (see table 3). The model fits the
data quite well: the individual coefficient for the variances after 1992 is
significant (P < .05) and the conditional likelihood test of difference be-
tween EBD7 and EBD4 is also significant (P < .01). Thus, if we too make
concessions to 1986 as an exception in the earlier period, there is evidence
that attitudes over abortion are more dispersed from 1992 to present than
in previous years, assuming a change in cutpoint after 1990. This is sug-
gestive of increased dispersion in addition to the shift toward the pro-
choice pole that we measured with kurtosis in our earlier paper. In sum,
even when the change modeled by the shifting cutpoint is controlled, there
seems to have been increased dispersion in abortion between 1980 and
1998.
REFERENCES

Alvarez, R. Michael, and John Brehm. 1995. “American Ambivalence towards Abortion
Policy: Development of a Heteroskedastic Probit Model of Competing Values.”
American Journal of Political Science 39 (4): 1055-82.

Bryson, Bethany. 2000. “Notes on Measuring Opinion Polarization with
Heteroscedastic Probit Analysis.” Manuscript. Department of Sociology, University
of Virginia.

Clogg, Clifford C., and Darwin O. Sawyer. 1981. “A Comparison of Alternative Models
for Analyzing the Scalability of Response Patterns.” Pp. 240-80 in Sociological
Methodology, edited by Samuel Leinhardt. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.

Davis, Nancy J., and Robert V. Robinson. 1996. “Are Rumors of War Exaggerated?
Religious Orthodoxy and Moral Progressivism in America.” American Journal of
Sociology 102 (3): 756-76.

DiMaggio, Paul, and Bethany Bryson. In press. “Americans’ Attitudes towards
Cultural Diversity and Cultural Authority in Higher Education and the Arts.” In
The Arts of Democracy: The State, Civil Society and Culture, edited by Casey Blake.
Princeton, N.J.: Woodrow Wilson Center Press.

DiMaggio, Paul, John Evans, and Bethany Bryson. 1996. “Have Americans’ Social
Attitudes Become More Polarized?” American Journal of Sociology 102:690-755.
Duncan, Otis Dudley, Douglas M. Sloane, and Charles Brody. 1982. “Latent Classes
Inferred from Response-Consistency Effects.” Pp. 19-64 in Systems under Indirect
Observation: Causality, Structure, Prediction, edited by K. G. Joreskog and H. Wold.

Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Evans, John H. 1996. “‘Culture Wars’ or Status Group Ideology as the Basis of U.S.
Moral Politics?” International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy 16 34.

. 1997. “Worldviews or Social Groups as the Source of Moral Value Attitudes:

Implications for the Culture Wars Thesis.” Sociological Forum 12 (3): 371-404.

2000. “Polarization over Abortion in American Religious Traditions,
1972-1998.” Manuscript. University of California, Los Angeles.

Gay, David A., Christopher G. Ellison, and Daniel A. Powers. 1996. “In Search of
Denominational Subcultures: Religious Affiliation and ‘Pro-Family’ Issues
Revisited.” Review of Religious Research 38:3-17.
Gillespie, Michael W., Elisabeth M. Ten Vergert, and Johannes Kingma. 1987. “Using
Mokken Scale Analysis to Develop Unidimensional Scales: Do the Six Abortion
Items in the NORC GSS Form One or Two Scales?” Quality and Quantity 21:
393-408.

. 1988. “Secular Trends in Abortion Attitudes: 1975-1980-1985.” Journal of
Psychology 122 (4): 323-41.

Harvey, Andrew. 1976. “Estimating Regression Models with Mutiplicative
Heteroscedasticity.” Econometrica 44:461-65.

Hoffmann, John P., and Alan S. Miller. 1998. “Denominational Influences on Socially
Divisive Issues.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 37 (3): 528-46.

Hout, Michael. 1999. “Abortion Politics in the United States, 1972-1994: From Single
Issue to Ideology.” Gender Issues 17 (2): 3-34.

Hunter, James D. 1991. Culture Wars: The Struggle to Define America. New York:
Basic Books.

. 1994. Before the Shooting Begins: Searching for Democracy in America’s
Culture War. New York: Free Press.

Muthen, Bengt. 1982. “Some Categorical Response Models with Continuous Latent
Variables.” Pp. 65-80 in Systems under Indirect Observation: Causality, Structure,
Prediction, edited by K. G. Joreskog and H. Wold. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Williams, Rhys H. 1997. Cultural Wars in American Politics: Critical Reviews of a
Popular Thesis, edited by Rhys H. Williams. Hawthorn, N.Y.: Aldine de Gruyter.
