Children and Marital Disruption

Author(s): Linda J. Waite and Lee A. Lillard

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 96, No. 4 (Jan., 1991), pp. 930-953
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780736

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:00 UTC
Children constitute the prime example of “marital-specific capi-
tal,” a resource worth substantially more inside a marriage than
outside it. This article examines the effect of children on marital
stability, using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,
and tests the propositions that (1) children enhance marital stability,
(2) younger children increase stability more than older children, and
(3) under some circumstances children have no stabilizing effect
or even increase chances that their parents’ marriage will end. A
proportional hazards model in continuous time is estimated and
then modified to accommodate key features of the data. The results
indicate that firstborn children increase the stability of marriage
through their preschool years. Other children increase marital sta-
bility only when they are very young. Older children and children
born before marriage significantly increase chances of disruption.
The initially stabilizing and later destabilizing effects of children
combine over the course of the marriage to give parents only a
modestly higher chance than childless couples of reaching their
twentieth wedding anniversary.
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

A rich research tradition focuses on the relationship between children
and marital disruption. But the relationship is so complex and so depen-
dent on other circumstances that much of the literature addresses a lim-
ited part of the problem, uses special samples that cannot be generalized,
or ignores the intertwined effects of marital duration and childbearing.

First, couples tend to disrupt marriages more readily in the early years
of marriage—exactly the period when rates of childbearing are highest.
This association confounds the effects of marital duration with the effects
of presence, number, and ages of children (Schoen 1975; Cherlin 1981).
Second, the “effect” of children on marital stability actually comprises
a number of distinct effects, primarily number of children, ages of chil-
dren, and timing of births relative to marriage.

Most research to date has examined only one of these effects. For
example, Chester (1974) focuses on childlessness and marital disruption;
he concludes that one cannot say for sure whether there is a relationship
if one has only cross-sectional data and compares mean marital duration
for those with children and without. Some research examines only the
age of the youngest child (vs. no children); Mott and Moore (1979) find
no evidence of effects of youngest child, but their sample includes only
the early years of marriage and is focused on the preschool years. Thorn-
ton (1977) examines the effect on marital stability of number of children
without regard to their age. He reports that both women with no children
and those with relatively large families exhibit higher rates of marital
disruption than those with one or two children. In a related piece, he
reports that the number of children has no significant effect on attitudes
toward divorce in general (Thornton 1985) (but presence of children un-
der age six decreases the proportion of husbands who have ever consid-
ered divorce for themselves, according to Huber and Spitze [1980]).

Waite, Haggstrom, and Kanouse (1985) focus only on effects of the
firstborn. In an analysis restricted to the early years of parenthood, they
find that married parents have disruption rates of 5% and 8% for males
and females, respectively, by two years after the birth of the first child.
However, they estimate that from 22% to 25% of these couples would
have broken up without the birth of a child. This is an estimate based
on comparisons with married but childless couples with many of the
same characteristics.

Cherlin (1977) examines the effect of having any preschool children
and of having any older children, the effect of total number of children,
and the effect of premarital childbearing on chances of disruption over
a five-year period. He finds that only the presence of any preschool-aged
children decreases the probability of divorce for married women, a result
also reported by Becker et al. (1977). But Hannan, Tuma, and Groene-
veld (1977), analyzing data from the Seattle and Denver Income Mainte-
nance Experiment, find no effect of the presence of children under age
six or of children aged 6—10 on marital dissolution for black, white, or
Hispanic women, although the investigators do not consider number of
children.

In perhaps the most comprehensive examination of the determinants
of marital disruption and how these change between cohorts and over
the life cycles of the women involved, Morgan and Rindfuss (1985) find
that first births decrease the likelihood of divorce in all marital cohorts
and at all the marital durations that they examined. Premarital births
increased chances of disruption, but these effects were limited to the first
few years of marriage. In contrast, Cherlin (1977) finds no effect for
premarital births.

If the empirical evidence on the relationship between children and
marital disruption is mixed, most theoretical perspectives are clear. We
turn to the major perspectives in the next section.
children (Thornton 1977). Children may increase the psychic costs of
divorce to the parents, both because of the loss of access to the children
experienced by the noncustodial parent (Furstenberg et al. 1983) and the
increased burden on the custodial parent and because of the decreased
financial well-being that typically follows divorce, especially for the
mother and the children (Hoffman 1977; Duncan and Hoffman 1985).
Parents may end their marriages less readily than childless couples be-
cause they believe that disruption will harm the children (see Thornton
[1977] for a review of this literature), and, indeed, the literature on the
consequences of divorce shows deleterious short-term and long-term ef-
fects (Furstenberg and Allison 1985; McLanahan and Bumpass 1988).

A number of researchers argue that young children stabilize marriages
more than older children. Cherlin (1977) argues that preschool children
more effectively inhibit marital disruption because they require more
time, effort, and expense than do older children. We elaborate this rea-
soning as follows. If children tie their parents together through increasing
specialization within the marriage, this tie might be strongest when that
specialization is most complete, that is, during the years of childbearing,
infancy, and the preschool ages. Mothers turn over some of the tasks of
child rearing of older children, such as discipline, entertainment, helping
with homework, and athletic training, to fathers. This is especially true
for sons (Morgan et al. 1988). And schools take over some of the child
care and training functions for children over five or six. Parents may
believe that very young children’s dependence on parental time and at-
tention is such that the loss of a parent from the home would be more
harmful for them than for a school-aged child or teenager. And recent
research suggests that children who receive full-time care by someone
other than their mother during the first year suffer emotional and behav-
ioral consequences over the long run (Belsky and Rovine 1988; Desai,
Chase-Landale, and Michael 1989). Since marital disruption and the con-
sequent loss of income force many previously homemaking mothers into
the labor force, these considerations might deter divorce most forcefully
during the child’s early years. In addition, having a child may signal
commitment to the relationship, a signal that gets weaker the more dis-
tant the signaling event.

Older children may inhibit the disruption of their parents’ marriage
less than younger children if, as children enter school, they need much
less of their parents’ time in care and become more emotionally indepen-
dent. And since parents spend less time with older than with younger
children, noncustodial parents give up less contact with older children
than with younger. Finally, the closer children get to maturity and the
residential independence that accompanies it, the less future contact with
the child a parent gives up by divorcing.
Economic perspectives on divorce (Becker 1973; Becker et al. 1977)
focus on investments in the marriage and on the alternatives to the mar-
riage. Unlike many investments in being married, such as specialization
by the spouses, children constitute an investment in this particular mar-
riage and, as such, should decrease chances of disruption of the marriage
in which they were produced. In fact, previously married women, espe-
cially young women, are less likely to remarry if they have children than
if they are childless (Teachman and Heckert 1985), so that alternatives
to the current marriage probably are less attractive for mothers than for
childless women. However, economic theories appear to be silent on how
children of different ages affect marital stability.

Both sociological and economic perspectives imply that, to the extent
that children increase the real or psychic costs of divorce or create a long-
lasting bond between the parents, couples that have ever had children
will have more stable marriages than childless couples. In addition,
young children may decrease the chances of divorce either by raising
the parents’ commitment to the marriage or by increasing the costs of
disruption. Having children may signal at least a short-run commitment
to the continuation of the relationship. We test both of the hypotheses
implied by this perspective: first, that offspring reduce the probability of
dissolution and, second, that younger children have a greater stabilizing
effect on marriages than older children.

However, both sociological and economic theories have paid less atten-
tion to the destabilizing than to the stabilizing effect children may have
on marriages, and neither perspective has fully explicated the conditions
under which children stabilize or, conversely, destabilize marriages. Em-
pirical work and scattered theoretical treatments point to the mechanisms
through which and the conditions under which children might increase
chances of disruption.

First, as most theories note, children born outside the marriage in
question may increase chances of divorce because they belong to only
one of the partners, by providing ties to relationships outside the mar-
riage, and by acting as a source of conflict within the marriage (Becker
et al. 1977; Cherlin 1978). In fact, recent research has found that remar-
riages that include stepchildren are more likely to dissolve than remar-
riages without them and that children from previous relationships consti-
tute a source of tension, strain, and discord in new marriages (White and
Booth 1985a). This same reasoning extends to children born outside this
relationship, before the first marriage. We test the hypothesis that chil-
dren born out of wedlock increase the chances of marital disruption.

There are a number of other conditions under which children may
make marriages less likely to survive. Much previous research shows
strong, zero-order effects of premarital conception on chances of disrup-
tion (Furstenberg 1976; Coombs and Zumeta 1970); theory points to the
abbreviated search for a marital match often caused by such a pregnancy
as a primary mechanism (Becker et al. 1977). In addition, any childbear-
ing soon after marriage gives the new couple relatively little time to
establish their relationship before entering their new roles as parents.
Childbearing early in the marriage often reduces the couple’s ability to
accumulate assets prior to the financial drain of supporting a third family
member (Coombs et al. 1970; Freedman and Thornton 1979). We test the
hypothesis that a first birth conceived before marriage increases marital
instability.

But we suggest other mechanisms through which children may increase
chances of disruption: children interfere with time spent maintaining the
marital relationship and may decrease happiness and life satisfaction.
Hill (1988) suggests that children decrease marital stability indirectly be-
cause, as she shows, their presence interferes with the parents’ leisure
time spent together and shared leisure activities create a bond that
strengthens marriage. Her research, which is based on the sample of
individuals interviewed in the Michigan Time Use Survey in 1975-76,
supports this reasoning (see also Kingston and Nock 1987). And a sub-
stantial literature suggests couples with children are less satisfied, on
average, with their marriages than are childless couples (Glenn and
McLanahan 1982) and that women with young children perceive a lower
quality of life than those in any other life-cycle stage (Campbell, Con-
verse, and Rogers 1976). Some of this unhappiness appears to result
directly from the demands and disruptions of the birth of a child, espe-
cially a first child (Rossi 1968).

If the presence of young children inhibits divorce, for reasons outlined
above, but decreases marital and life satisfaction, this process may result
in increasing heterogeneity of the population of couples at longer marital
durations, with still-married childless couples happier and more satisfied
than couples with children. If, as we and others have suggested, the
stabilizing effect of children declines with the children’s ages, then par-
ents may postpone disruption when children are young, creating a pent-
up demand for divorce that parents satisfy when children get older. This
would appear as a declining negative effect on disruption with children’s
age, with the inhibiting effect disappearing or even turning positive at
older ages. We test the hypothesis that the presence of older children
increases marital instability compared with childless couples among those
couples still married.

We restrict our attention in this analysis to the stability of first mar-
riages because a sizable number of influences on disruption apply only
PSID DATA: MARITAL DURATIONS AND CHILDBEARING PATTERNS

Our analysis uses data on first marriages constructed from the first 18
years, 1968-85, of the PSID. The PSID is well suited to analysis of the
relationship between children and marital disruption. First, it contains
longitudinal information on both marital and fertility changes. This
allows us to trace the experiences of individual couples over a substantial
period. Second, the sample of married couples is large, with a sizable
number of disruptions during the period of observation. Third, since our
analysis uses all information on any sample member ever in the PSID
who meets our criteria, we minimize problems of sample attrition.
Fourth, the PSID obtained information on marital status at each inter-
view, a practice that minimizes recall bias, together with a complete
retrospective marital and fertility history in 1985. The availability of the
two types of information allows us to date marriages, separations, di-
vorces, and births with a good deal of precision. Finally, the PSID repre-
sents the entire age range of married couples in the United States, which
allows us to generalize to the nation as a whole.

The PSID began in 1968 with 5,500 households. Approximately half
of those were drawn from a nationally representative sample and half
drawn from the prior year’s Survey of Economic Opportunity (SEO)
sample, which oversampled low-income households. Demographic and
socioeconomic data were collected for the household and each member of
the household. These included marital status and, for married household
heads (the husband in the case of married-couple households and the
householder in others), data on whether the current marriage was the
first marriage and the date of marriage. Information was collected on all
Sample Characteristics

We begin with every couple that we observed married between 1968 (the
initial interview in the PSID) and 1985, the year in which the PSID
obtained a detailed retrospective marital history. We restrict our analysis
to those couples for whom this was the respondent’s first marriage. For
couples married in 1968, the respondent is the husband. For those who
married later, the respondent is the PSID sample member and could be
either male or female.

We observe separation or divorce within intervals defined by the inter-
view year. The value of all time-varying measures, such as the husband’s
income, comes from the immediately preceding interview. In addition,
within years we begin a new interval whenever one of the children born
to the couple enters a new age category or when a marriage begins or
ends. For example, we define a new interval when the couple has a first
birth, when a preschool child reaches age six, or when an 18-year-old
reaches 19. This allows us to measure the value of these time-varying
variables very precisely over the marriage. We include in our sample all
intervals during which the marriage is at risk of disruption.

In this analysis we combine divorces and separations under the general
rubric of marital disruption or dissolution. We include separations be-
cause separation often precedes legal divorce by several years, and be-
cause separation without subsequent divorce is a frequent disruption
pattern for blacks (Glick and Norton 1977).

The result is a sample of 4,400 first marriages, one-third of which
ended in divorce or separation during the panel period. Thirty-one per-
cent of these marriages were underway at the first interview in 1968 and
so are left truncated—we have no information about the marriage before
that year. The observations are truncated rather than censored because
the marriage date is known, but the marriage had to survive to its current
duration in 1968 to be a first marriage. The remainder of the marriages
in our sample began during the panel period.

For all marriages observed at any point during the panel period we
observe the duration of the marriage (if the couple divorces or separates
during the panel) or the censoring of the marriage by attrition, death of
one partner, or the last wave of the survey. But we observe 1,070 di-
vorces or separations among those married during the panel and 354
disruptions among marriages underway in 1968 for a total of 1,424 dis-
ruptions. Thus, 26% of those couples who were already married in 1968
dissolved their marriages within their participation in the panel, and 35%
of those married for the first time within the panel divorced or separated
during their participation in the panel. This difference in the percentage
of marriages disrupted reflects high divorce rates early in marriage, espe-
cially since the average period of participation as a married couple is
shorter for those married within the panel. The remaining couples, not
divorced within the sample, represent right-censored observations be-
cause we do not observe the dissolution of the marriage and know only
that, if it occurred, it happened after the last survey period.

We adjust risk of dissolution for the effects of covariates that theory
and previous research point to as important determinants of marital in-
stability. These include race (Michael and Tuma 1985), the education of
the husband (Glick and Norton 1977), income (Hannan et al. 1977), age
at marriage of the husband and of the wife (Moore and Waite 1981),
religion (Chi and Houseknecht 1985; McCarthy 1979), and time period
(Thornton and Rodgers 1987). South and Spitze (1986) find that the ef-
fects of these and similar variables do not change over the marital life
course. Table 1 gives definition of these variables and their means for
couples observed at various durations of marriage. We measure the in-
come of the head (Cherlin 1978; Ross and Sawhill 1975) as a dummy
variable for low income (the bottom quartile). Only the income mea-
sure—and measures of ages and numbers of children, discussed next—
is time varying. In all cases, we experimented with a number of specifi-
cations of these independent variables before settling on those presented
here as best capturing the effects in question.
to allow us to test the hypotheses presented earlier. For this reason, we
distinguish first children from their later-born siblings, and we distin-
guish younger from older children. One variable indicates that the cou-
ple’s first child was born in the previous year (FB), another that the
couple had a second- or higher-order birth in the last year (BIRTH). We
measure the presence of a first child between 1 and 5 years old (FPSC),
the number of preschoolers other than the first (NPSC), the number of
children between 6 and 12 years old, the number of children between 13
and 18, and the number of children older than 18. In addition, we include
a dummy variable for a premarital conception, measured as a birth
within eight months of marriage (BIRTHMAR), and a dummy variable
for a child born prior to the mother’s first marriage (PREMAR). Table
2 presents means for presence and ages of children for couples at various
durations of marriage.

The panel nature of the data used in this study is extremely useful for
identifying the separate effects of duration and children, given the strong
association of presence and ages of children with years married. A cross-
sectional view of the data reveals a strong tendency for those couples
who have been married for a longer time at the initial survey to have
more and older children. We include marriage cohort variables to capture
those trends. However, we observe the couples in our sample over many
years, and so have a longitudinal view of their childbearing and marital
stability.
Statistical Model

The statistical model underlying our approach is based on proportional
hazards in continuous time, modified to accommodate the key features
of our data: (1) the explanatory variables of primary interest, measures
of the presence of children, inherently vary over time; (2) some marriages
were in progress at the time of the final survey or at the time that the
couple left the sample (due to attrition), so that marriage durations may
be right censored; (3) the data on marriage durations come either from
retrospective reports of dates of marital separation or divorce or from
annual reports of marital status at survey times over the 18-year panel;
and (4) some marriages were in progress at the time of the initial survey,
so that marriage durations may be left truncated (at a known duration).

Let us begin with the basic continuous-time model of marital duration.
A couple marries and is immediately at risk of dissolution. The (log)
hazard of marital disruption is given by

In h(t) = In A [v(t), w,] + «,X(t) + a5 kids(t),
where v(t) is the duration at time ¢, X(t) is a vector of time-varying (or
constant) regressors, and kids(t) is a vector of variables measuring the
presence and ages of children.

The risk of dissolution may change systematically over time as the
marriage continues. The couple learns over time about the quality of the
match, and the couple may acquire “marriage-specific capital,” which
makes the union more desirable so that the risk of divorce declines as
the marriage endures. This change accounts for declining divorce proba-
bilities with marital duration (Becker et al. 1977). These systematic
changes in the risk of dissolution are reflected in the baseline hazard. We
use a piecewise log linear spline in marriage duration, v(t), for the base-
line hazard.
where ¢;,, is the duration at the end of the last subinterval J.

About a third of the first marriages were in progress at the time of the
first survey. These observations are left truncated. Left truncation occurs
in the case in which the marriage date is known but the marriage had
been in progress m years when it was first observed.* For these observa-
tions the likelihood is conditioned on the probability of the marriage’s
surviving from its inception to the initial period of observation, that
is, the survivor function at that duration. In this proportional hazard
formulation this probability simply cancels with the corresponding por-
Parameter Estimates

Maximum-likelihood estimates of the parameters of the model are pre-
sented in table 3. The first column of table 3 presents estimates from our
preferred model, which includes all measures of numbers and ages of
children discussed earlier. The other columns in table 3 present alterna-
tive models estimated for comparison. Column 2 presents the model with
a single measure of number of children instead of the detailed measures
we prefer, column 3 presents the model with no measures of presence
and ages of children, and column 4 presents a model that includes only
splines for duration of marriage and a dummy variable for race. The
coefficients from the models must be transformed to yield clearer substan-
tive interpretation; however, we discuss the pattern of statistical signifi-
cance and sign briefly below.

Children clearly have a powerful effect on the risk of marital dissolu-
tion—at least under some circumstances. While we explore these issues
more fully below, the basic pattern is clear: the presence of young chil-
dren delays the initiation of separation or divorce until the child is of
school age. Young children greatly reduce the hazard of disruption,
whereas children over age 12 increase the hazard by a smaller amount
but for a longer period. Only the presence of preschool children after the
first child and children ages 6-12 have no statistically significant effect
on the chances that their parents’ marriage will dissolve; each child older
than 12 significantly increases the risk of disruption. And a child born
before the beginning of the first marriage substantially increases chances
of disruption.

We control for the effect of a number of demographic variables in
addition to the measures of the presence of children. Couples in which
the husband is highly educated have a much lower rate of separation and
divorce than those with less educated husbands, with chances of disrup-
tion falling fairly steadily with increases in husband’s schooling. Mar-
riage when the wife is age 20 or younger reduces the chances that the
couple will dissolve, although we find this result suspect.° The measures
(ost0") (osto") (110°)
«xb000" %76£0" xbveo" os verre OLTLUVWA
(8€T0') (Tr10°) (sT0")
+STO" 1600° Leto" seeeneeeeneneeeseeeeeeo sO OOTY ATA
(2120') (120°) (v120")
#x£7S0" 1870" ax S S10" ue “OOUVINA
(s€TT’) (6etT) (Lv1T’)
wx 06S" — 4978S" — sexe] 299° — OTT
(960°) (860°) (v080")
#7891 — xxl £91 — 99ST vereeeneeees stetHdg
(290°) (€290°) (290°)
wen SOLE™ sea TATE" sexe POOL” vrereteteeeeneee " 7LLTHdd
(0290°) (9290°) (4290°)
sea POLT — ee @TbT — aeeSS@D vere “OZ7MUWOV
(090°) (sT90") (2190)
1840" 2690" 8h10" . beeeeseseteteneeeeseseneeeees “ 27ERNOV
(2¢s0") (09s0°) (860°) (8690°)
wna T9ZS" waxbZ97" e662" sexe TSZE™ “MOVIE
(¥600") (9bT0") (urt0') (1020°)
48690" — sexx SHO" — xx0S0" — wee€l80'— “7 sawak OT <
(s220°) (9¥20") (uv20") (o0€0")
evn €£80°— #2260" — 407H0"— gafQQ0) Herre reeereeneeeeseessneneseessneessessneessess ga@ad OTS
(64£0") (16¢0°) (s6¢0") (60+0')
sea 8201" — $ze0'— $20" — z$20'— ver saead $-2
(88z1") (8621°) (662T') (otet)
¥SL22°— 6201 — +60" — 0060" — srrsaead 7-1
(8112’) (se1z") (uet2") (1s12")
#40686" axe LOLUT wee 9087 'T see Obbe TD “sread 1-0
(4e9T) (goze") (90z€") (9zze")
n078S'E — sean STES™E — weanSZ28'E — wen f006'S — + -ydaoxoquy
+ £ z I aqqeHeA

 

 

NOLLANUSIG IVLNAVI, 40 Tao] NI SUALAWVAVG JO SALVWILSY GOOHITAMT-WOAWIXVIL

€ ATaVL
10'S d xxx

“10° <d < $0" xx

“$0. <d < Ol’

“SUS ere sasayjuaied ur sanjeA—‘aLON:

 

6°706

“

—

ST6L‘L—
(99S0°)

axa SO0V

9°s84‘L—
(990°)
aa STUD"

vsELL—
(49S0°)
seen DOEP™
(p£L0")
«6797
(6190°)
ae CbbT
(StS0°)
T6T0" —
(980°)
£6£0' —
(€920°)
#x8L9T —
(LET)
wna 8 S60" —
(6T€T)
#448883" —

[oun mne\

 
 

“pooyrfayl] BOT

 
 

 

 

“NYGWIO

 

“ 8SLLON

 

“STEIN

  

*7T9N

 

 

 

 

“ OSdN

 

“OSdA

 

“HLA

 

aa
of marriage cohort show increases in chances of disruption before 1960,
a period of relative stability from 1960 to 1970, and then substantial
increases after 1977. This pattern maps secular trends in divorce rates
fairly well. We also see that low husband’s income (in the year preceding
a survey response) increases the risk of disruption. These results closely
match those reported by others.

Comparison of the estimates in columns 1-4 of table 3 makes some
interesting points. First, the effect of number of children born during the
marriage (col. 2) is negative but quite modest in size. This effect reflects
the strong negative effects of young children, especially the firstborn, the
weak effects of preschool- and school-age children, and the positive ef-
fects of children older than 12. The measure of number of children ap-
pears to be quite misleading about the effect of children of different ages
and birth orders on the chances that their parents’ marriage will dissolve.
Note also that the effect of a premarital birth is much weaker in the
equation estimated in column 2, which includes numbers of children born
but none of their characteristics. This suggests some correlation between
occurrence of a premarital birth and timing and number of marital births
so that, without appropriate controls, some of the protective effect of
young children offsets the disruptive effect of a child born before mar-
riage.

Note also that the parameter estimates in column 3 come from models
that contain no measures of presence or ages of children and are virtually
identical to those in columns 1 and 2 for all the remaining variables in
the model. So, although a simple measure of number of children born
does not reflect the complex effect of children on chances that a marriage
will end, use of such a variable—or even no measures of marital child-
bearing—has little effect on conclusions about the strength of other
factors.

The final column of table 3 shows a very simple model, which includes
only splines for marital duration and a dummy variable for race. Note
that when other factors are not controlled, black couples are much more
likely to end their marriages than are whites. But controls for education,
low income, age at marriage, and so on substantially reduce this differen-
CONSEQUENCES OF CHILDBEARING PATTERNS FOR
MARITAL DURATIONS

In this section we present a discussion of specific hypotheses about the
effect of children on marital duration. To make the rather cumbersome
coefficients in table 3 more easily interpretable, we present simulations
of the proportion of marriages surviving and the hazard of disruption at
each duration of marriage for a couple with a chosen set of character-
istics.

The previous section presented estimates of the effects of children on
the hazard of marital disruption, focusing on effects of the first birth, all
subsequent births, and presence and numbers of children of various ages.
We find that a first birth dramatically lowers the probability that the
marriage will dissolve in the interval, with a smaller effect of later births.
This finding is consistent with the reasoning that a first birth acts as a
signal of the stability of the couple—so that those couples who plan to
stay together are much more likely than others to become parents, at
least in part because they plan to stay together. This finding is also
consistent with Cherlin’s (1977) argument that the high costs of caring
for a young child increase the costs of dissolving a marriage.

Couples with children ages five or younger face significantly lower risks
of disruption than other couples (although the effect is only significant for
the first preschooler). But the inhibiting effects of children older than
five decrease with the age of the child; we see very small, statistically
insignificant effects of children ages 6-12, with the effect of children
becoming positive in the teenage years, so that each child age 13 or older
significantly increases the chances that his or her parents will dissolve
their marriage. These results match quite closely other findings of the
effects of preschool children (Becker et al. 1977; Cherlin 1977). However,
previous research only vaguely suggests a positive effect of children ages
12 and older on the chances that their parents will dissolve their mar-
riage. We address this issue in more detail below.

Next, we assess the implications of the estimates presented earlier of
effects of children on the hazard of divorce and for the long-run marital
stability of couples with different numbers of children. We do this by
simulating hazards of disruption and survival rates for couples with base-
line values on the time-invariant independent variables while varying
the number and timing of children. This exercise displays the effect of
different patterns of childbearing on disruption at various marital dura-
tions, other things being equal.

We take: as the baseline case a couple with the omitted values on all
series of dummy variables: couples married in 1970, with a male head of
household with 12 years of schooling and an income higher than the
lowest quartile, who married at age 22 or older to a woman aged 20 or
older, with no premarital birth or birth in the first year of marriage.

Figure 1 displays the effects of any versus no children on hazards of
disruption of the marriage. Figure 2 shows survival rates at 20 years of
marriage for couples with no children, with one child, with three chil-
dren, and with five children.

These figures make two important points. First, as figure 1 shows,
hazards vary dramatically over the course of the marriage for couples
with and without children; those with no children face hazards that rise
steeply over the course of the first year and then fall gradually over the
remainder of the marriage, whereas parents face dramatically lowered
hazards of disruption when their first child is young and somewhat lower
hazards until their children become teenagers. But each older child in-
creases the hazard of disruption significantly.

Figure 2 shows the implications of this pattern for the long-term sur-
vival of couples with different numbers of children. The results are strik-
ing. The early protective effects of children on the marriage are largely
offset by the later disruptive effects, making the overall effect of children
on marital stability quite modest. This substantive result does not arise
from any constraints on the model but from the empirical results we
obtain.

We are now in a position to use our findings to answer some of the
questions posed earlier. First, does having children increase marital sta-
bility? The answer is clearly, yes and no. Having children increases mari-
tal stability in the short run. But in the long run, children have only a
modest stabilizing effect. Second, do younger children increase stability
more than older children? Clearly they do. In fact, we estimate that older
children significantly decrease marital stability after about age 12. We
find that each additional child reduces the parents’ risk of disruption
when the child is age five or younger and increases this risk when he or
she enters adolescence. The number of children changes the timing of
disruption but does little to change its long-run probability. Do children
born before or shortly after marriage decrease stability? The stability is
decreased greatly, but only for premarital births. Children conceived
before but born after marriage have no measurable effect on the stability
of the marriage.
children, considered by itself, affects the survival of marriages; any effect
that exists is modest at best. Second, young children decrease chances of
disruption, and this effect is strongest for the first birth. Third, under a
number of circumstances children significantly decrease stability of first
marriages, for example, if they were born out of wedlock or have reached
the age of 13. Both of these effects are substantial.’ So our results indicate
that, over the long run, marriages with many children are only slightly
more likely to survive than marriages with few or even none.

We argued earlier that children could hold couples together by raising
the financial or psychic costs of divorce, by increasing the gains from
division of labor between the couple (see Morgan et al. 1988), and because
of the high costs in time, effort, and money of providing for children,
especially when they are young. Whatever the mechanism through which
young children decrease the chances that their parents’ marriage will
dissolve, a substantial literature suggests that parents do not have hap-
pier marriages and are not happier with life in general than couples
without children (Glenn and McLanahan 1982). White and Booth (19856)
suggest that the desire to have children or the arrival of offspring keeps
marriages together even if they are of only moderate quality. Childless
couples of the same marital quality divorce more readily, even in the
absence of major problems. Thus, the intact childless couples become
more and more selected for high marital quality relative to couples with
children.

Our results suggest that, although young children hold marriages to-
gether, older children do not and may push couples apart. This result
could occur if a birth causes couples who would otherwise have divorced
to stay together, at least in the short run. Then the sample of couples
with older children would include some who would have divorced had
they not become parents. If the inhibiting effect of children fades and
eventually disappears, these couples would then show higher divorce
rates than childless couples simply because some of them had put off
divorce earlier.

An alternative argument suggests that children become a source of
marital tension as they get older, especially as teenagers, when the strains
of parenthood could augment the strains of marriage, leading to increased
risks of disruption. And once children reach adulthood and leave home,
parents need to give up very little contact with their children if they want
to dissolve their marriage. Although our data do not allow us to test these
REFERENCES

Bachrach, C. A., and M. C. Horn. 1985. “Marriage and First Intercourse, Marital
Dissolution and Remarriage, United States, 1982.” Advance Data from Vital and
National Center for Health Statistics 107, Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices publication no. 85-1250. Washington, D.C.: Public Health Service.

Becker, Gary S. 1973. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal
81:813-47.

Becker, Gary S., Elizabeth Landes, and Robert T. Michael. 1977. “An Economic
Analysis of Marital Instability.” Journal of Political Economy 85:1141-87.

Becketti, Sean, Bill Gould, Lee Lillard, and Finis Welch. 1988. “The Panel Study of
Income Dynamics after Fourteen Years: An Evaluation.” Journal of Labor Eco-
nomics 6:423—45.

Belsky, Jay, and Michael J. Rovine. 1988. “Nonmaternal Care in the First Year of
Life and the Security of Infant-Parent Attachment.” Child Development 59 (1):
157-67.

Campbell, Angus, Philip Converse, and Willard Rodgers. 1976. The Quality of Ameri-
can Life: Perceptions, Evaluations, and Satisfactions. New York: Russell Sage.
Cherlin, Andrew. 1977. “The Effect of Children on Marital Dissolution.” Demogra-

phy 14:265-72.

. 1978. “Remarriage as an Incomplete Institution.” American Journal of Soci-

ology 84:634—50.

. 1981. Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

Chester, Robert. 1974. “Is There a Relationship between Childlessness and Marriage
Breakdown?” Pp. 114-26 in Pronatalism: The Myth of Mom and Apple Pie, edited
by E. Peck and J. Senderowitz. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Chi, S. Kenneth, and Sharon K. Houseknecht. 1985. “Protestant Fundamentalism
and Marital Success: A Comparative Approach.” Sociology and Social Research
69 (3): 351-75.

Coombs, Lolagene, Ronald Freedman, Judith Friedman, and William Pratt. 1970.
“Premarital Pregnancy and Status before and after Marriage.” American Journal
of Sociology 75 (5): 800-820.

Coombs, Lolagene, and Zena Zumeta. 1970. “Correlates of Marital Dissolution in a
Prospective Fertility Study: A Research Note.” Social Problems 18:92—102.

Desai, Sonalde, P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale, and Robert T. Michael. 1989. “Mother
or Market? Effects of Maternal Employment on the Intellectual Ability of 4-Year-
Old Children.” Demography 26 (4): 545-61.

Duncan, Greg J., and Saul D. Hoffman. 1985. “A Reconsideration of the Economic
Consequences of Marital Dissolution.” 22 (4): 485-97.

Durkheim, Emile. 1933. The Division of Labor in Society. London: Macmillan.

Freedman, Deborah, and Arland Thornton. 1979. “The Long-term Impact of Preg-
nancy at Marriage on the Family’s Economic Circumstances.” Family Planning
Perspectives 11 (1): 6-21.

Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr. 1976. “Premarital Pregnancy and Marital Instability.”
Journal of Social Issues 32 (1): 67-85.

Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr., and Paul D. Allison. 1985. “How Marital Disruption
Affects Children: Variations by Age and Sex.” Paper presented at the annual meet-
ing of the Society for Research in Child Development, Toronto.

Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr., Christine Winquist Nord, James L. Peterson, and Nicho-
las Zill. 1983. “The Life Course of Children of Divorce.” American Sociological
Review 48 (5): 656-67.

Glenn, Norval D., and Sara McLanahan. 1982. “Children and Marital Happiness:
A Further Specification of the Relationship.” Journal of Marriage and the Family
44 (1): 63-72.

Glick, Paul C., and Arthur J. Norton. 1977. “Frequency, Duration, and Probability
of Marriage and Divorce.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 33:307-17.

Hannan, Michael T., Nancy Brandon Tuma, and Lyle P. Groeneveld. 1977. “Income
and Marital Events: Evidence from an Income-Maintenance Experiment.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 82 (6): 1186-1211.

Hill, Martha. 1984. “Marital Stability: The Effects of Spouses’ Time Together.”
Paper presented at the meeting of the Population Association of America, Minne-
apolis.

. 1988. “Marital Stability and Spouses’ Shared Time.” Journal of Family
Issues 9 (4): 427-51,

Hofferth, Sandra L. 1982. “Uses of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics for the
Demographic Study of the Family: Strengths, Weaknesses, and Suggestions for
Improvement.” Paper prepared for the National Advisory Board on the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics.

Hoffman, Saul. 1977. “Marital Instability and the Economic Status of Women.”
Demography 14 (1): 67-76.

Huber, Joan, and Glenna D. Spitze. 1980. “Considering Divorce: An Expansion of
Becker’s Theory of Marital Instability.” American Journal of Sociology 86 (1):
75-89.

Kingston, Paul William, and Steven L. Nock. 1987. “Time Together among Dual-
Earner Couples.” American Sociological Review 52, no. 3 (June): 391-400.

McCarthy, James. 1978. “A Comparison of the Probability of the Dissolution of First
and Second Marriages.” Demography 15 (3): 345-59.

. 1979. “Religious Commitment, Affiliation, and Marriage Dissolution.” Pp.
179-97 in The Religious Dimension: New Directions in Quantitative Research,
edited by Robert Wuthnow. New York: Academic Press.

McLanahan, Sara, and Larry Bumpass. 1988. “Intergenerational Consequences of
Family Disruption.” American Journal of Sociology 94 (1): 130-52.

Michael, Robert T., and Nancy Brandon Tuma. 1985. “Entry into Marriage and
Parenthood by Young Men and Women: The Influence of Family Background.”
Demography 22:515—44.

Moore, Kristin A., and Linda J. Waite. 1981. “Marital Dissolution, Early Mother-
hood, and Early Marriage.” Social Forces 60 (1): 20-40.

Morgan, S. Philip, Diane N. Lye, and Gretchen A. Condran. 1988. “Sons, Daughters,
and the Risk of Marital Disruption.” American Journal of Sociology 94 (1): 110-29.

Morgan, S. Philip, and Ronald R. Rindfuss. 1985. “Marital Disruption: Structural
and Temporal Dimensions.” American Journal of Sociology 90 (5): 1055-77.

Mott, Frank L., and Sylvia F. Moore. 1979. “The Causes of Marital Disruption
among Young American Women: An Interdisciplinary Perspective.” Journal of
Marriage and the Family 41 (2): 355-65.
Ross, Heather L., and Isabel V. Sawhill. 1975. Time of Transition: The Growth of
Families Headed by Women. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

Rossi, Alice. 1968. “Transition to Parenthood.” Journal of Marriage and the Family
30:26-39.

Schoen, Robert. 1975. “California Divorce Rates by Age at First Marriage and Dura-
tion of First Marriage.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 37 (3): 548-55.

South, Scott J., and Glenna Spitze. 1986. “Determinants of Divorce over the Marital
Life Course.” American Sociological Review 51 (4): 583-90.

Teachman, Jay D. 1986. “First and Second Marital Dissolution: A Decomposition
Exercise for Whites and Blacks.” Sociological Quarterly 27 (4): 571-90.

Teachman, Jay D., and Alex Heckert. 1985. “The Impact of Age and Children on
Remarriage.” Journal of Family Issues 6 (2): 185-203.

Thornton, Arland. 1977. “Children and Marital Stability.” Journal of Marriage and
the Family 39:531-40.

. 1985. “Changing Attitudes toward Separation and Divorce: Causes and Con-
sequences.” American Journal of Sociology 90 (4): 856-72.

Thornton, Arland, and Willard Rodgers. 1987. “The Influence of Individual and
Historical Time on Marital Dissolution.” Demography 24 (1): 1-22.

Waite, Linda J., Gus W. Haggstrom, and David E. Kanouse. 1985. “Changes in the
Employment Activities of New Parents.” American Sociological Review 50:263—72.

White, Lynn K., and Alan Booth. 1985a. “The Quality and Stability of Remarriages:
The Role of Stepchildren.” American Sociological Review 50:689—98.

. 19856. “The Transition to Parenthood and Marital Quality.” Journal of

Family Issues 6 (4): 435-49.
