Intergenerational Class Mobility in Postwar Japan

Author(s): Hiroshi Ishida, John H. Goldthorpe and Robert Erikson

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 96, No. 4 (Tan., 1991), pp. 954-992
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780737

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:01 UTC
1 An earlier version of this paper was presented at the meeting of the Research Com-
mittee on Social Stratification, International Sociological Association, Berkeley, Cali-
fornia, August 1987. This research was, in part, supported by grants of the Stiftung
Volkswagenwerk, Hannover, to the CASMIN project. For helpful comments on ear-
lier versions of this paper, we are indebted to Ronald Dore, Takeshi Inagami, Harold
Kerbo, Walter Korpi, Carl le Grand, Yoshiaki Nishida, Sawako Shirahase, Ken’ichi
Tominaga, Wout Ultee, participants in the seminar at the Nissan Institute of Japanese
Studies, University of Oxford, England, and anonymous AJS referees. Requests for
reprints should be sent to Hiroshi Ishida, Department of Sociology, Columbia Univer-
sity, New York, New York 10027.

© 1991 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0002-9602/91/9604-0006$01.50
nations do differ appreciably in the amount and pattern of their intergen-
erational social mobility if this mobility is considered (as it was by these
authors) at the “phenotypical” level of absolute rates—that is, of inflow,
outflow, or total rates calculated in percentage terms from the standard
mobility table.

ii) A basic cross-national similarity can, however, be detected if inter-
generational mobility is considered rather at the “genotypical” level of
relative rates, as expressed by odds ratios implicit in the mobility table,
which show the pattern of association between “origins” and “destina-
tions” or, alternatively, the relative chances of individuals of differing
origins subsequently being found at different destinations.’

The main argument that underlies the FJH hypothesis could be stated
as follows. Absolute mobility rates are influenced—via the marginal dis-
tributions of the mobility table—by social structural changes, and indeed
by a range of other factors, which can be regarded as exogenously deter-
mined so far as particular individuals and families are concerned. Thus,
since such factors will tend to be cross-nationally highly variable in their
effects—in consequence, for example, of major differences in national
economic and political histories—a corresponding degree of variation is
likely to be observed in absolute rates. In contrast, relative rates are
assessed net of all such exogenous effects and are influenced only by those
factors operating within a society to create differences in mobility chances
as between individuals of differing origin. If, then, it is the case, as FJH
would believe, that industrial societies show a basic similarity in their
patterns of socioeconomic inequality—as indicated, for example, in the
ordering of occupational hierarchies and in the distribution of income and
other resources within them—this similarity should in turn be reflected in
relative rates or, as FJH express it, in “endogenous mobility regimes.”

To operationalize the distinction between absolute and relative rates
on which their hypothesis depends, FJH treat a set of cross-nationally
comparable mobility tables as constituting a single three-way contingency
table of origin (O) with J categories, destination (D) with J categories J
= I), and nation (NV) with K categories. They then represent their hypoth-
esis of similarity in relative rates by the multiplicative model:
sent the “main” effects Hot origin, destination, and nation. The following
two-way terms (79, 7o%, 7) represent the association between origin
and destination, origin and nation, and destination and nation, respec-
tively. The fact that the model does not contain the one possible three-
way term, 9%, implies that OD will not vary with N; or, in other words,
that, under the model, the odds ratios defining the OD association will
be identical from one nation to another.

However, the FJH hypothesis may not be most usefully construed in
the strict sense represented by the model of equation (1)—which, not
surprisingly, perhaps, has rarely given an entirely satisfactory fit to em-
pirical data. The model does not in fact correspond to the hypothesis in
its verbal formulation, in which only a “basic” similarity in relative rates
is claimed (Featherman, Jones, and Hauser 1975, p. 340) and not the
complete similarity that the model entails. One can, we believe, construe
the hypothesis in a weaker, yet still meaningful sense as claiming that
across industrial societies there prevails a common or “core” pattern of
relative rates—or, as we would wish to say—of social fluidity, so that
even where cross-national differences do appear, they are still better
understood as variations on this common theme rather than, say, as
constituting a set of distinctive types of fluidity.

Working within the conceptual context of a class structure, Erikson
and Goldthorpe (1987a, 1987b) have developed a model of such “core”
fluidity and have applied this model to data on intergenerational mobil-
ity—of a high standard of comparability—for seven Western and two
Eastern European societies. The results thus obtained provide a measure
of support for the FJH hypothesis, interpreted in the way we have sug-
gested, in the following respects. (i) While statistically significant national
deviations from core fluidity, as modeled, do in most cases show up, these
deviations tend to be small relative to the extent of the cross-national
commonality in fluidity patterns that is revealed.’ (ii) The effects identi-
fied in the model as inhibiting or favoring intergenerational class mobility
would appear to be cross-nationally present in creating this commonality,
even if operating from one nation to another with differing force. (iii)
The national deviations displayed are often not ones open to explanation
in terms of macrosociological variables, by reference to which a system-
atic typology of national fluidity patterns might in turn be constructed.
The source of deviations from core fluidity that would appear to create
greater difficulty for the FJH hypothesis is that of political intervention
in the processes, or the outcomes of the processes, through which class
inequalities in mobility chances are produced and intergenerationally sus-
tained. But such intervention is itself highly variable, both in its objec-
tives and in the degree of success that it achieves.*

In this article, we have two, complementary aims. We seek, first, to
extend these earlier analyses to the case of Japan and, in this way, to
subject the FJH hypothesis to a further and, arguably, more demanding
examination. Second, we wish to take the results we obtain as a basis
for contributing to the now widely joined debate on the question of the
“exceptionalism” or “peculiarity” of Japanese industrial society (for re-
cent contributions, see Mouer and Sugimoto [1986]; and Dale [1986]).

As the first nation outside the European cultural sphere to have
reached the stage of “mature” industrialism, Japan represents an oppor-
tunity to test all claims regarding “generic properties” of industrial soci-
eties. And indeed such a test would seem all the more requisite in that
two different arguments are extant that, while in large part opposed to
each other, both lead to the conclusion that the FJH hypothesis will
in fact have greater difficulty in accommodating the Japanese than the
European experience.

One of these two positions is well represented in the work of Nakane
(1970). The general interpretation of contemporary Japanese society that
Nakane offers is clearly intended as a critical alternative to that provided
by Western, especially American, exponents of theories of modernization
and of “convergent” industrialism. Nakane argues that many of the
basic forms of traditional Japanese social structure have persisted in the
course of industrialization and, indeed, have found new expression
within an industrial context. Thus, she claims, in Japan the prevailing
modes of group formation and group relations have always produced a
society in which the dominant structural feature is “not that of horizontal
stratification by class or caste but of vertical stratification by institution
or group of institutions” (Nakane 1970, p. 87). In preindustrial Japan,
the key institutions were those of the household (ie) and community; but
at the present time the business enterprises, with their distinctive systems
of “lifetime employment” and “company welfare,” have taken the lead-
ing role in creating social identities and affiliations. “In Japanese society
it is really not a matter of workers struggling against capitalists or manag-
ers but of Company A ranged against Company B. The protagonists do
not stand in vertical relationship to each other but instead rub elbows
from parallel positions” (Nakane 1970, p. 87).
It seems to follow that Western concepts of social stratification and
hypotheses deriving from them are unlikely to be applied with much
success to the Japanese case. As Nakane herself puts it: “Even if social
classes like those in Europe can be detected in Japan, and even if some-
thing vaguely resembling those classes that are illustrated in the textbooks
of western sociology can also be found in Japan, the point is that in
actual society this stratification is unlikely to function and that it does
not really reflect the social structure” (1970, p. 87; our emphasis).*

The second position that we should note finds strong expression in the
work of another leading Japanese social scientist, Ken’ichi Tominaga. In
a number of publications (but see esp., 1982) Tominaga has criticized the
idea of Japanese “peculiarity” and has explicitly defended the relevance
to Japan of Western theories of industrialism. In Tominaga’s view, those
who, like Nakane, would see Japanese society as sui generis quite fail to
appreciate the radical nature of the sociocultural changes that industrial-
ization has produced, and their claims that traditional institutional forms
are reestablished within the new industrial order are largely miscon-
ceived. Thus, Tominaga points out that the “lifetime employment” sys-
tem, to which so much attention has been given, is not in fact “tradi-
tional” (it became common only after the First World War), is found
only in certain types of Japanese companies, and must in any event be
seen as differing only in degree and not in kind from employment prac-
tices that are quite widespread in many Western societies. Changes in
Japanese social stratification have in fact very closely followed the course
that theories of industrial society would predict. Through industrializa-
tion and accompanying social reforms, the traditional status order of
Japanese society has been progressively undermined, and in its place
there has developed a far less extreme and more “open” form of stratifi-
cation, based not on the ascribed attributes of family, kinship, or place
of origin but rather on the achieved attributes of education, occupation,
and income (Tominaga 1988). Indeed, Tominaga is prepared to suggest
that, despite its very different history, Japan can today be regarded as
having joined the United States as preeminently a “land of equality”
(1982).®

What, then, is significant for our present purposes is that, through the

5 Views such as those of Nakane are usually associated with the indigenous genre
of nihonjinron—an extensive literature treating questions of Japanese identity and
uniqueness—but it should be noted that they have been echoed by some Western
students of Japan. See, e.g., Vogel (1967, p. 108): “The basic cleavages in Japanese
society have not been between different social classes but between one corporate group
(composed of people at different positions) and other corporate groups.”

6 Defenses of Western theories of industrial society and “modernization” as applied
to the Japanese case have of course also been provided by Western authors. For an
early example, see Bennett (1967).
presentation of Japan as a society that in this way exemplifies the “logic
of industrialism” in action, Tominaga’s position (1979b, p. 83) also con-
stitutes a challenge to the FJH hypothesis. For, while this hypothesis
might allow for some initial developmental effect on social fluidity—in
the period, say, of “take-off” into industrialism—it does not envisage,
and indeed must preclude, any systematic relationship between fluidity
and the further development of industrial societies (see Grusky and
Hauser 1984, p. 20). Thus, if Tominaga’s arguments are valid, not only
might one expect Japan, as a “land of equality,” to show fluidity consis-
tently above the “core” level but, in any event, the essential features of
its mobility regime would seem unlikely, because of their rather rapid
evolution, to be adequately represented by any fixed model. In sum, one
could say that from Nakane’s (1970) position the Japanese case threatens
to expose the FJH hypothesis as being too universalistic—too neglectful
of cultural diversity that industrialism does not necessarily preclude; but
from Tominaga’s position, the critical potential of the Japanese case is
to show the hypothesis as being too static—too neglectful of the develop-
mental tendencies that are inherent in industrialism.

Finally, on one point at least Tominaga appears to agree with Nakane:
that is, in doubting the appropriateness of the concept of class to the
analysis of Japanese society. Tominaga does not, like Nakane, mistrust
universal concepts as such, but questions whether “class” is such a con-
cept (see, esp., Tominaga, Naoi, and Imada, n.d., pp. 1-5). The origins
of class distinctions lie, it is argued, in distinctive features of the history
of European societies, and when the concept is applied to these societies
it can then map out “real” social groupings; but Japan—like the United
States, though for different reasons—has a history in which the idea of
class did not spontaneously emerge, and thus its application to the pres-
ent-day society must involve a degree of artificiality. If Japanese stratifi-
cation is to be compared with that of other societies, a more “nominalist”
conceptual approach is to be preferred—as, for example, that provided
by mainstream American sociology in which stratification is envisaged
as a hierarchy or continuum of “socioeconomic” status groupings.’
on the results of national mobility inquiries as published, but rather on
the secondary analysis of the original data sets of these inquiries, follow-
ing the recoding of items of interest to standardized categories. In this
way a substantial improvement in the quality of comparative data can
be achieved (Goldthorpe 19855). Under the auspices of the CASMIN
(Comparative Analysis of Social Mobility in Industrial Nations) project,
located at the University of Mannheim, a major recoding exercise has
been undertaken of mobility data collected in a number of industrial
societies during the early and mid-1970s (for further details, see Erikson
and Goldthorpe [1987a]), and Japanese material has recently been incor-
porated into the data base.®

The Japanese data source is the 1975 Social Stratification and Mobility
National Survey (1975 SSM). This survey, designed by a consortium of
Japanese social scientists, took as its population all males aged 20-69
resident in Japan in 1975. The achieved sample size was 2,724, represent-
ing a response rate of 68.1% (for further details of the inquiry, see Ando
[1978]; Suzuki 1978).? For our comparative purposes we have restricted
the sample to one of economically active men 20—64 years old, and we
have recoded mobility data for these respondents to the categories of the
class schema shown in table 1, which, in its sevenfold version, serves as
the main basis for analyses within the CASMIN project.

When the present (i.e., 1975) occupational and employment status dis-
tributions of respondents to the 1975 SSM were set against nominally
comparable distributions from the 1975 Japanese population census, cer-
tain discrepancies emerged. Farmers and managers appeared somewhat
overrepresented at the expense mainly of manual workers in industry;
and employers and self-employed men were clearly overrepresented at
the expense of employees. The most likely source of this latter discrep-
ancy was thought to be that employers and the self-employed had higher
response rates than employees since the former could be more readily
found “at home” by interviewers.'° We decided therefore to apply a
weighting factor to the sample ex post, which was designed to bring the
employment status distribution of respondents into line with census data.
"| After sample restriction and weighting, we obtained the usable sample size of 2,064.
” One problem encountered in coding the Japanese data to the categories of the class
schema should be mentioned, even though it is numerically rather minor. This con-
cerns the employment status of “family worker,” which was accorded to 103 of our
respondents and to 28 fathers. We have in fact followed the usual practice of the
CASMIN project in placing such workers (where they are distinguished) together with
“other” employees. In the case of Western nations, this may be justified on the
grounds that family workers are typically in receipt of a wage or salary of some kind,
even though they may also benefit, directly or indirectly (e.g., through payments in
kind), from the proceeds of the family enterprise. However, we would believe that in
the Japanese case the category of family worker includes, in addition to such family
employees, some further number of persons who do not have claims to a regular wage
or salary but whose income derives either from some share in profits (and who in
Western surveys would probably have been treated as “partners”—i.e., as having
employer or self-employed status) or is in the form of largely casual or ad hoc disburse-
ments made by the family head. In particular, it would appear that until quite recent
times—probably around the early 1960s—family workers on Japanese farms, even
adults and married sons, could expect only such “pocket money” payment (see Fuku-
take 1967, chap. 4). Thus, the allocation of all Japanese family workers alike to
“employee” classes of the schema (in fact to classes III, V+ VI, VIIa, and VIIb) must
be reckoned to involve a degree of distortion. Some—though we cannot identify
which—would certainly have been more appropriately allocated to classes IVa +b or
IVc; while we must acknowledge that such others who are neither partners in the
family enterprise nor yet its paid employees do not readily fall into any of the classes
of the schema.
TN

ae
~exystururpe ur seakojdure yenueuuou

(e27aMIUIOD pue UOTTeNsIUIWIpeE) spesd
-saysiy ‘saaAojduia [enuewuou suynoy = BY TT

 

auryNod :s1ax10M TenueUIUOU aUTNOY mm

saakojduia fenuewu0ou

jo siostasadns ‘syuaurystqe}

-Sa JeLSsNpul [yews ur siaseuew ‘suerd

-1UYd9} epes3-s9ySryY ‘spetsgso pur ‘s10}
-esturupe ‘speuorssajoid apeis-1aM0'T ii

siayIOM sioyatid

yenuewuou jo srostAsadns ‘sue -oid aie] ‘syuaurystiqeysa peLsnput

SdaxIOM -499} opei3-s9y Sy ‘staseuew pure ‘s10} aBIe] ur sIaZeueU ‘sTeIgjo pue ‘s107
TeT[OI-ayIG MA It ~eIstUIUIpe ‘speuorssayoid :sse[D adtAIaS TI+I ~exsjuruipe ‘sfeuorssajoid apeis-s0y3tpy I

apoyy apoy! SSeIQ-uaAag peal IM
SSeIQ-OALT

‘uorsiaa pasdeyjod

 

 

VWEHOS SSVID FHL

T ATaVvL
“sse[o yoea 0} rajor Affensn |] am yoTyM
Aq—'972 ,‘SSEPP BdTAIaS,,—aUIeU ay} BAIS ay “Sask[eU IMO UT pasn APUNbedy ysoUL BuO ay} St SMTBYOS ay} JO UOISIOA ssE[I-UaAaS OY} 4X9} JY} UT PayZoIpUl Sy— "ALON

 

aaoge uononpoid Areuitid ut siayiom 13430 uoronpoid Areur
ILA + 2AI 2295 pure yeinynsuge :siaioqe] [eInyNIUZy QnA. -lid Ut siayJOM JayIO pue yeINNIUBy ITA
(uornonpoid Areur
sIayIOM -lid ul jou) siayiom [enueul paT[rys (emmy[NI143e ut jOU) S13

Ppal[rysuoN PIA -UN pue pal[Tystuies :s19y10M PaT[TysuON, SIA -YJOM TeNueUL pal[tysun pue pay[rystuses ey A,
iii)

iv)

hierarchy (HI1, HI2)—effects on mobility resulting from differences
between classes in the relative advantages they offer as classes of
origin and their relative desirability as classes of destination (in this
respect, a threefold hierarchical division of the class schema is intro-
duced, as indicated in fig. 1 below);

inheritance (IN1, IN2, IN3)—effects that increase the likelihood of
individuals being found in the same class as that in which they
originated;

sector (SE)—an effect resulting from barriers to mobility between
agricultural and nonagricultural classes; and

affinity (AF1, AF2)—effects on mobility that derive from particular
discontinuities (negative affinities) or linkages (positive affinities) be-
tween classes and that operate additionally to the more generalized
effects of hierarchy and sector.
where F;; is the expected frequency in cell ij of the mobility table, 1n is a
scale factor, 7? and +P are the main effects of class of origin and of
destination, and the remaining eight terms refer to the two levels of
hierarchy effects, the three levels of inheritance effects, a sector effect,
and negative and positive affinity effects.

In order to make more apparent the substantive content of the model,
we show first in figure 1 how the effects of hierarchy, inheritance, sector,
and affinity are seen as operating over the individual cells of the 7 x 7
intergenerational mobility table based on our class schema. (The eight
separate levels matrices relating to these effects are given in the Appen-
dix.) Then, in figure 2, we report parameter estimates, in log-additive
form, for each of the effects specified. The method by which these esti-
mates were arrived at is discussed by Erikson and Goldthorpe (1987a).
We further show in figure 2 the interaction parameters that result in each
cell of the table when all effects that apply to that cell are summed. The
arrow shape drawn in the figure serves to demarcate cells showing posi-
tive and negative parameter values and thus helps bring out the main
features of core fluidity: (i) a generally high—though variable—propen-
sity for intergenerational class immobility (positive values in all cells on
the main diagonal); (ii) two areas of high fluidity (positive values in off-
diagonal cells) that involve white-collar and blue-collar classes, respec-
tively; (iii) otherwise, a prevalence of either “neutral” or low fluidity,
with particularly marked inequalities in mobility chances (high negative
values in off-diagonal cells) being most often associated—as can be seen
by reference back to figure 1—with sector effects, that is, barriers to
mobility between agricultural and nonagricultural classes.

In the case of nine European nations, Erikson and Goldthorpe (19875)
fitted the model of core fluidity to intergenerational class mobility tables
in three ways of varying strictness: first, with fixed, cross-nationally com-
mon, parameters—as given in figure 2; second, with parameters esti-
mated separately for each nation; and third, in variant form—that is,
with modifications being allowed to the effects originally specified in
order to achieve a fit of an acceptable degree of closeness. In table 3 we
show the results of proceeding likewise with our Japanese table, and we
also indicate how these results compare with those for European nations.

When, to begin with, our model is applied with fixed parameters, the
indications are (table 3, rows 1 and 2) that the fit achieved to the Japanese
data is indeed less good than to the European. As can be seen, the
standardized G? and A (the proportion of all cases that the model misclas-
sifies) values returned for Japan are higher than those for any European
nation, and the percentage reduction in the G’ from the independence
model is lower; that is, the core model accounts for a smaller part of the
total origin-destination association within the mobility table. However,
when our model is applied with its parameters being allowed to vary
(table 3, rows 3 and 4), a rather different picture emerges. In this case,
while the fit to the Japanese table is still not acceptable, the deviations
from the model are of much the same order of magnitude as those we
have encountered in our analyses of European data. Both the G(S) and
A values for Japan now fall within the European range, and the percent-
age of the origin-destination association accounted for lies only just out-
side it. On the basis of the findings presented in the first four rows of
table 3, it could be suggested that the “contours” of social fluidity within
the Japanese class structure, although apparently displaying some un-
usual “highs” and “lows,” do nonetheless still follow broadly the same
lines as those that seem to be characteristic of European societies. '
We can further explore this possibility by considering how the model
of core fluidity could most effectively be adapted in order to fit the Japa-
nese data more closely. In working with European mobility tables, a
G*(S) of around 40 or below was regarded as an acceptable fit since, with
28 df allowed by the model (with parameters estimated separately for
each nation), this would imply a P-value of .05 or greater. Of course,
once changes to the model are allowed, there will be little difficulty in
producing, ad hoc, a version to fit any national mobility table. Thus, in
order to preserve interpretability in our results, we sought to restrict
modifications to a minimum and, further, to make ones that were not
prompted by the inspection of residuals alone but for which we could
also claim some substantive grounds.

Following this approach, we were able to devise a variant of the core
model adequate to the Japanese data that required changes in only three
cells of the mobility table—in each of which, it may be added, numbers
were quite small. (i) The IN2 and IN3 terms were included in the cell
indicating immobility in the class of agricultural workers, class VIIb; (ii)
the AF 1 (negative affinity) term was included in the two cells indicating
mobility from origins in the service class, I+TII (on the concept of the
service class, see Goldthorpe [1982]), to either the skilled or nonskilled
divisions of the working class, V+ VI and VIIa.

The first modification of the model would seem required in conse-
quence of the highly familial character of Japanese agriculture (see Fuku-
take 1967; Dore 1978). In Japan the majority of farm workers are in fact
members of the farmer’s family, and sons would appear to be accorded
the status of “family worker” while their fathers are alive or at least still
active. Thus, it turns out that 70% of men found in the VIIb-VIIb cell
of the Japanese mobility table had fathers who were still family workers,
even at the time of the respondent’s adolescence, and were themselves
family workers, presumably waiting to inherit in turn. In other words,
we need to adapt our model here to the fact that in the Japanese case
most men who appear as immobile farm workers are not true members
of an agricultural proletariat but rather are in the—protracted—process
of succeeding their fathers as farmers. '*
The second alteration to the model is required in order to accommodate
an evidently very low propensity. for the sons of service-class families in
Japan to be downwardly mobile into the ranks of the industrial working
class. This we would relate to the awareness—perhaps exaggerated
awareness (see Ishida 1986)— of the importance of educational credentials
in Japan and to the fact of unusually low chances of work-life counter-
mobility back from manual employment to service-class positions, which
we can illustrate from our own comparative data.'* A particular concern
may then be suggested on the part of service-class families to protect
their offspring from being forced into manual jobs from which there
might be no escape and a corresponding readiness to devote resources to
this end. For example, the practice would seem widespread of more
advantaged parents buying additional private tutoring for their children
in the attempt to ensure an education appropriate to white-collar employ-
ment (Fukutake 1982, pp. 209-11; Morishima 1982, pp. 182-83).

When the core model with the changes indicated was fitted to the
Japanese data, an acceptable G7(S) value of 35.9 was produced. '!* How-
ever, it further emerged that under this variant model the HI2 and IN2
terms were nonsignificant. These terms were therefore omitted and the
model reestimated. The G?(S) and other results that were then returned
are those in row 3 of table 3. (The levels matrices for this final version
of the model are given in the Appendix.)

In table 4 we seek to show what are the more detailed implications for
the pattern of Japanese social fluidity of the variant model that we pro-
pose. We report the parameter estimates for the model and give the
interaction parameters that are produced under the model for each cell
of the Japanese mobility table. Table 4 then corresponds to figure 2,
TABLE 4

PARAMETERS IN LOG-ADDITIVE FORM FOR EFFECTS IN THE VARIANT MODEL
FOR JAPAN AND RESULTING INTERACTION PARAMETERS IN THE CELLS OF THE

JAPANESE MoBILITy TABLE

 

Parameters ..
Standard error

 

 

 

 

 

 

EFFECT

Hii HI2 IN1 IN2 IN3 SE AFL AF2
—.16 a £74 s .79° —.63 —.68> 37
.07 .09 .29 14 17.06
I+l Tr IVa+b IVe V+VI Vila VIIb
174 21 21 —.79 —.84 -.84 -1.47
21 74 0 —.63 0 —.16 -.79
21 0 174 —.26 0 -—.16 -.79
—.719 -.79  —.42 134 -.79  -.26 0
—.16 0 0 —.63 174 2100 =.79
—.16 -.16 —.16 -.79 21 4 =.63
-1.47° 0 -.79° 0 --.79 —.16  -.79  —.26 1.53

 

® Indicates parameters that initially returned a nonsignificant value at the 5% level and have then
been omitted in reestimating the model.
» Indicates parameters directly affected by modification to the core model.
1. The fact that, as noted above and as indicated in table 4, two terms
can be dropped from our variant model for Japan does of course imply
further deviations from core fluidity. However, as regards the insignifi-
cance of the HI2 term, this is in part offset—as may be seen by reference
back to figure 1—by the inclusion of the AF1 (negative affinity) term in
the I+ II-VIla cell. The main deviations that arise thus take the form of
relatively low barriers to mobility between the service class and the two
agricultural classes and a marked asymmetry in fluidity as between the
service class and two divisions of industrial working class—low bar-
riers to upward movement coexisting with high barriers to downward
movement.

2. The insignificance of the IN2 term, taken together with the inclusion
of the IN3 term in the VIIb-VIIb cell, is of greater consequence. It means
in fact that in the Japanese case all nonagricultural classes have the same
level of inheritance. Comparison of the cell values given in table 4 with
those of figure 2 then shows that in Japan the propensity for immobility
within classes III, V+ VI, and VIIa—that is, among routine nonmanual
employees and skilled and nonskilled industrial workers—is higher, rela-
tive to “neutral” fluidity, than under the core model. On the other hand,
this propensity is correspondingly low within classes I+II and IVa+b,
those of the service class and the petty bourgeoisie. Two factors that may
in part account for this feature of Japanese fluidity can be noted. First,
the line between class I+TII and class III is particularly difficult to draw
in the Japanese case because of the widespread practice in business and
other organizations of young entrants being initially assigned to routine
clerical grades even though they may be of graduate status and have been
recruited specifically for, and will eventually move into, professional,
administrative, or managerial positions (Cole and Tominaga 1976, p.
74).!° Second, intergenerational stability within class IVa+b is likely to
be depressed in the Japanese case as a result of the role played by self-
employment—especially homework—as a response to unemployment
and also to retirement at around age 55, which is usual in Japanese
industry (cf. Steven 1983, pp. 80-86; also Cole and Tominaga 1976, pp.
77-78).

3. The sector effect on mobility would appear to be well below core
level in the Japanese case. This feature can be associated—as in several
European societies, notably the FRG, Hungary, and Poland—with a
high frequency of part-time farming or, alternatively, the supplementing
of farm-family incomes through various kinds of industrial work (Fuku-
take 1967, 1982, chap. 11), which would appear to be practices that
typically reduce the barriers to intergenerational mobility between ag-
ricultural and nonagricultural classes.”°

4. In the final outcome, then, areas of both relatively low and relatively
high fluidity are displayed within the Japanese pattern as represented by
our model. In general, though the tendency is for somewhat less unequal
mobility chances to be shown up than those implied by “core” fluidity.
In particular, it may be observed from the comparison of figure 2 and
table 4 that, in those off-diagonal cells where “neutral” fluidity is not
indicated, Japan has values that are in fact closer to “neutral” fluidity
than are the corresponding parameters under the core model in all cases
but two—those indicating downward mobility from service-class origins
into industrial working-class positions. To provide some overall assess-
ment, we have computed the values of all 441 odds ratios that are implicit
in the 7 X 7 mobility table, both under the core model and under the
Japanese variant model as applied to the Japanese data. Comparing cor-
responding ratios, we find that, in 54% of cases, the Japanese value is
the closer to 1— indicating higher fluidity than the core expectation—and
in 40%, the further from 1—indicating lower fluidity—with the remain-
ing values being identified.

Our results here could then be regarded as consistent with, though at
the same time more differentiated than, those reported by Yamaguchi
(1987) on the basis of a Japan—England—United States comparison. Thus,
our finding that Japan tends to have high fluidity—relative to core expec-
tations—apart from some high propensities for immobility is in line with
Yamaguchi’s suggestion that, overall, the Japanese pattern of social flu-
idity is “closer to quasi-independence” (1987, p. 489) than those of the
other two nations he studies. However, Yamaguchi does not, for exam-
ple, pick up the relatively low propensity for immobility among the petty
bourgeoisie—the “status” categories on which his analysis is based do
not take account of differences in employment relations; nor could his
analysis reveal the low sectoral barrier that we have noted—he has only
a single “farm” category treated as one of status—nor the marked asym-
metry in propensities for long-range mobility between the service class
and working class.

Finally in this section we report on the results of two supplementary
analyses that we have undertaken. The first was prompted by the possi-
bility that even if, as we would suppose, the concept of class is applicable
to Japanese society, we may still not have implemented our class schema
in the way most appropriate to the Japanese case: in particular, we may
not have given due recognition to the fact—which Nakane (1970) and
many other commentators have emphasized—that the employment rela-
tions and conditions of Japanese workers are influenced as much, if not
more, by the type and especially the size of the firm in which they are
employed as by their own occupation or skill level (cf. Cole 1979; Clark
1979; and the discussion in Mouer and Sugimoto [1986], pp. 281-88).

To explore this possibility to some extent, we modified the form of our
class schema so as to provide for a distinction between large and small
firms. The dividing line was set at 300 employees, which is that most
often used in official Japanese statistics for the manufacturing industry.
Specifically, we recategorized respondents’ and respondents’ father’s
class positions in the following ways:

1. Where the employing firm was large, cases originally allocated to
class III were transferred to class I+ II—the assumption being that in
large firms even routine nonmanual workers would tend to be more or
less fully integrated, in terms of their employment relations and condi-
tions, into administrative and managerial bureaucracies.

2. All cases allocated to classes V+ VI and VIIa were reallocated to
two new classes, V-VIIa (large) and V-VIlIa (small)—the assumption here
being that, so far as employment relations and conditions are concerned,
the division within the industrial working class by size of firm is more
consequential than that by skill.

With our mobility data organized on the basis of this modified version
of the class schema, we then repeated the analyses described above. The
main finding was that very little difference was made to the general
pattern of our results. The core model, without fixed parameters, fitted
slightly better (G’[S] = 51.0 as against 53.8) but with a broadly similar
pattern of residuals; and our preferred variant model then fitted some-
what less well (G’[S] = 45.4 as against 39.5). We can thus say that we
do not find any obvious indications that our class schema in its original
form fails to give insight into some highly distinctive feature of Japanese
social fluidity which attention to the size of employing firms would
reveal?!
The second supplementary analysis that we undertook was aimed at
investigating the stability of the Japanese pattern of social fluidity in the
light of claims, such as those made by Tominaga (1982; and see also
1969; 1979b), of relatively rapid change in the direction of greater open-
ness. Ideally we would have wished to work with appropriate data from
two or more mobility inquiries carried out at different times. However,
since such data coded to our class schema were not available to us, we
resorted to birth-cohort analysis of the data of the 1975 inquiry. We
divided the sample into four cohorts—those of men born 1911-20,
1921-30, 1931-40, and 1941-50 (men born between 1951 and 1955, who
were only 20-24 years old at the time of inquiry, were omitted); and, in
order to maintain adequate cell counts, we resorted to the fivefold version
of the class schema, as shown in table 1.”” We then fitted to the intergen-
erational mobility tables for our four cohorts what has elsewhere been
referred to as the constant social fluidity (CSF) model (Erikson, Gold-
thorpe, and Portocarero 1983). This model is in fact identical to that of
equation (1) above, but with cohort being substituted for nation. It thus
states that, while an association will exist between origin and cohort and
destination and cohort, as well as between origin and destination, no
three-way interaction occurs: in other words, the set of odds ratios defin-
ing the association between origin and destination is identical across co-
horts.

When applied to the Japanese data, this CSF model shows a rather
satisfactory fit: G? is 49.0 (P = .43; df 48). The model misclassifies only
3.9% of all cases and accounts for 88.8% of the total origin-destination
association. However, it is true that in this way we achieve only a
“global” test of the hypothesis of constant fluidity, and the presence of
various specific trends in fluidity, within an overall constancy, cannot be
ruled out.

We therefore went on to consider a further model that provides for a
linear trend in each of the 16 odds ratios in the basic set of our 5 X 5
tables; that is, the model allows each of these ratios to increase or de-
crease linearly across the four cohorts distinguished (for a similar model,
see Goldthorpe [1987], pp. 78-85). When this model is applied to the
Japanese data, the reduction in G’ from the CSF model is not significant
(AG? = 14.9, Adf = 16, P > .50). Furthermore, inspection of the linear
3 For the CSF model, G? = 44.8, df = 48, P = .60. The improvement in fit made
by providing for linear trends was again not significant (AG? = 5.3, Adf = 16, P >
90), and of the trends displayed in the 100 odds ratios, 43 went toward and 39 away
from greater fluidity, while 18 reversed.

24 The question might be raised of what changes, if any, appear in the various effects
specified in the Japanese variant of the core model if this is itself fitted to successive
cohorts within our sample. It would of course be in principle possible for such changes
to occur even while the pattern of relative rates—that is, of odds ratios—that was
generated remained unaltered. The practical difficulty that we encounter in trying to
answer this question is that we must of course work with the sevenfold version of the
class schema (in terms of which the model is specified), and even if we then collapse
our four cohorts to just two, e.g., to those of men born 1911-30 and 1931-50, the
resulting tables are disturbingly sparse. However, from an exercise conducted on this
basis, we find no significant differences from the earlier to the later cohort for the two
inheritance effects or for the sectoral effect in the model, and we find a shift (increase)
in the positive affinity term that is only marginally significant. The differences in
which we would have greatest confidence occur in the two remaining terms: the
hierarchy effect (HI1) strengthens across the two cohorts while the negative affinity
effect (the extended AF1 term) weakens. These changes would then be consistent with
a shift in fluidity patterns toward closer conformity with the core model—service-
class sons showing, e.g., a reduced propensity to become farm workers but an in-
creased propensity to become industrial workers. It may be noted that our results here
fail to confirm Yamaguchi’s findings (1987), based on analyses of data from the 1975
Japanese mobility study and that of 1955, that diagonal (or in our terms, inheritance)
effects decrease over time while the association between origins and destinations in
off-diagonal cells tends generally to increase. However, our results as a whole are in
broad agreement with those of other Japanese sociologists who have compared mobil-
ity tables based on the 1975 survey with ones based on the surveys of both 1955 and
1965. Thus, Kojima and Hamana (1984) have shown that the CSF model fits the
mobility tables for 1955, 1965, and 1975 when these are organized on the basis of an
eightfold occupational classification. The fit ceases to be acceptable if either a fivefold
Given, then, the results we have thus far presented in this article, how
should the Japanese case be regarded from the standpoint of the FJH
hypothesis (which, according to our understanding, claims that within
the social fluidity patterns of industrial nations a large commonality pre-
vails)? There is no doubt that, when set against the model of core fluidity
that we have proposed, the Japanese pattern has its “peculiar” features.
These however, in our view, can be better understood as variations on
a common theme—represented by the core model—than as expressions
of a national social structure that is in some way distinctive. A model
developed from the experience of European societies does prove capable
of reproducing Japanese mobility data to a very substantial extent.”

In this regard, we would wish to emphasize, first, the relatively few
modifications that need to be made to the form of the core model in order
to produce a fitting variant for Japan; and, second, the fact that, while
the overall extent of the Japanese deviation from the core pattern is more
extensive than that found in some of the European nations we have
studied (as is indicated in table 3), it could still scarcely be reckoned as
extravagant. Thus, what we can at all events say is that the Japanese
case does not create special problems for the FJH hypothesis in the sense
in which we take it. If this hypothesis is to be rejected on the basis of
the Japanese data, it could have been rejected already on the basis of the
European data that we have previously analyzed.

On the other hand, we would note that arguments claiming that Japan
is sui generis or possesses a quite different form of stratification to that
found in European societies can draw little support from our findings.
Thus, if it were the case, as Nakane (1970)—and also Tominaga (1982,
1988)—would maintain, that the “European” concept of class is inap-
propriate to the study of Japanese society, one would not expect an analy-
sis that rests on this concept to produce results that are largely compara-
ble to those achieved for European nations. Contrary to Nakane’s claim
that class as a form of social stratification is “unlikely to function” in
Japan and “does not really reflect the social structure” (1970, p. 87), we
would see in our findings clear evidence that a class structure does indeed
function in Japan, and it functions in much the same way as in other
industrial societies, to generate a pattern of unequal mobility chances.
We do not, we should stress, seek here to challenge the contention that
class consciousness, or even class awareness, is only rather weakly devel-
oped among the Japanese population. But what we do wish to maintain
is, first, that sociologists need not be restricted in the concepts they apply
to those that are prevalent among the “lay members” of the societies
they study; and, second, that class is in any event a concept relevant not
only to how individuals view the social world and act within it but also
to what actually happens to them—in the present context, to what
chances of mobility or immobility they have experienced or may expect.

Again, if we assume that Tominaga (1982) is suggesting that Japan,
together with the United States, is outstanding in showing how these
inequalities are diminished by the onward march of industrialism, our
evidence is once more uncongenial. As we have shown, social fluidity in
Japan does tend to be somewhat above the level provided for by the core
model, and Japan could certainly be regarded as a more “open” society
than some European ones; even so, it can scarcely claim preeminence.
Thus, if we calculate odds ratios under our national variant model for
Sweden, we find that a still-larger proportion of odds ratios fall below
“core” expectations than in the Japanese case—83% as against the 54%
reported above.”° Furthermore, we have also failed to find support for
the argument to which Tominaga is more obviously committed: that
social fluidity in Japan is, at all events, on a steadily rising trend. To the
contrary, our results would indicate that, despite the rapid economic
growth and structural change that have characterized modern Japan, a
large measure of stability has in fact been preserved in the pattern of
its social fluidity—just as, it may be noted, the FJH hypothesis would
imply.
the version that we have adopted; or, at all events, no further qualifica-
tions to the hypothesis would seem required to those that have already
been suggested on the basis of analyses of mobility in European nations
(Erikson and Goldthorpe 1987a, 19876). However, if we now wish to
focus our attention on the more general issue of the “exceptionalism” of
Japan as an industrial society, we must examine not only social fluidity
or the pattern of relative mobility rates, but also absolute rates. As we
noted earlier, FJH complement their claim of a basic cross-national simi-
larity in relative rates with the argument that, pace Lipset and Zetterberg
(1959), absolute rates can be expected to vary widely under the influence
of diverse “exogenous” factors. Thus, Japan could still be distinctive in
terms of this variation even though conforming to the generic pattern in
its “endogenous mobility regime.”

To begin with, we may consider total mobility rates. In the Japanese 7
X 7 intergenerational class mobility table, the proportion of respondents
whose present class is different from their class of origin—that is, who
are found in cells off the main diagonal of the table—is 73%. The range
of total mobility rates for nine European nations is from 54% to 76%.
Thus, while Japan tends toward the higher end of the range—with a
rate that exceeds those of seven out of nine European nations but falls
below those of Hungary and Sweden—no very compelling evidence of
exceptionalism is here provided.

However, if we turn next to inflow and outflow mobility rates, a some-
what different picture emerges. Rather than attempting to present these
rates in full, we resort, in figures 3 and 4, to graphic methods in order
to show the Japanese rates in relation to the corresponding European
ones. From both of these figures it is in fact apparent that the Japanese
data are not easily assimilated into the European pattern. With 18 of the
43 inflow rates represented in figure 3 (flows not exceeding 5% in any
nation are excluded), the Japanese value falls outside the European
range; and this is likewise the case with 15 of the 39 outflow rates that
are represented in figure 4. Moreover, these departures from the Euro-
pean pattern are of a rather systematic kind.

Thus, more detailed examination of figure 3 will reveal that, of the 18
instances of outlying Japanese inflow rates, five feature inflow from class
IVa+b (the petty bourgeoisie) that is greater than in any European na-
tion, and a further 10 feature inflow from class V + VI or class VIIa (the
two divisions of the industrial working class) that is less. And similarly,
of the 15 outlying outflow rates in figure 4, five feature outflow to class
III (routine nonmanual employees) that is above the European range,
and seven more demonstrate outflow to either class V+ VI or class VIIa
below the European range. On this basis, then, and from other informa-
tion contained in figures 3 and 4, it is possible to draw a number of more
general conclusions concerning the distinctiveness of class formation or
“reproduction” in modern Japanese society, especially as regards the
service class and the working class.

The Japanese service class is, to begin with, quite clearly set apart
from those of European nations in the pattern of its recruitment. The
class not only comprises an exceptional proportion of men of petty-bour-
geois origins, it tends also, as figure 3 indicates, to recruit heavily from
among the sons of farmers. Thus, of men found in class I+ II within the
Japanese sample, as many as 55% reported fathers who were engaged in
proprietorship or self-employment of some kind. This may be set against
a European range of from only 12% to 38%. Offsetting this, and in turn
a source of further distinctiveness, is then the very limited degree to
which the Japanese service class includes men of working-class origins:
only 10% of its members had fathers in classes V+VI and VIIa, as
compared with from 28% to 49% among our European nations. At the
same time, the intergenerational stability of the Japanese service class
would appear, in the light of figure 4, to be unusually low: only 47% of
the sons of service-class fathers are themselves found in service-class
positions as against a European range of 52%-67%. However, if, for
reasons noted above, we regard class III as being more closely associated
with class I+II in Japan than in most of our European nations, a rather
different conclusion is suggested. Intergenerational stability within the
white-collar bloc, which is constituted by classes I+II and III together,
turns out to be quite high in Japan: 65% of the sons of white-collar
fathers are found in white-collar positions and only 19% in the working-
class positions of classes V+ VI and VIIa. This may be compared with
the corresponding European ranges of 52%—-64% and 28%—43%, respec-
tively.

Turning, then, to the Japanese working class, the feature that is most
obviously distinctive is the very low level of its self-recruitment. In this
respect, our European nations themselves show wide variation—the pro-
portions of industrial workers who are the sons of industrial workers
extending from 78% down to 39%. However, the Japanese figure is lower
still, at only 21%. In just the same way as the service class, the Japanese
working class is far more extensively recruited than would seem typical
in Europe from among the sons of the petty bourgeoisie and farmers:
65% of men in classes V+ VI and VIIa in the Japanese sample were of
class IVa+b or IVc origins as against a European range of from only
7% to 45%. Moreover, the Japanese working class is also distinctive in
its low level of intergenerational stability. In our European nations, from
61% to 73% of the sons of working-class fathers were themselves found
in working-class positions; but the corresponding figure for Japan is only
56%. If, then, its low self-recruitment and its low stability are taken
QIIA PLIA IA+A OAT GRAIL LIL LI+h
QIIA ELIA IAtA OAT QIIA PITA TAtA PAT GPAL TIT II+1

|
QIIA ELIA ITAtA OAL GPAL III LI+l
“pepnpoxe are uolyeu Aue ul %¢ ZuIpesoxe jou sMOTJ “(SouT] [e21I12A Aq payeotput)
suoyyeu uvadoing ouru Joy a8ue1 ay} YIM paredutos (Op yoe[q Aq pazeorput se) uedef Joy saye1 Mmopino a8ejueIag—"p “OL

uoTJeuTysep JO sessetD
together, the “social metabolism” of the Japanese working class must
be reckoned as falling clearly outside the European experience. Unlike
the white-collar bloc, which, on a comparative view, would appear to
have formed as a rather stable collectivity, the working class that has
emerged in modern Japan must be said to possess only a very poorly
developed “demographic identity” (Goldthorpe 1985a, 1987). And it is
then, one may add, a rather obvious speculation that the small proportion
of manual workers in Japan who could be regarded, in Sorokin’s terms
(1959, chap. 17), as being both “hereditary” and “lifetime” proletarians
is a factor in the existence of only a weakly developed working-class
consciousness alongside a “relatively strong middle-strata conscious-
ness” that has been described by several Japanese investigators (see, e.g.,
Murakami 1984).

Thus, at the “phenotypical” level of absolute mobility rates, a case
for Japanese distinctiveness can indeed be made out—even while main-
taining that at the “genotypical” level of relative rates Japan, along with
other industrial nations, shares in a largely common pattern. What is of
course implied by such a position is that the source of this Japanese
distinctiveness must be traced primarily to the “shape” of the Japanese
class structure and to trends of class structural change during the modern
period. This point is in fact one that we can bring out empirically in the
data of table 2.

From this table, an association is readily apparent between those fea-
tures of the Japanese distributions of class origins and destinations that
depart most sharply from the European pattern and those features of
Japanese inflow and outflow rates that chiefly attracted our attention
above. Thus, the tendency for inflows to be high from class IVa+b and
low from classes V+VI and VIIa can be related to the proportion of
our Japanese sample with petty-bourgeois fathers being well above the
European range while that with working-class fathers is well below it.
And, likewise, the tendency for outflows to be high to class III and low to
classes V + VI and VIla can be related to—by European standards—the
unusually large proportion of our Japanese sample found in routine non-
manual positions and the small proportion in manual ones.

It should therefore be clear enough that, if we wish to account for
Japanese distinctiveness in absolute rates of intergenerational class mobil-
ity, we must account for the historical development of the Japanese class
structure rather than for any special features in Japanese social fluidity.”’
To attempt such a task in any detail must of course lie beyond the scope
of the present article, but there are two points of a general and prelimi-
nary kind that, given the purposes at hand, seem relevant.

First, some insights are to be gained from “patterns of growth” analy-
sis and, specifically, from recognizing the trajectory of development fol-
lowed by Japan as a “latecomer” to the process of industrialization.
Most important, it is in this way that the relatively small size of the
Japanese working class can best be understood. In nations that industrial-
ized early—for example, England and Scotland—the period of rapid
decline in the agricultural work force was accompanied by a massive
transfer of labor into manual, wage-earning jobs in industry, and it was
only at a later stage that a significant expansion in white-collar employ-
ment began (Goldthorpe 1987, chap. 11). In Japan, in contrast, the phas-
ing of these changes has been far more compressed. The decline in agri-
culture has gone together with a marked increase in white collar as well
as blue-collar employment, and the latter would, moreover, seem already
to have reached its peak. As a latecomer, Japan experienced a rather
precocious growth of large industrial and commercial bureaucracies and
hence of white-collar positions (Dore 1973; Cole and Tominaga 1976, pp.
76-82); on the other hand, the latecomer’s advantage of being able to
take over advanced, labor-saving technology, in manufacturing industry
especially, has allowed Japan to “catch up” in its economic development
without ever needing an industrial working class of the size that typically
emerged in Western nations (Singlemann 1978; Gagliani 1985)—even
though, we should note, table 2 may well exaggerate this difference in
relating only to men.”

Second, though, it would also seem essential to take into account in-
fluences shaping the Japanese class structure that are of a more specific
kind than could be captured by the “patterns of growth” analysis. Thus,
for example, one must recognize the persistence into the stage of ad-
vanced industrialism of a still relatively numerous petty bourgeoisie.
Small-scale, and usually familial, business enterprises would appear to
have survived in Japan to a greater extent than in most Western indus-
trial societies (Hara 1979; Patrick and Rohlen 1987). Many such enter-
prises are in the service sector, but small-scale manufacturing also re-
mains important within the context of the much-discussed “dualism” of
CONCLUSIONS

In this article, we have had two main objectives. First, we have sought
to use the Japanese case in order to provide a further test of the FJH
hypothesis. Taking this hypothesis to claim that industrial societies are
characterized by a common or core pattern of relative rates of intergener-
ational mobility—for which we have provided a formal model—we
know that the hypothesis receives some measure of support from mobility
data for a number of European societies. Here, then, we have asked
whether a similar outcome is achieved when we turn to Japan, the lead-
ing industrial nation outside the European cultural sphere. Second, we
have attempted to draw on our analyses of Japanese mobility data in
order to contribute to the wider debate on Japanese exceptionalism. In
this debate, questions concerning the nature of Japanese social stratifica-
tion have held a prominent place, and assessments of inequalities of
condition and opportunity in present-day Japan within a comparative
perspective have been implied, if not systematically presented.
Evidently, then, the issues that we address are not independent of
each other. Indeed, as we have noted, positions already taken up in the
literature would lead one to expect that the FJH hypothesis would not
in fact show up as well against Japanese as against European data be-
cause the Japanese form of industrial society is a distinctive one. How-
ever, it is perhaps when compared with such expectations that the results
we have reported take on greatest interest. For our two main findings
are (1) that the Japanese case does not appear to create any special prob-
lems for the FJH hypothesis but (2) that an argument for the distinctive-
ness of Japanese mobility rates, and in turn processes of class formation
or reproduction, can nonetheless be made—at least in relation to Euro-
pean experience.

As regards relative rates, our analyses of data from the 1975 SSM
survey indicate that Japan does not display any greater deviations from
our model of core social fluidity than those found among European na-
tions. That is to say, Japanese peculiarities in relative rates can be de-
tected, but they are no greater than, say, West German, Hungarian,
Trish, or Polish peculiarities; and there would thus seem little basis for
proposing a distinctive Japanese type of fluidity pattern, rather than
seeing Japanese fluidity as representing simply another national variation
on the common theme that our core model serves to define. Furthermore,
such a finding must throw doubt on larger claims either that Japanese
social stratification is sui generis and not amenable to analysis via the
concepts of Western sociology or that it represents a particularly ad-
vanced version of a generic form—for example, in the degree of equality
in relative mobility chances that it allows. To repeat, then, the point we
made earlier: our analyses of Japanese mobility at all events add nothing
to the argument for rejecting, or qualifying, the FJH hypothesis and
hence do not lead us to change the assessment of the FJH hypothesis that
was made on the basis of our European data and that we summarized
at the start of this article.

It is when we shift attention from relative to absolute mobility rates
that the case for Japanese distinctiveness emerges. Although the Japanese
total mobility rate is not exceptional, inflow and outflow rates alike show
departures from the ranges established by our European data that are
frequent and systematic; and, in turn, patterns of intergenerational re-
cruitment and stability, among the Japanese service class and working
class especially, are likewise set apart from the European experience.
This result is chiefly produced, as we have shown, through the Japanese
“mobility regime,” which is not itself unusually deviant from our core
model, operating within a class structure that, in the course of industrial-
ization, has developed in a very different way from the class structures
of our European nations. In part, this reflects Japan’s status as a late-
comer; but furthermore, as we have suggested, it is in this respect that
some scope does exist for Japanese institutional specificities to be in-
voked.

Thus, rather than calling the FJH hypothesis into greater doubt, the
Japanese case may serve in the end to underline the importance of the
insight that this hypothesis expresses. That is to say, if cross-national
regularities in social mobility are to be discovered, this will not be at the
APPENDIX

Levels Matrices for the Model of Core Social Fluidity and for the
Japanese Variant

The matrices for the hierarchy (HI), inheritance (IN), sector (SE), and
affinity (AF) effects in the core model and in the Japanese variant are as
shown in figure Al.

It should be noted that in the case of HI and IN, a separate matrix is
provided for each shift in the level of the effect. For example, since—as
is indicated in figure 1—we aim to capture hierarchy effects on the basis
of a threefold division of our class schema, we need here two matrices.
In HI1, we put at level 1 cells that imply no hierarchical mobility, and
at level 2 all those that do imply such mobility. Then in HI2 we put at
level 2 those cells that imply a “two-step” movement—that is, from the
highest hierarchical division to the lowest or vice versa—while all other
cells go to level 1. Correspondingly, the three IN matrices should be
interpreted as providing for a base level of inheritance effects and for
two shifts from this to higher-level inheritance effects. In the case of SE,
on the other hand, there is only one level of effect, and the two AF effects
are seen as going in opposite directions, AF1 relating to negative and
AF? to positive affinities.

Each matrix relates, of course, to the cells of the 7 X 7 class mobility
table, and the term above each is that by which the effect it represents
is indexed in our model as expressed by equation (2) in the text. For
further details, see Erikson and Goldthorpe (19874).
CORE

HI1 (a(i, j))

ANNA
ANNA
Adaanaana
Adaadaa
Adaadana
Aadaaadaa
nANAANAN

HI2 (b(i, j))

Nada
Addddag
dade
dddddded
dddddae
ddd
daANAANA

IN1 (c(i, j))

dada
deadanae
dan aNae|
aed Nd ae
aA Nd dae
WAM ade
Addadade

IN2 (dG, j))

ddd
dHeddaded
Haddad
Head
tA NA de
dade
Adda
REFERENCES

Ando, Bunshiro. 1978. “Hyohon Sekkei” (Sample design). Pp. 16—28 in Shakai Kaiso
to Shakai Ido (Social stratification and social mobility), edited by the 1975 SSM
Committee. Tokyo: 1975 SSM Committee.

Bennet, John W. 1967. “Japanese Economic Growth: Background for Social
Change.” Pp. 411-53 in Aspects of Social Change in Modern Japan, edited by
Ronald P. Dore. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Broadbridge, Seymour. 1966. Industrial Dualism in Japan. London: Cass.

Clark, Rodney. 1979. The Japanese Company. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press.

Cole, Robert E. 1979. Work, Mobility and Participation: A Comparative Study of
American and Japanese Industry. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cole, Robert E., and Ken’ichi Tominaga. 1976. “Japan’s Changing Occupational
Structure and Its Significance.” Pp. 53-95 in Japanese Industrialization and Its
Social Consequences, edited by Hugh Patrick. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Dale, Peter N. 1986. The Myth of Japanese Uniqueness. New York: St. Martin’s.

Dore, Ronald P. 1973. British Factory—Japanese Factory. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

. 1978. Shinohata. New York: Pantheon.

Erikson, Robert, and John H. Goldthorpe. 1987a. “Commonality and Variation in
Social Fluidity in Industrial Nations. Part I: A Model for Evaluating the ‘FJH
Hypothesis.’ ” European Sociological Review 3:54-77.

. 19876. “Commonality and Variation in Social Fluidity in Industrial Nations.
Part II: The Model of Core Social Fluidity Applied.” European Sociological Review
3:145-66.

Erikson, Robert, John H. Goldthorpe, and Lucienne Portocarero. 1983. “Intergenera-
tional Class Mobility and the Convergence Thesis.” British Journal of Sociology
34:303—43.

Featherman, David L., F. Lancaster Jones, and Robert M. Hauser. 1975. “Assump-
tions of Social Mobility Research in the U.S.: The Case of Occupational Status.”
Social Science Research 4:339-60.

Fukutake, Tadashi. 1967. Japanese Rural Society. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press.

. 1982. The Japanese Social Structure. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.

Gagliani, Giorgio. 1985. “Long-Term Changes in the Occupational Structure.” Euro-
pean Sociological Review 1:183-210.

Goldthorpe, John H. 1982. “On the Service Class, Its Formation and Future.” Pp.
162-85 in Social Class and the Division of Labour, edited by Anthony Giddens and
Gavin Mackenzie. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

. 19854. “Soziale Mobilitat und Klassenbildung: Zur Erneuerung einer Tradi-

tion soziologischer Forschung.” Pp. 174-204 in Die Analyse Sozialer Ungleichheit,

edited by Hermann Strasser and John H. Goldthorpe. Opladen: Westdeutscher

Verlag.

. 19856. “On Economic Development and Social Mobility.” British Journal
of Sociology 36:549—73.

Goldthorpe, John H., in collaboration with Catriona Llewellyn and Clive Payne.
1987. Social Mobility and Class Structure in Modern Britain, 2d rev. and enlarged
ed. Oxford: Clarendon.

Grusky, David B., and Robert M. Hauser. 1984. “Comparative Social Mobility Re-
visited: Models of Convergence and Divergence in 16 Countries.” American Socio-
logical Review 49:19-38.

Hara, Akira. 1979. “Kaikyu Kosei no Shinsuikei” (A new estimation of class composi-
tion). Pp. 325-64 in Ryotaisen kan no Nihon Shihonshugi (Japanese capitalism
between the two wars), edited by Yoshio Ando. Tokyo: Todai Shuppan Kai.

Hout, Michael. 1983. Mobility Tables. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.

Ishida, Hiroshi. 1986. “Educational Credentials, Class, and the Labor Market: A
Comparative Study of Social Mobility in Japan and the United States.” Ph.D.
dissertation. Harvard University, Department of Sociology.

Iwamoto, Takeyoshi. 1985. “Sedaikan Ido no Susei Bunseki” (Trend analysis of
intergenerational mobility). Pp. 215-28 in Suri Shakaigaku no Genzai (Contempo-
rary mathematical sociology), edited by Junsuke Hara and Michio Umino. Tokyo:
Suri Shakaigaku Kenkyukai.

Kojima, Hideo, and Atsushi Hamana. 1984. “Shokugyo Ido no Keiko Bunseki”
(Trend analysis of occupational mobility). Ibaraki Daigaku Kyoiku Gakubu Kiyo
33:17-32.
Lipset, S. M., and Hans L. Zetterberg. 1959. “Social Mobility in Industrial Soci-
eties.” Pp. 11-75 in Social Mobility in Industrial Society, edited by S. M. Lipset
and Reinhard Bendix. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Morishima, Michio. 1982. Why Has Japan “Succeeded”? Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Mouer, Ross, and Yoshio Sugimoto. 1986. Images of Japanese Society. London: KPI.

Murakami, Yasusuke. 1984. Shin Chukan Taishu no Jidai (The age of new middle
mass). Tokyo: Chuo Koronsha.

Nakane, Chie. 1970. Japanese Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Patrick, Hugh, and Thomas Rohlen. 1987. “Small-Scale Family Enterprises.” Pp.
331-84 in The Political Economy of Japan, Vol. 1: The Domestic Transformation,
edited by Kozo Yamamura and Yasukichi Yasuba. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Uni-
versity Press.

Saxenhouse, Gary P. 1976. “Country Girls and Communication among Competitors
in the Japanese Cotton-spinning Industry.” Pp. 97-125 in Japanese Industrializa-
tion and Its Social Consequences, edited by Hugh Patrick. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Singlemann, Joachim. 1978. From Agriculture to Services: The Transformation of
Industrial Employment. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.

Sorokin, Pitirim A. 1959. Social and Cultural Mobility. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Steven, Rob. 1983. Classes in Contemporary Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Suzuki, Tatsuzo. 1978. “Hyohon Seido” (Sample accuracy). Pp. 16-28 in Shakai
Kaiso to Shakai Ido (Social stratification and social mobility), edited by the 1975
SSM Committee. Tokyo: 1975 SSM Committee.

Tokuyasu, Akira. 1986. “Nihon ni okeru Sangyoka to Sedaikan no Susei Bunseki”
(Industrialization and trends in intergenerational mobility in Japan). Pp. 101-11 in
Shakai Kaiso no Susei to Hikaku (Trends and comparisons of social stratification),
edited by Ken’ichi Tominaga. Tokyo: SSM Susei to Hikaku Kenkyukai.

Tominaga, Ken’ichi. 1969. “Trend Analysis of Social Stratification and Social Mobil-
ity in Contemporary Japan.” Developing Economies 7:471—-98.

. 1979a. “Shakai Kaiso to Shakai Ido eno Apurochi” (Approaches to social

stratification and social mobility). Pp. 3-29 in Nihon no Kaiso Kozo (The structure

of social stratification in Japan), edited by Ken’ichi Tominaga. Tokyo: Todai Shup-
pan Kai.

. 1979b. “Shakai Kaiso to Shakai Ido no Susei Bunseki” (Trend analysis of

social stratification and mobility). Pp. 33-87 in Nihon no Kaiso Kozo (The structure

of social stratification in Japan), edited by Ken’ichi Tominaga. Tokyo: Todai Shup-
pan Kai.

. 1982. “Problems of Viewpoint in Interpreting Japanese Society: Japan and

the West.” Ostasiatisches Seminar, Freie Universitat Berlin, Occasional Papers no.

38,

 

 

 

. 1988. Nihon Sangyo Shakai no Tenki (Change in Japanese industrial society).
Tokyo: Todai Shuppan Kai.

Tominaga, Ken’ichi, Atsushi Naoi, and Takatoshi Imada. n.d. “Current Trends in
Studies of Social Stratification and Mobility in Japan.” University of Tokyo.

Vogel, Ezra F. 1967. “Kinship Structure, Migration to the City, and Modernization.”
Pp. 91-111 in Aspects of Social Change in Modern Japan, edited by Ronald P.
Dore. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Yamaguchi, Kazuo. 1987. “Models for Comparing Mobility Tables: Towards Parsi-
mony and Substance.” American Sociological Review 52:482—94.
