Delinquent Peers Revisited: Does Network Structure Matter?

Author(s): Dana L. Haynie

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 106, No. 4 (January 2001), pp. 1013-1057
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/320298

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:27 UTC
This study examines whether structural properties of friendship net-
works condition the association between friends’ delinquency and
an individual’s own delinquent behavior. Data from the Add Health
allows a more accurate conceptualization of the peer network and
a more rigorous measurement of peer delinquency than previous
research. Findings from this study indicate that friends’ delinquency
is associated with an adolescent’s own delinquency involvement.
However, characteristics of adolescents’ friendship networks, such
as its density and adolescents’ centrality and popularity, condition
the delinquency-peer association. Network density, in particular,
emerges as an important component of the delinquency-peer asso-
ciation, with very cohesive networks containing stronger delin-
quency-peer associations than those that are less cohesive. These
findings suggest that it is necessary to consider the underlying struc-
tural properties of friendship networks in order to understand the
impact of peer influence on adolescent delinquency.
linquency.’ Dating back to the 1930s with Shaw and McKay’s (1931)
discovery that more than 80% of juveniles appearing before court had
peer accomplices, researchers have noted the strong tendency for offenders
to commit delinquent acts in the company of others (Akers et al. 1979;
Elliott, Huizinga, and Ageton 1985; Elliott and Menard 1996; Jensen 1972;
Kandel 1978; Krohn 1974; Matsueda 1982; Matsueda and Anderson 1998;
Matsueda and Heimer 1987; Reiss 1986; Short 1957; Voss 1969; Warr
1996). In fact, many studies find that the relationship of peer delinquency
to self-report delinquency exceeds that of any other independent variable,
regardless of whether the focus is on status offenses, minor property
crimes, violent crimes, or substance use (Akers et al. 1979; Elliott et al.
1985; Jensen 1972; Matsueda and Heimer 1987; Short and Nye 1958;
Warr and Stafford 1991). Therefore, causal explanations of delinquency
that emphasize delinquent peer associations (e.g., differential association,
social learning, and developmental theories such as Thornberry’s [1987]
interactional theory) appear justified.

Although prior delinquency research establishes that adolescents are
likely to behave in a manner consistent with their friends, it has yet to
incorporate the network structure of friendship relations into empirical
models. This omission of network structure is attributable, in part, to
researchers’ reliance on a one-dimensional conceptualization of peer in-
fluence as “exposure” to delinquent friends. However, by ignoring the
underlying social structure of friendship patterns, prior research has failed
to address whether network structure moderates peer influence. For ex-
ample, in closely knit (dense) friendship networks, peer behavior may
more strongly influence members’ behavior than is the case in less cohesive
networks.

This study departs from previous research by recognizing the multi-
faceted nature of peer groups. Most adolescents do not belong to a single,
densely knit, isolated friendship clique, but instead are affiliated with
many loosely bounded friendship groups with varying degrees of cohesion
and permeability (Dunphy 1963). A measure of the number of delinquent
friends is thus insufficient to truly capture the dynamics involved in the
peer delinquency association. Since it is generally acknowledged that peers
play an important role in delinquency involvement, it is important to
examine the factors that may affect the peer-adolescent relationship. This
study incorporates the friendship networks in which delinquent and non-
delinquent adolescents are enmeshed, in order to address the question:
Do structural characteristics of the adolescent’s friendship network con-
dition the association between friends’ behavior and delinquency
involvement?

Data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (here-
after, Add Health) enable this question to be addressed in a novel manner,
through the application of a social network perspective and methods.*
Because these data contain detailed social network information on high
school-age adolescents, more valid measures of peer delinquency are pos-
sible. In contrast to previous work, this study uses measures of peer de-
linquency that are based on responses from the peers themselves, rather
than perceptions from respondents. In addition, these data allow incor-
poration of the underlying structural characteristics of friendship net-
works. This allows for a determination about whether the strength of the
delinquency-peer association depends upon how tightly an adolescent is
integrated into the peer network (density), the adolescent’s position within
the network (centrality), and the adolescent’s prestige (popularity) among
network members. The use of network methods will provide a deeper
understanding of the role that adolescent friendship networks play in
either facilitating or discouraging delinquent behavior.
expand their personal networks to avoid becoming lost and isolated in
the new school setting (Eckert 1989).

The importance of finding a position within larger friendship networks
suggests that adolescents are particularly susceptible to peer influence
during these transition years, including behavioral constraints that may
pull them toward or away from delinquent behavior. This concern over
locating position within the school hierarchy and gaining a sense of be-
longing among their peers leads students to adapt a variety of strategies
to enhance peer solidarity. One strategy involves the use of gossip to
constrain friends’ behaviors. As Eder and Enke (1991) explain, “this con-
straint stems from the fact that while adolescents appear comfortable
challenging the evaluations made by an individual, they seem reluctant
to challenge a ‘group’ evaluation. Once an initial evaluation was sup-
ported by another group member, it was never challenged” (p. 505). For
boys, a mechanism of ensuring conformity among peers involves “policing
masculinity” (Best 1983) with behaviors such as aggressiveness, domi-
nance, and toughness encouraged among peers (Messerschmidt 2000). To
ensure compliance with this masculine ideology, boys often use derogatory
female and homosexual references to keep group members in line (Best
1983; Messerschmidt 2000).

These findings suggest that friendship networks and peers exert con-
siderable influence over adolescents’ behavior, including delinquency.
While ethnographic research is invaluable in highlighting the social mech-
anisms that peers use to constrain friends’ behavior, it cannot tell us
whether structural characteristics of the friendship networks provide more
or less opportunity for these mechanisms to operate. This requires detailed
information on the structural characteristics of friendship networks for a
large number of adolescents situated across many different contexts.
so that most delinquent offenders belong to multiple groups, with each
group specializing in a smaller range of offenses. This finding also high-
lights the multifaceted nature of peer groups; individuals in school settings
can be members of many different friendship groups and face differing
degrees of constraint depending upon whether the behavior, norms, and
values of the groups coincide or diverge.’

The nature of friendship relations in delinquent versus nondelinquent
networks is developed in two influential studies. First, an often cited study
by Giordano, Cernkovich, and Pugh (1986) finds that various dimensions
of friendship relations do not differ markedly between delinquent and
nondelinquent adolescents. In contrast to control theory’s depiction of
delinquents’ friendships as cold and exploitive (Hirschi 1969), Giordano
et al. (1986) find that both delinquent and nondelinquent adolescents
report similar levels of attachment, intimacy, and contact with friends.*
Similarly, Kandel and Davies (1991) investigate whether friendship net-
works among adolescents who do and do not use illicit drugs differ in
terms of intimacy. Again, contrary to social control theory, the authors
find few differences in the characteristics of the friendship network. In
fact, among frequent drug users, they find more intimate friendships than
among adolescents with no drug use or lower levels of drug use.°

While these two studies go beyond others by incorporating the nature
of friendship relations, they are largely descriptive and do not consider
whether characteristics of friendship relations condition the influence of
friends’ delinquency on an adolescent’s own delinquency involvement.
This is an important issue since Agnew (1991) finds that subjective char-
acteristics of the social relations of friendships (e.g., attachment, contact,
delinquency) condition the effect of friends’ behavior on adolescents’ se-
rious delinquency. Specifically, the effect of peers is strongest when an
adolescent has strong attachment to peers, much contact with friends,
and when their peers display delinquent patterns.

These are noteworthy findings because they indicate that even in de-
linquent peer networks, individuals display substantial variation in their
attachment to and the amount of time they spend with their peers—both
of which condition peer influence. While Agnew’s research suggests that
members of a friendship network are not affected by the network’s be-
havior in exactly the same way, it is unknown whether structural prop-
erties of the network, such as density, centrality, and popularity, similarly
condition peer influence. The latter finding may suggest that both struc-
tural and emotional ties play a role in determining the strength of the
association between delinquent peers and delinquency involvement.

Therefore, despite advancing understanding of the role that peers play
in adolescents’ delinquency, prior research does not account for the role
of network structure on adolescent delinquency. The criminological lit-
erature, in particular, and sociological literature, in general, reflect a sur-
prising lack of clarity in conceptualizing peer influences and little con-
sideration of peer network structure. By focusing only on the number of
delinquent friends reported by an adolescent, prior research assumes that
everyone in the friendship network is affected similarly by the behavior
of the friendship network, regardless of their position within the network
or their status among network members. The assumption that persons
and groups are independent overlooks how interconnections among per-
sons influence behavior.

In contrast, a social network perspective posits that examining an im-
portant element of peer relations, the observed pattern of interpersonal
friendship relations, provides insight into whether the susceptibility ad-
olescents have to their friends’ behaviors derives in part from their po-
sition within the peer network. The interrelationships among adolescents
serve as the context in which social norms and cultural values regarding
delinquency are shared. Because of the importance of peer relationships
in delinquency, the fact that few accounts of the delinquency-peer asso-
ciation are based on a social network perspective provides an opportunity
to see whether a network approach provides a deeper understanding of
the delinquency-peer association.
adequately.’ In regard to temporal ordering, there is some evidence that
adolescents sort themselves into friendship networks based on aggressive
personality (Cairns et. al. 1988; Patterson and Dishion 1985). Although
this selection into particular friendship networks may partially explain
the association between delinquent peers and delinquency, it should also
increase delinquency through differential association and processes of so-
cial contagion (Cairns and Cairns 1994; Elliott and Menard 1996; Kandel
1978; Krohn et al. 1996; Matsueda and Anderson 1998; Thornberry 1987).

Furthermore, while some criminologists speak of friendship formation
as a self-selection process where “birds of a feather flock together” (Glueck
and Glueck 1950), early child socialization researchers (e.g., Kupersmidt,
Coie, and Dodge 1990) suggest that a process of peer rejection drives the
formation of more problematic (i.e., aggressive and delinquent) friendship
networks. Additionally, many children and adolescents have to wait until
a peer group selects them, although they can accept or veto participation.
This is because the number and type of networks open to them are limited
by many factors including age, gender, cultural, and socioeconomic fac-
tors—which may be even more important factors than personality or
behavior orientation (Brown, Lohr, and Trujillo 1990). This suggests that
children and adolescents do not have as much control/freedom in selecting
their friends as the selection perspective argues. Limited opportunities to
join particular networks may make the peer network that adolescents
eventually find a particularly important source of influence on their
behavior.
Social Control Theory

Travis Hirschi’s (1969) social control theory of delinquency is based largely
on the notion of social integration focal to the work of Durkheim (1951).
Instead of focusing on why certain individuals commit crime, social con-
trol theory emphasizes the necessity of explaining why individuals refrain
from criminal activity (Hirschi 1969). Offering motivation for criminality
is unnecessary, according to Hirschi, because “we are all animals and thus
all naturally capable of committing criminal acts” (1969, p. 31). Instead,
he focuses on constraining influences and argues that adolescents tightly
bonded to family, the school, and peers are less likely to engage in delin-
quent acts because these bonds restrain them from acting on their natural
antisocial impulses (1969).*

Although Hirschi discusses four bonds responsible for constraining de-
linquent behavior—attachment, involvement, commitment, and_be-
lief—most research concentrates on the importance of the bond of at-
tachment (Vold, Bernard, and Snipes 1998). According to social control
theory, adolescents who have strong ties of affection to others (family,
friends, school) are more behaviorally constrained than those lacking these
bonds and thus less likely to become involved in delinquency. In terms
of friendship networks, social control theory posits that the more bonds
an adolescent has via friendship ties, which carry a connotation of at-
tachment, the less delinquent the adolescent will be.

While research provides modest empirical support for Hirschi’s theory
(see a review of research on this issue in Jensen and Rojek [1992]), it is
evident that a complete explanation of delinquent behavior is not offered
by the theory. One of the more problematic aspects of social control theory
involves its neglect of the context in which the social bonds occur. Spe-
cifically, while research establishes that in most cases social bonds via
attachment are associated with a reduction in delinquency, they are not
likely to reduce delinquency when adolescents are bonded to delinquent
friends. When bonded to delinquent peers, the constraint of the bond is
toward delinquency. Despite Hirschi’s denial of the importance of delin-
quent friends, it is these delinquent associates who are implicated in the
transmission of delinquency and to whom differential association theory
attaches primary importance.

Although social control theory pays limited attention to the context in
which social bonds occur, its focus on the constraining influence of social
integration is consistent with a social network perspective (Krohn 1986).’
Being integrated within a friendship network where adolescents are likely
to report high attachment and time spent with peers (Giordano et al. 1986)
either facilitates or discourages delinquency involvement depending upon
the norms, values, and behaviors evident in the network (see also Krohn
1986; Elliott et al. 1985). Consistent with Eder and Enke’s (1991) finding
that although adolescents often discount a peer’s evaluation, but never a
group evaluation, is the notion that embeddedness within a social struc-
ture (such as a friendship network) acquires additional influence because
it creates expectations for behavior, while reinforcing the social norms
and beliefs of the network (Granovetter 1973, 1974, 1985). This idea of
embeddedness ties nicely into Sutherland’s theory of differential associ-
ation since being enmeshed in a peer network provides access to expec-
tations, norms, and sanctions that either support or discourage delinquent
behavior.
in conventional or delinquent behavior. The social transmission of delin-
quency occurs within the friendship network through the dissemination
of attitudes about the appropriateness of delinquent behavior (Sutherland
1947). While Sutherland’s theory emphasizes the attitudes of peers in the
transmission of delinquency, Aker’s (1985) extension to differential rein-
forcement theory suggests that the adoption of delinquent behavior occurs
through the imitation of peers’ behavior or through the observation of
its consequences (either positive or negative). Consistent with Aker’s re-
formulation of differential association theory, research finds that the be-
havior of peers is more important than the attitudes of peers in influencing
an individual’s own delinquency (Warr and Stafford 1991).

Differential association theory, and Aker’s extension to it, are partic-
ularly suited to an examination of friendship networks because “definitions
favorable to violation of law” are learned in the intimate social networks
of individuals (Sutherland and Cressey 1974). Moreover, several research-
ers drawing on differential association theory have argued that the effect
of delinquent peers is conditioned by specific features of social relations
(Agnew 1991; Orcutt 1983, 1987; Short 1957, 1960; Voss 1969). Because
Sutherland’s theory stipulates that the frequency, duration, priority, and
intensity of associations are the most relevant for differential association,
researchers have explored whether these features of social relations con-
dition delinquent peer influences. Unfortunately, the imprecise definitions
offered by Sutherland for the features of differential association leave
room for subjective interpretation of the defining characteristic of social
relations, and subsequent researchers have offered various definitions.

Instead of focusing on subjective properties of social relations, such as
affection, a network perspective suggests that useful conceptualizations
of social relations should also incorporate the underlying structural prop-
erties of interpersonal relationships in which definitions, favorable or un-
favorable, to delinquency are transmitted. This may particularly be the
case for Sutherland’s property of intensity. For example, a more cohesive
peer network in which everyone is friends with everyone (i.e., high density)
will provide greater intensity in differential associations for adolescents
than will location in a friendship network in which only certain members
identify each other as friends. Additionally, an adolescent’s structural
location within the network may affect the intensity of differential as-
sociations. For example, adolescents located in more central positions
within the network should experience greater differential association than
adolescents located in more peripheral positions in their peer network.

In summary, a network perspective offers a structural approach to
defining characteristics of social relationships. As discussed next, a net-
work perspective suggests that (1) some group members are more sus-
ceptible to control by their friendship network due to their position within
Social Network Perspective

A social network perspective provides a useful framework for expanding
on social control and differential association theory.’ Not only does the
network perspective assume that networks constrain individual behavior
to become consistent with the norms, expectations, and behaviors of the
network, but that “the structure of a network has consequences for its
individual members and for the network as a whole, over and above
effects of characteristics and behaviors of the individuals involved” (Klo-
vdahl 1985, p. 1204). This suggests that after accounting for relevant
individual attributes, structural location and positioning within social net-
works influence behavior by moderating the effect of the network’s
behavior.

Social network analysis is uniquely suited for measuring and under-
standing the behavior of peers because it provides a formal means for
“mapping” friendships and measuring properties of those friendships (En-
net and Bauman 1996). In most prior criminology/delinquency research
designs, adolescents simply describe their perceptions of their friends’
behavior. This is then construed as a measure of peer influence. Network
analyses offer an alternative and more methodologically rigorous ap-
proach, where the beginning point is asking respondents both to describe
their own behavior and to identify their friends. The second step involves
locating and interviewing the friends, with the friends describing their
own behavior and then identifying their friends, and so on. In a best case
scenario (which the Add Health comes very close to), all adolescents and
friends in the population of adolescents provide this information. This
allows the links among friends to be established for the purpose of con-
structing analytical friendship networks with identifiable structural prop-
erties. The characteristics of the adolescent’s friendship network, includ-
ing peer delinquency, can then be treated as individual attributes of that
respondent.

Because network methods are premised on the idea that patterns of
friendship ties structure the flow of information, social norms, and social
support, incorporating the friendship context is important for the study
of delinquency since these ties potentially provide linkages for the trans-
mission of delinquent behavior (Ennett, Bailey, and Federman 1999).
These are the links through which differential associations are believed
to occur. Despite advances in network methodologies that have pointed
to the importance of social relations for understanding behavior (e.g., Bott
1957; Coleman 1961; Granovetter 1973; Kapferer 1969), most criminol-
ogists have not yet examined the different ways social networks influence
adolescents’ participation or nonparticipation in delinquency. Theories of
adolescent delinquency have focused on the existence of peer networks
(differential association theory) or on adolescents’ feelings toward friends,
such as attachment to friends (social control theory), without considering
characteristics of the networks themselves (Krohn 1986).

Krohn and his colleagues (1986, 1988, 1993) represent some of the only
criminologists who have recognized the benefits of applying a network
perspective to the study of delinquency. To evaluate the degree to which
delinquent behavior is within the purview of an individual’s network,
Krohn directed attention to two network characteristics he believed were
especially important: muliplexity (defined as the number of activities in
which individuals interact jointly) and density (defined as the extent to
which all members in the network are connected by direct ties). Despite
relying on survey data (where respondents were asked to describe network
characteristics), Krohn’s study is one of the first to suggest the importance
of structural properties of networks for evaluating the probability of de-
linquency. That is, structural characteristics of friendship networks can
help elucidate when network members have, more or less, control in
enforcing common norms, expectations, and obligations for behavior. Un-
fortunately, little research in criminology has followed up on Krohn’s lead.

This study expands on prior research in two important ways. First,
peer networks are defined more rigorously as adolescents’ egocentric
friendship networks and are measured with network data on friendship
nominations linking adolescents within schools. An adolescent’s friend-
ship network consists of all adolescents who the respondent directly nom-
inates as friends, as well as those adolescents who directly nominate the
respondent as a friend. Second, the behavior and structural characteristics
of the personal friendship network are measured directly through infor-
mation provided by all members of the friendship network, rather than
by the perceptions of the respondent. Information on how delinquent the
network is, as well as the structural properties of the friendship network,
Network Characteristics and Expectations

By drawing linkages between social control and differential association
theory, a network perspective suggests how structural properties of friend-
ship networks may moderate the delinquency-peer association. These ex-
pectations are detailed below.

Density —When network density is high and all members of the net-
work are likely to know and interact with one another (Bott 1957), it is
expected that the behavior evidenced in a friendship network will be
more strongly associated with an adolescent’s behavior than will be the
case in less cohesive friendship networks. More cohesive networks contain
higher levels of interaction and communication within them so that the
opportunities for network members to express their views of appropriate
behavior are maximized (Giordano et al. 1986). Additionally, when all
network members know one another, the likelihood of knowing others
outside the network is reduced compared to the opportunity to know
outsiders in less dense friendship networks (Granovetter 1973). This sug-
gests that outside pressures are less influential for adolescents located in
dense friendship networks.

James Coleman (1990) discusses the advantages of social closure of this
sort in an individual’s network for the facilitation of a clear social identity.
Conceptualizing networks in terms of social capital suggests that “a co-
hesive network conveys a clear normative order within which the indi-
vidual can optimize performance, whereas a diverse, disconnected net-
work exposes the individual to conflicting preferences and allegiances
within which it is much harder to optimize” (Podolny and Baron 1997,
p. 676). Thus, very dense social networks facilitate common identities and
constrain the behavior of their members to be consistent with the net-
work’s behavior, whether that is toward delinquency or not.

Density is defined in this study as the number of ties present in the
egocentric friendship network divided by the number of possible ties. A
network’s density would be completely maximized if every member had
ties to every other member and at a minimum if others in the network
were only connected to the respondent.

Centrality.—Similarly, it is expected that an individual’s position within
the friendship network affects how influential the network’s behavior is
on the adolescent’s behavior. Adolescents located in more central positions
are expected to report behavior more closely associated with their friends’
behavior than individuals located in more peripheral positions (Giordano
1983)."" A central adolescent is defined as one who has ties to all or most
of the network members in the friendship network so that information
passed through the network will have to be passed through this central
adolescent. This definition of centrality gauges whether adolescents are
located in prominent positions within their friendship networks according
to whether they are involved with many others in the network. It does
not matter whether involvement is due to being the recipient of many
friendship ties or the source of the ties—what is important is that a central
adolescent is involved in many relationships with friends. This is an ex-
posure argument—the central adolescents are exposed to greater com-
munication and interaction within their friendship network than adoles-
cents located in peripheral positions within the network.

Centrality is a measure of the number of links required to link all other
adolescents in a respondent’s friendship network; the lower the number
of links necessary, the more central the respondent. The measure used in
this study also accounts for the centrality of the adolescents to whom
respondents are linked by weighting respondents’ centrality scores by the
centrality of those to whom respondents send ties. Therefore, this measure
of influence not only depends on the adolescent’s centrality within the
network, but also on the positioning of those to whom he or she is
connected.

Popularity —Individuals who receive many friendship nominations
(i.e., popularity) are expected to be more constrained by the behavior of
the network than individuals who receive fewer friendship nominations.
For example, individuals who are more popular may have behavior more
similar to their friendship network than individuals with less status in
the peer hierarchy. This expectation arises because the most popular stu-
dents in the school have the most to lose (the furthest to fall in the status
hierarchy) by not adopting the network’s behavior. Supporting this idea,
ethnographic research by Eder (1985) finds that the most popular ado-
lescent girls in a junior high school perceived more limited friendship
choices and experienced great stress associated with maintaining their
dominant position within the student hierarchy. The stress resulting from
maintaining positions within school hierarchies was partly attributable to
the girls’ considerable effort directed at ensuring that their behavior re-
mained consistent with that expected from their elite position. Limited
While fundamental, the effect of social networks within a school context
on adolescents’ delinquency has rarely been studied. In part, this is be-
cause the requisite data have not been available. Understanding social
networks’ influence on adolescent delinquency requires detailed popu-
lation-level data on the structure of friendship patterns within a school,
for many different schools. Until recently, the only data that approached
these stringent requirements was Coleman’s landmark study (1961) of
social relationships among high school students in the 1960s. Although
these data provided insight into the importance of peer relationships and
adolescent culture, they were only available for a small number of schools,
so that generalizability to other schools and adolescents as a whole was
prevented.

This study utilizes data from the first wave of the Add Health survey,
a newly available data set consisting of a nationally representative sample
of adolescents in grades 7-12 nested within randomly selected schools in
the United States during 1994-95. The innovative design of this sample,
particularly its emphasis on the effects of multiple contexts of adolescents’
lives, allows for an examination of the correlates of adolescent health and
health behavior (including delinquency) that goes considerably beyond
prior research.
In-School Interviews

In contrast to other nationally representative surveys of adolescent delin-
quency that use sample designs to randomly select adolescents from the
schools, the Add Health study contains very detailed social network data
for students in 129 randomly selected schools stratified by region, urban-
icity, school type, ethnic mix, and size.’’ Within each school, brief inter-
views were conducted with every student attending the school on that
day (V = 90,000). During this in-school phase, students were asked to
identify their best male and best female friends from a school roster (up
to 5 friends of each sex),’’ as well as provide some brief demographic
information and describe their participation in a few minor delinquent
activities. Because friendship nominations were recorded by student iden-
tification number located from school rosters, it is possible to link together
most of the students in the schools, thereby recreating the social networks.
From this complete network information, network characteristics and the
mean delinquency rate of the respondent’s friendship network are
calculated.

Because this is a study of friendship networks within schools, it is
important to acknowledge that the network data do not include detailed
information on ties to friends who do not attend the school. Friends who
do not attend school may be particularly likely to be delinquent (e.g.,
drop-outs), and delinquent adolescents attending school may be more
likely to nominate these out-of-school friends. However, adolescents were
able to nominate friends outside of the school, allowing a calculation of
the number of out-of-school nominations per adolescent to be determined
(this is the only information available on network structure outside of the
school). This information reveals that the average number of outside nom-
inations for adolescents is generally small, averaging 1.4 ties per adoles-
cent. More important, out-of-school nominations do not significantly differ
between delinquent and nondelinquent adolescents (1.4 vs. 1.3). Therefore,
the assumption that delinquent and nondelinquent adolescents have
friendship networks located within schools (rather than outside of school)
appears reasonable.
sample of adolescents. This nationally representative sample of adoles-
cents in grades 7-12 was drawn from school rosters provided by each
school, with students stratified by grade and sex. Approximately 200 ad-
olescents were selected from each of the 80 pairs of schools (the high
school and its feeder junior high school), yielding a sample of approxi-
mately 20,000 adolescents.

These in-depth interviews involved the collection of more sensitive data
such as an extensive series of questions that concern involvement in both
property and violent delinquency. An additional advantage of this data
involves the use of laptop computers to maintain confidentiality about
sensitive subjects such as delinquency. This method of data collection
allowed respondents to maintain their anonymity by listening to pre-
recorded questions about participation in different delinquent activities
and then entering their responses directly into the computer. This self-
report information on participation in a series of delinquent activities is
used to construct the dependent variable—delinquency involve-
ment—which is described in the following section. Because the dependent
variable can only be constructed from the in-home survey (vs. the in-
school survey), the in-home survey composes the main sample for this
project. Network information from the in-school survey is appended to
this sample. Drawing on these data components, the final sample for this
study consists of approximately 13,000 adolescents nested within 120
schools who had completed both in-school and in-home interviews.
TABLE 1
FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTIONS OF DELINQUENCY ITEMS

 

 

Dependent Variable N %

 

Delinquency index:”
Painted graffiti:

 
  
 

 

 

 

   
  
  

 

 

 

 

  
 
 

 

 

 

   

Never .. 12,332 91.2

One or more times 1,186 8.3
Damaged other’s property:

Never .......c cece eee cence eee eee e neces 11,135 82.4

One or more times .................24- 2,383 17.6
Shoplifted from a store:

Never ........ 10,247 75.8

One or more times : 3,271 24.2
Stolen something worth less than $50:

Never .......e cece eee e eee ee cece ee ene 10,813 80.0

One or more times .................24- 2,705 20.0
Stolen something worth more than $50:

Never ........... 12,885 95.3

One or more times 633 4.7
Burglarized a building .

Never .. 12,870 95.2

One or more times 648 4.8
Borrowed a car (w/o owner’s permis-

sion):

Never ........ 12,204 90.3

One or more times 1,314 9.7
Sold drugs:

Never ....... 0c cece ec ee eeeee eee ee ene 12,592 93.1

One or more times 926 6.9
Got into serious physical fight:

Never ........ 9,457 70.0

One or more times .. 4,061 30.0
Seriously injured someone:

Never .. 11,186 82.7

One or more times 2,332 17.3
Taken part in group fight:

Never ....... 0c cece cc eee cece e eee eeen es 10,980 81.2

One or more times .................24- 2,538 18.8
Used or threatened to use weapon:

Never ........... 13,001 96.2

One or more times 517 3.8
Pulled a knife/gun on someone:

Never ....... 0c cece cc eee cece e eee eeen es 12,961 95.9

One or more times .................... 557 4.1
Shot/stabbed someone:

Never ........... 13,303 98.4

One or more times 215 1.6
fight, seriously injured another, used or threatened to use a weapon, par-
ticipated in a group fight, pulled a knife/gun on someone, or shot/stabbed
someone.

The particular questions ask students to report how often in the past
12 months they have participated in these activities. Each response is
coded “0” if the respondent reported not participating in the activity dur-
ing the past year or coded “1” if they reported participation.’® Following
common procedures used to measure self-report delinquency, a summated
delinquency index is created based on responses to the 14 delinquency
items. The Cronbach alpha of 0.83 indicates that these items have con-
Peer Delinquency

Most of the prior research on the delinquency-peer association assumes
that respondents’ perceptions of their friends’ attitudes and behaviors
accurately reflect the reality of these attitudes and behaviors without
allowing for the powerful influence of assumed similarity (Jussim and
Osgood 1989). Problems with this common approach to measuring the
influence of peer behaviors have been highlighted in the developmental
literature and, to a lesser extent, in the criminological literature. Generally,
this literature notes that respondents’ perceptions of friends’ behavior are
not very accurate assessments of the friends’ actual behavior (Bauman
and Fisher 1986; Billy, Rodgers, and Udry 1984). These findings give
particular credence to Gottfredson and Hirschi’s (1990, p. 157) argument
that measures of peer delinquency are simply “another measure of self-
reported delinquency.” That is, when asked to report their peers’ delin-
quent behavior, adolescents show a proclivity to report their own delin-
quent behavior. If this is the case, it casts considerable doubt on the
frequently observed relationship between peers’ delinquency and adoles-
cents’ own reports of their delinquency.

To avoid problems of projection (i.e., a respondent projecting his or her
behavior to friends), this study relies on the actual responses of all iden-
tified friends to a series of questions about delinquency. During the in-
school interview, every student was asked about his or her involvement
in a series of six minor delinquent acts. Using the friendship nomination
data, which links up all of the students in the school and this information
on friends’ delinquency involvement, a measure of peer network delin-
quency is created.’* It is calculated as the average response of all identified
friends to the minor delinquency items, which include smoked cigarettes,
drank alcohol, got drunk, skipped school without an excuse, did dangerous
things on a dare, and raced vehicles such as cars or motorcycles (see table
1 for a description of the six items). Table 1 indicates that the mean minor
* Unfortunately, information on friends’ delinquency is only available from in-school
interviews, which do not include the friends’ involvement in the extensive list of
delinquency items used to create the dependent variable (which were collected during
the in-home portion of the interview). Therefore, a measure of friends’ minor delin-
quency involvement is the only information available for all adolescents composing
the respondent’s friendship network in the schools included in the complete sample.
In the Add Health data, in-home interviews were conducted with every adolescent
attending school in 14 small schools, chosen because of their size, and in two large
schools, which were purposefully selected. (This is referred to as a saturation sample).
This very limited sample, therefore, contains information on friends’ involvement in
the more extensive list of 14 delinquency items, as well as the minor delinquency items.
To gain an initial benchmark of how big a discrepancy there is between the association
of friends’ minor delinquency involvement and a respondent’s more serious delin-
quency involvement—compared to the association between friends’ more serious de-
linquency and a respondent’s serious delinquency index—some preliminary regression
analyses were conducted on the saturation sample. The correlation between friends’
minor and friends’ serious delinquency involvement in the saturation sample (ry =
0.47) suggests that while the two indicators of friends’ misbehavior are correlated
substantially as expected, it is far from a perfect association. Next, regression analyses
(using a negative binomial model) indicated that using friends’ minor delinquency as
a proxy for more serious delinquency involvement provides a more conservative es-
timate of the association between friends’ delinquency and a respondent’s behavior
(b = .06 using friends’ minor delinquency compared to b = 0.11 using friends’ serious
delinquency). Nonetheless, despite a weaker association, friends’ minor delinquency
involvement remained significantly associated with a respondent’s more serious delin-
quency involvement and supports the use of this measure in subsequent analyses, so
results can be generalized from a more representative sample.
Mean friendship delinquency ..._ Mean value of minor delinquency items MEANDEL, = £x,/n;, where x; = the

for the respondent’s friendship network value of the delinquency index for the

jth member of the adolescent’s network
and n; = the number of nodes in the
adolescent’s network based on send and
receive friendship nominations (exclud-

ing ego)
Popularity ................0.c00ee Measures no. of times the respondent is IN-DEGREE = £X;,, where EX,, = the
nominated by other students in the sum of the ith column of the total
school

friendship network X

Density (relative) ................. No. of ties in respondent’s friendship send/ ERSDEN, = [ESRi/sr x (sr —
receive-network divided by the number 1)Mabs{(10 x sr)/sr(sr — 1)}}, where SR =
of possible ties in the total friendship total ego send/receive-network and sr =
send/receive-network (corrected for the number of nodes (ties in SR)
maximum number of ties a respondent
can send)

Respondent’s centrality, weighted by the BCENT1O x (a,8), = a( — BX) 'X1,
centrality of those to whom he or she
sends ties

Centrality (Bonacich) ............

where: a = a scaling vector; 8 = power
weight (here = 0.1); J = identity ma-
Other race ................cee eee Dummy variable indicating respondent is
of Indian, Asian, or other racial descent
(ie., not white, or African-American)

ABO oie eee eee eee cece eens Measures respondent’s age at the time of
the initial in-school survey

Measures the respondent’s age squared

Dummy variable that indicates whether
respondent lives in a household with
two married parents present

Dummy variable indicating whether re-
spondent’s family acknowledged receipt
of public assistance

Mean value of two items: (1) feel close to
parents; (2) feel parents care about you
(Cronbach a = .78)

Mean value of three items: (1) feel close to
people at school; (2) feel like part of
school; (3) happy to be at school (Cron-
bach a = .78)

Response to How strongly do you believe
that your friends care about you?

Age? oo...
Two-parent family ..

 

 

Public assistance .................

Parental attachment index ......

School attachment index ........

Friend attachment ...............

Friend involvement .............. Response to During the past week, how

many times did you just hang out with
pe 4s

 

Othrace = 1; white, black = 0

Continuous variables in years

(Continuous variables in years)’
TWOPAR = 1; other living arrangements =
0

PUBASSIST = 1; no public assistance
0

Not at all = 1; very little = 2; somewhat =
3; quite a bit = 4; very much = 5 (av-
erage response of the two items)

Strongly disagree = 1; disagree = 2; nei-
ther agree/disagree = 3; agree = 4;
strongly agree = 5 (average response of
the three items)

Strongly disagree = 1; disagree = 2; nei-
ther agree/disagree = 3; agree = 4;
strongly agree = 5

Not at all = 0; 1 = 1 or 2 times; 2 = 3
or 4 times; and 3 = five or more times
has a centrality level of 0.82 (range 0-4.3) and 4.6 other adolescents in
the school nominating him or her as a friend (popularity range: 0-32).
Control variables associated with delinquency in prior criminological
research are included in this study, and measurement of these variables
are also described in table 2. These control variables include gender, race,
age, an indicator of family structure, receipt of public assistance, a parental
attachment index, a school attachment index, a friend attachment index,
and a measure of friend involvement. These control variables were se-
lected because they either control for important demographic differences
in delinquency propensity (e.g., age, gender, race, social class, family struc-
ture) or because they are implicated as key variables in social control and
differential association theory (e.g., parental attachment, school attach-
ment, peer attachment, friend involvement). Table 3 provides the de-
scriptive characteristics of these variables and reveals that the average
adolescent is white, lives in a two-parent family, has relatively high at-
ANALYSIS

Assessing whether peer network characteristics are associated with delin-
quency and condition the delinquency-peer relationship necessitates mul-
tivariate analyses with emphasis on interaction terms. However, deter-
mining the proper modeling procedure for the analyses requires examining
the distribution of the dependent variable: delinquency involvement.
While the mean value of the overall delinquency index is 1.7 (see table
1), the distribution of the variable is far from normal. Inspection of the
frequency distribution for the delinquency index finds that the most com-
mon value is zero, indicating that many adolescents report no delinquency
involvement. Additionally, a minority of respondents report involvement
in a large number of delinquent activities (5% reports participating in six
or more acts, and 1% reports participating in 10 or more). Due to a large
number of zeros and a large positive skew in the distribution, the nor-
mality assumption of OLS cannot be approximated with a mathematical
transformation. Therefore, negative binomial regressions, designed to han-
dle dependent variables with distributions incorporating many zero values
and large positive skews, are used in the results that follow.”

Because standard negative binomial models assume that regression co-
efficients are fixed between groups and that error terms are not correlated,
these models are inadequate for complex sampling designs where indi-
viduals are nested within a larger macrounit (here schools; see Goldstein
1987; Lee and Bryk 1989; Raudenbush and Bryk 1986). Due to the clus-
tering of the data and the correlated error structure, statistical techniques,
which can correct for design effects and unequal probability of selection,
are necessary to achieve unbiased parameter estimates.’' In addition, since
FINDINGS
Delinquency-Peer Association

Before addressing the main question about the moderation of delinquency-
peer associations by network characteristics, it is useful to examine
whether network characteristics are associated with delinquency and im-
prove model fit after accounting for control variables. The multivariate
analyses in table 4 present models that examine the association between
delinquency involvement and background individual-level characteristics.
Model 1 simply provides a baseline against which to assess model fit.
Consistent with prior research, variables that tap dimensions of social
control are associated with a reduction in delinquency involvement (the
exception is attachment to friends), whereas involvement with friends (ie.,
the amount of time spent with friends) is associated with increased de-
linquency involvement. Model 2, which is of more interest, assesses
whether a measure of peer delinquency is associated with an adolescent’s
delinquency. Recall that a common critique of prior studies’ findings of
a strong association between delinquent peers and a respondent’s self-
report delinquency is that the friends’ behavior is measured through the
respondent’s potentially biased perceptions.

Model 2 indicates that friends’ delinquency is associated with a re-
spondent’s own delinquency; each unit increase in friends’ delinquency
yields a 4% increase in the respondent’s mean delinquency level
(exp (.04) = 1.04). This finding indicates that friends’ delinquency is not
simply a measurement artifact reflecting a respondent’s own delinquency
involvement, but rather remains an important correlate of a respondent’s
delinquency even after controlling for a host of different individual-level
factors. With maximum-likelihood estimates, it is possible to determine
whether a more complex model provides a better fit to the data than do
simpler models using likelihood ratio significance tests. Model 2 yields a
TABLE 4
BASE-LINE MoDELs: RANDOM EFFECTS NEGATIVE BINOMIAL MODEL OF DELINQUENCY INVOLVEMENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Move 1 MopEL 2 MODEL 3
Coeff. B Coeff. B Coeff. B
Intercept ...... —2.21 (1.04) —1.67" (1.02) -157" (1.03)
Control variables:
Black .................. 7 (.03) 07 24 (.03) 10 25 (.03) Al
Other race (nonwhite) . .20 (.03) .09 24 (.03) Al 24 (.03) ll
Female . —.52 (.02) —.25 —.50 (.02) —.24 —.50 (.02) —.24
Age 53 (.13) 86 43 (13) -70 Al (.13) 67
Age’ —.02 (.00) —.60 —.02 (.00) —.60 —.02 (.00) —.60
Two-parent family . —.11 (.02) —.06 —.09 (.02) —.05 —.09 (.02) —.05
Public assistance ... 13 (.04) .04 13 (.04) 04 14 (.04) .04
Friend involvement .. .20 (.01) .20 18 (.01) 18 18 (.01) 18
Friend attachment ... —.03° (.01) —.02 —.02" (01) .02 —.03 (.01) —.02
Parent attachment index ... —.13 (.01) -11 —.13 (.01) —.11 —.13 (.01) -11
School attachment index ... —.22 (.01) —19 —.20 (.01) —.18 —.20 (.01) —.18
Friends’ delinquency ....... tae 04 (.00) 13 05 (.00) 17
Network characteristics:
Density ... —.31" (18) —.03
Centrality —.01" (.02) —.01
Popularity . tae tae .02 (.00) .07
Log likelihood — 22,243.87 — 22,136.16 22,123.27
—2 log likelihood . 215.54" 25.78"

 

 

Note.—N = 12,971 adolescents clustered within 120 schools. All variables are significant at P < .05 unless otherwise noted. SEs are given in parentheses.
* Not significant.
** P< 001.
likelihood ratio value of 215.5 in comparison to the baseline model (model
1), which is statistically significant (df = 1, P < .001).

To assess the strength of the association between delinquent peers and
delinquency compared to other control variables, it is useful to standardize
the coefficients by multiplying the b,s by the X;s’ standard deviations.
The coefficients are thus expressed in terms of change in log(Y) per stan-
dard deviation of X, . Column 3 for each model presents these standardized
coefficients (exponentiating the results indicates the proportional change
in delinquency per standard deviation of X,). In terms of delinquent peers,
each standard deviation is associated with a 13% increase in a respon-
dent’s delinquency (exp(.13) = 1.13). The effect of delinquent peers is thus
larger than the effect of family structure (two-parent family), public as-
sistance receipt, and attachment to friends; is comparable to the effect for
race, parental attachment, and school attachment; and is smaller than the
gender, age, and peer involvement effect. This finding that delinquent
peers is not among the strongest (or weakest) variable in the model sug-
gests that prior findings that delinquent peers have the strongest associ-
ation in models may have overestimated the strength of the delinquency-
peer association by using potentially biased respondent perceptions.

To determine the main effect of network characteristics on delinquency
involvement (before assessing whether they condition the delinquency-
peer association), model 3 incorporates the network measures of density,
centrality, and popularity. Findings indicate that density and centrality
within friendship networks are not associated with delinquency involve-
ment when relevant control variables and peer delinquency are accounted
for. Network popularity, in contrast, is associated with a small increase
in delinquency involvement. Each additional friendship nomination re-
ceived translates into a 2% increase in delinquency involvement. Peer
delinquency remains associated with delinquency when the network char-
acteristics are incorporated into the model.

Although results from this model suggest that structural characteristics
of friendship networks are unassociated with delinquency when peer de-
linquency is accounted for, the model does not tell us whether network
characteristics play a role in the degree to which peer behavior is trans-
lated into the adolescent’s own behavior. Assessing this requires inter-
action models. Finding significant interactions between peer delinquency
and network properties will suggest that network characteristics are not
as important in regard to their main effect on delinquency, but are very
important in understanding how the context of friendship networks de-
termine the degree to which peer behavior is associated with an adoles-
cent’s own behavior. That is, network characteristics may determine the
intensity of differential associations.
Interactions between peer delinquency and each network characteristic
of interest are examined in models 4-6 of table 5. Each model focuses on
a particular network characteristic or property of an adolescent’s friend-
ship network. Model 4 examines whether the association between friends’
delinquency and a respondent’s own delinquency is conditioned by the
cohesion within the friendship network (ie., network density). Results
reveal this is the case; the interaction between peer delinquency and den-
sity is very strong and significant (exp(.33) = 1.39), indicating that density
in conjunction with delinquent peers is associated with a large increase
in self-reported delinquency. In contrast, the coefficient for density, in
model 4, suggests that when adolescents do not have delinquent peers,
density is associated with a reduction in delinquency involvement
(exp(—1.77) = 0.17). This provides strong evidence that network density
is an important structural component of peer networks in its ability to
moderate the delinquency-peer association.

Graphing this relationship in figure 1 reveals that high density in com-
bination with a delinquent peer network translates into greater delin-
quency involvement, whereas low density is less related to delinquency.
Specifically, when an adolescent is located in a friendship network re-
porting a minor delinquency index of 5, medium and low density in the
peer network is associated with a respondent’s serious delinquency index
of 0.33; however, being enmeshed in a dense peer network translates into
a serious delinquency index of 1.3. Moreover, when friends’ delinquency
is at higher levels (equals an index of 10), a less cohesive friendship net-
work is associated with a respondent’s mean delinquency index of 0.45
versus 1.75 for respondents located in very dense friendship networks.
What is important in this graph is that as density increases, the association
between peer delinquency and an adolescent’s own delinquency involve-
ment increases rapidly. This highlights that the relationship between
friends’ delinquency and a respondent’s own delinquency is conditioned
by the cohesion present in the friendship network.

Network centrality, an indicator of positioning within a friendship net-
work, also moderates the delinquency-peer association. Specifically, model
5 indicates that location within a central position in a delinquent peer
network is associated with an increased delinquency index (exp(.05) =
1.05). Conversely, location in a central position within a nondelinquent
friendship network is associated with a reduction in delinquency involve-
ment (exp(—.27) = 0.76). Graphing this relationship in figure 2 illustrates
the interaction. With friendship delinquency equal to 5, there is little effect
of network centrality (low, average, and high centrality = 0.28). With
increased peer delinquency (equal to 10), low centrality corresponds to a
TABLE 5
INTERACTION MOopDELs: RANDOM EFFECTS NEGATIVE BINOMIAL MODEL OF DELINQUENCY INVOLVEMENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

 

MODEL 4 MODEL 5 MODEL 6
Coeff. B Coeff. B Coeff.

Intercept ................ cece eeceeeee ee ee ee —1.08" (1.02) -1.37° (1.02) -1.27° (1.03)

Control variables:
Black ........... 25 (.03) al 26 (.03) al 27 (.03) Al
Other race (nonwhite) . 25 (.03) al 25 (.03) Al 25 (.03) wll
Female —.50 (.02) —.24 —.50 (.02) —.24 —51 (.02) —.25
Age 39 (.13) 64 41 (13) 67 39 (.13) 64
Age? —.02 (.00) —.60 —.02 (.00) —.60 —.02 (.00) —.60
Two-parent family . —.09 (.02) —.05 —.09 (.02) —.05 —.09 (.02) —.05
Public assistance ... 12 (.04) 03 12 (.04) 03 13 (.04) .04
Friend involvement .. 18 (.01) 18 18 (.01) 18 17 (.01) 17
Friend attachment . —.03 (.01) —.02 —.02° (.01) 02 —.03 (.01) —.02
Parent attachment index —.13 (.01) —11 —.13 (.01) —.11 —.13 (.01) -11
School attachment index —.20 (.01) —.18 —.20 (.01) —.18 —.21 (.01) —.18
Friends’ delinquency .................. —.00°
Network characteristics:

Density ............

Centrality ..

Popularity
Interactions:

Density x friends’ delinquency ...... 233

Centrality x friends’ delinquency ...

Popularity x friends’ delinquency ... tae
Log likelihood ................ccceeeeeeee — 22,083.34

—L77

 

 

—2 log likelihood (compared to
model 2) ..........0cccececeeeceeceeeeeees 105.64"

(01) .00 02
(.22) —.16 oe
—.27
(.03) 25 :
05
—22,089.36
93.6"

(.00) 07 .02 (.00)
(.03) —.18 see
—.03 (01)
(.00) 21 :
01 (.00)
— 22,091.32
89.68"

07

—11

18

 

Note.—N = 12,971 adolescents clustered within 120 schools.
* Not significant.
** P< 001.

All variables are significant at P < .05

unless noted in table. SEs are given in parentheses.
delinquency index of 0.32, average centrality to a delinquency index of
0.37, and high centrality to a serious delinquency index of 0.56. These
results indicate that the association between friends’ delinquency and a
respondent’s own level of delinquency is stronger when the respondent
is located within a central position in the friendship network

The last network characteristic, popularity, is examined in model 6.
Here it is found that although the delinquency-peer relationship is con-
ditional, popularity plays a smaller role in moderating the delinquency-
peer association. When an adolescent is without delinquent friends, pop-
ularity has a small negative relationship with delinquency status (exp
(—.03) = 0.97). In contrast, when located in a delinquent peer network,
popularity is associated with a small increased delinquency index
(exp(.01) = 1.01). Specifically, figure 3 indicates that when an adolescent
is located in a peer network that averages a minor delinquency index of
5, high popularity is associated with a delinquency index of 0.37 compared
to 0.34 and 0.32 for average and low popularity, respectively. With greater
peer delinquency (index = 10), high popularity is associated with a de-
linquency index of 0.69 versus 0.47 and 0.39 for average and low
popularity.

Overall, these results indicate that all of the network characteris-
tics—density, centrality, and popularity—condition the delinquency-peer
association. Incorporation of the underlying pattern of relationships
among adolescents explains when friendship networks are more or less
effective in constraining adolescents’ behavior to resemble that of their
peers. However, the size of the coefficients and graphs of the interactions
suggest that network density (i.e., cohesion) is a particularly important
structural property, followed by network centrality (i.e., positioning) and
popularity.

To better assess which network property is more important in explaining
when the behavior of peers is associated with an adolescent’s own be-
havior, it is useful to examine a model with all three network interactions
incorporated. This allows for the effect of each network characteristic to
be assessed independently while controlling for the others. Model 6 in
table 6 presents findings from this analysis and indicates that while all
of the network interactions remain significant, that is, moderate the de-
linquency-peer association, density is the more important component of
friendship networks. Peer delinquency in conjunction with greater co-
hesion is associated with an increased delinquency index (exp(.16) =
1.17), whereas centrality within the friendship network and popularity
play much more modest roles (exp(b) = 1.03 and exp(b) = 1.01, for cen-
trality and popularity, respectively) in moderating the delinquency-peer
association. Graphing the relationship between peer delinquency and a
respondent’s delinquency in figure 4 reveals that when an adolescent is
located in a friendship network with an average minor delinquency index
of 10, high density within the network translates into a serious delinquency
index of 1.64 versus 0.49 for centrality and 0.61 for popularity.
Respondent's Delinquency

20

16

14

]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 3.4 3 6 7 8 9 1011 1213 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31

Friends’ Delinquency

  

“High Density _
—= High Centrality
+ High Popularity
TABLE 6

COMPLETE INTERACTION MODEL: RANDOM EFFECTS NEGATIVE BINOMIAL MODEL
OF DELINQUENCY INVOLVEMENT

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MODEL 6
Coeff. B
Intercept ..............0. cece eeeee ee ee eee —.98° (1.02)
Control variables:
Black ........... 26 (.03) al
Other race (nonwhite) . 25 (.03) al
Female ... —.50 (.02) —.24
Age 38 (.13) 62
Age’ —.02 (.00) —.60
Two-parent family . —.09 (.02) —.05
Public assistance ... 13 (.04) 04
Friend involvement 17 (.01) 17
Friend attachment ....... —.03 (.01) —.02
Parent attachment index —.13 (.01) -11
School attachment index —.21 (.01) —.18
Friends’ delinquency .... .00" (.01) .00
Network characteristics:
Density ............ —1.20 (.36) -11
Centrality .. —.15 (.04) —.10
Popularity .00* (.01) 00
Interactions:
Density x friends’ delinquency ...... 16 (.05) 12
Centrality x friends’ delinquency ... 03 (.00) 09
Popularity x friends’ delinquency ... 01 (.00) .08

 

Nore.—N = 12, 971 adolescents clustered within 120 schools. All variables are significant at P <
05 unless noted. SEs are given in parentheses. Log likelihood = 22,062.06; 2 log likelihood (compared

to model 2) = 148.2 (P < .001).
* Not significant.
spective can provide a coherent and powerful framework for addressing
adolescent delinquency.

Two major findings emerge from this research. First, friends’ delin-
quency, as measured by responses from friends who compose the adoles-
cent’s friendship network, is associated with an adolescent’s own delin-
quency involvement. This is an important finding because the
delinquency-peer association found in prior research has been criticized
for inadequate and potentially misspecified measures of peers’ behaviors.
Since most prior research incorporates a measure of peer delinquency
based on responses from the respondents rather than the peers themselves,
Jussim and Osgood (1989) caution that peer delinquency may simply
measure the respondent’s own delinquent behavior due to processes of
assumed similarity. In contrast, measures used in the present research
incorporate the responses of friends themselves and indicate that the de-
linquency-peer association exists and remains robust regardless of controls
for numerous other factors. The significant association consistently evi-
denced in this study gives credence to the idea that delinquency is best
understood in the context of the friendship network where common norms
and behaviors emerge from locations in structured patterns of relation-
ships (Wellman 1988).

Second, network properties summarizing the structure of friendship
networks moderate the delinquency-peer association. Specifically, delin-
quent friends have a lesser association with delinquency (and occasionally
no association) when adolescents are located in a peripheral position
within their peer network (low centrality), when their peer network is not
very cohesive (low density), and when they have less prestige (low pop-
ularity). Conversely, peers’ delinquency has a stronger association with
an adolescent’s delinquency when the adolescents are located in a central
position within their friendship network, when their friendship network
is very dense, and when they are nominated as friends by many others.

While all network characteristics were found to condition the delin-
quency-peer association to some degree, one network characteristic ex-
erted stronger influences than others. In particular, network density
emerged as an important moderator of peer delinquency. Because network
density represents the number of ties present in the friendship network
divided by the number of possible ties in the network, it serves as an
ideal measure of peer cohesion. Greater network cohesion better facilitates
a common identity as either delinquent or nondelinquent and subse-
quently places more constraint on the behavior of peer members to be
consistent with the network’s behavioral disposition. The premise that
densely knit networks have stronger norms and better communication
and control has an extensive history in sociological studies (e.g., Durkheim
1951; Sutherland 1947; Bott 1957; Fischer 1982), which makes it surprising
that criminological studies have yet to incorporate network cohesion as
a variable central to the delinquency-peer association.

Popularity within the friendship network is a network property that
plays a smaller role in conditioning the delinquency-peer association. Re-
call that popularity is indicative of the number of other adolescents in
the school network that nominate the adolescent as a best friend. One
explanation for the weaker interaction between popularity and peer de-
linquency is that prestige may be indicative of the permeability of peer
group boundaries. That is, the extent to which members have contact
with individuals outside their immediate peer clique. An adolescent who
is located in a delinquent friendship network but also has high popularity
may be well connected to other adolescents outside his or her immediate
peer clique, resulting in weakened influence of the friendship network.
In these situations, the intensity of the peer network may be reduced. In
all likelihood, the more popular adolescents belong to several different
peer cliques such that their egocentric network is large and heterogenous
in terms of exposure to different behaviors, norms, and values in the
school setting.

These results highlight the constraining influence of peer networks on
individual behavior when certain structural components of friendship
networks are maximized. With a friendship network centered around
delinquent activities, adolescents are even more likely to report self-
involvement in delinquency when they are located in a very cohesive peer
network. Conversely, when peer networks do not incorporate peer delin-
quency, cohesion in the network is associated with lower risk of self-
involvement in delinquency. This finding, if properly interpreted, is con-
sistent in part with social control’s emphasis on the constraining influence
of social bonds, although it appears even more compatible with differential
association and social learning theories’ emphasis on the importance of
the context of friendship networks. It is in this network context where
social norms and values regarding delinquency are shared and validated.
According to differential association and learning theories and consistent
with this research, when delinquent peer networks are very cohesive,
network members are at heightened exposure to definitions and behavioral
patterns favorable to delinquency involvement.

However, an alternative explanation is offered for the influence of net-
work structure on adolescent delinquency. Critics of differential associ-
ation and social learning theories argue that the observed delinquency-
peer association is not due to peer influence, but rather to self-selection
into delinquent peer networks based on prior behavioral dispositions. The
cross-sectional data on which this study is based do not allow explicit
determination of whether the observed associations solely reflect network
influences on adolescent behavior or whether they additionally reflect the
tendency of youth with similar behaviors to select each other as friends.
However, studies with longitudinal data have found that both influence
and selection processes are responsible for similarities in adolescent be-
havior (Bauman and Ennet 1996; Elliott and Menard 1996; Kandel 1978;
Krohn et al. 1996; Matsueda and Anderson 1998; Thornberry 1987). Al-
though the precise mechanism underlying the delinquency-peer associa-
tions cannot be specified with the available data, the findings do suggest
that personal networks containing delinquent members provide, at a min-
imum, a supportive environment conducive to delinquency involvement.”

With this in mind, it is important to point out that if selection were
mainly responsible for the association found between delinquent peers
and self-involvement in delinquency, we would not expect to find the
network characteristics conditioning the delinquency-peer association. For
example, being located in a very dense peer network or in a very central
position within the network should not influence the strength of the
delinquency-peer association if adolescents are selecting peer networks to
join that most closely match up with their own delinquent proclivities.
Therefore, the strength and consistency of the pattern of network prop-
erties found to condition the delinquency-peer association suggest expla-
nations more consistent with a differential association or social learning
approach to peer influence. However, to explicitly test whether self-
selection or socialization is the primary mechanism responsible for the
association, longitudinal data incorporating the social networks of ado-
lescents is necessary. In addition to longitudinal data on adolescent peer
networks, a theory of delinquency is needed that incorporates an under-
standing of friendship formation. Such a theory would explain processes
underlying selection into and out of peer networks.

The findings presented in this project should be considered in light of
the following limitations. As noted earlier, the data that this project is
based on are cross-sectional, which limits the causal inferences we can
make about the relationships between network characteristics and delin-
quent behavior. Longitudinal data that allow measurement of changes in
network characteristics and delinquency behavior over time would be
extremely valuable. Such a data design would allow determination of
whether delinquent behavior precedes selection into friendship networks
or whether incorporation into peer networks occurs prior to delinquency
involvement. Moreover, another reason for the use of longitudinal data
for investigating peer networks, as well as the difficulty with such anal-
yses, involves the constantly changing nature of social networks. The
dynamic nature of network structures suggests that it is rare for friendship
networks to remain unchanged even in a short period of time. Capturing
and modeling these changing network structures remains a challenge for
longitudinal analyses.

The ideal longitudinal network analysis of friendship networks also
would have included complete network data on a wide range of delin-
quency items including more serious delinquency items. As indicated ear-
lier, a drawback of the present study is that friends’ involvement in minor
delinquency is used to predict the respondent’s more serious delinquency
involvement. Unfortunately, this strategy tends to underestimate the
strength of the actual relationship between friends’ serious delinquency
and the respondent’s own involvement in serious delinquency.

Additionally, while this study drew attention to common properties of
peer networks, other network characteristics may be important and wor-
thy of future investigation. For example, age, sex, and race heterogeneity
of the friendship network and the percent of reciprocated friendship ties
in the network are a few additional properties of peer networks that may
condition the delinquency-peer association.

Despite these limitations, the present study’s results show that the ap-
proach of identifying and examining peer social networks provides a co-
herent and promising framework for investigating a variety of ways that
social relationship might be associated with adolescent delinquency. This
framework’s emphasis on the social connections among adolescents goes
considerably beyond that of prior research, which viewed individuals as
essentially separate from their social structure.
positioning in the peer network provides different opportunities for peer
interaction resulting in varying exposure to delinquent behavioral models,
communication of delinquent norms, access to information on delinquency
opportunities, and opportunities for rewards or deterrents for delinquency.
Examining properties of peer networks elucidates when the peer network
is more or less effective in constraining the behavior of adolescents to be
similar to that of their peers. This conclusion is consistent with the current
emphasis on the significance of social contexts (e.g., community, neigh-
borhood, schools) and suggests that an important context with implica-
tions for adolescents’ behaviors is the peer networks in which youth are
embedded.
TABLE Al
CORRELATION MATRIX

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 144 15
Overall delinquency index ... 1.00 ...
Friends’ deliquency . 16 1.00
Network popularity —.01 01 1.00
Network centrality —.06 —.05 .37 1.00
Network density . —-.06 13 .26 01 1.00
Female —19 —.07 04 06 .00
Black . 01 —.19 —.08 —.09 —.16
Other race 06 —.06 —.10 —.00 —.40 1.00
Age . —.04 12 -.05 —.10 —.09 .03 10 1.00
Two-parent family —.07 —.02 09 AL 10 02 —.23 .02 —.00 1.00
Public assistance .............. 04 —.01 —.08 —-.06 -.07 03 11 02 —.05 ~.18 1.00
Parental attachment index ... —.09 —.07 .04 07. 1 ~—.08 .04 ~.04 —.16 .03 .00 1.00
School attachment index . —.17 —.12 13 18 03 —.03 —.03 —.01 —.09 —-.07 —.03 .18 1.00
Friend attachment ........ —.08 —.00 .14 09 07 15 -.09 —.04 —.01 07 —.06 .10  .21 1.00
Friend involvement ........... 14 11 10 05 00 —.06 —.05 —.04 01 ~.00 —.01 .02 02 .10 1.00
REFERENCES

Agnew, Robert. 1991. “The Interactive Effects of Peer Variables on Delinquency.”
Criminology 29:47-72.

Akers, Ronald. 1985. Deviant Behavior: A Social Learning Approach, 3d ed. Belmont,
Calif.: Wadsworth.

Akers, Ronald, Marvin Krohn, L. Lanza-Kaduce, and M. Radosevich. 1979. “Social
Learning and Deviant Behavior: A Specific Test of a General Theory.” American
Sociological Review 44:636-55.

Ambert, A. M. 1994. “A Qualitative Study of Peer Abuse and It’s Effects: Theoretical
and Empirical Implications.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 56:119-30.

Bauman, Karl, and Juson Ennet. 1996. “On the Importance of Peer Influence for
Adolescent Drug Use: Commonly Neglected Considerations.” Addiction 9:184-98.

Bauman, Karl E., and Lynn A. Fisher. 1986. “On the Measurement of Friend Behavior
in Research on Friend Influence and Selection: Findings from Longitudinal Studies
of Adolescent Smoking and Drinking.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 15 (4):
345-53.

Best, R. 1983. We’ve All Got Scars. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Billy, John O., Joseph L. Rodgers, and Richard J. Udry. 1984. “Adolescent Sexual
Behavior and Friendship Choice.” Social Forces 62 (3): 653-78.

Bott, E. 1957. Family and Social Networks. London: Tavistock.

Brown, Bradford B., M. J. Lohr, and C. M. Trujillo. 1990. “Multiple Crowds and
Multiple Lifestyles: Adolescents’ Perceptions of Peer Group Characteristics.” Pp.
30-36 in Adolescent Behavior and Society: A Book of Readings, edited by R. E.
Muuss. New York: Random House.

Cairns, Robert B., and Beverley D. Cairns. 1994. Lifelines and Risks: Pathways of
Youth in Our Time. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Cairns, R. B., B. D. Cairns, H. J. Nekerman, S. D. Gest, and J. Gariepy. 1988. “Social
Networks and Aggressive Behavior: Peer Support or Peer Rejection?” Developmental
Psychology 24:815-23.

Coleman, J. R. 1961. The Adolescent Society. New York: Free Press.

. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

Corsaro, William, and Donna Eder. 1990. “Children’s Peer Cultures.” Annual Review
of Sociology 16:197-220.

Cusick, P. 1973. Inside High School. New York: Holt, Rinehardt, & Winston.

Dunphy, D. 1963. “The Social Structure of Urban Adolescent Peer Groups.” Sociometry
26:230-46.

Durkheim, Emile. 1951. Suicide: A Study in Sociology, edited by George Simpson and
translated by John A. Spaulding and George Simpson. New York: Free Press.

Eckert, Penelope. 1989. Jocks and Burnouts: Social Categories and Identity in the
High School. New York: Teachers College Press.

Eder, Donna. 1985. “The Cycle of Popularity: Interpersonal Relations among Female
Adolescents.” Sociology of Education 58 (July): 154-65.

Eder, Donna, and Janet Lynne Enke. 1991. “The Structure of Gossip: Opportunities
and Constraints on Collective Expression among Adolescents.” American
Sociological Review 56:494-508.

Elliott, D., D. Huizinga, and S. Ageton. 1985. Explaining Delinquency and Drug Use.
Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications

Elliott D., and S. Menard. 1996. “Delinquent Friends and Delinquent Behavior:
Temporal and Developmental Patterns” Pp. 28-67 in Delinquency and Crime:
Current Theories, edited by J. David Hawkins. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge
University Press.

Ennett, Susan, Susan L. Bailey, and Belle Federman. 1999. “Social Network
Characteristics Associated with Risky Behaviors among Runaway and Homeless
Youth.” Source 40 (11): 63-78.

Ennett, Susan, and Kari Bauman. 1996. “Adolescent Social Networks: School,
Demographic, and Longitudinal Considerations.” Journal of Adolescent Research 11
(2): 194-215.

Everhart, R. 1983. Reading, Writing and Resistance: Adolescence and Labor in a Junior
High School. New York: Teachers College Press.

Fischer, Claude. 1982. To Dwell among Friends. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press.

Friedman, S. R., R. Curtis, A. Neaigus, and B. Jose. 1999. Social Networks, Drug
Injectors’ Lives, and HIV/AIDS. New York: Plenum.

Gardner, William, Edward P. Mulvey, and Esther C. Shaw. 1995. “Regression Analyses
of Counts and Rates: Poisson, Overdispersed Poisson, and Negative Binomial
Models.” Psychological Bulletin 118 (3): 392-404.

Giordano, P. 1983. “Sanctioning the High Status Deviant: An Attributional Analysis.”
Social Psychology Quarterly 46 (4): 329-42.

Giordano, P., S. Cernkovich, and M. Pugh. 1986. “Friendships and Delinquency.”
American Journal of Sociology 91:1170-202.

Glueck, Sheldon, and Eleanor Glueck. 1950. Unraveling Juvenile Delinquency.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Gold, M. 1970. Delinquent Behavior in an American City. Belmont, Calif.: Brooks/
Cole.

Goldstein, H. 1987. Multilevel Models in Education and Social Research. London:
Oxford University Press.

Gottfredson, Michael R., and Travis Hirschi. 1990. A General Theory of Crime.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Granovetter, M. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociology
81:1287-303.

. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. Cambridge, Mass.:

Harvard University Press.

. 1985. “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness.”
American Journal of Sociology 91:481-510.

Henggler, S. 1989. Delinquency in Adolescence. Newbury Park, Calif: Sage
Publications.

Hindelang, Michael J., Travis Hirschi, and Joseph G. Weis. 1980. Measuring
Delinquency. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Library of Social Research.

Hirschi, Travis. 1969. Causes of Delinquency. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Jensen, Gary F. 1972. “Parents, Peers, and Delinquent Action: A Test of the Differential
Association Perspective.” American Journal of Sociology 78:562-75.

Jensen, Gary F., and Dean G. Rojek. 1992. Delinquency and Youth Crime, 2d ed.
Chicago, IIl.: Waveland Press.

Jussim, Lee, and D. Wayne Osgood. 1989. “Influence and Similarity among Friends:
An Integrated Model Applied to Incarcerated Adolescents.” Social Psychology
Quarterly 52 (2): 98-112.

Kandel, Denise B. 1978. “Homophily, Selection, and Socialization in Adolescent
Friendships.” American Journal of Sociology 84:427-36.

Kandel, Denise B., and Mark Davies. 1991. “Friendship Networks, Intimacy, and Illicit
Drug Use in Young Adulthood: A Comparison of Two Competing Theories.”
Criminology 29 (3): 441-70.

Kapferer, B. 1969. “Norms and the Manipulation of Relationships in a Work Context.”
Pp. 181-244 in Social Networks in Urban Settings, edited by J. Mitchell. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.

Klovdahl, S. 1985. “Social Networks and the Spread of Infectious Diseases: The AIDS
Example.” Social Science and Medicine 21:1203-16.
Krohn, Marvin D. 1974. “An Investigation of the Effect of Parental and Peer
Associations on Marijuana Use: An Empirical Test of Differential Association
Theory.” Pp. 5-8 in Crime and Delinquency: Dimensions of Deviance, edited by M.
Riedel and T. P. Thornberry. New York: Praeger.

. 1986. “The Web of Conformity: A Network Approach to the Explanation of
Delinquent Behavior.” Social Problems 33:601-13.

Krohn, Marvin D., Alan J. Lizotte, Terence P. Thornberry, Carolyn Smith, and David
McDowall. 1996. “Reciprocal Causal Relationships among Drug Use, Peers, and
Beliefs: A Five-Wave Panel Model.” Journal of Drug Issues 26:405-28.

Krohn, Marvin, James L. Massey, and Mary Zielinski. 1988. “Role Overlap, Network
Multiplexity, and Adolescent Deviant Behavior.” Social Psychology Quarterly 51 (4):
346-56.

Krohn, Marvin D., and Terence P. Thornberry. 1993. “Network Theory: A Model for
Understanding Drug Abuse among African-American and Hispanic Youth.” Pp.
102-28 in Drug Abuse among Minority Youth: Advances in Research and
Methodology, edited by De La Rosa, Mario R., and Juan-Luis Recio Adrados. NIDA
research monograph 130. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.

Kupersmidt, J. B., J. D. Coie, K. A. Dodge. 1990. “The Role of Poor Peer Relationships
in the Development of Disorder.” Pp. 274-305 in Peer Rejection in Childhood, edited
by Asher and Coi. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Laumann, Edward O., Peter Marsden, and D. Prensky. 1989. “The Boundary
Specification Problem in Network Analysis.” Pp. 18-34 in Research Methods in
Social Network Analysis, edited by Freeman, White, and Romney. Fairfax, Va.:
George Mason University Press.

Lee, Valerie E., and Anthony S. Bryk. 1989. “A Multilevel Model of the Social
Distribution of High School Achievement.” Sociology of Education 62:172-92.

Matsueda, Ross L. 1982. “The Dynamics of Moral Beliefs and Minor Deviance.” Social
Forces 68:429-57.

Matsueda, Ross L., and Kathleen Anderson. 1998. “The Dynamics of Delinquent Peers
and Delinquent Behavior.” Criminology 36 (21): 269-99.

Matsueda, Ross L., and Karen Heimer. 1987. “Race, Family Structure, and
Delinquency: A Test of Differential Association and Social Control.” American
Sociological Review 52:826-46.

Messerschmidt, James W. 2000. Nine Lives: Adolescent Masculinities, the Body and
Violence. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Orcutt, J. D. 1983. Analyzing Deviance. Homewood, IIl.: Dorsey Press.

. 1987. “Differential Association and Marijuana Use: A Closer Look at
Sutherland (with a Little Help from Becker).” Criminology 25:341-58.

Osgood, Wayne D. 1999. “Poisson Based Regression Analysis of Aggregate Crime
Rates.” Working Paper no. 99-04. Center for Research on Crime and Justice,
Pennsylvania State University.

Osgood, Wayne D., Lloyd Johnston, Patrick O’Malley, and Jerald Bachman. 1988.
“The Generality of Deviance in Late Adolescence and Early Adulthood.” American
Sociological Review 55:81-93.

Patterson, G. R., B. DeBaryshe, and E. Ramsey. 1989. “A Developmental Perspective
on Antisocial Behavior.” American Psychologist 44:329-35.

Patterson, G. R., and T. J. Dishion. 1985. “Contributions of Families and Peers to
Delinquency.” Criminology 23:63-79.

Podolny, Joel M., and James N. Baron. 1997. “Resources and Relationships: Social
Networks and Mobility in the Workplace.” American Sociological Review 62:673-93.

Raudenbush, Stephen W., and Anthony S. Bryk. 1986. “A Hierarchical Model for
Studying School Effects.” Sociology of Education 59:1-79.

Reiss, A. J. 1986. “Co-Offender Influences on Criminal Careers.” Pp. 121-60 in Criminal
Careers and “Career Criminals,” vol. 2. Edited by A. Blumstein, J. Cohen, J. Roth,
and C. Visher. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Shaw, C. and H. McKay. 1931. Report on the Causes of Crime, vol. 2. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Short, James F. 1957. “Differential Association and Delinquency.” Social Problems 4:
233-39.

. 1960. “Differential Association as a Hypothesi
Testing.” Social Problems 8:14-25.

Short, J. F, and F. I. Nye. 1958. “Reported Behavior as a Criterion of Deviant
Behavior.” Social Problems 5:207-13.

Sutherland, E. H. 1947. Principles of Criminology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott.

Sutherland, E. H., and D. R. Cressey. 1974. Criminology, 9th ed. Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott.

Thornberry, Terrence. 1987. “Toward an Interactional Theory of Delinquency.”
Criminology 25:863-91.

Vold, George B., Thomas J. Bernard, and Jeffrey B. Snipes. 1998. Theoretical
Criminology, 4th ed. New York: Oxford University Press.

Voss, H. 1969. “Differential Association and Containment Theory: ‘Theoretical
Convergence.’” Social Forces 47:381-91.

. 1996. “Organization and Instigation in Delinquent Groups.” Criminology 34
(1): 11-38.

Warr, Mark, and Mark C. Stafford. 1991. “The Influence of Delinquent Peers: What
They Think or What They Do?” Criminology 29:85 1-66.

Wellman, Barry. 1988. “Structural Analysis: From Method and Metaphor to Theory
and Substance.” Pp. 19-61 in Social Structures: A Network Approach, edited by
Barry Wellman and S. D. Berkowitz. New York: Cambridge University Press.

. 2000. “The Network Community: An Introduction.” Pp. 1-47 in Networks in
the Global Village, edited by Barry Wellman. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Willis, P. 1981. Learning to Labour: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs.
New York: Columbia University Press.

 

Problems of Empirical
