American Sociology and Black Assimilation: Conflicting Perspectives
Author(s): L. Paul Metzger

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Jan., 1971), pp. 627-647
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776432

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:05 UTC
INTRODUCTION

The failure of sociologists to anticipate and direct their research attention
to new developments in American race relations during the 1960s has
been acknowledged by Hughes (1963) and Pettigrew and Back (1967,
pp. 714-16). Rossi (1964, pp. 125-26) noted that “‘it is sadly ironic that
as the pace of change in race relations stepped up in the past four years,
the volume of social science research has declined during the same pe-
riod.’”’ With the exception of projects sponsored by the federal govern-
ment—most notably, the so-called Coleman and Moynihan reports
(Coleman 1966; Rainwater and Yancey 1967)—significant in terms of
their potential impact on national policy but resting on the theoretical
foundations of an earlier period of basic research (Tumin 1968, pp. 118-
1] wish to express my appreciation to Mrs. Saundra Hudson for her assistance in
providing background material for this article, and to Vassar College for a grant which

helped to make its preparation possible. Appreciation is also due Lilo Stern and James
Moss for their comments on an earlier draft.
American Journal of Sociology

19), the picture Rossi sketched remains relatively unchanged; his call for
research into the black movements, the political aspects of racial change,
and the role of ethnicity in American life has been met by only a handful
of sociologists. Despite two recent studies by Bell (1968) and Levy
(1968), the civil rights movement of the early sixties remains largely
uncharted by sociologists. Similarly, the black-power and nationalist
movements which succeeded it, as distinct from the earlier Muslim move-
ment (about which there are able accounts by Lincoln [1961] and Essien-
Udom [1962]), remain virtually terra incognita within the sociological
profession.

As an explanation for this failure, Hughes suggests that the concern
with professionalism among sociologists has impaired their capacity to
empathize with the movements of lower strata; Pettigrew and Back
(1967, p. 706) refer to the timidity of foundations, the obstacles placed in
the way of race-relations research by diehard white segregationists, and
“a, sociological bias in race relations toward studying the static and
segregation-making elements.” It is the thesis of this paper that the
failure can be attributed in part to the theoretical framework through
which most American sociologists have viewed race relations in the
United States. This framework, it is believed, rests essentially on the
image of American society which has been set forth by American liberal-
ism, wherein the minority problem is defined in the narrow sense of pro-
viding adequate, if not equal, opportunity for members of minority
groups to ascend as individuals into the mainstream culture. America, in
this view, is the land of opportunity through competitive struggle in the
marketplace; it can, and will, provide opportunities for all to gain just
rewards for their individual merit. (American liberalism differs with
American conservatism largely over the issue of whether the opportuni-
ties already present are adequate and takes its reformist cast from its
recognition that they are not.)

Sociologists, by and large, have accepted this image of Horatio Alger
in the Melting Pot as the ideal definition of American society. Although
they have repeatedly documented the discrepancy between social reality
and cultural myth in America, they have also taken the view that the
incorporation of America’s ethnic and racial groups into the mainstream
culture is virtually inevitable. (Similar tendencies can be discerned in the
field of social stratification, according to Pease, Form, and Rytina 1970.)
Successful assimilation, moreover, has been viewed as synonymous with
equality of opportunity and upward mobility for the members of minor-
ity groups; “opportunity,” in this system, is the opportunity to discard
one’s ethnicity and to partake fully in the “American Way of Life”; in
American Sociology and Black Assimilation

this sense, assimilation is viewed as the embodiment of the democratic
ethos.

The convergence of liberal and sociological thought in the area of race
relations is striking and raises serious questions about the ‘“value-free”
character of sociological inquiry in this area,? This is particularly the case
since the equation of assimilationist with democratic values in minority-
majority relations is by no means universal even within Western culture
(Schermerhorn 1959). The right of national self-determination has played
a significant role in the liberal-democratic movement in Europe, and as
Myrdal (1944, p. 50) noted, “the minority peoples of the United States
are fighting for status in the larger society; the minorities of Europe are
mainly fighting for independence from it.”

Equally remarkable, perhaps, is the fact that assimilationist values,
with their connotations of elitism and a monocultural society, have come
under as little attack as they have from either liberal or radical social
criticism in the United States. The philosophy of democratic cultural
pluralism has had, in fact, able spokesmen in America, most notably dur-
ing the period of World War I (Bourne 1964) and the twenties (Kallen
1924), but the issue of ethnic pluralism has not been a central preoccupa-
tion of the American Left until the recent emergence of the black-power
movement. This can be traced, perhaps, to the ascendancy in the thirties
of Marxian modes of thought in Left circles and the resulting preoccupa-
tion with economic and political questions, on one hand, and working-
class solidarity, on the other.

The aim of this paper is to examine some of the major arguments which
have appeared in the sociological literature in support of the view that
the outcome of race relations in the United States will be the integration
or assimilation? of the Negro into the American mainstream. The wide-
spread and uncritical acceptance of these arguments by sociologists, it is
believed, has contributed heavily to the void in race-relations research

2 Horton (1966) has stated that ‘‘the liberal tendency of American sociology . . . is
particularly marked in the sociological analysis of the Negro question. ... The
liberal fate of minorities, including Negroes, is basically containment through so-
cialization to dominant values’ (pp. 707-8). He goes on to argue that ‘contemporary
liberalism . . . is a variant of conservative order theory” (p. 707).

3 The terms “integration” and “assimilation” are not necessarily synonymous. Inte-
gration, especially as it was used in the fifties, can have the limited meaning of
“desegregation” (particularly de jure) and, sociologically, need not be followed by
assimilation in the usual sense of cultural merger. Most sociologists have seemingly
assumed, however, that desegregation would be followed by the gradual movement,
of blacks into mainstream American culture, and that racial characteristics would
gradually lose their significance as determinants of social status and identity, and it is
this assumption which is called into question here (see also Gordon 1964, pp. 246-47).
The tendency for sociologists to use the two terms interchangeably is apparent in the
writings of Hauser (1966a, 1966b).
which has been noted above, as well as to the tendency to regard black-
nationalist movements as “extremist”? (Glazer and Moynihan 1968, p.
78), “escapist” (Morsell 1961, p. 6), and essentially deviant-pathological
phenomena.‘ It will be pointed out that some of the components of a
revised perspective on American race relations can already be found
within the sociological literature and that a new perspective will include
(1) abandoning the idea that racial assimilation in the form of gradual
absorption of black Americans into the middle-American mainstream is
necessarily either inevitable or desirable from the standpoint of demo-
cratie values, (2) a recognition that forces producing ethnicity as well as
forces favoring assimilation are operative in American society today and
that a realistic analysis of the ethnic and racial situation will take both
into account, (3) a more balanced view of “black pluralism” (Killian
1968, p. 135) than has thus far appeared in the work of most sociologists.
In short, it is argued that a rethinking of the theory of eventual assimila-
tion will open up prospects for a more pertinent and realistic assessment
of minority problems, particularly race problems, in the United States.

The arguments favoring eventual assimilation will be grouped under
two headings: (1) those which rest on assertions about the nature of the
dominant white American society, (2) those which rest on assertions
about the nature of minority groups and experience within this society.
Robert E. Park and the Race Relations Cycle

In 1926, one of the most famous and influential statements of the theory
of eventual assimilation was made by Robert E. Park (1950, pp. 149-50):
“Tn the relations of races there is a cycle which tends everywhere to re-
peat itself. .. . The race relations cycle which takes the form . . . of con-
tacts, competition, accommodation and eventual assimilation, is appar-
ently progressive and irreversible. ... Racial barriers may slacken the
tempo of the movement, but cannot change its direction. . . . The forces
which have brought about the existing interpenetration of peoples are so

the races within this time . . . but the dynamic social forces creating inequality will, if
the present trends continue, be practically eliminated in three decades.”

® The emergence of the black movement in the sixties and the racial crises which
followed forced sociologists to acknowledge, ex post facto, the resistance of American
society to racial integration. They were quick to apply the retrospective wisdom that
social change entails strain and conflict and that racial conflict may have positive
functions (Himes 1966). Mounting black pressure was accounted for, again ex post
facto, by an application of reference-group theory in the form of the notion of “relative
deprivation” (Pettigrew and Back 1967, pp. 694-96). It should be noted that insofar
as this theory assumes that the black movement is the product of actual gains made
by blacks since World War II, it is open to question since the extent of black gains,
especially vis-a-vis whites, in this period is not clear. On the negative side, for example,
residential segregation increased in American cities between 1930 and 1960 (Hauser
1966b, pp. 76-77), and there was virtually no change in the ratio of nonwhite to white
family income between 1947 and 1964 (Fein 1966, p. 122). Moynihan points out (1966,
p. 189) that the acknowledged growth of the black middle class may not be accom-
panied by improvement in the condition of the black lower-class majority and, in
The Negro Family: The Case for National Action, claims that the black family is in a
state of decline (Rainwater and Yancey 1967). Wright (1967), citing comparative
data from the U.S. Census, disputes the notion of the rapid socioeconomic advance
of the Negro since World War II. Finally, Wilhelm and Powell (1964) find the roots
of the black movement not in Negro advance, but retrogression: ‘‘With the onset of
automation, the Negro is moving out of his historical state of oppression into useless-
ness... . He is being removed from economic participation in white society”; and
his nascent nationalism constitutes a ‘quest for identity” (pp. 3-6). In short, the
theory of relative deprivation as an account of black unrest has yet to be adequately
tested.
vast and irresistable that the resulting changes assume the character of a
cosmic process.” The universality and inevitability of this ‘cosmic
process” along with other formulations of race-relations cycle theories
have long since been questioned by many sociologists,’ but the acceptance
of some form of melting-pot theory as descriptive of American society has
been strongly maintained nonetheless.’

An ambiguity with respect to Park’s (1950) views on the eventual
assimilation of the American Negro should be noted. In 1913, for ex-
ample, he wrote:

Under conditions of secondary contact, that is to say, conditions of in-
dividual liberty and individual competition, characteristic of modern
civilization, depressed racial groups tend to assume the form of nationalities
[italics mine]. A nationality, in this narrower sense, may be defined as the
racial group which has attained self-consciousness, no matter whether it
has at the same time gained political independence or not. . . . The funda-
mental significance of the nationality movement must be sought in the
effort of subject races to substitute, for those supplied to them by aliens,
models based on their racial individuality and embodying sentiments and
ideals which spring naturally out of their own lives... . In the South...
the races seem to be tending in the direction of a bi-racial society, in which
the Negro is gradually gaining a limited autonomy. [Pp. 219-20]

Frazier (1947, p. 269) noted that even up to “about 1930, Park’s sociolog-
ical theory in regard to race relations did not go beyond the thesis of a
bi-racial organization.’”’ Hence, if Park believed in the eventual assimila-
tion of races in the United States, his attention as an observer in the
contemporary situation was strongly focused on the emergence of a black
‘national consciousness.”’ Insofar as he regarded the growth of such a
consciousness as a stage in the process leading to eventual assimilation,
however, his cycle theory can be regarded as one of the more potent
influences in the direction of viewing assimilation as a natural and in-
evitable process in the evolution of modern society.®

7 Berry (1958, pp. 128-49) provides a useful and critical survey of Park and others’
cycle theories. Etzioni (1959) presents a systematic critique of Park’s views in the
context of his review of Wirth’s The Ghetto (1928). He points out that there is no
a priori reason for regarding assimilation as the inevitable outcome of culture contact,
and that Park’s theory, because it fails to specify the temporal span of and conditions
producing each phase, can accommodate any observation and hence is untestable.

8 For a statement of the theory of the “triple melting pot,” which presents the case
for the disappearance of the ethnicity of the white immigrant groups within the wider
structure of American religious pluralism (itself compromised by the ecumenical
movement and a shared commitment to the ‘‘American Way of Life” as a quasi-
religious ideal), see Herberg (1955, particularly chap. 2).

® The fact that an earlier generation of American sociologists did not regard the as-
similation of the American Negro as anything like an immediate prospect and viewed
the emergence of a sense of collective unity as an outcome of the Negro’s status in
American society is apparent in E. B. Reuter’s The American Race Problem (1927).
In chap. 16, Reuter traces the history of, and analyzes the “growth of race con-
An American Dilemma

If Gunnar Myrdal (1944) was critical of the ‘‘do-nothing (laissez faire)”
presuppositions which he detected in the work of American sociologists
(including Park) and the subsequent tendency of the latter to ‘ignore
practically all possibilities of modifying—by conscious effort—the social
effects of the natural forces” (p. 1050), his classic opus remained very
much within the assimilationist tradition. The author of An American
Dilemma wrote that “we assume it is to the advantage of American Ne-
groes as individuals and as a group to become assimilated into American
culture, to acquire the traits held in esteem by the dominant white
Americans” (p. 929).1°

Myrdal discerns no structural impediment in American society to the
realization of an assimilationist program: the race problem is a moral
problem “‘in the heart of the American” (p. xlvii); and ‘America is free
to choose whether the Negro shall remain her liability or become her
opportunity” (p. 1022). This decidedly nonsociological approach to the
problem is justified, according to Myrdal, because “there is evidently a
strong unity in this nation and a basic homogeneity and stability in its
valuations. Americans . . . have something in common: a social ethos, a
political creed. It is difficult to avoid the judgment that this “American
Creed” is the cement in the structure of this great and disparate nation”
(p. 1). Furthermore, “the conquering of color caste in America is Amer-
ica’s own innermost desire....The main trend in its history is the
gradual realization of the American Creed” (p. 1021)." The creed is car-
ried, Myrdal believed, by the “huge institutional structures” of the so-
ciety, through which “a constant pressure is brought to bear on race
prejudice, counteracting the natural tendency for it to spread and be-
come more intense... . The ideals thereby gain fortifications of power
and influence in society. This is a theory of social self-healing that applies
to the type of society we call democracy” (p. 80).

Despite his hortatory tone and his call for national planning, social
legislation, and social engineering on the part of an enlightened leader-

sciousness,” and concludes that “the continued growth of a Negro nationalistic spirit
in America is perhaps inevitable” (p. 429).

10 Tt, is to the credit of Myrdal that he recognized that this assumption was indeed a
“value premise’ (p. 929) and not the statement of a “natural force” or an “inevitable
social process.” This distinction frequently is blurred in the sociological literature, as,
for example, when Herberg (1955, p. 23) writes that the “perpetuation or ethnic dif-
ferences is altogether out of line with the logic of American reality.’ This “‘logic’”’
would seem to amount to little more than the power of an entrenched social myth.

4 For a critique of Myrdal’s view that the “strain toward consistency” produced by
the psychological and moral discomforts of the dilemma is a major motive force in the
direction of realization of the American creed, see Medalia (1962).
American Journal of Sociology

ship, however, Myrdal had relatively few conerete suggestions for policy
with respect to the race problem beyond his faith in the power of con-
certed educational effort (pp. 48-49) to break down the already-crum-
bling walls of the “caste beliefs and valuations” which he believed lay at
the heart of white racism.” The race problem would be solved simply by
moving the society further in the course on which it was already set—
that of welfare capitalism—which would require no major reorganization
of its economic and political institutions. In the process, the South, as
the major locus of the racial problem and “‘itself a minority and a national
problem” (p. 1010), would take its place in the mainstream of the Ameri-
can polity.1%

At the level of social determinants, Myrdal suggested that the forces
of modernization in the South—industrialization, urbanization, the
spread of literacy—were themselves powerful mechanisms for the elimi-
nation of racism in America. This theme frequently recurs in the post-
Myrdal writings on race, and is especially emphasized by Arnold Rose
(1956, p. 75): “The conditions which led to the development of the caste
system in the nineteenth century are no longer with us. . . . New forces
have arisen which make the caste system increasingly less desirable and
useful to the dominant white group in the South or any other section of
the country: These include industrialization, automation, the leadership
of the United States in the free Western world, rising educational levels
among both whites and Negroes. ... These changes... have made a
mere hollow shell of tradition” (italics mine).

12 In his emphasis on beliefs and attitudes, Myrdal’s analysis had an affinity with the
social psychological interpretation of race relations which has been so pronounced in
American social science. Blumer (19580) refers to this interpretation as the “‘prejudice-
discrimination axis” and characterizes it as follows: “It rests on a belief that the
nature of relations between racial groups results from the feelings and attitudes which
these groups have toward each other. . . . It follows that in order to comprehend and
solve problems of race relations it is necessary to study and ascertain the nature of
prejudice’ (p. 420). It is probable that the search for the determinants of prejudice
and discrimination in attitudinal sets, personality structure, or role-specific behavior
has inhibited the development of a social structural perspective on race relations in

American sociology. The work of Lohman and Reitzes (1952, 1954) offered some
corrective, but the lead they offered has not been followed.

8 Ralph Ellison (1966, pp. 298-99) writes that “‘An American Dilemma . . . sponsored
by a leading capitalist group . . . is the blueprint for a more effective exploitation of
the South’s natural, industrial, and human resources. . . . In the positive sense, it is
the key to a more democratic and fruitful usage of the South’s natural and human
resources; and in the negative, it is the plan for a more efficient and subtle manipula-
tion of black and white relations—especially in the South.”

14 Similar statements can be found in Simpson and Yinger (1954, 1958, 1959) and
Rose (1965). The hypothesis that urbanization constitutes a major impetus to racial
integration and equalization has been challenged on theoretical grounds by Killian
and Grigg (1966) and Howard and Brent (1966); Blalock (1959) found little support
for it in an analysis of Southern census data and comments that “urbanization in the
South has at least in part taken a form which is compatible to that developed in
The Sociological Tradition

In the course of their presentation of the case for the inevitability of
desegregation, Simpson and Yinger (1959, p. 389) note that “in the ap-
proach to desegregation that we are taking, one can perceive a major
recurring theme of sociological theory. Here is Sir Henry Maine’s idea of
the shift from status to contract. Here is an illustration of the perceptive-
ness of Simmel’s work . . . concerning the influence of a money economy.
Here is much of Toennies and Weber and Durkheim. Parsons and others
who use the structural-functional approach have caught this fundamental
orientation in such a way as to make it more readily applicable to such
. .. problems as the one with which we are concerned.’

Thus, it is no surprise that Parsons (1966, p. 739) states that the
major theoretical reason for asserting that conditions are ripe in America
for the full “inclusion” of the Negro is that ‘“‘the universalistic norms of
the society have applied more and more widely. This has been true of
all the main bases of particularistic solidarity, ethnicity, religion, re-
gionalism, state’s rights, and class. ... Today, more than ever before,
we are witnessing an acceleration in the emancipation of individuals of
all categories from these diffuse particularistic solidarities.”” Whether
phrased in terms of the Parsonian pattern variables, the older formula-
tions of Durkheim, Cooley, or Toennies, or Myrdal’s American creed, it
is clear that this tradition of sociological theory views ethnicity as a sur-
vival of primary, quasi-tribal loyalties, which can have only a dysfunc-
tional place in the achievement-oriented, rationalized, and impersonal
social relationships of the modern, industrial-bureaucratic order.

That the tenets of this theoretical tradition necessarily imply the in-
evitable disappearance of “particularistic solidarities,’ however, has
been put to a major theoretical test in the recent work of Van den Berghe

certain colonial territories. . . . It is. . . entirely possible that as the South continues
to urbanize, at least in the early stages... non-whites may remain in the most
unskilled positions. ... A constant or even an increasing gap may be maintained”
(pp. 147-48).

18 Greeley (1964), a proponent of the view that the ethnic group, which he defines as
a “semi-gemeinschaft collectivity” (p. 108), remains a significant element in modern
social structure, suggests that the gemeinschaft-gesellschaft tradition poses a ‘‘danger
that sociologists, impressed with the tremendous increase in gesellschaft, would rule
out the possibility of the survival of gemeinschaft, at least beyond the level of the
nuclear family” (p. 107).
American Journal of Sociology

(1967). Rather than assuming, with the Myrdal-Parsons school, that
race relations per se tend to disappear in gesellschaftlike societies, he
asserts that they merely shift their form from “paternalistic” to “com-
petitive.” In the latter case, there is declining contact between racial
castes, segmentation into ghettoes, and economic competition between
racial groups. Although Van den Berghe (1967) asserts that racial cleav-
ages in competitive societies ‘constitute one of the major sources of
strain and disequilibrium in such systems’ (p. 30), he makes no judg-
ment as to their ultimate disappearance and states that a possible
outcome is the “Herrenvolk democracy ...in which the exercise of
power and suffrage is restricted, de facto and often de jure, to the domi-
nant group” (p. 29).

Van den Berghe’s formulation is one of the few attempts in the litera-
ture to link the persistence of racial cleavages in competitive modern
societies to the essential structure of such societies, and thus represents a
major theoretical departure from the tradition discussed in this section.
It is a departure which permits the description of America as a “socially
pluralistic” society along racial lines despite its cultural homogeneity
(pp. 34-36), which views racial cleavage and conflict as inherent in the
nature of competitive society (pp. 30-31) and sees racism! as central to,
rather than a “hollow shell” within, the Western cultural tradition (pp.
11-18). As such, it provides a perspective for the analysis of racial con-
sciousness and conflict which is lacking in the orthodox Myrdal-Parsons
schema.
dominance that will require the greatest adjustment in the social order
and that provides the greatest revolutionary potential’ (p. 22). By virtue
of his exclusion from a “white man’s country” (p. 26), the black, says
Killian, is “in the process of becoming an ethnic group” (p. 137), a de-
velopment which is a radical challenge to the assimilationist ideal in
America and which, hence, is fraught with the potential for a revolution-
ary confrontation.

The notion that specifiable “gains” accrue to whites by virtue of the
subordination of blacks was introduced by Dollard (1937) and suggests
that white resistance to racial change rests on something more than cul-
tural lag or Myrdalian moral schizophrenia. As such, it is a valuable
corrective to the notion that racism is “dysfunctional” or “deviant”
within the wider culture. Heer (1959) and Glenn (1963, 1965, 1966) have
offered both theoretical and empirical support for this notion, and Glenn
writes: ‘“Negro-white antagonism in the United States is and will long
remain a matter of realistic conflict. Negroes cannot advance without the
loss of traditional white benefits and it is unlikely that most of the whites
who benefit . . . will willingly allow Negro advancement. This is not to
say that race prejudice and social discrimination are strictly or even
largely an expression of economic rationality [1966, p. 178]... nor
should the many known and possible dysfunctions of discrimination be
overlooked. However ... the tradition of discrimination against Ne-
groes apparently receives continuous reinforcement from the present
self-interests of the majority” (1963, pp. 447-48). To the extent, how-
ever, that the theory of white gains conceives of white resistance in terms
of benefits to individuals, or categories of individuals, it tends to find its
place within a social psychological rather than a social structural perspec-
tive. Hence, there is not, as yet, a systematic exploration by American
sociologists of the possibly latent and positive functions of racism in
sustaining the “equilibrium” of the American social system.
American Journal of Sociology

guard response of a dying tradition. The second perspective suggests that
racism is integral in American society, that it is central to the culture
and interests of the white majority, and that its breakdown will only
occur through a protracted process of social conflict and at least some
degree of restructuring of the existing institutional arrangements of the
society. The gradual emergence of the elements of such a perspective can
be noted in the sociological literature in the sixties, although there is
little doubt that the first perspective continues to hold sway as a kind of
official orthodoxy within the sociological establishment (see, e.g., Parsons
1966, Hauser 1966a, and Pettigrew 1969). An earlier prototype of the
second perspective has been present in the Marxian analysis of the race
problem.'®

The affinity of these two perspectives with liberal and radical ideologi-
cal stances, respectively, on the race problem is apparent (Horton 1966).
Our purpose here, however, is neither to claim more abstract-truth value
for one or the other (although we believe that the credibility of the first
has been seriously put to the test by the racial events of the sixties) nor to
condemn both on grounds of their ideological ‘“contamination.”!® Like
many sociological theories, these perspectives are schema which serve to
point to differing aspects of a complex and probably contradictory real-
ity. What is problematic, we believe, is the overwhelming acceptance,
until recently, of the assimilationist perspective among sociologists and
the claim that it is supported by social science evidence (Pettigrew 1969)
in a way in which the second perspective—which can be referred to as
“pluralistic’’—is not. In our view, neither the accumulated evidence of
social science research nor developments in American race relations in
the sixties can support this view. Moreover, the acceptance of the as-
similationist perspective has played a large role in shaping the direction
of empirical research on race relations”® and in inhibiting the develop-
18 For an effective, if neglected, analysis of American race relations in the Marxian
tradition, see Cox (1948). As noted above, Marxism failed to supply a corrective to the
assimilationist bias of both American social science and American social criticism. In
fact, the overall impact of Marxian thought has been to relegate ethnicity to the
status of “false consciousness”; national and ethnic sensibility is viewed as an out-
growth of the culture of capitalism and as a stratagem of the bourgeoisie for dividing
and weakening the working-class movement. For the orthodox Marxist, minorities
and minority problems, as such, will disappear with the cessation of class oppression.
The strengths of the Marxian interpretation of racism lie in its linking of this pattern
to the total structure of the society of which it is a part and its insistence that the race
problem has determinants in the economic institutions and the struggle for power
and privilege in the society. The viable elements of the Marxian perspective can be
retained even as the simplistic account of the race problem as a reflex of the class
struggle has been, correctly, rejected.
19 We agree with Horton (1966, p. 713) when he writes that “the error of the sociolo-
gist is not that he thinks politically and liberally about his society, but that he is not
aware of it.”

20 The main trends of this research prior to the 1960s have been thoroughly summa-
rized in the invaluable papers of Drake (1957) and Blumer (19580).
ARGUMENTS FROM THE NATURE OF AMERICAN MINORITY GROUPS

If sociologists who have favored the assimilation-integration perspective
have taken a benign view of the capacity and willingness of American
society to achieve racial assimilation, they have also supported their
position through a common set of assumptions about American minorities
in general and blacks in particular. These assumptions can be stated as
follows: American minorities (especially blacks) desire assimilation into
mainstream America. As far as the white ethnic immigrant groups are
concerned, there have been no insuperable obstacles in either their socio-
cultural characteristics or their ideologies which have prevented their
assimilation; in this respect, their most relevant traits have been those
which they shared with lower-class groups in American society as a conse-
quence of their having entered the society at the lower rungs of the class
hierarchy. They have shared the majority commitment to the American
creed, and the rate of their assimilation is directly proportional to their
access to the socializing agencies of the dominant culture. The conven-
tional position on the assimilation of white ethnics was well stated by
Warner and Srole (1945, p. 295) when they wrote: “The future of Ameri-
can ethnic groups seems to be quite limited; it is likely that they will be
quickly absorbed. When this happens, one of the great epochs of Ameri-
can history will be ended, and another, that of race, will begin” (p. 295).

With the exception of the distinctiveness of his castelike position in
the South and his unique visibility, the position of the Negro, it has been
believed, is similar. In the words of Kristol (1966), “the Negro today is
like the immigrant yesterday,” and if his special history and status in
American society have subjected him to unusually severe barriers to full
participation, his absorption can be expected nonetheless. The remainder
of this section will discuss some questions which arise concerning this
view of black assimilation in the light of the recent reassessment by
social scientists of the assimilation process and the nature of black culture
in American society.
ethnicity in American society. As early as fifteen years ago, Glazer (1954,
p. 172) noted that a kind of ethnic consciousness, part “nostalgia” and
part “ideology,” was observable among the descendants of immigrant
groups, which consciousness performs ‘“‘some functions, and even valuable
functions, in American life.” Gordon (1964) distinguishes between struc-
tural assimilation (participation in the dominant society at the primary
group level) and acculturation (acquisition of the culture of the dominant
group). He argues that the latter process has been rapid on the part of
minorities in American society, but that the former has not and will
remain limited for the foreseeable future (except in the “intellectual sub-
society’’). In the sense that primary social participation for most people
remains limited by ethnic boundaries, the United States, argues Gordon,
can be described as structurally pluralistic along ethnic, racial, and re-
ligious lines. Glazer and Moynihan (1968) note the differential response
and resistance of diverse minorities to Americanizing influences and state
that the ethnic group is more than a survival of traditional immigrant
culture; it is, they claim, a product of the impact of American life on such
culture, a ‘new social form” (p. 16). They go beyond Gordon in em-
phasizing the ethnic influence in secondary (occupational, political) as
well as primary spheres. Greeley (1969, p. 7) doubts that even the
acculturation process has been as thorough as Gordon claims and has
called for (1964) a reassessment of the ethnic group as a source of iden-
tity, interest-group formation, and subcultural differentiation in Ameri-
can society.

In view of the emphasis placed by these writers on ethnicity in con-
temporary American society, it is surprising, perhaps, that they have not
explicitly addressed themselves to a reassessment of the assimilation-
integration perspective as it applies to the black American. If the white
minorities have legitimately preserved an ethnic identity, should not the
blacks propose to do the same? In this connection, the views of these
writers are squarely in the assimilationist tradition. Glazer and Moyni-
han (1963, p. 52), for example, write that “it is not possible for Negroes
to view themselves as other ethnic groups viewed themselves . . . because
the Negro is only an American, and nothing else. He has no values and
culture to guard and protect.” In a similar vein, Gordon (1964, p. 114)
writes of the black community that “dual social structures are created
solely by the dynamics of prejudice and discrimination rather than being
reinforced by ideological commitment of the minority itself.” Both these
studies, in short, are concerned with the survival or transformation of
prior ethnic identities in America rather than with the generation of new
ones, or, in Singer’s (1962) terms, “ethnogenesis.” Moreover, they fail to
raise the question of what the meaning and content of racial assimilation
can be in a society which remains ethnically plural. In the words of
The Problem of Black Culture

If the American Negro has been considered “100 percent American” by
sociologists, the divergence of his culture from the middle-class norm has
at the same time been heavily examined and documented. The prevailing
sociological view was stated by Myrdal (1944, p. 928): “American Negro
culture is not something independent of general American culture. It is
a distorted development, or a pathological condition of the general Amer-
ican culture.’ The view that the race problem is a white man’s problem
here becomes coupled with the view that the black has been unable to
create an authentic subculture in America, owing to his oppression and
powerlessness, and, hence, that his condition is to be diagnosed as one of
a pervasive social pathology.

It is beyond the scope of this paper to review the reassessment of this
perspective which is currently under way in the social sciences, but two
observations can be made. First, this reassessment, no doubt stimulated
by the efforts of black intellectuals (e.g., Ellison 1966; Cruse 1967) to
question the “social pathology” interpretation of black culture, has been
mainly evident in the work of the so-called urban anthropologists rather
than that of sociologists. Their application of ethnographic techniques to
the study of the culture of the black ghetto contrasts with the usual
practice of sociologists of compiling statistical indexes of social disorgani-
zation. Particularly notable in this respect have been the works of Keil
(1966) and Hannerz (1969), as well as the theoretical attack mounted by
Valentine (1968) on the theory of the “culture of poverty.”’ Recent essays
by Blauner (1969) and McCarthy and Yancey (this issue, pp. 648-72)
make an overdue shift of sociological attention in this direction. Elli-
son’s (1966, p. 302) comment that “in Negro culture, there is much of
value for America as a whole. What is needed are Negroes to take it and
create of it the uncreated consciousness of their race” might well serve
as a major leitmotiv of this reassessment on the part of both the scholar-
ly and the black communities.

Second, the sociological emphasis on the pathologies of the black com-
munity produced a tendency among sociologists in the sixties to view the
major barriers to racial integration as residing in the sociocultural char-
Note on the Caste Hypothesis

Through the work of Dollard (1937), Davis, Gardner, and Gardner
(1941), and Warner (1936), the concept of caste became, during the
forties, an almost standard tool for the analysis of American race rela-
tions. The caste hypothesis acknowledged that the race problem could
not be regarded as merely another instance of the minorities problem in
the United States, owing to the unique position of the Negro in the over-
all system of stratification. Moreover, at least in the statement of Warner,
the caste hypothesis viewed racial development (especially in the
South) as tending toward “parallelism” (Warner 1936, p. 235), or, in
Park’s terms, a “biracial society.” Within the conventional sociological
literature, then, there has been available a conceptual framework which
was not assimilationist in its premises but which has not been adequate
to account for or foresee the racial crisis of the past decade.

Several reasons for the failure of the caste hypothesis in this respect
can be noted. First, it described a system of racial accommodation in
which the permanent status subordination of the black caste was believed
to lie in a system of folkways and mores which both castes accepted as
inevitable and unalterable. Hence, it was attacked by both Myrdal
(1944) and Cox (1948) for failing to take into account the dynamic forces
which were altering the traditional Southern pattern of “race etiquette,”
for exaggerating the extent of black compliance with this system, and
21 The hypothesis that there is a direct correlation between economic discrimination

and Negro population increase has been put to empirical test by Blalock (1956) and
Glenn (1963), whose data do not clearly support it.
CONCLUSION

Three major conclusions emerge from this survey of the role of the
assimilation-integration perspective in the study of American race rela-
tions:

1. The belief that racial assimilation constitutes the only democratic
solution to the race problem in the United States should be relinquished
by sociologists. Beyond committing them to a value premise which com-
promises their claim to value neutrality, the assimilationist strategy
overlooks the functions which ethnic pluralism may perform in a demo-
cratic society. Suggestions as to these functions are found in the writings
of Gordon (1964, pp. 239-41), Greeley (1964; 1969, pp. 23-30), and
Etzioni (1959, pp. 260-62). The application of this perspective to the
racial problem should result in the recognition that the black power and
black nationalist movements, to the extent that they aim at the creation
of a unified and coherent black community which generates a sense of
common peoplehood and interest, are necessarily contrary neither to the
experience of other American minorities nor to the interests of black
people. The potential for racial divisiveness—and in the extreme case,
revolutionary confrontation—which resides in such movements should
also be recognized, but the source of this “pathological” potential should
be seen as resting primarily within the racism of the wider society rather
than in the “extremist” response to it on the part of the victimized
minority.
2. To abandon the idea that ethnicity is a dysfunctional survival from
a prior stage of social development will make it possible for sociologists to
reaffirm that minority-majority relations are in fact group relations
(Blumer 1958a) and not merely relations between prejudiced and vic-
timized individuals. As such, they are implicated in the struggle for
power and privilege in the society, and the theory of collective behavior
and political sociology may be more pertinent to understanding them
than the theory of social mobility and assimilation. Although general
theories of minority-majority relations incorporating notions of power
and conflict can be found in the writings of sociologists (e.g., Scher-
merhorn 1964; Lieberson 1961), it is only recently, in the work of
Killian (1968) and Oppenheimer (1969), that such perspectives have
found their way into sociologists’ analyses of the American racial situa-
tion.

3. To abandon the notion that assimilation is a self-completing process
will make it possible to study the forces (especially at the level of cultural
and social structure) which facilitate or hinder assimilation or, con-
versely, the forces which generate the sense of ethnic and racial identity
even within the homogenizing confines of modern society. On the basis of
an assessment of such forces, it is certainly within the province of socio-
logical analysis to point to the possibilities of conscious intervention in
the social process (by either the majority or the minority group) to
achieve given ends and to weigh the costs and consequences of various
policy alternatives. These functions of sociological analysis, however,
should be informed by an awareness that any form of intervention will
take place in a political context—that intervention itself is in fact a
political act—and that the likelihood of its success will be conditioned
by the configuration of political forces in the society at large. Without
this awareness—which is nothing more than an awareness of the total
societal context within which a given minority problem has its meaning—
sociological analysis runs a very real risk of spinning surrealistic fantasies
about a world which is tacitly believed to be the best of all possible
worlds. Whether the call of sociologists for racial assimilation in Ameri-
can society as it is currently organized will fall victim to such a judgment
remains to be seen.
Blauner, Robert. 1969. “Black Culture: Myth or Reality?” In Afro-American Anthro-
pology, edited by Norman E. Whitten, Jr. and John F. Szwed. New York: Free
Press.

Blumer, Herbert. 1958a. ‘“Race Prejudice as a Sense of Group Position.” Pacific So-
ctological Review 1 (Spring) :3-7.

. 1958. ‘Research on Racial Relations: The United States of America.” Inter-
national Social Science Bulletin 10 (1):403-47.

Bourne, Randolph 8. 1964. War and the Intellectuals: Collected Essays, 1915-19,
edited by Carl Resek. New York: Harper & Row.

Broom, Leonard, and Norval D. Glenn. 1965. Transformation of the Negro American.
New York: Harper & Row.

Coleman, James §., et al. 1966. Equality of Educational Opportunity. Office of Educa-
tion, United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (OE 38001).
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Cox, Oliver C. 1948. Caste, Class, and Race. New York: Doubleday.

Cruse, Harold. 1967. The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. New York: Morrow.

Davis, Allison, Burleigh B. Gardner, and Mary R. Gardner. 1941. Deep South.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Dollard, John. 1937. Caste and Class in a Southern Town. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.

Drake, B. St. Clair. 1957. ‘Recent Trends in Research on the Negro in the United
States.” International Social Science Bulletin 9 (4):475-94.

Ellison, Ralph. 1966. Shadow and Act. New York: New American Library.

Essien-Udom, E. U. 1962. Black Nationalism: The Search for Identity in America.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Etzioni, Amitai. 1959. “The Ghetto: A Re-evaluation.” Social Forces 37 (March):
255-62.

Fein, Rashi. 1966. “An Economic and Social Profile of the Negro American.” In The
Negro American, edited by Talcott Parsons and Kenneth B. Clark. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.

Frazier, E. Franklin. 1947. “Sociological Theory and Race Relations.” American
Sociological Review 12 (June) : 265-70.

Glazer, Nathan. 1954. “Ethnic Groups in America.” In Freedom and Control in Mod-
ern Society, edited by Morroe Berger, Theodore Abel, and Charles H. Page. New
York: Van Nostrand.

Glazer, Nathan, and Daniel Patrick Moynihan. 1963. Beyond the Melting Pot: The
Negroes, Puerto Ricans, Jews, Italians and Irish of New York City. Cambridge,
Mass.: M.I.T. Press.

Glenn, Norval D. 1963. “Occupational Benefits to Whites from Subordination of
Negroes.” American Sociological Review 28 (June) :443-48.

. 1965. “The Role of White Resistance and Facilitation in the Negro Struggle

for Equality.” Phylon 26 (June) : 105-16.

. 1966. ‘White Gains from Negro Subordination.” Social Problems 14 (Fall):
159-78.

Gordon, Milton. 1964. Assimilation in American Life. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Greeley, Andrew M. 1964. ‘American Sociology and the Study of Immigrant Ethnic
Groups.” International Migration Digest 1 (Fall): 107-13.

. 1969. Why Can’t They Be Like Us? New York: Institute of Human Relations
Press.

Gregor, A. James. 1963. ‘Black Nationalism: A Preliminary Analysis of Negro
Radicalism.” Science and Society 27 (Autumn) :415-32.

Hannerz, Ulf. 1969. Soulside. New York: Columbia University Press.

Hauser, Philip M. 1966a. ‘“Next Steps on the Racial Front.” Journal of Intergroup
Relations 5 (Autumn): 5-15.

. 1966b. “Demographic Factors in the Integration of the Negro.” In The Negro

American, edited by Talcott Parsons and Kenneth B. Clark. Boston: Houghton

Mifflin.
Heer, David M. 1959. “The Sentiment of White Supremacy: An Ecological Study.”
American Journal of Sociology 64 (May) :592-98.

Herberg, Will. 1955. Protestant, Catholic, and Jew. New York: Doubleday.

Himes, Joseph. 1966. “The Functions of Racial Conflict.”’ Social Forces 45 (Septem-
ber): 1-16.

Horton, John. 1966. ‘Order and Conflict Theories of Social Problems as Competing
Ideologies.” American Journal of Sociology 71 (May):701-13.

Howard, Perry, and Joseph Brent III. 1966. “Social Change, Urbanization, and Types
of Society.”’ Journal of Social Isswes 22 (January) :73-84.

Hughes, Everett C. 1963. ‘(Race Relations and the Sociological Imagination.”’ Ameri-
can Sociological Review 28 (December) : 879-90.

Kallen, Horace. 1924. Culture and Democracy in the United States. New York: Boni &
Liveright.

Keil, Charles. 1966. Urban Blues. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Killian, Lewis M. 1968. The Impossible Revolution? New York: Random House.

Killian, Lewis M., and Charles Grigg. 1966. “Race Relations in an Urbanized South.”
Journal of Social Issues 22 (January) : 20-29.

Kristol, Irving. 1966. “The Negro Today is Like the Immigrant Yesterday.” New
York Times Magazine, September 11, p. 50.

Levy, Charles J. 1968. Voluntary Servitude: Whites in the Negro Movement. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Lieberson, Stanley. 1961. ‘A Societal Theory of Race and Ethnic Relations.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 26 (December) : 902-10.

Lincoln, C. Eric. 1961. The Black Muslims in America. Boston: Beacon.

Lohman, J. D., and D. C. Reitzes. 1952. “Note on Race Relations in Mass Society.”
American Journal of Sociology 58 (November) : 240-46.

. 1954. “Deliberately Organized Groups and Racial Behavior.” American So-
ciological Review 19 (June) :342-44.

Medalia, Nahum Z. 1962. ‘“Myrdal’s Assumptions on Race Relations: A Conceptual
Commentary.” Social Forces 40 (March) : 223-27.

Morsell, John A. 1961. “Black Nationalism.” Journal of Intergroup Relations 3
(Winter) : 5-11.

Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. 1966. “Employment, Income, and the Ordeal of the Negro
Family.” In The Negro American, edited by Talcott Parsons and Kenneth B.
Clark. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Myrdal, Gunnar. 1944. An American Dilemma. New York: Harper & Bros.

Oppenheimer, Martin. 1969. The Urban Guerrilla. Chicago: Quadrangle Books.

Park, Robert E. 1950. Race and Culture. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Parsons, Talcott. 1966. “Full Citizenship for the Negro American?” In The Negro
American, edited by Talcott Parsons and Kenneth B. Clark. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.

Pease, John, William Form, and Joan Rytina. 1970. “Ideological Currents in Ameri-
can Stratification Literature.” American Sociologist 5 (May): 127-37.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. 1969. “Racially Separate or Together?” Journal of Social Issues
25 (January) :43-69.

Pettigrew, Thomas F., and Kurt W. Back. 1967. “Sociology in the Desegregation
Process: Its Use and Disuse.”’ In The Uses of Sociology, edited by Paul F. Lazars-
feld, William H. Sewell, and Harold L. Wilensky. New York: Basic.

Rainwater, Lee, and William L. Yancey. 1967. The Moynihan Report and the Politics
of Controversy. A Trans-Action Social Science and Public Policy Report. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press.

Record, Wilson. 1956. “Extremist Movements Among American Negroes.” Phylon 17
(March) : 17-23.

Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders. 1968. New York:
Bantam.

Reuter, Edward B. 1927. The American Race Problem. New York: Crowell.

Rose, Arnold. 1956. “Intergroup Relations vs. Prejudice: Pertinent Theory for the
Study of Social Change.” Social Problems 4 (October) : 173-76.
. 1965. “The American Negro Problem in the Context of Social Change.”
The Annals 357 (January) : 1-17.

Rossi, Peter. 1964. “New Directions for Race Relations Research in the Sixties.”
Review of Religious Research 5 (Spring) : 125-32.

Schermerhorn, R. A. 1959. “Minorities: European and American.’”’ Phylon 20 (June):
178-85.

. 1964. “Toward a General Theory of Minority Groups.” Phylon 25 (Septem-
ber) : 238-46.

Simpson, George E., and J. Milton Yinger. 1954. “The Changing Pattern of Race
Relations.” Phylon 15 (December) : 327-46.

. 1958. “Can Segregation Survive in an Industrial Society?” Antioch Review 18

(March) : 15-24.

. 1959. “The Sociology of Race and Ethnic Relations.”’ In Sociology Today,
edited by Robert K. Merton, Leonard Broom, and Leonard 8. Cottrell, Jr. New
York: Basic.

Singer, L. 1962. “Ethnogenesis and Negro Americans Today.’ Social Research 29
(Winter) :419-32.

Tumin, Melvin M. 1968. “Some Social Consequences of Research on Racial Rela-
tions.” American Sociologist 4 (May) :117-23.

Valentine, Charles A. 1968. Culture and Poverty. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Van den Berghe, Pierre L. 1967. Race and Racism: A Comparative Perspective. New
York: Wiley.

Vander Zenden, James. 1959a. “Desegregation and Social Strains in the South.”
Journal of Social Issues 15 (4):53-60.

. 1959b. “A Note on the Theory of Social Movements.” Sociology and Social

Research 44 (September—October) : 3-8.

. 1965. Race Relations in Transition: The Segregation Crisis in the South. New
York: Random House.

Warner, W. Lloyd. 1936. ‘‘American Caste and Class.” American Journal of Sociology
32 (September) : 234-37.

Warner, W. Lloyd, and Leo Srole. 1945. The Social Systems of American Ethnic Groups.
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Westie, Frank R. 1965. ‘The American Dilemma: An Empirical Test.’’ American
Sociological Review 26 (August) : 527-38.

Wilhelm, Sidney M., and Elwin H. Powell. 1964. ‘“Who Needs the Negro?” Transac-
tion 1 (September—October) : 3-6.

Wirth, Louis. 1928. The Ghetto. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wright, Nathan. 1967. “The Economics of Race.’”’ American Journal of Economics
and Sociology 26 (January) : 1-12.
