The Contagiousness of Aircraft Hijacking

Author(s): Robert T. Holden

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 4 (Tan., 1986), pp. 874-904
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2779961

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:48 UTC
Attempts to divert aircraft from their scheduled flight plans through force
or threats of force are familiar occurrences in the United States and
throughout the world. Such incidents are referred to by a variety of
terms, including “aircraft hijacking,” “aerial hijacking,” “air piracy,” and
“skyjacking.”

Although there have been hijackings from 1931 to the present, their
peak period was 1968-72 (see fig. 1). During that period there were 326
hijacking attempts worldwide, or one every 5.6 days. These included 137
attempts by individuals who boarded flights in the United States, or one
such attempt every 13.3 days. Newspapers, television, and other mass
media constantly carried stories about aircraft hijackings, and it was
often suggested that the motivation to hijack planes spread from individ-
ual to individual as a result of the media coverage.

In this article, I will first detail various arguments about the conta-
giousness of hijacking. I will then review the history of hijacking with a
special focus on incidents that occurred in the United States during the
period 1968-72 and on the possibility that contagion was involved. A
general mathematical model of contagion will be developed and applied
to data on hijacking attempts in the United States during the peak period.
SOCIAL CONTAGION AND AIRCRAFT HIJACKING

The assertion that aircraft hijacking is a contagious phenomenon, that
one hijacking leads to another, appears in a wide variety of literature.
Rich (1972) and Whelton (1972) write of a “skyjack virus” transmitted
through the media. Phillips (1973) discusses the importance of imitation
in explaining hijackings, and Chauncey (1975) and Minor (1975) consider
a “hijacking as fad” hypothesis. Arey (1972) attributes several specific
incidents to imitation of certain other incidents. Similar assertions are
made in more general literature on “terrorism” and collective violence
(e.g., Hacker 1981; Livingstone 1982; Pitcher, Hamblin, and Miller 1978)
and in Hawkes’s (1971) discussion of a stochastic model of contagion. The
cross-national diffusion of terrorist hijacking incidents is discussed by
Heyman and Mickolus (1981). In another variation on the idea of conta-
gion, Hamblin, Jacobsen, and Miller (1973) discuss hijacking in terms of
the diffusion and modification of a basic invention, claiming in effect that
each hijacker is attempting to outdo previous hijackers by inventing a
better hijacking. The assertion of contagiousness of hijacking also ap-
pears in newspapers (e.g., New York Times [January 28, 1972]) and
magazines (e.g., U.S. News and World Report [February 17, 1968],
p. 68).

The claim that publicity stimulates subsequent hijackings receives cre-
dence from studies of the effects of media coverage on other types of
violent acts. Berkowitz and Macaulay (1971) report that violent crimes
increased in the United States following certain well-publicized mass
murders and following the assassination of President Kennedy. Phillips
(1978, 1979, 1980) and Bollen and Phillips (1982) report that various types
of suicides and murder-suicides increase following other well-publicized
suicides and murder-suicides, and Phillips (1983) reports that homicides
increase following well-publicized championship prizefights. Mazur
(1982) reports that bomb threats against nuclear energy facilities are in-
fluenced by media coverage of the nuclear energy controversy. Claims of
contagiousness have also been made about larger-scale incidents of vio-
lence, including racial disturbances (Spilerman 1970), disorders in schools
(Ritterband and Silberstein 1973), political violence (Hamblin et al.
1973), military coups (Li and Thompson 1975; Midlarsky 1970), and
incidents of international terrorism (Hamilton and Hamilton 1983).

Berkowitz (1984) reviews much of the literature on the effects of the
depiction of violence and discusses a number of ways in which such
depiction may lead to violence by the viewer. The National Institute of
Mental Health (1982) reviews a number of studies demonstrating that
children (but not necessarily adults) imitate aggressive behavior im-
mediately after they have seen it on television. Of particular interest is
that many of the studies have shown that imitation is more likely if
aggressive acts are seen to be rewarded and less likely if such acts are seen
to be punished.
? A number of psychiatric theories have been advanced to explain hijacking. Specifi-
cally, Time ([January 31, 1969], pp. 19-20) reports the views of several psychiatrists,
none of whom had ever seen a hijacker. All attributed irrational motives to hijackers;
e.g., one states that “the skyjacker believes that he can prove himself a decisive,
effective human being by taking control of a plane, its crew and passengers, and
commanding it to go to Cuba.” McWhinney (1971, p. 17) writes, “Hijacking has thus
become, in the Cuban context at least, a form of direct physical outlet for the inner
repressions and frustrations of pathological personality types.” The psychiatrist David
Hubbard claims to have found evidence of mental disturbance in each person in a
sample of hijackers and suggests that hijacking and other types of “terrorist” behavior
are caused by faulty vestibular function of the middle ear and resultant difficulties in
dealing with gravity (see Holden 1979; Hubbard 1971; Knebel 1971). He suggests that
even hijackings by Palestinian guerrillas might be explained by such pathology instead
of by the hijackers’ stated political objectives (reported in Knebel 1971). A number of
other psychiatric theories of terrorist behavior (including terrorist aircraft hijacking)
have been advanced, e.g., that terrorists suffer from the psychological effects of incon-
sistent mothering (reported in Holden 1979). Another view is that of Rich (1972), who
suggests that hijacking should be defined as a type of insanity: “committing the act of
skyjacking makes a man a lunatic even as committing the act of murder makes a man
a murderer” (p. 29). Psychiatric theories are not by themselves viable as explanations
because they do not explain why hijacking was especially common, e.g., among Cu-
ban refugees in the United States or among Palestinians, nor do they explain why the
requisite mental pathology was more manifest during 1968—72 than at other times.

* The most serious limitation of my operational definition is that it does not rule out
“spurious” contagion as an alternative explanation of dependence between events.
Since I do not (in this article) have the means to control for possible sources of spurious
contagion, it would be pointless to use a more restrictive definition. Spurious contagion
is discussed near the end of the article.

4 Many other authors have proposed hijacking typologies. Hijacking for transporta-
tion, as a means of escaping from or to a particular country or type of government, is
noted by Aggarwala (1971), Clutterbuck (1975), Clyne (1973), Evans (1969), Joyner
(1974), McWhinney (1975), Minor (1975), Rein (1971), Turi et al. (1972), Turner
(1969), and Whelton (1972). Several authors distinguish hijackings by political ref-
ugees from other hijackings for transportation, and Aggarwala (1971), Arey (1972),
Joyner (1974), Evans (1969), and Loy (1970) distinguish hijackings by escaping crimi-
nals. Hijacking for political purposes is noted by Aggarwala (1971), Agrawala (1973),
Arey (1972), Clutterbuck (1975), Clyne (1973), Joyner (1974), McWhinney (1975),
Minor (1975), and Turner (1969), although such incidents are often treated as unre-
lated to extortion; Rein’s (1971) category of hijacking for blackmail appears to refer
largely to extortion hijackings with political objectives. Turi et al. (1972) omit such a
category and Mintz (1973) combines hijackings by “the political revolutionary” and
“the propagandist” with those committed by “the troubled juvenile.” Most authors
writing after 1972 also include a category of hijackings for ransom (Agrawala 1973;
Joyner 1974; McWhinney 1975; Mintz 1973; Minor 1975; Turi et al. 1972), and Clyne
(1973) goes so far as to distinguish ransom hijackers using real weapons from those
who were bluffing. Most authors include a separate “mentally disturbed” category.
The term appears in Aggarwala (1971), Loy (1970), Evans (1969), Turi et al. (1972),
and Whelton (1972); Joyner (1974) and Turner (1969) refer to “unbalanced persons,”
Clyne (1973) to “lunatics,” and McWhinney (1975) to the “lunatic fringe.” Rein (1971)
includes such individuals under the category “inner directed motives,” and Arey (1972)
writes of “losers and misfits” and “emotional disaster cases.” Time ([January 31, 1969],
p. 19) suggests that all hijackers of U.S. planes to Cuba were either escaping criminals
or emotionally disturbed. Hubbard (1971) and Rich (1972) regard all hijackers of U.S.
planes as mentally unbalanced.
TABLE 1

DESTINATIONS DESIRED BY U.S. HIJACKERS, 1968-72

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

Destination N %
Transportation attempts: ......... lll 100.0
Cuba 90 81.1
Mexico .... 4 3.6
Italy .... 3 2.7
Canada 2 1.8
Bahamas 1 a)
Egypt ... 1 9
Israel 1 ao
North Korea .... 1 9
North Vietnam .. 1 9
South Vietnam 1 x]
Sweden 1 9
Switzerland ... 1 9
United States 1 9
Unknown ..... 3 2.7
Extortion attempts: 26 100.0
Bailout ... 17 65.4
Algeria .. 3 11.5
Bahamas . 2 7.7
Cuba 1 3.8
North Vietnam ....... 1 3.8
United States 1 3.8
Unknown ............6...00005 1 3.8

 

Nore.—Aircraft boarded in 50 states or Puerto Rico.
History

Hijacking frequencies and dates given below are based on Federal Avia-
tion Administration (FAA) documents (1983);5 other references cited give
detailed descriptions of specific incidents. Additional information on the
history of aircraft hijacking can be found in scholarly papers (e.g., Aggar-
wala 1971; Evans 1969; McWhinney 1971; Turner 1969) and the popular
press (Arey 1972; Hubbard 1971; Phillips 1973; Whelton 1972).

Aircraft hijackings prior to the late 1950s bear little relation to the later
incidents in the United States.° However, the incidents that began occur-
ring in the late 1950s are relevant. From late 1958 through 1969, aircraft
hijacking was predominantly a phenomenon of the Western Hemisphere,
centered on Cuba, and many of the hijackings of U.S. planes to Cuba are
best understood in that larger context. Of the 177 worldwide hijacking
attempts between 1958 and 1969, 80% originated in the Western Hemi-
sphere and 77% either originated in Cuba or were efforts to divert planes
to Cuba.

The incidents involving Cuba happened in several distinct phases. The
first wave of hijackings began in 1958, after Fidel Castro had taken
control of Cuba.’ Those hijackings were primarily attempts by anti-
Castro individuals to divert Cuban planes to the United States. A number
of Cuban boats were also hijacked to the United States.* Immediately
after the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, the direction of the hijackings
reversed and there was a brief wave of diversions of U.S. planes to Cuba,
many of these carried out by Cuban exiles.? The earliest hijackings of
U.S. planes to Cuba might thus be regarded as an extension of the inci-
dents that occurred during the Cuban revolution.

In the mid-1960s there were only a handful of hijacking attempts,
including several attempts to and from Cuba and some isolated hijack-
ings in Hawaii. However, as figure 1 shows, the hijacking rate in the
United States increased dramatically in 1968 and remained high through
1972. A similar increase occurred in hijacking attempts outside the
United States. There were two peaks in the rate of U.S. hijacking activity
during that period, one early in 1969 and one in 1972 (see fig. 2). The first
peak consisted primarily of hijackings by individuals seeking transporta-
tion to Cuba, whereas the second consisted primarily of extortion at-
tempts.

Transportation hijackings, 1968—72.—The first hijacking attempt in
1968 occurred on February 9, when a U.S. Marine attempted unsuccess-
fully to hijack a military charter flight out of South Vietnam. The first
attempt in the United States followed shortly thereafter, on February 17,
when a private plane was hijacked from Florida to Cuba. Four days later
the first hijacking of a scheduled airline flight to Cuba was attempted,
committed by an escaping murderer. A flood of similar incidents fol-
lowed. In 1968 there was a total of 19 hijackings of domestic U.S. flights
to Cuba plus a hijacking of a U-S. -registered plane from the Bahamas to
Cuba. There were also unsuccessful attempts to hijack flights from the
United States to Mexico and to South Vietnam.

The hijacking pattern of 1968 continued in 1969, the biggest year ever
for hijacking in the United States. Except for two incidents late in the
year (see below), all the hijackers sought Cuba. The hijackings to Cuba
during that period were largely routine. Airliners carried approach plans
for the Havana airport and crews were instructed not to resist hijackers.
There were also standard diplomatic procedures for obtaining the return
of planes and passengers (Phillips 1973). As a result, there were no partic-
ularly dramatic hijackings to Cuba whose impact might be traceable in
the subsequent history of hijacking.

The unique hijacking of 1968-69 occurred in October 1969, when an
absent-without-leave Marine named Raphael Minichiello boarded a Los
Angeles—San Francisco flight and hijacked it to Rome (Phillips 1973).
That incident set a record for greatest distance traveled by a hijacker and
received front-page publicity for several days in the United States and
overseas. Ten days later there was a hijacking attempt by a 14-year-old
boy in Cincinnati who, his mother claimed, had been influenced by the
publicity (Vew York Times [November 11, 1969]). The Minichiello inci-
dent seems to have influenced subsequent hijackers’ choices of destina-
tions: every hijacker who preceded Minichiello in 1969 had sought Cuba,
but two who followed soon after chose destinations in Europe. However,
despite the anecdotal evidence of imitation, there was no great increase in
the hijacking rate following the Minichiello incident (see fig. 2).

Transportation hijacking attempts continued in the United States in
1968 1969

       

     

C
TTIW
DOAK
COI
OOO

 
  

 

JFMAMIIJASONDIFMAMIISITASOND

 

1970 1971

 

 

 

JFMAMISJASONOIFMAMISASONODO

 

1972

(D TRANSPORTATION TO CUBA
© OTHER TRANSPORTATION

@ exrorr10n

 

Oe

JFMAMJJASOND
Fic. 2.—Monthly hijacking attempts—U.S.-boarded aircraft
those who hijacked planes to Cuba were black Americans, who commited
the hijackings during a period of militant civil rights activity in which
leftist ideology was prominent. The white, non-Latin individuals, on
whom much of the psychiatric theorizing by Hubbard (1971) and others is
based, composed little more than a third of all transportation hijackers.

Although far more hijackings occurred in the United States than in any
other country, hijacking was a worldwide phenomenon. As figure 3
shows, the peak years for transportation hijacking outside the United
States were 1969 and 1970. Between 1968 and 1972 there were almost as
many hijackings to Cuba from outside the United States as there were
from within it. The majority of those incidents took place in Latin
America, although there were also two attempted hijackings to Cuba
from Japan and one from England. In addition to the foreign hijackings
to Cuba, there were 22 attempts to hijack planes from the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe and a number of transportation hijackings in the
Middle East, as well as many isolated incidents around the world.

Some of the foreign hijackings were publicized in the United States,
although many others were not. For example, one highly publicized inci-
dent was the hijacking of a Japanese plane to North Korea, in March
1970, by nine students wielding Samurai swords (Phillips 1973). Although
an increase in the U.S. hijacking rate might be expected following that
incident, figure indicates that none occurred.

Extortion hijackings, 1968—72.—The first extortion attempt during
the peak period occurred outside the United States. Following the Arab-
Israeli war of 1967 and the diversion to Algeria of a plane carrying Moise
Tshombe, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) hi-
jacked an Israeli airliner to Algiers on July 23, 1968 (Phillips 1973). With
the cooperation of the Algerian government, the hijackers demanded that
Israel free a number of Palestinian guerrillas in return for the release of
the passengers. That incident was followed by a series of related inci-
dents, some of which are described below.

The first extortion hijacking in the United States, the first modern
hijacking for money, occurred in June 1970.'' A man named Arthur
Barkley held a plane hostage at Dulles Airport while demanding a ran-
som of $100 million from the government. He was eventually over-
powered, and his plans for escape were not clear. The Barkley incident
JFMAMJJASONOJFMAMJIJASOND

1972

(D TRANSPORTATION To CUBA
© OTHER TRANSPORTATION

@ exrorrran

 

JFMAMJJASOND
Fic. 3.—Monthly hijacking attempts—foreign-boarded aircraft
were hijacked by groups demanding political concessions. However, it
was not until the end of May 1971 that another extortion hijacking oc-
curred in the United States. That hijacker successfully held a plane for
ransom and then ordered it to fly to Nassau, Bahamas, where he was
arrested. A similar unsuccessful attempt was made the following month,
by an extortionist who planned to escape to North Vietnam.

It appears that up until that time there was little relationship between
U.S. and foreign extortion hijackings. The first three U.S. extortion hi-
jackings were the first modern attempts to hold planes for money, and
those incidents did not closely follow on any foreign incidents. However,
in July 1971, just a month after the third U.S. incident, a plane was
hijacked for money outside the United States. That occurrence suggests
that there may have been diffusion of ransom attempts from the United
States to foreign countries. The next extortion hijacking in the United
States, in September 1971, was an attempt to gain the release of several
Black Panthers from prison. That incident happened during the same
period as several hijackings of Jordanian planes by Palestinians.

The most famous of all U.S. hijackings took place on November 24,
1971. A man who boarded a flight in Portland, Oregon, under the name
of D. B. Cooper hijacked the plane, demanding a ransom of $200,000 and
two parachutes. His demands were met and he later bailed out with the
money. The idea of a parachute escape may not have originated with
Cooper, however; a hijacker who held a Canadian plane for ransom just
12 days earlier had attempted unsuccessfully to bail out (Phillips 1973).

A wave of extortion attempts followed Cooper’s (see fig. 2). In the
following month there were two attempts, including one by a hijacker
who demanded a parachute in an apparent attempt to imitate Cooper. Of
the 31 U.S. hijacking attempts in 1972, 19 involved extortion and 15 were
by hijackers who demanded parachutes.

Hijacking for money also became common overseas (see fig. 3). Three
months after the Cooper hijacking, the PFLP hijacked a West German
plane, released the passengers, and held the plane for a $5 million ran-
som. At least eight other foreign planes were hijacked for ransom in 1972,
including flights from Indonesia, Ecuador, Brazil, and Australia, hi-
jacked by individuals who apparently planned Cooper-style parachute
escapes. A number of other foreign hijackers followed the PFLP’s earlier
pattern of demanding the release of criminals or political prisoners.

The hijacking rate in the United States began to decline in late 1972
and never again reached the high level of the period 1968-72. In the 10-
year period 1973-82, there was an average of only 9.3 hijacking attempts
in the United States per year, compared with 29 attempts per year for
1968-72. Foreign hijackings also decreased after 1972, though not as
sharply as U.S. hijackings.
HYPOTHESES

The literature on contagion of violence and the historical discussion
above suggest several factors on which contagion effects might depend. I
will express them in terms of five hypotheses, which will be tested quan-
titatively. The first is the basic hypothesis that contagion occurred. The
history of hijacking yields a great deal of anecdotal support for this hy-
pothesis, but some counterexamples have also been noted.

HyportHEsis 1: The rate of aircraft hijacking attempts in the United
States increased following other hijacking attempts.

The view that hijacking was stimulated by media publicity leads to a
refined version of the first hypothesis.

HyporuHEsIs 2: The rate of aircraft hijacking attempts in the United
States increased following publicized hijacking attempts, but not follow-
ing unpublicized attempts.

The third hypothesis is suggested by previous findings that behavior is
more likely to be imitated if it is seen to be rewarded. The assumption is
made that a “successful” hijacking was a “rewarded” hijacking.

HyporuEsis 3: Successful hijacking attempts had a greater stimulating
effect than unsuccessful attempts.

The motivations for transportation and extortion hijacking attempts
may be very different, and the history of hijacking indicates that the peak
periods for the two types of hijackings were separated by three years.
Thus, it seems reasonable to distinguish between the two types of inci-
dents and to test the following quantitatively.

HyporTuHEsis 4: Transportation hijackings were stimulated only by
prior transportation hijackings, and extortion hijackings only by prior
extortion hijackings.

Many foreign hijackings were reported in the U.S. media, and there is
a possibility that cross-national diffusion occurred. Alternatively, foreign
hijackings were often different from U.S. hijackings and may not have
been relevant to potential hijackers in the United States. The historical
evidence for imitation of foreign hijackers is inconsistent, so it is impor-
tant to distinguish foreign hijackings from U.S. hijackings and to test the
following prediction.

HyporuHEsis 5: The stimulating effect on the U.S. hijacking rate was
greater for hijackings from the United States than for foreign hijackings.
" The sociological literature contains several deterministic and stochastic models for
social contagion. Those models typically incorporate increases or decreases in the rate
of occurrences that are deterministic functions of time or of the total number of
previous events. The logistic growth curve and several similar curves, e.g., have been
fitted to data on hijackings and other types of event by Hamblin et al. (1973) and
Pitcher et al. (1978). Various other authors have attempted to capture the dynamics of
social contagion with stochastic models. The starting point fer most stochastic models
is the Poisson process, which assumes the absence of dependence between event
counts. Gleason (1980) reports that the Poisson model provides a good fit to incidents
of international terrorism in the United States. The simple Poisson model has been
generalized in various ways to allow for contagion effects. Coleman (1964) develops a
“contagious Poisson” process in which the rate of new incidents increases linearly with
the total number of previous incidents, and that model is considered in Midlarsky’s
(1970) study of political coups and in Spilerman’s (1970) study of riots. Diekmann
(1979) and Hamilton and Hamilton (1981, 1983) discuss various generalizations of the
Coleman model, which incorporate a deterministic decrease in the rate of new inci-
dents when the total number of incidents grows sufficiently large. Hamilton and
Hamilton (1983) apply a model of that type to data on terrorism. The problem with the
existing models is that they do not allow for stochastic decreases in the rate of new
incidents. If hijacking attempts occur with randomness in time, there may be long
periods during which no new incidents occur, even when the underlying intensity of
the process is high. In that case, individuals’ memories of the previous incidents should
fade and the rate of subsequent hijackings should begin to decline. It should even be
possible for a contagious process to die out simply as a result of stochastic fluctuations
in the frequency of events, if there is no additional generation of incidents by exoge-
nous factors. Thus the previous models, which take into account only the total number
of past events, are inadequate, since the recency of the events must also be considered.
The sequence of airplane hijackings over time will be regarded as a
point process, a sequence of points occurring randomly on the time line
(Cox and Isham 1980). The events will be modeled with a discrete time
version of the linear excitation model that Hawkes (1971) developed for
orderly point processes in continuous time. >

Time will be assumed to take the value ¢ in {..., —1, 0, 1, 2, ...}. The
number of events (hijacking attempts) at time ¢ will be denoted by N; and
is assumed to have a Poisson distribution with expectation \, = v + 8,
where v is a constant (unexplained) baseline hijacking rate and 8, is
an increment owing to the history of hijacking up through time ¢ — 1.
Under the linear self-exciting model (adapted from Hawkes 1971), 8, =
>2%_,W,,N,—», so that an event at time ¢ — » contributes an amount W,, to
the hijacking rate at time ¢. The effects of multiple prior events are
assumed to be additive. Because 5, involves only N,—;, N;—2, ..., the rate
of new incidents at time ¢ is influenced only by events that occurred
during at least one time period in the past.

The lag structure {W,,} will be assumed to have the form

ail + B+ B? +... + B*~4, l1sn<p
a1 + B + B? +... + B?7') BR", n>p

for some positive integer , where 0 = B < 1. The parameter a can be
either positive or negative but is subject to certain restrictions (see Holden
1985). If a > 0, the occurrence of a hijacking increases the intensity of the
process above its previous level (i.e., contagion occurs). However, it is
also mathematically possible to allow a < 0, so each event tends to reduce
the subsequent rate of hijacking attempts.

The lag structure is such that the contagiousness of an event (or its
inhibiting effect, if «a < 0) increases steadily for p time periods, then
declines. The specific form of the contagiousness function W,, simplifies
many of the computations necessary in the statistical analysis (as de-
scribed in Holden 1985).

A very important property of the model is that as the lag m approaches
infinity the lag coefficient W,, approaches zero, so the model incorporates
the assumption that every incident tends to be forgotten eventually. Ex-
Summary Parameters

The parameterization of the effect of the kth input series in terms of a,,
Bz, and p, is one of mathematical convenience only. For the purpose of
interpretation, several computed quantities are far more useful. The first
is the long-term effect O, = 2%, Wen, which can be interpreted as the
expected number of additional hijacking attempts generated directly by
each event in the kth input series (or the expected number prevented if a,
is negative).

The second summary quantity is the mean of the lag distribution, t, =
2% =1 2Wep»/OQ,. When the input event has a stimulating effect, 7, gives the
expected lag at which the generated output events occur. The mean lag
may be misleading when the contagiousness function W,,, has a long tail.
In that case, the median lag, &, may be a better indicator of the delay
between an input event and the output events it generates. The various
summary quantities thus describe the magnitude of the stimulating or
inhibiting effect of an event and the delay at which the effect occurs.
ing boarding location of hijacker(s); (3) hijacker’s desired destination;
(4) nature of any extortion demands; and (5) outcome (successful or unsuc-
cessful hijacking). The FAA information about extortion demands was
sometimes supplemented with information from other sources (e.g., Phil-
lips 1973).

All incidents were first coded as either U.S. or foreign hijackings. The
U.S. hijacking attempts included all incidents in which the hijacker(s)
boarded the plane within any of the 50 states or Puerto Rico, since it was
assumed that individuals in those areas were exposed to much of the same
mass media content. There was no distinction made between scheduled
airline flights and general aviation flights, and the registry of the plane
was also considered immaterial. Any incident in which the hijacker
boarded outside the United States and Puerto Rico was considered a
foreign hijacking attempt. !*

The FAA recorded attempts to hijack U.S.-registered aircraft as “suc-
cessful,” “unsuccessful,” or “incomplete,” and attempts on foreign air-
craft as “successful” or “unsuccessful.”'> Except for the fact that the latter
two categories were combined for US. aircraft, the FAA code was used
without modification. The appropriateness of the code is discussed fur-
ther below.

For the purpose of testing the dependence of contagion effects on pub-
licity, media publicity was measured by coverage of hijacking incidents
on the evening news programs of the three major U.S. television net-
works. Data on television coverage were obtained from two sources. For
the period of August 1968 through the end of 1972 data were obtained
from the Vanderbilt Television News Archive Indexes and Abstracts. If
the abstracts showed any mention of a particular hijacking attempt on the
evening news broadcasts of ABC, CBS, or NBC during a period from
zero to three days after the event, the event was coded as “reported.”
Although some incidents were reported a day or more after their occur-
rence, no attempt was made to record the exact dates of the reports or the
amounts of coverage. The Vanderbilt archives were not in operation
during the first seven months of 1968. For that period, data were ob-
tained from indexes of the “CBS Evening News” and the same coding
procedure was used.'°

The television news data showed that about 90% of the hijacking
attempts in the United States were reported on network evening news
programs, and those not reported were almost exclusively attempts to
hijack general aviation flights (i.e., private and commuter planes). As a
result of the small number of unreported U.S. hijacking attempts, no
distinction was made in the analyses between reported and unreported
U.S. hijackings. However, only about one-third of all foreign hijacking
attempts were reported (see table 2), so it was worthwhile to distinguish
reported from unreported foreign incidents.
ous successful hijackings from the United States. The long term effect 0
was estimated as 0.506 new attempts generated by each successful at-
tempt. The mean delay t was 35.5 days, and the median é was 32.0.
However, that effect did not quite reach statistical significance at the .05
level, and none of the effects of the other types of input events came close
to significance. !”

I also estimated the effects of the various types of input event jointly,
and the results are shown in the right-hand side of the table. The x?
statistics were obtained by successively deleting input series from the
model and computing the change in the overall likelihood ratio statistic.
Because the various types of input event are listed in the table in the order
of their theoretical importance, the order of deletion of inputs was from
the bottom to the top of the list. The results of the joint analysis were very
similar to the results of the single-input analyses.
(sep) Se] aun uerpaut = 3 pur “(skep) Be] awy ueeut =

4 ‘syduiayje mau jo ‘ou

ZL0°22 = (81) -X THIOL

FP € YM /X OFVI-PooUrayT «

U Sis L = (¢),X St aueoyrusis ¢Q° 10J anyea [eos ay L—" ALON

 

 

060°S 891 $27 09s" 9e7 7 Vat 8°72 ecg “+ ss* payzodar you ‘durayye usi1as0j [nyssaoonsuy)
cole Lg oss ors — £88'T S6LT Tose p- ct payzoda you ‘ydurayye ustaI0J [NJssaaIns¢
L60°7 gee bre 608° — C177 zSz LZ oos’ — * WOISTAZ]9} “S'Q UO paysodar ‘ydur9}7e UStaI0j [NJssadonsu~—)
90S°T 98 98 L6e° T8LT 06 06 122" noe wOIsTAg|ay > a uo payodas ‘ydura}ye us19I0J [NJssasong
6787 or Or Orr’ vro'€ Ty ey 7) nn prt eees cots ss qdurayye “s'9 [nyssaoonsug,
BSE Ss 87L 409° BSE L o7e ose gos popes e ess seer ese * yduiaye “Ss 4 [Nyssaoong
azuey), 3 4 Uv aX 3 2 Uv LdWILLY SNOIATAg 40 IdAL,
xX

ee

 

KILNIO[ GALVWILSY SLOT

ATALVAVdIS GILVWILSY SLOGIAY

 

SLAWALLY ONIMOV{IH “S' NO SLOaIAY NOIOVLNOD dO SALVINILSA
Contagion Effects on Transportation Attempts

In the remaining analyses, all hijacking attempts were categorized as
either transportation or extortion attempts. I first performed analyses
using transportation hijacking attempts in the United States as the output
series and various types of transportation hijackings as input events.
Those results are shown in the top section of table 4.

When successful U.S. transportation hijackings were the only predic-
tors of later U.S. transportation attempts, the long-term effect was es-
timated to be Q. = 0.758, and the mean time lag was tT = 80.0 days.
However, because the estimated contagiousness function had a very long
tail, the median lag € = 60.6 days is a better measure of the delay before
additional attempts occurred. The x’ statistic of 13.972 was significant at
well beyond the .05 level. The unexplained rate of U.S. transportation
attempts for that model was v = .0284, so the contagion effect of previ-
ous successful transportation hijackings explained 53% of the overall
level of .0608 U.S. transportation hijacking attempts per day.

The estimated single-input effect of unsuccessful U.S. transportation
hijacking attempts was negative, suggesting that unsuccessful attempts
tended to inhibit subsequent attempts. However, neither that effect nor
the effects of any type of foreign transportation attempt were statistically
significant.

Joint effects of all the types of transportation hijacking attempts were
also estimated and tested in the manner described above (with inputs
deleted from the bottom of the list to the top of the full model). As shown
in the top right-hand part of table 4, the results of the joint estimation
were very similar to the results obtained by estimating the effects sepa-
rately. Thus, the only types of transportation hijacking that had a
significant effect on subsequent transportation attempts in the United
States were successful transportation hijackings that originated in the
United States.

Analyses of contagion effects of extortion attempts on transportation
attempts in the United States are shown in the lower half of table 4.
Successful U.S. transportation hijackings were also included in the joint
analysis as a control series because of the significant effect found in the
previous analysis. Because reporting of foreign extortion hijackings was
highly correlated with their outcomes (see table 2), it was not possible to
disaggregate foreign extortions to the same extent that foreign transporta-
tion hijackings were disaggregated. Therefore, the foreign extortion at-
tempts were disaggregated by outcome but not by television coverage.
Also, the U.S. transportation hijackings did not overlap U.S. extortion
hijackings temporally to an extent that allowed distinctions to be made
between outcomes of U.S. extortion attempts in the analyses of transpor-
tation attempts.
tty gz s7r stl 9th Let Let ort” “++ payodas jou ‘Tnzssaoonsun ‘uste10q
Tes" or vy 410° 80L°2 ee ee ect" “s+ * paysodai you ‘[nyssa0ons ‘us1210,5
scot SL SL 887° £007 “el “ek Sse ‘ress paqzodas ‘njssazonsun ‘uS1e104
TUT vy Ly 991" ysey ey ev TLz’ an payodar ‘qnyssaoons ‘us{sI0q
L677 err 87 687° 9617 OTT eer pre ster sess nyssaoonsun ‘°S"¢Q
ZL6°€T O8r S19 16S" ZL6°€T 9°09 0°08 BSL" corr esesseeeeeseces ss mmyssazons “Sa,
suone}iodsuel
agueyo 3 s ry} 2X 3 L oO LAWALLY SNOIATAG JO IAAL
X

7

 

KILNIO[ GALVWILSY SLOTIAY

 

ATALVAVAIS CALVWILSY SLOIIIT

 

 

SLUWALLY ONIMOVIIH NOILVLYOdSNVAL ‘S'f) NO SLOIMAY NOIOVLNOD AO SALVWILSY

valavs
Contagion Effects on Extortion Attempts

Analyses of contagion effects on U.S. extortion hijacking attempts are
shown in table 5. The top of the table shows analyses of the effects of
prior extortion hijackings. When effects were estimated separately, both
successful and unsuccessful U.S. extortion attempts showed highly
significant contagion effects. The long-term effect of a successful extor-
tion was 2, = 2.014 new attempts, with a median lag of € = 44.8 days.
The corresponding effect of an unsuccessful attempt was 2. = 1.412 and
& = 59.5.

The U.S. media coverage of foreign hijackings was highly correlated
with their outcomes (successful foreign extortions were much more likely
to be reported in the United States than unsuccessful ones, as shown in
table 2), so effects could not be estimated for foreign attempts disag-
gregated by both outcome and media coverage. Because the disaggrega-
tion by outcome yielded more significant effects, only those results are
shown. The analyses of the single-input effects of the foreign extortions
showed a nonsignificant effect of successful incidents but a highly
significant effect of unsuccessful incidents, with Q = 1.213 and a median
lag of € = 39.0 days.

The right-hand side of the top of table 5 shows the contagion effects
estimated when all four types of previous extortion attempt were entered
simultaneously as predictors. The value of © was reduced for each type of
input event. Although both unsuccessful U.S. extortions and unsuccess-
ful foreign extortions had produced very high x?s when used as the sole
inputs, they contributed an increment of only 6.1 to the x? (with 6 df) in
the joint analysis with successful U.S. extortions. Thus, when input series
were deleted from the full model starting from the bottom of the list (i.e.,
unsuccessful foreign extortions were deleted first), the only significant
effect that remained was that of successful U.S. extortions.

Contagion effects of transportation hijackings on extortion hijackings
are shown in the lower portion of table 5. Successful U.S. extortion
JP € YUM .X ONeI-POOyTaA'T x

€ 214k} 0} aj0u aes ‘siajourered Jo UOTLOyHUAp! Jog “SIg'L = (€),X SI eUEIyTUsIS GQ JOJ anyeA [eNO WY —"ALON

 

18S'Sb = (6),X [ROL

 

 

 

 

oer’ sor sr 687° LSs°6 $07 $07 ety — r+ ydurayqe uoneyodsues usie10g
TOT" sor sor sso 8190's ost ost OLE — rs * ydurayye uoeyodsuesy “¢°Q
066'TY 0'0r ots 460°7 066'Tr Usp Ts 107 pores JNyssaons ‘uoTj10}x9 “SQ,
vOe Oy = (ZT)X [RIOL

zos's 12 Vez 18s" 420'0¢ 06E Sip etzT ors s sss [nyssaoonsun ‘uorsoyxe ‘UB18107
LOT st st £10" 6sS°Z st st +80" vrtttttssss mnyssaoons ‘uons0}xe ‘UBI9I07
y7s" ger ver v9e £S6°0F $'6S osg Get re TNJssaoonsun ‘u0TI07K9 “SQ.
066° Tr Sut Sut £79" 066°Ir Sr Tss +10°7 Teves sessss sss Myssagons “UOrIO}x9 “°S*A)
asueyd 3 a U aX 3 2 UO IdWaLLy SNOIATAg 40 AdAL

x

*U

 

AILNIO[ GALVWILSY SLOAIAY

 

AIGLVAVATS GAILVWILSY SLOTIAY

 

 

SLAWALLY ONIMOVIIY NOILVINOdSNVAL “S') NO SLOGIAY NOIOVLNOD JO SALVWILSY

Ss aTaVL
hijackings were retained in the joint analysis as a control series. Because
of the lack of temporal overlap in the transportation and extortion hijack-
ings, it was not possible to disaggregate transportation hijackings to the
extent that was done in table 4.

The single-input effect of U.S. transportation hijacking attempts was
negative but nonsignificant. The single-input effect of foreign transporta-
tion hijacking attempts was also negative, with Q = —0.423 and € =
20.5 days, and was significant at beyond the .05 level. However, when
the contagion effects were estimated simultaneously and the effect of
successful U.S. extortions was controlled, the effect of foreign transporta-
tion attempts became positive and nonsignificant.

Thus, the only significant effect on U.S. extortion attempts that re-
mained was that of successful U.S. extortions. For that single-input
model, the unexplained rate of extortion attempts was only .002, so the
contagion effect of previous successful extortion hijackings explained
about 85% of the .014 attempts per day.
U.S. extortions were controlled. That result is entirely consistent with the
anecdotal evidence. Although some U.S. extortion hijackers (e.g., D. B.
Cooper) may have imitated foreign hijackers, the evidence seems much
stronger that foreign extortions were stimulated by hijackings in the
United States. The first modern hijackings for money occurred in the
United States, and it was only after a number of such incidents that
foreign hijackers made similar attempts. It was also in the United States
that parachute escapes first caught on, and that tactic was later copied by
foreign hijackers (the Canadian incident that preceded D. B. Cooper’s
attempt was not widely publicized, and most hijackers were probably
aware of only the U.S. extortions). Thus, the significant single-input
effect of unsuccessful foreign extortion attempts on U.S. extortion at-
tempts was spurious, since the causal connection ran in the other direc-
tion.

The discrepancy between the effects of successful and unsuccessful
foreign extortion attempts can also be explained by referring to the history
of hijacking. The successful foreign extortions during the 1968-72 period
were generally politically motivated (e.g., those by Palestinian guerrillas)
and preceded the period of extortions for money. Those incidents do not
seem to have stimulated similar incidents in the United States. The
foreign attempts to extort money that followed D. B. Cooper were largely
coterminous with the unsuccessful foreign extortions. Thus, there was a
(spurious) effect only of the unsuccessful incidents.

Type of prior hijacking.—It was confirmed that transportation hijack-
ings generated only transportation hijackings and extortion hijackings
only extortion hijackings by the finding of contagion effects for certain
hijacking attempts of the same type but none for hijackings of the oppo-
site type. Although there were apparent inhibiting effects of the opposite
type of hijacking when the effects of each input series were estimated
separately, those effects were due to the lack of temporal overlap of
transportation and extortion attempts and vanished when the full models
(which controlled for the effect of the history of the same type of hijack-
ing) were estimated.

This result perhaps offers support to the view of hijacking as goal-
directed behavior. The majority of the transportation hijackings in the
United States were to Cuba, and those hijackers were predominantly
Latinos (often Cuban exiles) or black Americans. For them, hijacking
was a means of returning home or traveling to a presumably friendlier
political climate. Although there were exceptions, extortion hijackers
were predominantly white and appear to have been using hijacking to
achieve the more commonplace goal of getting rich. The analyses suggest
that hijackings of a particular type tended primarily to influence individ-
uals with the appropriate type of motivation.
Outcome of prior hijacking.—One of the most important hypotheses
theoretically was the third, which predicted that successful hijackings
had a greater stimulating effect than unsuccessful hijackings. I found no
effects on the U.S. hijacking rate for foreign hijackings or for U.S. hijack-
ings of the opposite type, regardless of their outcomes. Significant conta-
gion effects, however, were found for successful U.S. hijackings of the
same type (either transportation or extortion) but not for unsuccessful
hijackings. Thus, the hypothesis was supported, provided it is inter-
preted to refer only to hijackings of the same type and those from the
United States.

This finding suggests more rationality in the hijackers than is often
credited. It is consistent with the view that the hijackers were genuinely
attempting to solve problems because they should have been more willing
to imitate a successful act than an unsuccessful one. But the result would
not have been expected if hijackers were merely publicity seekers, since
most hijackings received publicity regardless of their outcomes. The re-
sult is even more at variance with Hubbard’s (1971) theory that the
hijackers did not really want to go to Cuba but were seeking oblivion
through an act symbolic of suicide. Hubbard’s views suggest that the
effects of unsuccessful hijackings should have been greater than those of
successful hijackings.

A caveat must be added about the meaning of a “successful” hijacking.
Instead of finding a better life in Cuba, hijackers who reached that desti-
nation were usually imprisoned (Phillips 1973); thus, a successful trans-
portation hijacking was not necessarily a successful solution to the hijack-
er’s problems. That is equally true of extortions hijackings. Only five of
the extortion attempts in the United States that followed D. B. Cooper
were regarded by the FAA as successful, but even a successful hijacking
was not necessarily a successful crime. Two of the bail-out attempts
following Cooper’s were coded as successful, but both hijackers were
captured within days. The other “successes” involved two groups of hi-
jackers who extorted ransoms and then escaped to Algeria and one group
that escaped to Cuba. In all three cases, the money was returned by the
foreign government, although the hijackers were not. Thus, none of the
extortionists who preceded or followed Cooper actually got away with
the ransom. Moreover, recent reports (New York Times [February 13,
1980]) that Cooper’s loot was found in the wilds of Washington State indi-
cate that his crime was not as successful as was originally believed either.

The difference between the effects of clearly unsuccessful hijackings
and apparently successful (but, in reality, unsuccessful) hijackings sug-
gest that viewers’ perceptions of the outcomes were based primarily on
the initial image presented instead of on the eventual outcome of the
hijacking. Incidents in which an immediate capture appeared as part of
An Alternative to Contagion

Consistent with the operational definition of contagion, any positive de-
pendence (of a particular functional form) between counts of hijacking
attempts in different time intervals has been attributed to contagion.
However, there typically exist stochastic processes that, although not
truly contagious, can generate observations that are statistically indistin-
guishable from those generated by a contagious process, that is, processes
that generate “spurious contagion” (Taibleson 1974). More specifically,
there may be some underlying stochastic process {v,} such that N, is a
Poisson variate with mean v,, where 1; is not a function of the history of
{N,}. The process {N,} would then be a discrete-time doubly-stochastic
Poisson process (Cox and Isham 1980). Elsewhere I derive the necessary
form for a process {v;} yielding observations indistinguishable from those
of the contagion process used in this article (Holden 1985).

The possibility that the hijackings were generated by exogenous events
may be particularly likely, given the nature of the contagiousness func-
tions that were estimated. The significant effects of successful hijacking
on attempts of the same type were spread over fairly long periods of time
for both types of hijackings. Such long-tailed effects might be more con-
sistent with spurious contagion than with causal connections between
events. That is, exogenous factors may have raised the hijacking rate
over certain long periods, yielding dependence between counts of events
at time points within those periods. Of course, contagion and exogenous
causation are not mutually exclusive, and it is possible that both types of
effects occurred.
Summary

I found that each successful transportation hijacking in the United States
generated an average of .758 additional attempts, with a median delay of
60.6 days, and that that effect accounted for about 53% of the total rate of
U.S. transportation hijacking attempts. Each successful extortion hijack-
ing in the United States generated an average of 2.014 additional at-
tempts, with a median delay of 44.8 days. That effect explained about
85% of the total rate of U.S. extortion hijacking attempts.

Even though it was not possible to show statistically that media cover-
age was responsible for the stimulating effects, the results tend to support
the common belief that hijacking spread as a result of publicity. That
only successful hijackings had stimulating effects is consistent with previ-
ous studies showing that violent acts are more likely to be imitated if they
are seen to be rewarded. The finding is more consistent with the assump-
tion that most hijackers were rational than that they were irrational. The
general pattern of the findings lends support to the view that hijackers
were seeking goals other than publicity.

Finally, I have raised the possibility that exogenous factors may have
created spurious contagion among hijacking attempts. I plan to do future
research on that possibility.
Arey, J. A. 1972. The Sky Pirates. New York: Scribner’s.

Berkowitz, L. 1984. “Some Effects of Thoughts on Anti- and Prosocial Influences of
Media Events: A Cognitive-Neoassociation Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin
95:410—425.

Berkowitz, L., and J. Macaulay. 1971. “The Contagion of Criminal Violence.”
Sociometry 34:238—60.

Bollen, K. A., and D. P. Phillips. 1982. “Imitative Suicides: A National Study of the
Effects of Television News Stories.” American Sociological Review 47:802-9.

Chauncey, R. 1975. “Deterrence: Certainty, Severity and Skyjacking.” Criminology
12:447-73.

Clutterbuck, R. 1975. Living with Terrorism. London: Faber & Faber.

Clyne, P. 1973. An Anatomy of Skyjacking. London: Abelard-Schuman.

Coleman, J. S. 1964. Introduction to Mathematical Sociology. New York: Free Press.

Cox, D. R., and V. I. Isham. 1980. Point Processes. London: Chapman & Hall.

Diekmann, A. 1979. “A Dynamic Stochastic Version of the Pitcher-Hamblin-Miller
Model of Collective Violence.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 6:272-82.

Evans, A. E. 1969. “Aircraft Hijacking: Its Cause and Cure.” American Journal of
International Law 63:695—710.

Federal Aviation Administration. 1983. Aircraft Hijackings and Other Criminal Acts
against Civil Aviation Statistical and Narrative Reports. Washington, D.C.: Fed-
eral Aviation Administration, Office of Civil Aviation Security.

Gleason, J. M. 1980. “A Poisson Model of Incidents of International Terrorism in the
United States.” Terrorism 4:259-65.

Hacker, F. J. 1981. “Contagion and Attraction of Terror and Terrorism.” Pp. 73-85
in Behavioral and Quantitative Perspectives on Terrorism, edited by Y. G. Alexan-
der and J. M. Gleason. New York: Pergamon.

Hamblin, R. J., R. B. Jacobsen, and J. L. L. Miller. 1973. A Mathematical Theory of
Social Change. New York: Wiley-Interscience.

Hamilton, J. D., and L. C. Hamilton. 1981. “Models of Social Contagion.” Journal of
Mathematical Sociology 8:133—60.

Hamilton, L. C., and J. D. Hamilton. 1983. “Dynamics of Terrorism.” International
Studies Quarterly 27:39-54.

Hawkes, A. G. 1971. “Spectra of Some Self-exciting and Mutually Exciting Point
Processes.” Biometrika 58:83-90.

Heyman, E., and E. Mickolus. 1981. “Imitation by Terrorists: Quantitative Ap-
proaches to the Study of Diffusion Patterns in Transnational Terrorism.” Pp. 175—
228 in Behavioral and Quantitative Perspectives on Terrorism, edited by Y. G.
Alexander and J. M. Gleason. New York: Pergamon.

Holden, C. 1979. “Study of Terrorism Emerging as an International Endeavor.”
Science 203:33-35.

Holden, R. T. 1985. “Dynamic Models for Rare Events.” Unpublished manuscript.
Bloomington: Indiana University, Department of Mathematics.

Hubbard, D. G. 1971. The Skyjacker: His Flights of Fantasy. New York: Macmillan.

Joyner, N. D. 1974. Aerial Hijacking as an International Crime. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.:
Oceana.

Kaplan, A. 1981. “The Psychodynamics of Terrorism.” Pp. 35-50 in Behavioral and
Quantitative Perspectives on Terrorism, edited by Y. G. Alexander and J. M.
Gleason. New York: Pergamon.

Knebel, F. 1971. “The Skyjacker.” Look 35 (February 19): 23-26.

Li, R. P. Y., and W. R. Thompson. 1975. “The ‘Coup Contagion’ Hypothesis.”
Journal of Conflict Resolution 19:63-88.

Livingston, N. C. 1982. The War against Terrorism. Lexington, Mass.: Heath.

Loy, F. E. 1969. “Department Reviews Problem of Aircraft Hijacking and Proposals
for International Action.” Department of State Bulletin 60:212-15.
. 1970. “Some International Approaches to Dealing with Hijacking of Air-
craft.” International Lawyer 4:444-52.

McWhinney, E. 1971. “International Legal Problem-Solving and the Practical Di-
lemma of Hijacking.” Pp. 15—26 in Aerial Piracy and International Law, edited by
E. McWhinney. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana.

. 1975. The Illegal Diversion of Aircraft and International Law. Leyden,
Netherlands: Sijthoff.

Mazur, A. 1982. “Bomb Threats and the Mass Media: Evidence for a Theory of
Suggestion.” American Sociological Review 47:407-11.

Midlarsky, M. 1970. “Mathematical Models of Instability and a Theory of Diffusion.”
International Studies Quarterly 14:60-84.

Minor, W. W. 1975. “Skyjacking Crime Control Models.” Journal of Criminal Law
and Criminology 66:94—105.

Mintz, M. A. 1973. “Note on the Hijacker: His Criminal Evolution from Hijinks to
Revolution.” Sociological Inquiry 43:89-93.

National Institute of Mental Health. 1982. Television and Behavior: Ten Years of
Progress and Implications for the Eighties. Vol. 1, Summary Report. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Phillips, D. 1973. Skyjack: The Story of Air Piracy. London: Harrap.

Phillips, D. P. 1978. “Airplane Accident Fatalities Increase Just after Newspaper
Stories about Murder and Suicide.” Science 201:748-50.

. 1979. “Suicide, Motor Vehicle Fatalities, and the Mass Media: Evidence

toward a Theory of Suggestion.” American Journal of Sociology 84:1150-74.

. 1980. “Airplane Accidents, Murder, and the Mass Media: Toward a Theory

of Imitation and Suggestion.” Social Forces 58:1001—24.

. 1983. “The Impact of Mass Media Violence on U.S. Homicides.” American
Sociological Review 48:560-68.

Pitcher, B. L., R. L. Hamblin, and J. L. L. Miller. 1978. “Diffusion of Collective
Violence.” American Sociological Review 43:23-35.

Rein, B. 1971. “A Government Perspective.” Journal of Air Law and Commerce
37:183-93.

Rich, E. 1972. Flying Scared. New York: Stein & Day.

Ritterband, P., and R. Silberstein. 1973. “Group Disorders in Public Schools.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 37:461-67.

Spilerman, S. 1970. “The Causes of Racial Disturbance: A Comparison of Alternative
Explanations.” American Sociological Review 35:627-29.

Taibleson, M. H. 1974. “Distinguishing between Contagion, Heterogeneity and Ran-
domness in Stochastic Models.” American Sociological Review 39:877—80.

Turi, R. T., C. M. Friel, R. B. Sheldon, and J. P. Matthews. 1972. Descriptive Study
of Aircraft Hijacking. Huntsville, Tex.: Sam Houston State University, Institute of
Contemporary Corrections and the Behavioral Sciences.

Turner, J. S. G. 1969. “Piracy in the Air.” Naval War College Review 22:86-116.

Whelton, C. 1972. Skyjack. New York: Belmont/Tower.
