Development Towns in Israel: The Role of Community in Creating Ethnic Disparities in
Labor Force Characteristics

Author(s): Seymour Spilerman and Jack Habib

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 81, No. 4 (Tan., 1976), pp. 781-812
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2777597

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:24 UTC
INTRODUCTION

Urban communities in Israel have not attracted particular attention as
research sites. In part, this is because there are more novel settlement
patterns, found only in that country, such as the kibbutz (agricultural
collective) and the moshav (small-holders’ cooperative). These forms of
rural community have been studied intensively, in regard to work organi-
zation (Spiro 1970), productivity of the economy (Barkai 1974), decision
making (Cohen 1968), family structure (Talmon 1972; Weintraub and
Shapira 1971), and child-rearing practices (Bettelheim 1969). It is the
case, however, that Israeli urban settlements provide convenient sites for
investigating a number of topics that are of interest to urban specialists,
especially issues which relate to planned community development. The
country’s new towns, which were established in large numbers beginning
in the late 1940s, permit one to evaluate the various strategies that have
been employed in attempting to put together a viable community de novo:
which industries can be implanted successfully in outlying areas, what
mixes of settler backgrounds will produce socially integrated communities,
and what kinds of local political institutions tend to operate effectively in
the early stages of development of a new settlement.

The pattern of Israel’s urban growth has been a matter of much con-
cern to governmental authorities. At the time of the country’s founding,
in 1948, 63% of the population was concentrated in three main cities—
Tel Aviv, Haifa, and Jerusalem—and in their immediate environs. Exacer-
bating this population imbalance, a vast immigration in the early years
of the state threatened to create massive congestion in the urban centers,
taxing their physical plants, the absorption potentials of their labor mar-
kets, and their social service capabilities, unless many of the immigrants
could be motivated to settle outside the metropolitan regions.

Israel is a society with a considerable tradition of social planning and
centralized decision making, dating to the imperatives of existence in the
prestate period. The government, consequently, was in a position to under-
take far-reaching decisions concerning population redistribution, and did
so within months of the establishment of the state, committing extensive
resources to this task. The instrument to accomplish population redistribu-
tion was to be a network of small and medium-sized urban settlements,
located away from the densely populated coastal plain; these settlements
have since become known as “development towns.”

The new towns have been a focus of much concern. They are populated
by recent immigrants, particularly from less developed lands. Many are
isolated, outside the main stream of Israeli society geographically as well
as socially. For these reasons, the settlements constitute, in many respects,
a second and inferior Israel. What we wish to accomplish here in regard
to the towns is twofold: we want to describe their evolution and their
problems, and in doing so we intend to view them as strategic sites for
addressing an issue in ethnic stratification—the effect which community
can have in producing ethnic disparities in labor market characteristics.
Specifically, we consider how the creation of these settlements has influ-
enced (a) the areal distributions of different ethnic (country-of-origin)
groups, (4) the tendency for each group to be concentrated in certain in-
dustries, and (c) the occupational opportunities available to the members
of an ethnic population. In the concluding section we review the relevance
of these considerations for understanding the role of community in ethnic
stratification in America.
Jewish manual labor with great significance. The erection of agricultural
settlements was therefore consistent with the tenets of labor Zionism, as
well as having a basis in strategic considerations, in that it established
Jewish rights to land in outlying regions through purchase and cultivation.
Yet, as Cohen (1970, pp. 2-7) has remarked, in modern times the Jewish
population in Palestine was never more than 30% rural, a fact that was
ignored in early Zionist writings, in which little attention was given to the
role of cities in a modern economy, or to their potential importance in the
state which was to be created.

This situation changed abruptly following the establishment of Israel.
In the three years subsequent to the termination of the British mandate,
an influx of hundreds of thousands of immigrants, fleeing from persecution
in Europe and the Arab countries, more than doubled the population of the
state. In prior occupations, these immigrants had been predominantly arti-
sans and small shopkeepers; they came to Israel as refugees, not out of an
ideological conviction which might sustain them while adapting to the
harsh life of an agricultural laborer. It was soon recognized by governmen-
tal authorities? that residential quarters would have to be constructed in
large numbers, in urban areas, to accommodate the immigrants. In order
to relieve the congestion in Tel Aviv and Haifa resulting from very rapid
population growth, and open the hinterland to settlement, industrialization,
and mineral exploitation, the government adopted a policy of establish-
ing new towns principally outside the periphery of Israel’s metropolitan
centers.*
American Journal of Sociology

There is no consistent definition of a development town in the literature
on Israeli settlements, though the intention is to signify urban settlements
which lie outside metropolitan regions and which were established by de-
sign, since 1948, and with considerable governmental assistance.* The 1961
Israel Census of Population, the most recent census available, does not
employ this term and distinguishes instead between veteran and new com-
munities. “New” communities include those founded after 1948, whether
in outlying areas or in the suburban periphery, as well as a number of
older settlements which have experienced the major portion of their popu-
lation growth since the creation of Israel. According to the census, 38 new
settlements? existed in 1961, with a combined population of 398,000. Other
governmental agencies use the term “development town” to refer to new
communities distant from metropolitan areas; yet there are differences
with respect to the settlements each includes in this category. A report
written for the Ministry of Labor (Smith 1972, p. 17) lists 24 communi-
ties,® with 246,000 residents in 1961. A report prepared for the Ministry
of Housing (Lichfield 1971, 2:1) records 25 settlements, with 289,000
inhabitants in 1961. Nongovernmental researchers also differ in terminol-
ogy and settlement classification: Spiegal (1966, p. 34) cites 24 “new
towns,” with a combined population of 271,000 in 1961. Because suburban
settlements are excluded, her specification corresponds to the notion of a
development town. Amiran and Shachar (1969, table 4) list 28 develop-
ment towns as of 1961, with a total population of 312,000.

The differences among these classifications result from decisions con-
cerning which of the communities existing before 1948 should be consid-
ered “developmental,” and which settlements that were initially in this
category should be viewed as having outgrown the label, in that they no
longer receive extensive financial assistance from the central government.
Where we are in a position to calculate indices from census data, we will
use the list of communities proposed by Amiran and Shachar. Their defini-
tion covers settlements that were established after 1948, whether founded
on entirely new sites or brought into being as a result of an influx of new
populations into towns that had been vacated by Arab residents (Amiran
and Shachar 1969, p. 1). Suburbs are omitted from the list, although one
town (Tirat HaKarmel), which now is in the Haifa metropolitan region,
is included. Also, they retain settlements that have progressed successfully,
a consideration that is important, since we wish to discuss ethnic composi-
tion and industrial structure in the full array of communities which were
planned to achieve population redistribution and immigrant absorption.
Where we refer to statistics from other studies, the development towns to
which the figures pertain will be somewhat different from Amiran and
Shachar’s list, in accordance with the comments in the preceding paragraph.

The growth of development towns, and the impact which these settle-
ments have had on the distribution of the urban population, is reported in
table 1. The entries in the second row reveal that the considerable popula-
tion expansion in the country since 1948 has been accompanied by an
increase in proportion urban, from 73.3% to 84.4%. The decline in the
early years of the time series, incidentally, is due to the establishment of
many development towns during this interval; initially, they were too
small to be categorized as urban in the census. For our purpose, a more
important trend concerns the massive population increase in the develop-
ment towns and the population redistribution resulting from this growth
(Jast row), even during a period when all urban communities were ex-
panding. Indeed, the last two rows of the table, in combination, suggest
that the redistribution policies of the government were most successful,
since the proportion of the urban population residing outside the three
metropolitan areas increased from 14% in 1948 to 48% in 1972, with the
bulk of this change deriving from the growth of development towns.
*sumo} Juaudopaasp Jo ISI] (> 21GB} “696T) SIBYSeYS pue uRIPWY UO (1961 Ul BUNSIxa) soNTNUIWOD $e 94} sapnyoUy §
“JSI] SJeyeYyS pue ueltWY uo suo} JUsUIdojasap ay} pue ‘sqinqns ‘satzI9 UyeW ad14} 943 3deoxa sjUsUA]}es UeqIN [|e Sapnpouy +

“syuaur

-9]}39S aSOy} YIIM paztioFezeo st pue uMo} JUaudojenep e se (yp 292} ‘6961) IeYORYS pue uelIWY Aq poysl] SI ‘eyIeTY JO qinqns & Se snsUad [aeIST ay} Ul Paylsse[D SI YOIYM
PUILARE, IML “UP[ZIOPL IANO pue ‘weR AND “WRI WANG ‘WYSON Vy Ieyy ‘ueg Jeuey “Uo[OP ‘wIAeWeAIN ‘WeA Jeg “YeIg loug :sofyruNUUIOD OT sapnpouy |
*1961 Ul pexouue ‘waesnief yseq JO uorejndod sapnpuy y

“sosineig jo

neaing jejjuey ‘suoneynqe} peysyqndun pue ‘(> ‘T saqqeL 6961) qeyoeys pue uemmy ‘{(6¢-ge ‘dd ‘vEez6T ‘7¢96T) SONSNeIG Jo neaIng [eNuad JeeIs—saoanog

 

 

 

  

 

 

 
 

 

'00T o'00T o'00T O'00T o'00r 0001 o'0or o'00T OOOT tts ueqin [207
LIZ 91 Z1Z S07 y8I Out vel SIT 61 vrtrteetssessss* Ssumoz juaurdopasaqy
97 Vez vee OTe sor 802 ft SOT T2r vettesecssessess  dequgurayyjes Ue1a}0 A.
v6r +61 V61 81 Ost oor UST wat TI vrttesseesessessss Lsqanang
xCIL «SIT 06 £6 66 Zr 6IT Zl 9O°oT creteesecesssssss urgresniia f
og 68 96 TOt 6'0I ZIT 321 61 TLL coppeeeecesssessess ss BERET
eel 6'ST OuT ¥0z oz S'r2 $62 rz Tep  cttrtrrsssstetssssssssssess ATAW [aL

‘ur uoryeindod ueqin jo asezued1eg
v8 $28 S18 161, LOL OSL 9°04 LL9 ees settreeesesteessseses upqin agequaoieg
zer'e 6162 L597 oeh'z ost'z SLOT SILT LSs't 98 * (spuesnoy} ur) [aeisy ut uorefndod je,07,
7L6T 6961 996T £961 096T LS61 PS6T TS6T 8r6T

 

 

T ATavL

ZL-SP61 “TAVS] NI NOLLVINdOg NVSYQ FHL JO NOILnaraLsiq
in 1961, 67% of the population” in development towns consisted of recent
immigrants to the country, arrivals since 1948, in comparison with 45% in
the total Israeli population (36% in the main cities). Such great concentra-
tions of recent immigrants, in communities that are also growing rapidly,
could be expected to create massive problems of acculturation, and in the
provision of housing, suitable jobs, and the many social services which a
refugee population would require. Very great problems still exist in these
towns; some will be discussed in the concluding section. Yet the settlement
program was conducted within a framework of extensive assistance to the
new communities by the central government. Also, the facts that Zionist
ideology encouraged the ingathering of Jews, that many of the “veterans”
were themselves immigrants in an earlier decade, and that Israeli culture
was in the process of being molded during the initial years of the state,
made for tolerance of the variety of life-styles brought by the immigrants,
and a willingness to accept them as Israelis even while they were only
marginally acculturated to the mores of the society.

We wish to focus on how development towns have patterned the indus-
try affiliations of the immigrant groups and influenced their consequent
occupational distributions. For this purpose it will be useful to delineate
two aspects of residence location: representation of a population group in
a settlement category, and variability of its concentration among settle-
ments within the category. The latter factor speaks to the possibility that
individual communities may “specialize” in particular industrial activities.

In regard to the first point, we note that not only are development towns
places of concentration of recent immigrants, but that great differences
exist between these settlements and other urban communities with respect
to the origins of their foreign-born populations. Continent-of-origin figures
are reported in columns 1 and 2 of table 2. From the entries in the two
top panels it is evident that the population in development towns has been
drawn, to a very considerable extent, from among Asian-African immi-
grants. They comprise 66% of the foreign born, versus 29% for Euro-
peans. In reference to their percentages in Israel, Asian-Africans are
overrepresented by a factor of 1.65, Europeans underrepresented by a fac-
tor of 0.54 (1.00 = representation at the same rate as in the total popu-
lation). This suggests that the industrial structures of the towns should
be especially pertinent to understanding the labor force characteristics of
Asian-African immigrants.

An equally important matter concerns differences among settlement types
in regard to the variability of representation of the immigrant streams in
the individual communities. This point refers to the fact that the conti-
nent-of-origin groups are not dispersed evenly, but tend to be concentrated

7 Since many of the Israeli born would be young children, the percentage foreign born
in the adult population is much greater.
ee Ee

 

 

 

 

or or or ov oz 1 Ie wr oe + 87" Lz so" (OL= A) sqingng
£2" Iz or ov" 0" 02" os" 8s ue 9c tke thew cts (p= N)
syusmie]}}as UEqIN [TV
44uonenea jo xapur
a 190 260 ss‘0 sz0 6£'0 87'T sz OTT et 6eT +0 SOT +177 Sumo} quawdopeaaq,
aa 6£'0 £7 IT 960 660 90°T sO BT eT 46'0 1OT 00'T “+ syueutayyjas e839,
aa $3'0 TOT 9v'T 60'T 67'T oft gO —-9S°0 eT 8s'0 AUT oso tts sqanqng
aa LT I0T 20 £21 82T 09°0 sso 80 seo IT £71 690 ts sap Urey
an[eA [PPS] [eIOL jo uose1y & se WIOg UBIaIOg ay) Jo aeyUaDIAg
£46 sz Ozr 92 TI £01 9 sz 4s yer 76 182 099" -44SUM0} JuoUUdoTaAaq
£26 oT O91 es fy £92 e's £9 $6 sz 79 ves TOW «77 -gSIUAUIETIVas UEIE}OA,
9°86 oF Vet os oF vee $9 oF 62 ST ge S19 OTe otters ysqangng
226 OL Vel sb us ove o¢ zh 4 OL eh 99 94 rt §sanp urey_y
Of6 lr ost Lv sy 9°92 os Vet zs Zor 99 87S OOb ott JeRasy [eI0L
wog Uslasog ay} jo aBejuaiag
(21) aD (or) (6) (3) () (9) (3) () (€) (2) (1) REODTLVD LNIWATLIES
FT30L  a0a015 Ruewoy AreZunyR eLsny puejog eBIqhT ‘BIstuny uwapy bely uely adomy Boy
-e1esing ~eryeaoys -Aueuras “ussa -dA3Bq -euasjy «-uaula x -Aaqiny, -eISy
-04oaz) -o000109

 

ANTONIO 40 ALLNAOD

 

NIOTEQ 40 LNENIENOD

 

 

T96T ‘NIOTUQ 40 SHIXLINNOD NIVIL INV INANILNOD Ad ,‘SLNANATLLAG Nvauf) NI NOLLVINdOg N¥od-NoTAIOT

¢ aTav
in some settlements and underrepresented in others. To measure variability
we constructed an index that is analogous to the coefficient of variation
(Stigler 1966, pp. 294-95). For an array of percentage values {p} we as-
sess variability by the statistic /V(p) = SD(p)/\/p(1 — #). This index
compensates for the fact that the standard deviation of a percentage
(SD[p]) is constrained to be small when the average is very large or very
small, and thereby enables comparisons to be made among sets of per-
centages with different means. Indices of variation in the proportion Asian-
African are presented for the various settlement categories in the bottom
panel of column 1.8 The large value for development towns (0.33) means
that there are greater differences in ethnic composition among settlements
in this category than among either veteran communities or suburban settle-
ments. The relevance of this point is that disparities in industrial structure
which exist among development towns may correspond to the variation in
location of the continent groups, thereby exposing Asian-African and Euro-
pean settlers to very different industries and occupational opportunities.

Continent of origin is hardly a sensitive measure of cultural homogene-
ity, although this distinction is a salient one in Israeli life. Country of
origin is a more important consideration; it signifies language and life-style,
and it is at this level that ethnic identity is commonly specified. Columns
3-12 report representation values by settlement type for several ethnic
groups (top panel), and these figures standardized by the respective na-
tional percentages (middle panel). It is apparent from the latter that each
Asian-African group is overrepresented in development towns (entry > 1)
and, with few exceptions, underrepresented in metropolitan centers and
suburbs. The reverse situation characterizes the locations of most Euro-
pean populations. Superimposed upon this pattern are some sizable differ-
ences among the individual ethnic groups: the concentration of Moroccan-
Algerian-Tunisian immigrants in development towns is especially high
(2.48 times their representation in Israel); the presence of Yemenites
(1.10) indicates near equality to their percentage in the country, while
immigrants from Germany-Austria are grossly underrepresented in the
towns (0.25).

The variation in ethnic group concentration also speaks to the matter
of labor force characteristics of these populations. The index values re-
ported in the lower panel of table 2 show, in every instance, greater vari-
ability among development towns than among settlements in the other
categories. It also appears that the individual Asian-African ethnics are
apt to concentrate in certain towns, while the European groups are more
evenly dispersed (compare cols. 3-7 with 8-12, last row). (Indeed, the
Time of Immigration and Concentration in
Particular Development Towns

Although it is a digression from our main theme—to show the impact of
development towns on the industrial and occupational opportunities of the
various ethnics—it is of interest to understand how the concentration of
individual immigrant groups in certain settlements came about. The rele-
vant facts are: (a) the ethnic groups arrived in Israel in large numbers in
different years, and (b) the development towns were established and
experienced their periods of maximum population growth at different times.

The tendency for the country-of-origin groups to differ in year of arrival
to Israel is documented in table 3. The first two columns report immigra-
tion to Israel by continent of origin; column 3 shows the ratio of European
to Asia-African immigrants. There are several clusters of years during
which new arrivals came disproportionately from one continent. The bulk
of immigrants in the prestate period came from European countries, a
trend which continued into the first two years of the state’s existence, when
the survivors of the Nazi extermination camps comprised the majority of
newcomers. Following this period there was an eight-year interval when
immigrants came from the Arab countries at approximately three times the
rate from Europe. The ancient Jewish communities of Iraq, Yemen, and
Aden moved to Israel, practically in their entireties, in these years. Several
additional shifts followed in the dominance of a continent as a source of
immigrants. These shifts frequently accompanied political upheavals in
particular lands, and reflected the impact of those events on their Jewish
populations.®

The dominant period of arrival of immigrants from the individual coun-
tries is more relevant to the issue of ethnic group concentration in different
towns. In columns 4—7 we present immigration distributions for a few
countries of origin to illustrate the range of patterns that exist concerning
time of arrival in Israel. These distributions show that for some ethnics
(e.g., Bulgarians, Iraqis) immigration to Israel was compressed into a very
brief interval, although the specific years may vary among the groups.
Other ethnics (e.g., Iranians) show less concentration in time; their popu-
lations have arrived in sizable numbers over much of the lifetime of the
state. Still other origin countries (e.g., Romania) exhibit arrival patterns
which have several modes.

The tendency for period of immigration to have influenced the location
of the individual ethnics in different development towns can be investigated
by comparing the concentration of a group in the settlements that were
growing rapidly during its years of maximum immigration, with the group’s
representation in all development towns. To pursue this matter we specified
periods of substantial immigration to Israel for each ethnic group, and
periods of rapid population growth for every town. A period of substantial
immigration was defined as several adjacent years during which at least
50% of the group’s population in 1961, the census year, arrived in the
country. Alternatively, an ethnic group could have more than one period
of substantial immigration if at least one-quarter of its population in 1961
arrived in each time period. The periods were specified so as to maximize
TABLE 4

Erunic Group ConcENTRATION IN DEVELOPMENT Towns,* BY PERIOD
OF ARRIVAL TO IsrAEL, 1961

 

 

Proportion of Ethnic
Group’s Development
Town Population That Is Expected Proportion of — Overrepresentation of

 

 

Ethnic Group with Large _ in Settlements Which Ethnic Group in Ethnic Group in Rapidly
Population Proportion Grew Rapidly in Rapidly Growing Growing Development
Immigrating to Israel Time Periodt Development Towns§ Towns. (1) — (2)

in Indicated Period+ a) (2) (3)
1948-49]
Lybia# ......... 215 .288 —.073

     

 

 

 
       

 

 

 

 

 
    

Turkey# ..... .350 .288 062

Yemen ....... 17 288 429

Bulgaria o 736 .288 448

Poland ....... 391 288 -103
1950-51**

Egypt (Lybia) {+ 834 570 264

Tran arr 438 570 —.132

Iraq 799 570 299

Romania . 701 570 131
1954-56¢¢

Morocco# ........ Pere 501 413 .088
1957-61§§

Egypt# .260 246 .014

Poland .. aE 270 246 024

Romania .............. 291 246 045

 

Sources.—Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (19734, table 3; 1964, table 10; 19636, table 2),
Amiran and Shachar (1969, table 4).

* Computations pertain to the 19 development towns with populations exceeding 5,000 in 1961.

{ “Large population proportion” is defined as more than one-half of the group’s population in Israel
in 1961 arriving in indicated period (if ethnic group appears in one time interval), or more than
one-quarter of group’s population arriving in the period (if ethnic group appears in two time intervals).

4A “rapidly growing town” is one with more than one-third of its 1961 population accounted for by
expansion in the indicated period (if settlement appears in one time interval), or more than one-quarter
of its Po aaaa accounted for by expansion in the period (if settlement appears in more than one time
interval).

§ Entry is the proportion of the total population in development towns in 1961 that is in settlements
which grew rapidly in the time period.

|| Rapidly growing development towns in this period Akko, Lod, Ramla, Rosh HaAyin, Yehud.

# In some census data used in our calculations (Israel Central Bureau of Statistics 1964, table 10)
this ethnic group is paired with another which did not have a high immigration rate in the period.

** Rapidly growing development towns in this period: Akko, Afula, Ashkelon, Beer Sheva, Or Yehuda,
Tiberias, Tirat Hakarmel, Zefat.

tt Egypt and Lybia, which are grouped in the census data, each satisfied the criterion for inclusion
in this time period.

ti Rapidly growing development towns in this period: Ashkelon, Beer Sheva, Bet Shaan, Bet Shemesh,
Dimona, Qiryat Shemona, Yavne.

§§ Rapidly growing development towns in this period: Beer Sheva, Dimona, Elat, Qiryat Gat.
Rapidly growing development towns were defined as places which ob-
tained at least one-third of their 1961 populations in the indicated time
period. Alternatively, a town was considered to have multiple periods of
rapid growth if it obtained at least 25% of its 1961 population in each of
several intervals. Using these definitions we calculated the proportion of an
ethnic group’s development town population in 1961 which resided in set-
tlements that were growing rapidly when its members had a high rate of
immigration to Israel. This value is reported in column 1 of table 4. In
column 2 we present the proportion which would reside in these settlements
if the group were represented equally in all development towns. Column 3
shows the difference between the entries in the preceding columns, and
measures the extent of overrepresentation in the towns that were expand-
ing rapidly.

These calculations support the argument that the ethnics tend to be
concentrated in settlements which have growth histories that parallel
their immigration distributions. Eleven of the 13 entries in column 3 are
positive, indicating overrepresentation in rapidly expanding towns. Also,
the two instances in which a column 3 entry is negative refer to situations
where the ethnic group under consideration is paired in the census data
with a second group, one lacking a high immigration rate in the referenced
time period. In these cases our calculations cannot provide a sensitive test
of the thesis.1°
which a town can support. Second, the national government has followed a
policy of extending incentives for certain kinds of industries to locate in
development towns. Third, the preferred industries tend to have large
plants; this also serves to reduce the variety of firms in a settlement.

Governmental encouragement of industry is carried out through a plan
of financial incentives administered by the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry. For locating in a development town, firms are granted tax re-
ductions and low-interest loans for site acquisition, site development, on-
the-job training of workers, and working capital (Lichfield 1971, 1:3.13).
The kinds of industries that have been given preference are ones which
either exploit the resources of a region—food-processing plants in agri-
cultural locales, mining and chemical manufacturing in towns near the
Dead Sea—or ones which, while neutral to location, are labor intensive
and provide many jobs at a low initial capital cost. Textile manufacturing
has been the most favored industry; the short training period for spinning
and weaving jobs makes these tasks especially suitable for accommodating
low-skill immigrants.

The impact of the factors which make for industrial concentration can
be illustrated by reference to the economies of a few development towns.
In Qiryat Shemona, 71% of industrial employment is in textile manu-
facturing; this figure represents one-fourth of the total labor force in the
city!” (Zarchi and Shiskin 1972, pp. 61, 84). In Dimona, textile plants also
dominate the manufacturing sector: 96% of industrial workers, repre-
senting 50% of the labor force, are in these enterprises. Ashqelon special-
izes in food processing (46% of industrial employment); Bet Shemesh
manufactures transportation equipment (40% of the industrial labor
force) ; Afula weaves textiles (57% of the industrial work force); and the
economy of Yeruham, a new development town, is based principally on
chemical and mineral processing (92% of industrial employment). While
it is true that the preceding examples depict extreme instances of un-
balanced economic structures, they only exaggerate what is an evident
tendency.
Development Towns in Israel

As a result of community differences in industrial composition, the in-
dividual ethnic groups tend to be overrepresented in certain activities.
Yemenites are concentrated in textile manufacturing (three times their
representation in the Israeli population), Moroccans are in mining (four
times their representation), Lybians manufacture cement products (four
times their representation), and immigrants from Algeria-Tunisia are em-
ployed disproportionately (by a factor of three) in wood product indus-
tries.13 The overrepresentation of those immigrant groups can be attributed
to the particular development towns where they reside. Veteran settlements
play much the same sort of role, but tend to expose European ethnics to
certain industrial sectors. Germans are overrepresented (by a factor of two)
in chemical and petroleum processing, an industry which has a major center
in the Haifa Bay region, where this group is concentrated. Bulgarians, who
reside principally in the Tel Aviv metropolitan area, are overrepresented
(by a factor of two) in machinery and metal products manufacturing,
an economic sector with a strong representation in this region.

To inquire in a more systematic fashion into the impact of community
on the industry affiliations of the ethnic groups, indices of dissimilarity
(Taeuber and Taeuber 1965, p. 236) were computed from the 1961 census
tape to compare the industry distribution of each immigrant group with
that of the urban population. For ethnic group j, this measure is defined by
ID; = .502|P,, — Pi.|, where P,; = the proportion of group j’s urban
population in industry i, P;, = the proportion of the total urban population
in industry 7, and the subscript i ranges over the two-digit census industry
categories. The index /D, varies from 0 to 1, and has an interpretation as
the proportion of persons in ethnic group j who would have to change
their industry affiliations in order for the two distributions to be in
agreement.

Index values for the individual ethnic groups are reported in column 1
of table 5. These figures document a rather consistent tendency for Asian-
African ethnics to show greater discrepancies from the urban population
in their industry distributions than is the norm for European groups. When
continent of origin, as a summary measure, is considered, Asian-African
immigrants exhibit almost twice the disparity of Europeans!* (.13 versus
TABLE 5

DEGREE OF DISPARITY BETWEEN INDUSTRY DiSTRIBUTIONS OF THE ETHNIC GROUPS
in UrBAN AREAS AND ToTAL UrBan Popuration, 1961

 

 

DEVELOPMENT TowNS

 

ALL Urpan SETTLEMENTS — =
Ethnic Group

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Percentage Percentage Proportion in
Explained Explained Development
ID* by Communityt ID* by Communityt Towns

Erxnic Group a) (2) (3) (4) (s)
Turkey 7 06 26 38 .23
Iran .28 12 50 45 24
Iraq . 13 AAS 26 56 19
Vemen-Aden ....... .28 -18 39 59 .20
Morocco .23 26 31 58 46
Algeria-Tuni a 25 .29 32 46 -63
Egypt 21 04 30 12 21
Lybia ......... 28 21 40 37 26
Russia Al 07 25 —07 05
Poland ........ -10 07 .23 31 06
Germany-Austria . 21 -10 40 07 04
Czechoslovakia AS 05 33 02 07
Hungary ... 14 .00 27 —.03 14
Romania ... -10 04 .22 .29 1S
Bulgaria 18 A3 31 18 12
Asian-African +13 25 26 -70 27
European .... 07 12 18 .29 08

 

 

Source.—Computations are from the 1961 census tape, for males aged 14 and older, and pertain to
communities with more than 5,000 inhabitants in 1961.

* For ethnic group j, /D, = .502 | P,, — P, , where P,, = proportion of group j’s urban population
(development town population) in industry i, and P, _ = proportion of the total urban population in
industry i.

t Formula is (JD, — B, )/ID,. See text for details of this computation. Negative values should be
interpreted as indicating zero importance of community.
duction in the index, which can be attributed to community industrial
structure is (JD, — 1D,)/IDj.

The index proportions which are explained by community, in the sense
of the preceding discussion, are presented in column 2 of table 5. There is
an evident tendency for residence location to be more important for Asian-
African groups than for the European ethnics. When continent of origin
alone is considered, 25% of the discrepancy between the industry distribu-
tions of Asian-Africans and the total urban population can be attributed
to the concentration of those immigrants in certain communities; for
Europeans, the corresponding figure is 12%. The percentages for the
individual ethnic groups should also be compared with the indices of varia-
tion in settlement concentration (table 2, top row of lower panel). Despite
the lack of full comparability between the ethnic categories in our two
data sources, there is evidence that the effect of community is greater for
groups having a large variation in settlement concentration. For instance,
immigrants from Yemen-Aden and Morocco-Algeria-Tunisia have the
highest index values of settlement concentration, and the largest percent-
ages of their industry distributions accounted for by community. This
correspondence is hardly surprising; it simply illustrates the mechanism
we have been describing whereby community may create ethnic disparities
in labor force characteristics.

What is the impact of development towns on the industry affiliations of
the ethnic groups? To pursue this matter, the preceding calculations were
repeated for the 19 development towns identified on the 1961 census tape.
The index /D; now reports the difference between the industry distribution
of group j in the development towns, and the industry distribution of
the total urban population. The results, which are presented in column 3
of table 5, reveal slightly larger index values for Asian-African ethnics
than for Europeans; at the level of continent of origin, the respective
figures are .26 and .18. A more pronounced effect concerns the disparity
between the index value of an ethnic group in the development towns,
and its value in all urban settlements (cols. 1 and 3). The figures for
development towns are consistently larger, suggesting that these settle-
ments expose their residents to industrial structures that differ considerably
from the ones existing in other communities.> This observation, together
with the greater representation of Asian-African populations in develop-
ment towns (col. 5), explains the manner by which the towns contribute
to ethnic differences in industry affiliation (col.1).
American Journal of Sociology

The degree to which the index values in column 3 can be attributed to
the industrial composition of development towns is strikingly different for
Asian-African and European ethnics. The proportions explained by com-
munity in the case of the former greatly exceed the proportions for the
latter groups (col 4).1° At the level of continent of origin, the respective
figures are .70 and .29. It is also noteworthy that differences among the
ethnic groups in the effect of community correspond to differences among
them in degree of concentration in individual development towns (table 2,
lower panel, last row). For instance, with regard to Asian-Africans, Yemen-
Aden immigrants are highest on both concentration by settlement and
importance of community for explaining their industry distribution, while
immigrants from Egypt-Lybia are lowest on both factors. The European
groups exhibit little difference in degree of settlement concentration, al-
though Romanians do have somewhat higher values on the two indices.

We conclude that the overrepresentation of Asian-African ethnics in
development towns (which contain industries different from those common
elsewhere in the country [n. 15]), and their further concentration in
certain of these settlements, has served to expose them, to a disproportion-
ate extent, to particular industrial opportunities. This situation is re-
sponsible for the larger disparities between their industry distributions
and that of the total urban population, in comparison with European
groups (table 5, col. 1), and for the greater importance of community in
explaining their industry affiliations (col. 2).
TABLE 6

Occupat:onaL ComposiTion* by ComMMUNITY CATEGORY, FOR
Urpan SETTLEMENTS, 1961

 

 

 

Occupationat DistriBuTION (%)t

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

—— rs OccupaTionaL
Upper Lower Status Scoret
White White Upper Lower —
Collar Collar Manual Manual Observed Predicted
Community CaTEGoRY a) Q) (3) (4) Total (3) (6)
Development towns .09 13 39 39 1.00 97.5 101.3
Veteran settlements 14 18 40 .28 1.00 104.0 106.4
Suburbs 23 42 .20 1.00 1117 110.0
Main cities 26 33 18 1,00 114.8 113.0
All urban
settlements ........ 18 23 37 22 1.00 109.7 109.7
Sounce.—Computations are from the 1961 census tape, for males aged 14 and older, and pertain to

 

communities with more than 5,000 inhabitants in 1961.

* Occupational categories are defined as follows: upper white collar—scientific and academic workers,
other professional workers, administrators and managers, lower white collar—clerical and sales workers;
upper manual—skilled workers in industry, mining, building, and skilled workers in agriculture; lower
manual—unskilled workers in industry, transport, building, other unskilled workers, service workers.
The components refer to the 1972 occupational classification, to which the 1961 census codes were
transformed (Israel Central Bureau of Statistics 1974, appendix B).

+ Entries are unweighted averages of settlement values, with the exception of the last row, which
ieports the occupational distribution of the urban population.

{Each of nine major occupational categories was indexed by its median earnings in 1972 (Israel,
Central Bureau of Statistics 1973a, p. 344). ‘“Observed”’ status scores are a weighted average of the
earnings values, the weights being the proportions of the labor force from a settlement type in the
occupations. ‘Predicted’? status scores were calculated in the same manner except that the occupational
distribution of a settlement was first estimated from its industry distribution, the estimation being made
from an industry-by-occupation matrix for the entire urban population. Status scores are in units of
Israeli currency (IL X 100) and reflect annual occupational earnings in 1972.
is also the case that development towns have few skilled occupations, when
this occupational category is viewed relative to the size of the lower manual
work force. That is, while there are equal numbers of upper and lower
manual positions, in other settlements the ratio of skilled to unskilled oc-
cupations is much higher, enhancing the mobility prospects there for lower-
class workers. Some implications of the restricted occupational opportunity
in development towns are outlined in the next section.

We wish to make clear the structural underpinnings of the occupational
differences among settlement types. The differences derive principally from
the kinds of industries located in the communities, and relate only indi-
rectly to the skill levels of the inhabitants. The final two columns of table
6 provide evidence for this contention. In column 5, “observed” occupa-
tional status scores are presented for each settlement type. These scores
were calculated by classifying the occupations into nine major categories
for which national earnings data are available,!® and computing a weighted
average of the earnings figures, the weights being the labor force propor-
tions in the categories. The resulting scores index occupational standing;
the value for a community reflects only its occupational composition, not
the quality of work by practitioners of an occupation or community dif-
ferences in rate of pay for the same work. The entries indicate that oc-
cupational status varies considerably by settlement type, from a low of
97.5 for development towns to a high of 114.8 for the main cities.1® These
figures, then, express the preceding distributional information in more sum-
mary form. In column 6 estimates of the occupational status scores are
reported, the calculations being based on the occupational distributions
characteristic of the various industries,?° and the industry composition of
each settlement. These scores therefore report the status discrepancy that
should exist among community types, given their industrial compositions.
The estimated scores parallel the observed values, and reveal that 11.7
points from the 17.3-point range in occupational status is expected from
industry differences among the settlements.

The fact that the occupational distributions of the communities can be
Development Towns in Israel

understood from a consideration of the kinds of industries they contain
does not mean that the personal characteristics of residents are irrelevant
to the determination of occupational composition. Indeed, we have argued
that the industrial structures of development towns were deliberately
planned with the needs of their prospective populations in mind. What a
consideration of columns 5 and 6 reveals is that while the skill levels of
the inhabitants may have been influential as initial causes in attracting
certain kinds of enterprises, once an industrial base has been established
the occupational structure of a settlement is an immediate resultant of its
mix of industries. Also, since few industries have technologies which can
accommodate much variety in occupational composition, a settlement
cannot respond easily to changes in the skill and education levels of its
residents.

The impact of community on the magnitude of ethnic differences in
occupational status is reported in table 7 for the continent-of-origin
groups.?! Columns 1 and 4 present occupational status scores for each
ethnic group, by settlement category. These “observed” values were cal-
culated in the same fashion as the entries in column 5 of table 6, the sole
difference being that the weights used in computing the occupational
averages now pertain to proportions of the relevant ethnic group. The fig-
ures reveal sizable disparities for each group, over the community categories,
with development towns showing the lowest status scores, and suburbs and
American Journal of Sociology

main cities the highest. Within each settlement type there also are sub-
stantial status differences between the immigrant groups: Europeans con-
sistently have higher occupational standing than Asian-Africans. When all
urban settlements are considered, a 19.7-point differential is obtained be-
tween the origin groups. What we wish to ascertain is the extent to which
this gap is a consequence of the settlement patterns of the two ethnic
groups.

Expected status scores were computed for each origin group by assuming
that, in every community, its members had the same occupational distribu-
tion as the settlement’s total population. This computation therefore in-
dexes the degree to which an immigrant population is advantaged occu-
pationally by its community locations. The expected scores are reported
in columns 2 and 5, and reveal comparable occupational exposure patterns
for the two ethnic groups within each settlement category. However,
because Asian-Africans are overrepresented in development towns, while
Europeans are concentrated in the main cities and suburbs (cols. 3 and 6),
at the level of the total urban population a significant gap emerges in ex-
pected occupational status; the score for Asian-Africans is 106.6, and for
Europeans it is 110.8. This 4.2-point gap, which is attributable to different
settlement locations by the two ethnics, accounts for 21% of the observed
discrepancy in occupational status between the groups.

In actuality, this 4.2-point gap is an upper bound to the impact of com-
munity. Our computations have ignored resident characteristics, and
thereby presume that any settlement differences in years of schooling or
other job-related skills are, properly, the effects of community; for in-
stance, lower educational attainment in development towns might be due
to poor school facilities in these settlements. However, there is evidence
(next section) that capable individuals tend to migrate from development
towns. This means that individual attributes are, in part, a determinant
of settlement location, rather than the reverse. If we adopt this formula-
tion, the effect of community should be examined neé of individual
characteristics. While we cannot hold these factors constant using the pre-
ceding methodology, by means of a regression procedure an individual’s
occupational status was examined against terms for (a) ethnic origin, (d)
education, age, and length of residence in Israel, and (c) 46 dummy terms
for the settlements. The result was that the initial 19.7-point gap? between
Asian-African and European immigrants was reduced to 6.9 points by ad-
dition of the individual characteristics, and to 4.7 points by the introduc-
tion of the settlement terms. This last 2.2-point reduction, representing
We have characterized development towns as locales in which few
moderate-status positions are available, this limitation deriving from a
concentration of low-skill industries in the settlements. Relating the occu-
pational composition of the towns to their demographic features, we have
suggested that the restricted occupational opportunity in these comunities
is responsible, in part, for the disparities which exist in Israel in occupa-
tional standing between immigrants from European and those from non-
European countries; that is, the latter ethnics, being overrepresented in
the towns, are exposed disproportionately to disadvantageous industrial
contexts. Yet the impact of development towns on national-level indices of
the ethnic gap is muted by the fact that even among Asian-Africans, only
27% of the population resides in this class of settlements. When we turn to
a consideration of the social character of the towns themselves, however,
the full impact of the initial decisions concerning the structure of their
economies becomes evident.

There is merit to the contention that the government’s policy to establish
new towns in outlying areas, direct large numbers of immigrants to the
settlements, and introduce in them principally labor-intensive, low-skill
industries, constituted an efficient strategy by which a small country with
modest resources could cope with several pressing and related problems.
First, immigrant absorption was a matter of urgency, not something that
could be deferred or solved gradually, and the introduction of low-skill
technologies facilitated their rapid incorporation into the labor force. A
second objective furthered by the new towns was promotion of population
redistribution and the opening of the hinterland to development. This was
easier to achieve through encouraging new immigrants, who had few ties
with communities in Israel, to settle in the towns, than through stimulating
the migration of veteran Israelis from the country’s metropolitan centers.
Nevertheless, substantial disutilities can be associated with the new-town
policy once a longer-range time perspective is adopted. Pertaining to this
matter, we wish to discuss several immediate consequences of the labor
force composition of development towns, as well as a number of derivative,
second-order problems.

The direct consequences of limited opportunity are that immigrants who
come to the towns with training which qualifies them for skilled manual or
lower white-collar positions have difficulty in locating suitable work, and
residents who begin their careers in low-ranked jobs have limited prospects
for upward mobility. An indication of the seriousness of the blockage in
occupational mobility, even for poorly educated persons, can be seen by
noting that in the two medium-status categories underrepresented in the
towns (skilled manual and lower white collar),?4 58% of the country’s
labor force in the former category, and 29% of the labor force in the latter,
have eight or fewer years of education (Israel Central Bureau of Statistics
1973a, pp. 336-37). This means that it is not uncommon for capable in-
dividuals with little education to enter these occupations. To summarize,
while the industries established in development towns may be appropriate
to the skill level of the average immigrant, they severely constrain the
occupational prospects of the better-educated or more motivated settlers.

Partly as a consequence of limited occupational opportunity, there has
been considerable migration from development towns. A report on 21
towns (Israel Manpower Planning Authority 1964, p. 6) notes that 40%
of their population in 1961 moved out of this settlement category in the
succeeding two years; this figure was four times the national rate of inter-
urban movement. There is also evidence that the migrants come from the
more talented segment of the community:?> they are better educated than

24 “Skilled manual” refers to the census occupational category—skilled workers in
industry, mining, building, and transport; and to part of the census category—agricul-
tural workers, “Lower white collar” refers to two occupational categories—clerical and
related workers, and sales workers (Israel Central Bureau of Statistics 1974).

25 Data are from tabulations prepared by the authors from the 1961 census tape.
Occupational status is indexed by 1972 earnings figures for the one-digit census
occupation categories. Facility with Hebrew is based on a census tape code which
refers simultaneously to reading and writing competence.
nonmigrants (7.6 years of schooling vs. 6.2), have higher current occupa-
tional status (103 vs. 96), are more facile with Hebrew (74% can read
and write vs. 65%), and have been in Israel for a longer period (11.4 years
vs. 11.0).?° There is little migration to development towns from veteran
settlements, which might offset this loss of capable residents.?’ Rather,
these towns have functioned as ports of entry for new immigrants to the
country, providing them with temporary places of abode until they acquire
the means to establish themselves in other communities. Those who remain
tend to have modest occupational aspirations or require the housing sub-
sidies and other kinds of assistance that are more readily available to
residents of development towns. To put matters succinctly, the towns serve
s “sinks” for less resourceful immigrants.

An additional process appears to operate in development towns within
commuting distance of veteran settlements. Residents who are better
qualified occupationally frequently obtain employment outside the towns
and travel to work, much as if they lived in suburbs. From the 1961 census
tape we calculated that, for the industrial labor force?’ residing in develop-
ment towns, mean education of males employed outside their settlements
is 7.4 years, compared with 6.9 years for those residing and working in
the towns. It is unclear from our data whether the existence of suitable
employment in nearby communities permits development towns to retain
these individuals, or whether it facilitates their eventual departure by
enabling the withdrawal to be accomplished in stages. To some extent the
latter process probably operates, since many of the settlements are not
very attractive, and their inhabitants often have only a weak identification
with community (Lichfield 1971, 1:6.3, 6.10). In this regard we point out
that, alongside the departure of skilled manual and lower white-collar
workers, development towns tend to have nonresident professional and
administrative work forces (Smith 1972, p. 34). Teachers, social workers,
and industrial managers choose to commute to work rather than reside
in the towns. Our calculations from the 1961 census tape provide support-
ing evidence for this residence style among white-collar workers: educa-
tional attainment by nonresidents employed in development towns is
10.0 years of schooling, versus 6.6 years for inhabitants of the towns.

These processes are responsible for the indirect effects of industrial
structure that we wish to document. The inability of the settlements to
retain their more resourceful and better-acculturated inhabitants, or at-
tract comparable persons from other Israeli communities in substantial
numbers, has meant that the settlers who remain tend to have high rates
of dependency and related social problems. In 1963, 11.6% of families in
development towns received continuous economic help, in comparison with
4.4% in the total population. For all forms of assistance, the respective
figures were 34.5% and 17.4% (Israel Manpower Planning Authority
1964, p. 26). With regard to participation in education by youth, in the
14~17-year age group, 41% in development towns study full-time in some
educational institution, compared with 68% in the entire country (Israel
Manpower Planning Authority 1964, p. 11). Delinquency statistics are
consistent with this picture. Using data from the Israel Ministry of
Welfare’s (1972) handbook of community characteristics, we calculated
an incidence rate of 26.6 per 1,000 in the age group 9-16 for the 19
development towns used in the previous computations. This figure com-
pares with 14.3 for the country, and 16.4 for the three main cities.

Even if the rates of incurring social problems in development towns by
the ethnic and class groupings residing there were not greater than the
rates these same populations exhibit in other communities, the mere fact of
concentration of less resourceful families creates undesirable consequences.
The low representation of moderate-status individuals in the towns and
their high population turnover mean that local leadership tends to be
weak*® (Lichfield 1971, 1:63), that the schools are not centers of ex-
cellence, and that the clientele capable of supporting cultural activities is
small. Despite grants-in-aid from the central government, these settlements
are hard pressed to collect adequate tax monies to provide for the mani-
fold needs of their lower-class populations (Lichfield 1971, 1:5.16), not to
mention the amenities which can make a community an attractive place of
residence. Finally, because development towns are contexts in which de-
pendency is common, there is a serious risk that it will become an approved
life-style.8°
To clarify the preceding comments, and place them in perspective in
relation to long-range prospects for the towns, we must stress two points.
First, we have discussed development towns as if they formed a homogene-
ous settlement category with regard to occupational composition and the
presence of derivative problems. This is a reasonable first approximation
to ‘the reality, and an efficient analytic strategy considering that our
interest is to elucidate the relation between community and ethnic stratifi-
cation, and document the particular role played by industrial structure.
However, it means ignoring the many differentiating mechanisms which
have resulted in a few development towns constituting cases of successful
progress, in that they attract settlers from diverse population groups via
internal migration, retain their more talented residents, and have either
acquired a diversified industrial base or were founded originally around
industries which utilize a greater array of occupational skills than is the
norm in the majority of the towns.

Beersheva, Ashdod, and Arad are examples of successful development
towns. Beersheva is now a regional center for southern Israel; it has a
university, provides medical and commercial services for the surrounding
region, and is able to support a varied white-collar labor force. Ashdod
is a major seaport: Workers in shipping are well paid; also, the town has
attracted ancillary manufacturing, transportation, and commercial firms
that find it advantageous to be located in a maritime center. Arad is an
isolated community near the Dead Sea which has been built around mineral
extraction, chemical processing, and metal fabrication industries. These
activities require engineers, technicians, and skilled craftsmen. Because of
the settlement’s isolation, these personnel, together with teachers, social
workers, and others who provide professional services in the town, must
live there, and consequently have a vested interest in its progress. Arad,
in addition, is advantaged by social composition; a majority of its residents
are Israeli born, and lack the many adjustment problems which confront
new immigrants. Differentiating processes of considerable import therefore
operate, and some settlements are following satisfactory development
trajectories. However, a detailed consideration of these matters is outside
the scope of this report.

A second qualification concerns the fact that we are examining the towns
at a very early point in their histories. The bulk of our data are from the
1961 Census of Population; thus no development town is older than 13
years, at least in its modern phase. Most are very small, having less than
10,000 inhabitants, and their unbalanced industrial character stems
partly from this size factor. However, because governmental policy is to
encourage further growth, and because the immigrants now arriving in

knowledge about the allowance, and various individual characteristics, residence in a
development town has a strong, positive effect on application.
The processes we have described are very visible in Israel because of the
huge immigration inflow this country has experienced in a brief time
interval—far exceeding the rate of growth of the American population from
immigration in any similar period—and because the government’s espoused
intention has been to settle the immigrants in new towns. Nonetheless, the
importance of community for explaining ethnic stratification in the United
States is also considerable, although the mechanisms that have brought
immigrant groups to certain sections of the country, and to particular
communities, are not identical with the ones which have operated in
Israel.

The sorts of mechanisms that have generated ethnic concentration by
region and community in America concern time of arrival, route of travel,
and degree of affinity of a group for its own kind. The first factor is
associated with the processes we have described in connection with ethnic
concentration in Israel. Immigrants from various lands came to America
in different decades; and time of arrival correlates with location of the
western frontier and, consequently, with period of settlement of a geo-
graphic region. Route of travel is a consideration in explaining the concen-
tration of certain groups—French-Canadians, Mexicans, and Chinese—
who came via routes that were not followed by the majority of immigrants.
These ethnics tend to be overrepresented in the states that border their
ports of entry.

The preference of individuals from the same country of origin to live in
proximity to their own kind is also responsible for generating ethnic con-
centration, although this factor does not explain where in American a
group will choose to reside. Breton (1964) suggested that immigrants who
are different from the receiving population on a number of dimensions—
language, religion, cultural traditions—are likely to settle together in a
community in order to constitute a clientele of sufficient size to support
ethnic churches, schools, restaurants, newspapers, and Landsmanshaften.
Once the initial migrants have established themselves in particular cities,
chosen for whatever reason, subsequent immigrants from the country of
origin tend to travel to the same settlements.

As a consequence of these processes, the correspondence of ethnicity
with geographic region and community is quite strong. Scandinavians and
Germans are concentrated in the Midwest; French-Canadians are located in
northern New England; Italians are in southern New England and in the
Mid-Atlantic states; and Jews, a heavily urban group, reside principally
in New York City and Chicago. To cite instances of extreme ethnic
concentration in states, 1920 census data on the foreign born reveal that
Norwegians were represented in North Dakota at 15 times their national
rate; French-Canadians were concentrated in New Hampshire at 27 times
their rate in the country; and Mexicans were overrepresented in Arizona
by a factor of 41 (Hutchinson 1956, pp. 34-48). It is also the case that
first-generation American born continue to reside in the geographic regions
of their parents; 1950 census data on natives of foreign or mixed paren-
tage show representation rates of 19, 27, and 11 for the preceding three
groups, in their respective states (Hutchinson 1956, pp. 39-43).

The persistence of ethnic concentration means that regional and com-
munity differences in industry location will have a stable impact on ethnic
opportunity. There are striking differences among the immigrant groups
in industry affiliation. This is principally a consequence of the industrial
composition in the settlements where a group is concentrated, although the
ethnic populations are themselves responsible for introducing several in-
dustries into America—ready-made apparel manufacturing, for instance,
is associated with Jewish immigrants (Hapgood 1966, p. 10). To illustrate
the tendency toward ethnic concentration by industry, according to 1950
census data on the foreign born, French-Canadians are employed in textile
mills (a New England industry) at seven times their representation in the
population. Mexicans work in farming at 11 times their expected rate, and
in food processing at three times the expected rate (both industries have
extensive operations in the Southwest and far west). Czechoslovakian and
Yugoslavian immigrants are employed in primary metal processing at four
times their representations in the country; these groups have large popu-
lations in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois, which are centers of ferrous
metalworks (Hutchinson 1956, pp. 224~-31).8+

Industry affiliation is an important consideration in the analysis of
occupational standing and mobility for several reasons. Industries differ
in technology and, as a consequence, in mix of occupations. Textile manu-
facturing and food processing, for instance, contain few skilled manual
positions, while the majority of the blue-collar work force in printing and

31 Industry concentration figures are based on data for operatives, except in the case
of Mexicans in farming, for whom farm laborer figures were used.
in aircraft manufacturing is classified as skilled (U.S. Bureau of the
Census 1963, pp. 506-12). The occupational distribution in an industry
is one determinant of the mobility prospects facing an individual, and
constrains his advancement to a greater or lesser extent, depending on
the shape of the distribution, as long as he remains employed in that
sector of the economy.®? Where communities are centers of a particular
industrial activity, the occupational composition of the dominant industry
has an even more pervasive effect on labor market opportunity; indeed,
this is the situation that exists in many development towns in Israel.

Industries differ in other respects which can influence an individual’s
occupational mobility prospects. In some, the firms characteristically fill
their upper-manual positions by promotion from below; in other industries
a craft model is the norm, which permits little possibility for upward
movement. Demographic features of an industry are also relevant to under-
standing mobility opportunity: some industries are expanding, and create
new upper-manual and white-collar positions which might be filled through
promotion; others are stable or declining in employment, and present
limited promotion prospects. Finally, industries differ in the age composi-
tion of their employees, a consideration relevant to mobility, as it specifies
the amount of promotion and replacement hiring that will take place in
the short-term future.

It is unfortunate that industry and community characteristics have
been neglected in the main thrust of research on status attainment, which
has focused exclusively on individual-level variables. This omission is
especially serious in the study of ethnic stratification, since, as we have
documented, ethnic groups tend to be concentrated by region and settle-
ment, and are therefore exposed to different industrial structures. Analyses
of occupational standing have commonly attributed the ethnic effects
which remain after controls for individual characteristics (father’s SES,
respondent’s education and status of first job, etc.) to cultural background
or motivational differences among the groups (Duncan and Featherman
1972). While we have no reason to doubt the salience of such factors for
understanding ethnic stratification, we do suggest that they are confounded
in the residual ethnic terms with substantial industry and community
effects.
Aronoff, Myron J. 1973. “Development Towns in Israel.” In Israel: Social Structure
and Change, edited by Michael Curtis and Mordecai Chertoff. New Brunswick:
Transaction Books.

Barkai, Haim. 1974. “A Model of Kibbutz Production and Factor Allocation.” Dis-
cussion Paper no. 742. Jerusalem: Falk Institute.

Bar Yosef, Rivka, Gile Schild, and Yudith Varshar. 1974. “Research on the Economic
Situation of Large Families at the Time of the War.” In Hebrew, mimeographed.
Jerusalem: Work and Welfare Research Institute, Hebrew University.

Ben Porath, Yoram. 1973. “On East-West Differences in Occupational Structure in
Israel.” In Israel: Social Structure and Change, edited by Michael Curtis and
Mordecai Chertoff. New Brunswick: Transaction Books.

Berler, Alexander. 1970. New Towns in Israel. Jerusalem: Israel Universities Press.

Bettelheim, Bruno. 1969. Children of the Dream. New York: Macmillan.

Blauner, Robert. 1964. Alienation and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Breton, Raymond. 1964. “Institutional Completeness of Ethnic Communities and the
Personal Relations of Immigrants.” American Journal of Sociology 70 (September) :
193-205.

Brutzkus, Eliezer. 1964. Physical Planning in Israel. Jerusalem: E. Brutzkus.

Cohen, Erik. 1968. “A Comparative Study of the Political Institutions of Collective
Settlements in Israel.’ Mimeographed. Jerusalem: Department of Sociology, Hebrew
University.

. 1970. The City in the Zionist Ideology. Jerusalem: Institute of Urban and
Regional Studies, Hebrew University.

Duncan, Otis D., and David L. Featherman. 1972. “Psychological and Cultural Factors
in the Process of Occupational Achievement.” Social Science Research 1 (June):
121-45.

Galle, Omer R. 1963. “Occupational Composition and the Metropolitan Hierarchy:
The Inter- and Intra-Metropolitan Division of Labor.” American Journal of So-
ciolcgy 69 (November): 260-69.

Hapgood, Hutchins. 1966. The Spirit of the Ghetto. New York: Schocken.

Hutchinson, E. P. 1956. Immigrants and Their Children, 1850-1950. New York: Wiley.

Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 1963a. Population and Housing Census 1961: The
Settlements of Israel, Part 1. Publication no. 10. Jerusalem: Central Bureau of
Statistics.

. 1963b. Population and Housing Census 1961: The Settlements of Israel, Part 3.

Publication no. 12. Jerusalem: Central Bureau of Statistics.

. 1964. Population and Housing Census 1961: The Settlements of Israel, Part 4.
Publication no. 18. Jerusalem: Central Bureau of Statistics.

———. 1965. Population and Housing Census 1961: Procedures and Definitions. Publi-
cation no. 25. Jerusalem: Central Bureau of Statistics.

———. 1966. Population and Housing Census 1961: The Settlements of Israel, Part 6.
Publication no. 28. Jerusalem: Central Bureau of Statistics.

———. 1973a. Statistical Abstract of Israel. Jerusalem: Central Bureau of Statistics.

. 1973b. Immigration to Israel 1948-1972. Special Series no. 416. Jerusalem:

Central Bureau of Statistics.

. 1974. The Standard Classification of Occupations 1972. Jerusalem: Central
Bureau of Statistics.

Israel Manpower Planning Authority. 1964. Manpower in Development Towns. Jerusa-
lem: Ministry of Labor.

Israel Ministry of Welfare. 1972. Settlements in Israel: Profiles. Jerusalem: Ministry
of Welfare.

Lichfield, Nathaniel. 1971. Israel’s New Towns: A Developmental Strategy. 3 vols.
Jerusalem: Ministry of Housing.

Matras, Judah. 1973. “Israel’s New Frontier: The Urban Periphery.” In Israel: Social
Structure and Change, edited by Michael Curtis and Mordecai Chertoff. New
Brunswick: Transaction Books.
American Journal of Sociology

Sicron, Moshe. 1957. Immigration to Israel (suppl.). Jerusalem: Central Bureau of
Statistics.

Smith, Herbert. 1972. Survey of Development Towns and Cities. No. 1. In Hebrew.
Jerusalem: Smith Center for Research.

Spiegal, Erika. 1966. New Towns in Israel. Stuttgart: Kramer.

Spiro, Melford E. 1970. Kibbutz: Venture in Utopia. New York: Schocken.

Stigler, George. 1966. The Theory of Price. New York: Macmillan.

Taeuber, Karl E., and Alma F. Taeuber. 1965. Negroes in Cities: Residential Segrega-
tion and Neighborhood Change. Chicago: Aldine.

Talmon, Yonina. 1972. Family and Community in the Kibbutz. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1963. Census of Population 1960: Occupational Character-
istics. Report no. PC(2)-7A. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Weintraub, Dov, and M. Shapira. 1971. “The Family in the Process of Change: Crisis
and Continuity.” In Immigration and Social Change, edited by Dov Weintraub.
Jerusalem: Israel Universities Press.

Zarchi, Shaul, and Aryia Shiskin. 1972. Qiryat Shimona: Establishment of a Develop-
ment Town. In Hebrew. Jerusalem: Ministry of Housing.
