Ordaining Women: The Diffusion of an Organizational Innovation

Author(s): Mark Chaves

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Jan., 1996), pp. 840-873
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782232

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:07 UTC
INTRODUCTION

One of the most significant transformations in 20th-century American
religion is the entry of women into the clergy. In terms of numerical

! This research was supported by a large grant from the Louisville Institute for the
Study of Protestantism and American Culture and by smaller grants from the Society
for the Scientific Study of Religion and the University of Notre Dame. Elizabeth
Caniglia, James Cavendish, and Sam Reimer contributed excellent research assis-
tance. Helpful comments were offered by Gail Bederman, Rebecca Bordt, Virginia
Brereton, Patricia Chang, Kevin Christiano, Elisabeth Clemens, Chris Coble, William
R. Hutchison, Edward C. Lehman, Suzanne Marilley, George Marsden, John Meyer,
David Strang, and AJS reviewers. This paper also benefited from the comments of
participants in Harvard Divinity School’s American Colloquium and Duke Divinity
School’s Leadership Development Seminar. Direct correspondence to Mark Chaves,
Department of Sociology, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556.
E-mail: chaves@irishmvs.cc.nd.edu

© 1996 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0002-9602/96/10104-0002$01.50
strength, this is largely a post-1970 development. In 1974, only 14.3%
of students in U.S. theological seminaries were female; by 1993, 31%
were female (King 1994, p. 76). The increasing presence of professional
women after 1970 is not unique to the clergy, as figure 1 shows. With
the exception of World War II, the proportion of female doctors, lawyers,
and clergy was across the board very low from 1880 until 1970, after
which the proportion female started to rise steeply for all three
professions.

This influx of women into the clergy has prompted a fair amount of
sociological attention. Research has investigated the social backgrounds
of women entering the ministry, their experiences in seminary and on
the job market, and the ways in which their careers systematically differ
from the careers of male clergy (Carroll, Hargrove, and Lummis 1983;
Kleinman 1984; Nesbitt 1993). Other research has examined sources of
continuing resistance to female clergy among lay people (Lehman 1980,
1987), among male clergy (Nason-Clark 1987b), and among denomina-
tional officials (Lehman 1981). Still other research has focused on the
consequences for denominations of growing numbers of female clergy
(Nason-Clark 1987a; Royle 1987). Most recently, research has begun to
address the question of whether or not female clergy practice ministry
styles that are systematically different from the styles practiced by men
(Lehman 1993; Guth et al. 1994; Simon and Nadell 1995).

Distinct from the individual-level phenomenon of women entering the
ministry, however, is the organizational-level phenomenon by which de-
nominations adopted formal policies granting women access to all reli-
gious positions.” Figure 2 shows the diffusion of this organizational policy
among U.S. Christian denominations. Unlike the individual-level trend
in figure 1, the organizational change tracked in figure 2 diffuses slowly
but steadily across the denominational population during the 20th cen-
tury. In 1890, about 7% of U.S. denominations gave full clergy rights to
women; today, approximately half of U.S. denominations do so. This
diffusion of formal rules granting gender equality is the subject of the
present paper. Why did some denominations begin to ordain women so
much earlier than others? What are the differences between early and
late adopters of this organizational innovation?
Previous work on these questions has tended to focus on very narrow
slices of the denominational population. In addition to the numerous
accounts of women’s ordination within single denominations, extant
comparative work tends to focus on relatively small sets of denominations
(e.g., Bliss 1952; Lynch 1975; Brereton and Klein 1980; Barfoot and
Sheppard 1980; Bednarowski 1980; Boyd and Brackenridge 1983; Carroll
et al. 1983; Gilkes 1985; Zikmund 1986; Carden 1989; Ward 1991). In
addition to providing a wealth of factual material from which to draw,
this work also contains hypotheses about factors that influence how early
or late a denomination begins to ordain women.

The present paper builds on this earlier work by using a much larger
set of denominations and by exploiting recent methodological and theo-
retical advances in the study of organizational change. Methodologically,
this paper uses an event-history framework to study the diffusion of
formal gender equality across the denominational population. This strat-
egy for studying diffusion has been used profitably by others (e.g., Strang
1991; Sutton et al. 1994). Theoretically, this paper draws on the “new
institutionalist” approach to organizational change (Powell and DiMag-
gio 1991).

A basic insight of new institutionalism is that the loose coupling of
formal rules with everyday practice indicates that those rules likely have
a source outside the organization. Loose coupling suggests “the de-
pendence of organizations on the patterning built up in wider envi-
ronments—rather than on a purely internal technical and functional
logic” (Scott and Meyer 1994, p. 2). A formal rule or policy only loosely
connected to actual organizational practice is a clue that such a rule
exists more to respond to the environment than to govern internal opera-
tions.

As foreshadowed by the comparison of figures 1 and 2, formal rules
about gender equality in religious denominations are only loosely coupled
with the actual practice of women and men in congregations. The nature
of this loose coupling can be seen from several angles. First, there is a
clear disjunction between the timing of denominational policy changes
and trends in the number of women actually seeking clergy status. In
addition to figure 1, another indicator of these trends is the number of
women pursuing the relevant professional degree. Before 1970, women
did not pursue the professional degree for clergy in significant numbers
even in denominations that ordained women. After 1970, women began
to pursue the professional degree in significant numbers even within de-
nominations that did not ordain women.’
Second, women have performed and continue to perform significant
leadership roles within denominations that forbid women access to formal
leadership positions. Ethnographic investigators of U.S. religious groups
with restrictive gender roles consistently observe gaps between rhetoric
and practice, both with respect to women’s roles in households (e.g.,
Ammerman 1987, p. 136; Rose 1987; Davidman 1991, p. 161) and, more
to the point, with respect to women’s roles in religious organizations (e.g.,
Brasher 1994). Such gaps have been observed within mid-20th-century
fundamentalism (Hamilton 1993), contemporary American Catholicism
(Wallace 1992), and contemporary African-American Pentecostalism
(Gilkes 1985, p. 688).

Third, there also has been and continues to be loose coupling in denom-
inations that grant full formal equality to women. Research on female
clergy consistently documents the fact that formal rules asserting gender
equality do not necessarily produce real gender equality (Carroll et al.
1983; Nesbitt 1993). Congregations resist female clergy, and official de-
nominational policies designed to encourage congregations to consider
hiring female clergy often are ignored both by congregations and by
denominational officials (Lehman 1981, 1987). This sort of loose coupling
between national policy and congregational practice is not new.*

Such ubiquitous loose coupling between rule and practice indicates
that organizational rules have their source, at least in part, in external,
institutional pressures on organizations rather than in internal problems
to which the rules are solutions. Various sources of external pressure to
institute formal gender equality can in fact be identified. Both waves of
the women’s movement, most obviously, exerted direct political pressure
on American religion. Opening the clergy to women was an early move-
ment goal (see, e.g., Stanton et al. 1881, pp. 67, 73). The American
Association of Women Ministers (1923) formed in 1919, said that their
objective was “to secure equal opportunity for women in the ecclesiasti-
cal world,” and this association helped to influence events in several
denominations (see, e.g., Noll 1992, p. 91). Near the beginning of second-
wave feminism, the National Organization for Women established an
Ecumenical Task Force on Women and Religion (Hole and Levine 1971,
p. 390). Since then, groups devoted either to winning full clergy status
for women or, in denominations that already grant full status, to advo-
cating enhanced opportunities for female clergy have formed inside
very many denominations (Wuthnow 1988, pp. 228-35; Bendroth 1984,
p. 133).

In addition to this direct sort of pressure from an organized social
movement, denominations also experienced a more subtle form of norma-
tive pressure to ordain women. American religion has tended to lag be-
hind other areas of professional activity with respect to adopting formal
gender equality. As early as 1917, for example, all but four states admit-
ted women to the bar (Morello 1986, p. 36), and by 1972 every law school
in the country admitted women on an equal basis with men. Already by
1944, 90% of U.S. medical schools admitted women, and the last holdout
opened its doors to women in 1960 (McAnarney 1977, p. 10).
Denominational leaders have been quite conscious of the increasing
legitimacy of formal gender equality during the previous 100 years of
American history. Throughout the 20th century, denominational debates
and reports on the subject of women’s ordination virtually always have
acknowledged the normative pressure for gender equality coming from
outside the religious organizational world.* This is as true for denomina-
tions that continue to restrict women’s access to positions as it is for
denominations that proceed to change their formal rules in favor of full
clergy rights for women. The difference between the two is that, in some
denominations, recognition of the normative pressure leads to the conclu-
sion that they need to follow suit, while, in other denominations, recog-
nizing the normative pressure leads them to conclude, in effect, that they
must resist. Normative pressure, associated with the increasing legiti-
macy of formal gender equality in American society, was salient to reli-
gious leaders even between the two waves of the women’s movement.
The loose coupling and the external sources of the pressure to ordain
women that I have described strongly suggest that the diffusion of
women’s ordination should be understood in “new institutionalist”
terms.° That is, a denomination’s formal policy permitting female clergy
should be understood as a symbolic marker signaling orientation to and
cooperation with a broader movement for women’s equality. The diffu-
sion of women’s ordination is, at least in part, the result of an externally
generated norm of gender equality working its way through an organiza-
tional population.

At the same time, figure 2 makes clear that denominational response
to external pressure toward ordaining women has been far from uniform.
Some denominations adopted formal gender equality very early, others
later, still others not yet. This variation suggests that the experience of
external pressure, in and of itself, cannot fully explain the diffusion
of women’s ordination. An adequate explanation of the diffusion of
women’s ordination will invoke both the external sources of pressure
toward ordaining women and the internal organizational factors influ-
encing how denominations variously receive and respond to those exter-
nal pressures. This paper develops such an explanation.

The next section of the paper theorizes organizational change as a
combination of institutional pressures, cultural and network boundaries
within the denominational population, and internal organizational char-
acteristics, all of which affect the likelihood that a denomination will
ordain women. The third section describes the event-history analysis and
results, and a concluding section discusses implications of the argument.
roll et al. 1983, p. 42) have suggested that those shortages were responsi-
ble for the fact that some denominations granted full clergy rights to
women during that decade. In more recent decades, some Protestant
denominations have experienced clergy surpluses (Carroll and Wilson
1980) at the same time as the Roman Catholic Church is famously and
increasingly short of clergy (Schoenherr and Young 1993). In light of this
sort of historical and cross-denominational variation, it is plausible to
hypothesize that a denomination finding it difficult to fill its key positions
will be pressured to change its criteria of office to create a larger pool of
eligible individuals. By this logic of organizational rationality, we would
expect that denominations will be more likely to begin to ordain women
when they are in the midst of a clergy shortage.

Neoinstitutionalist logic, by contrast, while not denying the market
forces that lead congregations faced with a shortage of male clergy to
draft women to do the work, emphasizes the likelihood that such market
forces will not directly translate into formal rules. In this case, neoinstitu-
tionalism counterintuitively predicts that a clergy shortage will not raise
the likelihood that a denomination will begin to officially permit women’s
ordination.

Members’ preferences.—Denominations are quasi-political organiza-
tions, by which I mean that, with only a very few exceptions, they con-
tain more or less democratic mechanisms meant to assure that national
policy represents the wishes of the constituency. Thus, another way that
denominational policy concerning gender equality might be “rational”
would be if that policy reflected the wishes of the membership on the
matter. Gender equality, as a goal, does not enjoy equal levels of support
in all corners of our society. Recent survey data show, for example,
that individuals living in the South and living in more rural areas are
significantly less likely to endorse principles of gender equality, whether
they apply to family and work in general or to clergy in particular.’
These differences apparently represent long-standing social differences
in attitudes toward gender equality (Flexner 1974, pp. 229-30).

Denominations, of course, vary in their cultural contexts. Some are
based in certain geographical regions, some are more rural in their social
base, some are more middle class than others, and so on. To the extent
that these sociocultural variations are associated with feminism or anti-
feminism, they should influence the likelihood that a denomination grants
full equality to women #f official policy represents an aggregation of mem-
bers’ wishes. More specifically, from the perspective of organizational
rationality we would expect denominations that are more rural and more
Southern to adopt the innovation of female equality later than denomina-
tions that are more urban and non-Southern.*®

In this situation, however, it is not clear that neoinstitutionalism would
predict differently. A correlation between organizational rules and prefer-
ences of members would also be expected if, as neoinstitutionalism em-
phasizes, individuals’ preferences are themselves constituted by the insti-
tutional context in which they are embedded. Members of denominations
not ordaining women would be expected to be less favorable toward
gender equality but not only because organizational policy reflects mem-
bers’ independently held prior preferences. Rather, the correlation is pro-
duced in part because denominations that do not ordain women them-
selves help to shape the preferences of their members.

Denominations with a predominantly rural social base present another
complication. The extent to which a denomination’s social basis is rural
might “rationally” influence organizational policy both via a clergy-
shortage mechanism and via an aggregation-of-preferences mechanism.
On the one hand, as described above, individuals living in rural areas
are less supportive of gender equality as a goal; as a result, rural denomi-
nations might be expected to be more resistant to ordaining women. On
the other hand, rural congregations are most likely to be unable to find
male clergy willing to work for the lower salaries characteristic of these
congregations. Consequently, it is in rural congregations that women are
most likely to function as clergy both in denominations that ordain them
and in denominations that do not (Carroll et al. 1983; Wallace 1992). By
this mechanism, if women’s ordination is partly a solution to an internal
labor shortage, rural denominations might be expected to be /ess resistant
to women’s ordination. Thus, positing that rules about women clergy
are a response to internally generated organizational problems (e.g.,
matching rules to members’ preferences or tothe need to staff rural
congregations) does not yield a clear expectation regarding the effect of
a more rural constituency on such rules.

There is similar ambiguity regarding how the racial composition of a
denomination will influence its propensity to grant full clergy rights to
women. On the one hand, both waves of the women’s movement have
involved mainly white women, and there is a long-standing competitive
tension between the goal of expanding women’s rights and the goal of
expanding the rights of African-Americans. In the years immediately
following the Civil War, for example, some prominent feminists agitated
against the Fourteenth Amendment because it gave the vote to black
Institutional Pressures outside the Denominational Field

Women’s movement.—Most obviously, we would expect that both
waves of the women’s movement have influenced denominations’ adop-
tion of gender equality. There is good reason, however, to expect that
second-wave feminism will have had a stronger effect on denominations
than did the first wave of the women’s movement. Although the early
movement had broad goals, it became more narrowly focused on suffrage
as time went on (Buechler 1990, p. 90). More recent feminism, by con-
trast, has consistently maintained broad social change goals. I would
expect, then, that the historical periods associated with the first and
second waves of the women’s movement will see faster rates of adoption
by denominations of full clergy rights for women, but I also would expect
the effect to be stronger during the second wave than during the first.

Founding date.—A new institutionalist approach focuses on increasing
homogeneity among organizations within a particular institutional field.
Given the increasing legitimacy of formal gender equality within Ameri-
can society over this period—a trend that continued even during the
period between the two waves of direct political pressure from an orga-
nized women’s movement—it is reasonable to expect that denominations
founded later will be more likely to ordain women earlier in their organi-
zational lives. The idea is that environmental pressure to ordain women
increases steadily from the mid-19th century on, and, since organizations
are especially susceptible to environmental pressure early in their histo-
ries, denominations founded more recently will be more likely to have
gender policies that conform to these external expectations.
Institutional Pressures within the Denominational Field

The variables described in this subsection remain firmly within the new
institutionalist approach since, although they refocus attention inside the
denominational sphere, they represent influences external to any one de-
nomination. Two features of the denominational organizational field can
be expected to shape the diffusion of women’s ordination: the interde-
nominational network structure and the symbolic boundaries that sepa-
rate denominations from each other.

Interdenominational networks.—At least since Coleman, Katz, and
Menzel’s (1957) classic study of how the practice of prescribing tetracy-
cline diffused through communities of physicians, sociologists have inves-
tigated the ways in which social structure affects the diffusion of various
innovations. Recent advances in the conceptualization and measurement
of social networks have permitted more sophisticated studies of the effect
of social structure on diffusion (e.g., Burt 1987; Galaskiewicz and Burt
1991). Moreover, the development of event-history methods has provided
a new technique for studying diffusion, one into which network data are
easily incorporated (Marsden and Podolny 1990; Strang 1991; Strang and
Tuma 1993). The present study exploits these developments by incorpo-
rating interdenominational network data into an event-history analysis
of the adoption of women’s ordination.

Substantively, recent work on the diffusion of organizational innova-
tions strongly supports the idea that organizational action is influenced
by other organizations in the environment. Davis (1991), for example,
found that, among businesses, having ties to prior adopters of the “poi-
son pill” (a shareholder rights plan that makes hostile takeover more
difficult by increasing the costs an acquiring company would have to pay)
increases the rate at which a Fortune 500 company will itself swallow the
pill. Haunschild (p. 579), to take another example, found that “the num-
ber of prior acquisitions completed by the tied-to firms is positively re-
lated to the number of current acquisitions completed by the focal firm.”
The central idea of this recent research is that populations of organiza-
tions are not homogeneous with respect to the degree of influence of each
actor on each other actor. Instead, the behavior of organizations to which
an organization is more closely linked will be more important than the
behavior of organizations less closely connected.

There is good reason to expect that denominations will similarly be
influenced more by the denominations with which they are most closely
tied. Descriptive accounts of debates over the issue of women’s ordina-
tion makes it very clear that denominations are both aware of and not
indifferent to the practices of other denominations when it comes to
women’s ordination. But denominations are not equally aware of all
other denominations. Rather, they appear to be most influenced by the
behavior of denominations they understand to be most like them, espe-
cially denominations with whom they may imagine future merger. Given
this kind of structured awareness of denominations by other denomina-
tions, it is plausible to hypothesize a network effect on the likelihood that
a denomination will grant equal access to women. That is, other things
being equal, if denominations to which a target denomination is closely
tied via common memberships in interdenominational organizations
(e.g., the National Council of Churches) already ordain women, then the
target denomination itself will be positively influenced in that direction.

Perceived similarities: Sacramentalism and biblical inerrancy.—It is
unlikely, however, that the network variable will capture all of the struc-
ture among denominations that is relevant for shaping the diffusion of
gender equality. Strang and Meyer (1994) have argued that the diffusion
of a culturally meaningful practice is not adequately understood solely
in terms of literal social ties. That is, when a diffusing object or practice
carries meaning, the diffusion process is likely to be influenced by more
than “realist” elements of social structure such as connectedness, struc-
tural equivalence, spatial contiguity, and the like. Stated positively,
Strang and Meyer (1994, p. 100) argue that diffusion patterns also will
be influenced by “culturally theorized understandings of the nature of
social actors and of diffusing practices.” Most relevant in the present
context is their hypothesis that diffusion “flows are increased where the
actors involved are perceived as similar [since] perceptions of similarity
provide a rationale for diffusion” (p. 103). (I would add that perceptions
of dissimilarity provide a rationale for resisting diffusion.) From this
perspective, “diffusion processes often look more like complex exercises
in the social construction of identity than like the mechanical spread of
information” (Strang and Meyer 1994, p. 102).

Following this logic, I hypothesize that the diffusion of women’s equal-
ity across the denominational population will be influenced by cultural
boundaries within the denominational population. That is, denomina-
tions that understand themselves as similar to denominations and other
organizations that grant women full formal equality will ordain women
earlier than denominations that understand themselves as dissimilar to
such “liberal” organizations. Denominations construct their corporate
identities in part by their policies on women, and therefore it is likely
that relevant aspects of those identities will affect the diffusion of gender
equality. Consequently, I adopt one of the analytic strategies suggested
by Strang and Meyer (1994, p. 110) by explicitly measuring two cultural
similarities among denominations that are likely to influence the diffusion
of this particular practice: whether or not a denomination is highly sacra-
mental in its theology and liturgy, and whether or not a denomination
holds biblical inerrancy as an official ideology. Although denominations
perceiving themselves as similar in these ways are likely also to be more
closely linked via memberships in common interdenominational organi-
zations, the argument here is that the two diffusion mechanisms—direct
network ties and perceived similarities—are not identical. I expect both
to influence the diffusion of gender equality among denominations.

Sacramental denominations are those—including Roman Catholics,
Episcopalians, Eastern Orthodox, and Lutherans—in which the commu-
nion ritual is not seen as a symbolic remembrance of a meal long ago; it
is believed to be a transformation of bread and wine into body and
blood.® Similarly, in more sacramental denominations, baptism is not a
ritual marking membership in a group; it is an act that itself purifies and
sanctifies an individual, literally conferring salvation. Biblically inerrant
denominations are distinguished by an official assertion that, to take the
Conservative Baptist Association as an example, the “Old and New
Testaments are regarded as the divinely inspired Word of God and are
therefore infallible and of supreme authority” (Jacquet 1989, p. 54).

In different ways, the maleness of clergy is crucial to the core identity
of both sacramental and biblically inerrant denominations. In the case
of sacramental denominations, producing valid sacraments is central to
organizational identity, and the maleness of the clergy often is seen as a
crucial ingredient to the production of valid sacraments. Thus, to tradi-
tionalists within sacramental denominations, the ontological nature of
women makes them literally incapable of producing valid sacraments. ’°
Biblical inerrancy is also a doctrine that forms part of the core organiza-
tional identity for some denominations. Moreover, it is an idea as closely
tied to the gender of biblically inerrant clergy as the production of sacra-
mental ritual is to the gender of sacramental clergy. Here, biblical texts
regarding the submission of women to men and regarding the proper
roles for women during worship are taken to preclude female clergy.

Space constraints inhibit more elaboration of the connection between
sacramentalism and biblical inerrancy on the one hand and gender in-
equality on the other hand. It is important to see, however, that the
internal logic of neither sacramentalism nor biblical inerrancy requires
excluding women from the clergy. The connection is cultural, not logical.
The reason why the literal maleness of clergy has come to be seen as
essential to sacramental ritual is not at all obvious. Mary Douglas (1992,
pp. 275-76) puts the point nicely when she adopts the persona of a
“questioner” of sacramental rejection of female clergy: “Among the fa-
mous Nuer of the Sudan a cucumber can substitute for an ox in a sacri-

fice . . . and among the Mandari a ritual that requires a red ox to be
sacrificed can be performed with a white ox if the right words are ut-
tered... . So why cannot a woman be transformed by an agreed incanta-

tion into a man?” Regarding inerrant denominations, the biblical text
is, in fact, quite ambiguous regarding women’s proper roles, and propo-
nents of women’s ordination are easily able to cite their own biblical
passages to counter the passages favored by their opponents. Thus, it is
not the case that an all-male clergy is inherent either in sacramental
theology or in the Bible. The empirical fact of these connections among
contemporary denominations raises the question: Whence the connection
between sacramentalism and biblical inerrancy on the one hand and
gender inequality on the other hand?

Unfortunately, it is impossible to address this question in this paper.'!
The key point for the present argument is simply that these connections
exist, which means that excluding women from the clergy is a way of
symbolizing commitment to a certain kind of sacramentalism, and it is
also a way of symbolizing commitment to a particular way of interpreting
the Bible. Hence, the distinction between sacramental and nonsacramen-
tal denominations and the distinction between inerrant and noninerrant
denominations represent cultural boundaries within the denominational
population that are very likely to influence the diffusion of women’s
ordination.
nation has had an autonomous women’s mission society at some point
in its history.

Centralization.—In decentralized denominations, congregations have
the authority to ordain whomever they like and otherwise run their own
affairs; in more centralized denominations, congregations are subject to
the policies of regional or national bodies. There are several reasons to
expect that decentralized denominations will ordain women earlier than
centralized denominations. Most important, decentralization means that
there will be fewer denominationwide rules of any sort governing the
behavior of congregations, leaving congregations in such denominations
with greater freedom of action. In such denominations, the presence of
only a very few women wanting to be clergy would be enough to force
the issue, as long as such women could find even one sympathetic congre-
gation. Such denominations would be expected to begin to ordain women
almost as soon as there were any women who wanted to be ordained.

Compare, for example, the experience of Clara Celeste Babcock within
the decentralized Disciples of Christ to the experience of Louisa Woosley
within the more centralized Cumberland Presbyterian Church. Babcock
began preaching in 1888. Apparently a gifted speaker, she was hired by
a congregation in Erie, Illinois, after they heard her deliver a sermon,
and she remained pastor there for 12 years, becoming the first officially
recognized female minister in this denomination (Riley 1989).

In 1887, Louisa Woosley was asked to preach at a Cumberland Presby-
terian Church in Kentucky. Another fine preacher, she was welcomed
into the pulpits of congregations in the area, and the Presbytery, the local
governing body, ordained her in 1889. In 1890, the Kentucky Synod, the
regional governing body, revoked the ordination, an action that was
ratified by the 1894 General Assembly, the national governing body.
Woosley continued to function as a minister despite being stripped of her
formal status, but it was not until 1921 that the denomination officially
declared that religious offices were equally open to males and females
(Hudson 1990; Smith 1989, p. 58).

This example illustrates the importance of organizational decentraliza-
tion to the early granting of official clergy status to women. Small num-
bers of women were attempting to preach and be ordained throughout
American religion in the last decades of the 19th century. Often, such
women could find congregations that would hire them and support their
quest for formal status within the denomination. In a relatively decentral-
ized denomination such as the Disciples of Christ, a congregation’s sup-
port was all that was needed to break the formal gender barrier within
the denomination. In more centralized denominations, by contrast,
higher-level judicatories stood in the way. The result was that small
numbers of women seeking ordination could make it happen more easily
in decentralized denominations than in centralized denominations.
There, the formal change would require more pressure. '”

This may also be understood as an example of the general process
identified by Tolbert and Zucker (1983). That is, the earliest adopters of
an organizational innovation are more likely than later adopters to be
responding to internally generated organizational problems. The presence
of women, even small numbers of women, who request clergy status can
be understood as such an organizational “problem” to which denomina-
tions have to respond. My argument about the relevance of organiza-
tional centralization is that decentralized denominations are more likely
to “solve” this problem by permitting female equality while more cen-
tralized denominations are more likely to respond by forbidding it. The
key difference is that, in more highly centralized denominations, oppo-
nents to women’s ordination had at their disposal organizational infra-
structure that could be used to block the adoption of women’s ordi-
nation. '%

Autonomous women’s missions.—A second internal organizational
variable is inspired by recent work on 19th-century women’s voluntary
organizations and their social and political influence (e.g., Freedman
1979; Scott 1991; Clemens 1993). Skocpol (1992), for example, found that
the activity of women’s groups was a key force explaining state-level
variation in the enactment of “mother’s pensions” in the early part of
the 20th century. Within American religion, women’s organizing was
most evident in the form of women’s mission societies. Virtually every
denomination formed a women’s mission society in the decades sur-
rounding the turn of the century (Beaver 1980; Gilkes 1985; Hill 1985;
Higginbotham 1993). A 1902 Centennial Survey of Foreign Missions
(Dennis 1902, pp. 9-13) lists 90 societies directly engaged in foreign mis-
sions. Of these, 42 were women’s mission societies, and most were affili-
ated with particular denominations.

However, while many denominations formed women’s mission soci-
eties and while these societies almost always raised a substantial propor-
tion of a denomination’s missions budget, denominations varied substan-
tially in the extent to which their female mission societies and boards
were organizationally autonomous. Women’s boards in some denomina-
tions were completely independent, raising their own money, sponsoring
their own missionaries, and completely controlling their organizational
lives. In other denominations, women’s societies were merely “auxil-
iary” to the denominational agencies, providing another avenue for fund-
raising but granted little say over the disbursement of funds (Beaver
1980, p. 95). Consequently, these women’s societies varied in their capac-
ity to wield financial power within the organizational structure of denom-
inations.

It seems plausible to hypothesize with Carden (1989, p. 154) that this
variation in the intradenominational organizational position of women’s
mission boards has affected the likelihood that a denomination will grant
full clergy rights to women. More autonomous women’s societies can be
expected to wield more intradenominational power, and, if they take on
women’s ordination as a cause (which they often did), they could be
expected to be effective activists. By this logic, we would expect a posi-
tive effect of autonomous women’s boards on the likelihood of a denomi-
nation granting full clergy rights to women.

There is another mechanism by which having had an autonomous
women’s mission board might lead to a greater likelihood of full clergy
rights for women. In virtually every denomination that had an autono-
mous women’s organization, these societies were incorporated into de-
nominational agency structures by the end of the first quarter of this
century. These incorporations were conflict ridden: The men running the
other denominational agencies dearly wanted the resource-rich women’s
societies more completely under the denominational umbrella, and the
women running their own mission societies often resisted those efforts to
centralize control (Beaver 1980; Hill 1985). One might suppose that these
conflicts would bring to the fore broader issues of women’s participation
in denominational life, and one might suppose further that the still pow-
erful female executives of these organizations would be active in the
cause of greater organizational participation for women. This essentially
describes the case of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, where female
executives of the newly incorporated women’s boards were in fact key
players in 1920s conflicts over women’s ordination (Boyd and Brack-
enridge 1983). Brereton and Klein (1980, p. 182) suggest that this dy-
namic was more widespread.
had clergy, some degree of national-level organization, and over 300
congregations in 1992 were identified from that year’s Yearbook of Ameri-
can and Canadian Churches. Second, denominations in this group that
were the result of mergers were traced backward in time in order to
identify their organizational precursors. These precursors were added to
the population. This procedure yielded 103 denominations.'* Enough
data to include the denomination in the analysis were collected on 100
of these denominations for a “response rate” of 97%. Figure 2 is based
on this group of 100 denominations, only some of which existed in any
given year.

Of these 100 denominations, eight were excluded from the event-
history analysis because they were the result of merger between two or
more denominations, all of which already ordained women at the time
of the merger. For example, the United Presbyterian Church in the
United States of America (UPUSA) and the Presbyterian Church in the
United States (PCUS) merged in 1983 to form the Presbyterian Church
in the USA. But both of the merging denominations already ordained
women—the UPUSA since 1956 and the PCUS since 1964. Thus, the
merger did not create a new entity at risk of beginning to ordain women,
so the new denomination is excluded from the event-history analysis. Its
precursors, of course, remain.

The event-history analysis, then, is based on 92 denominations, 44
of which ordain women by 1987, the final year of observation. Each
denomination enters the data set at its founding date and leaves when it
either begins to ordain women or merges to form another denomination.
The resulting data set includes 6,696 denomination-year combinations.

The dependent variable.—The dependent variable is a dummy vari-
able that equals “O” for every year that a denomination both exists and
does not yet grant full clergy rights to women and equals “1” for the
year in which the denomination begins to ordain women. Information
about whether or not denominations ordain women and, if they do, when
they began, was gathered from several sources. First, historical sources
and literature were searched. Second, a 1987 National Council of
Churches (NCC) survey of denominations on this issue was used.!> Third,
telephone interviews were conducted with an informant from every de-
nomination that did not respond to the NCC survey and for which no
published descriptions on this issue had been found. The purpose of these
interviews was to establish the denomination’s current policy regarding
the access of women to official positions and, in denominations that cur-
rently granted full clergy rights to women, to establish the date at which
formal equality began.

The model.—Event-history analysis focuses on the occurrence of
events or “changes of state.” The dependent variable is an unobserved
quantity called the “hazard rate,” which is the rate (per unit time) of
movement from one state to another—here, the rate at which a denomi-
nation grants full clergy rights to women. Because time in this case is
measured in one-year discrete lumps rather than continuously, I use a
discrete-time logit model. In such a model, the dependent variable (the
hazard rate) is represented as the log of the odds of experiencing the
event at any given discrete point in time. This model can be written:

log{P,;(/[1 — P;(]} = a + bx; + cz,(t),

where P;(¢) is the probability that organization 7 has the event at time ¢,
given that it is still at risk of the event at time ¢; x; is a vector of explana-
tory variables characterizing denomination i that do not vary over time;
2,(t) is a vector of explanatory variables for denomination 7 that may vary
over time; and b and ¢ are vectors of parameters giving the effects on the
hazard rate of time-constant and time-varying variables, respectively. '®
The logit model is estimated in the usual way, using maximum likelihood.

The independent variables.—Four variables measure internally gener-
ated rationalizing pressures. Whether or not a denomination is experienc-
ing clergy shortage is measured by a time-varying dummy variable that
is “1” if a denomination has fewer clergy than congregations and “0”
otherwise. Because relatively complete data on numbers of clergy are
available only as early as 1890, the 1890 value of this variable is imputed
backward for denominations existing before that date. This means that
this variable is time varying after 1890 and time constant before that.
While not ideal, this procedure makes the most use of available informa-
tion. Two checks were made to gain confidence that the coefficient re-
ported for this variable is not an artifact of this procedure. First, I
reestimated models treating this variable as missing before 1890. Results
are nearly identical. Second, I reestimated models treating this variable
as a time-constant variable that is “1” if a denomination experienced a
clergy shortage at any point in its history. In this case, the coefficient is
significantly negative; denominations ever experiencing a clergy shortage
are slower to ordain women. Whatever the meaning of this result, it does
not support the idea that denominations begin to ordain women in an
attempt to address internal personnel supply problems.
Whether or not a denomination’s constituency is largely Southern is
measured by a time-constant dummy variable that is “1” for denomina-
tions with substantial Southern constituencies and “0” otherwise.!” This
variable was constructed using a four-step process. First, data were gath-
ered on the proportion of congregations that were located in three census
regions: South Atlantic, East South Central, and West South Central.
These data were gathered at two time points: 1936 and 1990 (Religious
Bodies 1941; Bradley et al. 1992). Second, for denominations in which
a regional breakdown was available in 1990 but not in 1936, the 1936
percentage Southern was estimated using an equation obtained by re-
gressing, for denominations with nonmissing data at both time points,
the percentage of Southern congregations in 1936 on the percentage of
Southern congregations in 1990. Third, this ratio measure was dichoto-
mized at 50% Southern congregations: Denominations with more than
50% of their congregations in the South were coded “1” and denomina-
tions with fewer than or equal to 50% of their congregations in the South
were coded “0.” Fourth, denominations for which no regional break-
down was available in either 1936 or 1990 were assigned “1” or “0”
based on the location of their national denominational headquarters: “1”
if located in the South; “O” otherwise."

The extent to which a denomination has a rural constituency was
measured in the same way using the same sources. It is coded “1” if at
least 60% of a denomination’s actual or estimated 1936 congregations
were located (a) outside incorporated areas having at least 2,500 inhabit-
ants or (b) outside other political subdivisions having a total population
of at least 10,000 and a population density of at least 1,000 per square
mile. Despite changing census definitions of “rural” and despite substan-
tial movement of individuals into cities over this period, the correlation
across denominations between the percentage of congregations that are
rural in 1936 and the percentage rural in 1990 is .79. A denomination’s
racial composition is measured by a time-constant dummy variable that
is “1” for predominantly black denominations and “0” otherwise.
Three variables measure institutional pressures for gender equality em-
anating from outside the denominational field. Two time-varying dummy
variables indicate the two waves of an active women’s movement: A
variable indicating wave 1 is “1” in the years 1880-1920 and “0” other-
wise. A variable indicating wave 2 is “1” in the years 1966-1983 and
“OQ” otherwise. A time-constant variable indicates the denomination’s
founding date, which usually means the date at which a national-level
organization was formed in the United States.

Three variables measure institutional pressures emanating from within
the denominational field. A time-varying denominational network mea-
sure indicates the proportion of a denomination’s ties to prior or concur-
rent adopters of women’s ordination. Denominational networks were
defined by comembership in an interdenominational organization, such
as the National Council of Churches. These network data were developed
in five steps. First, existing interdenominational organizations were iden-
tified at 10-year intervals beginning in 1915, yielding 46 organizations.
Second, attempts were made to identify the denominations that belonged
to each interdenominational organization for each year ending in a “5”
that the interdenominational organization existed. Such information
was available for 34 of the interdenominational organizations, and it is
these 34 organizations that constitute the network. Third, this organ-
izational membership information was used to construct a set of eight
denomination-by-denomination matrices—one for 1915, one for 1925,
and so on to 1985. The cells of these matrices contained the proportion
of a row denomination’s total ties that were to a column denomination
at a given time point.’® Fourth, each matrix was multiplied by the appro-
priate member of a set of time-varying vectors which, for each denomina-
tion in each year, contained “1” if the denomination already ordained
women by that year (inclusive) and “O” otherwise. Fifth, and finally,
the entries in the product vectors from the previous step were summed.
The result is a time-varying variable giving, for each denomination in
each year, the proportion of that denomination’s interorganizational ties
that are to denominations that already have begun to ordain women.”?
The extent to which a denomination is sacramental is indicated by a
time-constant dummy variable constructed on the basis of a denomina-
tion’s religious tradition. This variable is coded “1” for Lutheran, East-
ern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Episcopalian denominations and
“O” otherwise.

Whether or not a denomination’s official position on the Bible included
inerrancy was coded from descriptions of denominational theology avail-
able in a variety of published sources. The measure is a dummy variable
where “1” indicates a denomination that explicitly states its position as
one of holding the Bible to be something more than merely “inspired” by
God.*! The distinction between inerrant and noninerrant denominations
became culturally salient only in the 1880s (Marsden 1980, p. 25). Before
that, virtually all denominations are inerrantist, so this variable is coded
“1” for all denomination-year combinations prior to 1880. After 1880,
the variable is coded either “0” or “1” depending on a denomination’s
stance toward the Bible, although it is not permitted to vary with time
after 1880.”

Finally, two variables measure internal organizational features of de-
nominations. Decentralized religious authority is measured by a time-
constant dummy variable that is “1” for denominations in which congre-
gations have complete or nearly complete autonomy to enforce religious
discipline, hire and ordain clergy, and otherwise organize their religious
activities, and is “0” for other denominations. The presence of a strong
women’s voluntary organization inside a denomination is measured by a
dummy variable that is “1” for denominations that, at any point in
their history, had an autonomous women’s mission society, and is “0”
otherwise. “Autonomous” means that the women’s organization con-
trolled how money they raised was spent. Because the earliest denomina-
tionwide women’s mission organization was founded in 1868, this vari-
able is coded “0” in every year before that date. For denominations that
did at some point have an autonomous women’s mission organization,
this variable is coded “1” beginning either at the denominational found-
ing date (if the denomination is founded after 1895) or at the founding
date of the women’s mission organization (if the denomination is founded
before 1895). The reason for this procedure is that, by 1895, having a
denominational women’s mission organization (autonomous or not) is
a well-institutionalized organizational feature of denominations, which
Results

An interpretive note is necessary before discussing the event-history re-
sults. Because these data are from an entire organizational population—
the largest U.S. Christian denominations—rather than from a random
sample of a population, it is justifiable to interpret substantively large
effects even in the absence of statistical significance. To aid interpretation
of effect magnitude, table 1 contains the antilog of each coefficient, repre-
senting the multiplicative effect of a unit change in the independent vari-
able on the odds of the hazard rate. An antilog of 2.00 or greater (or one
of .5 or lessy means that a unit change in the independent variable doubles
(or halves) the odds of a denomination beginning to ordain women in a
given year. When independent variables are coded as dummy variables,
these antilogs represent the difference in the odds of beginning to ordain
women between denominations in the two categories denoted by the
variable. It seems reasonable to consider a doubling of the odds a strong
effect, and so table 1 marks with a superscript letter a the effects that
reach this threshold. These antilogs are less easily interpretable for vari-
ables that are not dummies (i.e., founding date and ties to prior adopters).
For those variables, I will rely on statistical significance to guide interpre-
tation.

All models in table 1 include 10 dummy variables measuring the age of
each denomination. While several of these age dummies are statistically
significant, I discern no interpretable pattern in the set of coefficients,
and so they are not presented in the table. All models also include two
variables measuring historical time. One is a dummy variable that is
“1” before 1850 and “O” after that date. This variable shows a large
negative effect, which is not surprising since no denomination ordains
women before 1850.”> The other is a continuous variable that is simply
historical year. This variable was included because inspection of a set of
"SO" > d xx
‘Ol > dx
00°2 = (q)dxa 410 Os" = (q)dxe
“s[feyap a10UL 10 4X9} 94} 22g “doqs sty} Je peppe e19m

ose sa[quizea jens ay} pue aBezOYs ABIa]O ay} UO saNyeAa ZuIsstus Joy Saqelzea AuUINp asnesaq 9 = fPY ‘I Japowl UT “Japoud Yyva UT papnjoul are YTYyAr Jo [Te ‘o[qQuLTeA
qeak snonuruos & pue ‘osg] 0} Jord potied ay} 10; Aurunp & ‘saruIUINp a3e OT YIM Japoul e 0} aANeIaI aBuLYD 0} Joyal Joy pue arenbs-1y9Vy ‘] [apoul 10J—"ALON

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

0" 00" 10" 9s" “a
z £ £ 9 “2PYV
br'9 v8 LZ v8°271 OS tert tt ttsssesesecseeescceeeeccceeeeccecececcs azenbs-1y9V
O16 v6'r 46'S — HCO Leet eee teneee seca ecu eeseeee seers yueysu0Zd
2977 TS nsec AYQIDOS UOISSTUL S,UaWIOM SNouOUO;Ny
wlth Z 4488" ue “* paziyerjuaseqy
rammjonays feusayuy
20e" #x02°T — 267" #e€7T — * queiour Aypeotqig:
287" x97 T— eT" KOT tnrnntnninnerinnrnnnce ccceceneneneneeeeess ystyeyuauIeI9eS
wb lol #697 286TT 48h 7 siajdope so1id 0} sary
rorayds snorstjar Spisur Wo4JJ Seinssaid yeuorNysuy
BST #86" wh 88° 267 ee8OT eter tttenereeseccesececcasercccecececeecccceees Z OAC
ToT 10" eat 12 19T BR nnnnnrngenenn nena gue cescecereeueereeess T oAeM
ve UISTUTUIEy BAT
so't +80" sot 80° sot eeSO0) ater t EEE SEES teeetenaaeaeeueaeerececeees ayep Zurpuno,y
alo SNOISI]aI apIsyno w1oIJ samnssaid reuonninsuy
13° vt 6L" ve SLT 9s" est 09° ” Pela
et It Tar or" LOT Is OLT es” yernyy
20S" OL - why" 418° — 20S" #0L°— es” ¢9— *~ uray Nog
71 6r" eet 62° TOT To’ - 64" ETI ri rrerstnesseeeeeeeceeseecccessceeee es aBey10ys AB19{D,
:samnssaid Surziyeuoryer payeroues AyfeusoUy
(q)dxo q (q)dxa q (q)dxa q (q)dxo q
> TAGOW € TACO! 2 TAQOW | Tadow

 

 

SISATVNY AYOLSIH-LNGAY AWIL-ALAIANSIC: VY :NAWOM OL SLHORY ADYATD TINY ONILNVAD

1 ATGVL
dummy variable period effects showed that, after a large spike upward
in the period encompassing 1850, the period coefficients drop steadily
from 1850 to the present. Apparently, as time goes on and the denomina-
tions that are more likely to ordain women begin to do so, those that
remain at risk are increasingly less likely to ordain women. Thus, these
two variables seemed the most appropriate way to specify the overall
effects of historical time.”

Model 1 includes the four variables measuring aspects of denomina-
tions’ internal features that could be expected to influence the rate at
which denominations begin to ordain women if that transition reflects
denominations’ “rational” response to internal organizational problems.
Adding these four variables (plus the two missing data indicators) to the
model does not significantly improve the fit over a model with only the
age and period effects. Neither experiencing a clergy shortage, nor having
a rural constituency, nor having an African-American constituency in-
fluences the rate of adopting female ordination. Having a Southern con-
stituency, however, just misses the cutoffs and, in later models, is statisti-
cally significant. I interpret this pattern of results as support for the idea
that denominations with Southern constituencies are less likely to ordain
women than are denominations with non-Southern constituencies. This
one coefficient, however, is the only support for the view that denomina-
tional rules reflect a rational organizational response either to internally
generated problems or to constituent preferences. As noted above, this
support is ambiguous since neoinstitutionalism also would predict a cor-
relation between individual preferences and organizational rules, though
emphasizing a mechanism other than the aggregation of preferences into
formal rules.

Model 2 adds measures of externally generated pressure to ordain
women. Adding these three variables significantly improves the fit of the
model, and the coefficients are as expected, except that the years associ-
ated with first-wave feminism did not see a higher rate of adoption of
women’s ordination large enough to reach specified cutoffs. This result,
in conjunction with the consistently strong positive coefficient associated
with second-wave feminism, supports part of the argument developed
above: Second-wave feminism had a much more substantial impact on
religious organizations than did the movement’s first wave. During both
waves, however, denominations began ordaining women at rates higher
than were evident during other periods.

The statistically significant coefficient associated with organizational
founding date indicates that, as expected, more recently founded denomi-
nations adopted women’s ordination faster. Taken together, these results
support the idea that pressures coming from outside the religious
sphere—both direct political pressure from a social movement and indi-
rect normative pressure from the increasing legitimacy of gender equal-
ity—impinged on denominations’ official policies concerning women.

Model 3 significantly improves the goodness of fit by adding variables
measuring institutional pressures from inside the denominational sphere.
All three coefficients are very strong and in the expected directions. De-
nominations that are sacramentalist or biblically inerrant are much
slower to ordain women, and denominations more tied to prior ordainers
of women are themselves much more likely to begin to ordain women in
a given year. The diffusion of gender equality across denominations is
strongly influenced both by structural and by cultural divides within the
denominational world.”

Model 4 adds variables measuring aspects of organizational structure,
and this again significantly improves goodness of fit. Denominations that
had an autonomous women’s mission society at some point in their history
are more than twice as likely to begin to ordain women in a given year than
are denominations that never had an autonomous women’s group. And,
as expected, decentralized denominations are substantially more likely to
ordain women earlier than are more centralized denominations.”°

Overall, then, these results present strong support for the argument
developed earlier in the paper. While there is some empirical support for
the idea that denominations with more conservative Southern constituen-
cies resist ordaining women, none of the other indicators of internal
“problems” to which women’s ordination might be a “solution” show
any explanatory power. At the same time, there is strong empirical sup-
port for the idea that institutional pressures of various sorts strongly
influenced the diffusion of women’s ordination. The years corresponding
to second-wave feminism saw a substantially higher adoption rate than
other periods, and more recently founded denominations ordain women
sooner. Structural and cultural divides within the denominational popu-
lation show particularly strong effects on the diffusion rate: Interorgani-
zational ties to prior adopters powerfully affect diffusion, as does main-
CONCLUSION

Rather than summarize the argument, I offer, in this section, four con-
cluding comments. First, “new institutionalist” analyses tend to depict
organizational change as the inevitable result of homogenizing pressure,
occurring inexorably as faceless organizations helplessly succumb to un-
yielding environmental pressures. A consequence of this focus is that
human agency tends to drop out of the picture (DiMaggio 1988). But, of
course, there are agents, or carriers, of institutional change, and the
social location of these agents within organizations shifts over time in
nonrandom ways. This suggests that a full understanding of organiza-
tional change, even of change that is largely externally driven, requires
close attention to the internal politics of organizations.

A cursory look at the history of intradenominational conflicts over
women’s ordination reveals the intriguing fact that the organizational
location of promoters of women’s ordination shifts over time. In the
earliest period, approximately 1850 to World War I, the conflicts emerged
in response to small numbers of individual women who wanted to speak
and preach in congregations. Then, from about 1920 to about 1970,
conflicts over women’s ordination shifted to become more “top-down” in
nature. Here, conflicts about gender equality in denominations occurred
mainly among denominational elites with, as I argued above, women
mission executives being important actors. After 1970, however, the con-
flicts look more like “bottom-up” social movements. The key actors now
are female seminarians who form organizations, mobilize constituencies,
and conduct “illegitimate” actions. After 1970, efforts to win the ordina-
tion of women also often face organized countermovements. Organiza-
tional elites still are key players, but they are joined, and sometimes
overshadowed, by the “special purpose groups” now on the scene (Wuth-
now 1988).””
This change in the social basis of the conflicts has produced change in
the nature of the conflicts. Post-1970 conflicts over women’s ordination
are much more contentious, much more divisive, and much more painful
for denominations than were earlier conflicts over the issue. This shift
calls out for more attention to help us understand how conflicts over the
exact same issue—in this case, women’s ordination—can take on such
different character depending on the social location of the key actors.
Moreover, this seems an example of a diffusion process in which, some-
what counterintuitively, late adoption is much more wrenching than
early, truly innovative, adoption. It is very likely that these phenom-
ena—intraorganizational conflicts that change as the social context
changes and diffusion in which innovation is easier than late adoption—
are more general.

Second, the influx of women into seminaries after about 1970 is a
development of tremendous importance for the diffusion of women’s or-
dination. The post-1970 shift in the social location of the proponents of
women’s ordination described above is partly explained by this surging
female enrollment in seminaries, especially since that influx occurred
even in denominations that did not yet grant full equality to women.
Seminaries have served the important function of bringing together in
one place women with common interests and common grievances, and
they have provided settings for forging the social networks that are cru-
cial for mobilizing a social movement, even an intraorganizational social
movement. As such, they have been important sites for feminist activism
within American religion. But, although the increase in women’s semi-
nary enrollment is very widespread across denominations, the results of
that increase are not uniform. Women mobilized more in some denomina-
tions than in others, and, where they did mobilize, they achieved differ-
ent degrees of success in winning their goals. Studying this variation is
likely to yield insight into the ways in which a broad social movement
such as feminism variously penetrates and effects change across organiza-
tional settings. Again, the intersection of social movement and organiza-
tional change is a phenomenon more general than the case of feminism
and women’s ordination.

Third, although I have been emphasizing the loose coupling between
formal rules and practice, it would be a mistake to overstate the discon-
nection between formal rules and organizational activity. Changing the
formal rules to permit female clergy does have organizational conse-
quences beyond symbolic display to the environment. Denominations
that already ordained women by 1970, for example, experienced larger
increases in female seminary enrollment than did denominations that did
not yet grant full clergy rights to women. As a result, the functional
clergy role may be feminizing in these denominations faster than in de-
nominations that withhold formal status from women.

Perhaps more important, the presence of a formal rule permitting fe-
male clergy provides an organizational opening for those who advocate
a deeper institutionalization of gender equality within the organization.
For example, within the United Presbyterian Church, a denomination
that had ordained women since 1956, the 1970s saw the creation of new
denominational organizations (e.g., the Council on Women and the
Church), which “gave priority to assisting women in their preparation
for and placement in pastorates” (Boyd and Brackenridge 1992, p. 294).
This kind of development was very widespread in the 1970s and 1980s.
In denominations that already had formal equality, efforts toward inter-
nal change were thus concentrated on establishing and implementing a
variety of equal opportunity programs and policies rather than on forcing
changes in formal rules.

In this way, officially permitting female clergy channels conflicts over
gender equality in particular directions, not unlike the ways that legal
rules channel broader collective action into certain standard forms of
organization and tactics (McCarthy, Britt, and Wolfson 1991). The for-
mal rules granting full equality matter, but they matter more because
they present opportunities for new sorts of legitimate social action inside
the organization than because they directly govern internal practice.

Fourth, and finally, a major theme of this paper has been that the
loose coupling of formal rules and practice concerning women’s ordina-
tion indicates that these rules mainly serve as symbolic display to the
outside world. This “new institutionalist” insight has led me to empha-
size variables measuring aspects of a denomination’s environment: the
presence of active feminism, embeddedness in networks of ordainers,
embeddedness in organizational cultures that support (or resist) gender
equality. But I have not directly addressed another question: What, ex-
actly, is the cultural message contained in a denomination’s formal poli-
cies concerning female clergy? If these policies are symbols, to what do
they point?

The passage from John Stuart Mill at the beginning of this article
contains a clue. For Mill, gender equality was one part of a broader
liberal agenda associated with “progressive human society,” with “hu-
man improvement,” with “modern tendencies.” To support gender
equality was to support this larger project of modernity; to resist gender
equality was to resist that project. If this symbolic connection between
gender equality and modernity remains salient, and I believe it does,
then to resist gender equality is to resist a modernizing, liberal agenda
within which the elevation of individual rights is of paramount impor-
tance. Meyer, Bolin, and Thomas (1994, p. 25) call this agenda the
REFERENCES

Allison, Paul D. 1984. Event History Analysis: Regression for Longitudinal Data.
Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

American Association of Women Ministers. 1923. “Who Are We?” Woman’s Pulpit
(April), p. 3.

Ammerman, Nancy Tatom. 1987. Bible Believers: Fundamentalists in the Modern
World. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.

Barfoot, Charles H., and Gerald T. Sheppard. 1980. “Prophetic vs. Priestly Religion:
The Changing Role of Women Clergy in Pentecostal Churches.” Review of Reli-
gious Research 22:2-17.

Beaver, R. Pierce. 1980. American Protestant Women in World Mission: History of
the First Feminist Movement in North America, rev. ed. Grand Rapids, Mich.:
William B. Eerdmans.

Bednarowski, Mary Farrell. 1980. “Outside the Mainstream: Women’s Religion and
Women Religious Leaders in Nineteenth-Century America.” Journal of the Ameri-
can Academy of Religion 48:207-31.

Beggs, John J. 1995. “The Institutional Environment: Implications for Race and
Gender Inequality in the U.S. Labor Market.” American Sociological Review 60:
612-33.

Bendroth, Margaret L. 1984. “The Search for ‘Women’s Role’ in American Evangeli-
calism, 1930-1980.” Pp. 122-34 in Evangelicalism and Modern America, edited
by George Marsden. Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans.

. 1993. Fundamentalism and Gender, 1875 to the Present. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press.

Bliss, Kathleen. 1952. The Service and Status of Women in the Churches. London:
SCM.

Borgatti, Stephen P., M. G. Everett, and L. C. Freeman. 1992. UCINET IV. Version
1.0. Columbia, S.C.: Analytic Technologies.

Boyd, Lois A., and R. Douglas Brackenridge. 1983. Presbyterian Women in America:
Two Centuries of a Quest for Status. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood.

. 1992. “Presbyterian Women Ministers: A Historical Overview and Study of the
Current Status of Women Pastors.” Pp. 289-307 in The Pluralistic Vision: Presbyte-
rians and Mainstream Protestant Education and Leadership, edited by Milton J.
Coalter, John M. Mulder, and Louis B. Weeks. Louisville, Ky.: John Knox.

Bradley, Martin B., Norman M. Green, Jr., Dale E. Jones, Mac Lynn, and Lou
McNeil. 1992. Churches and Church Membership in the United States, 1990. At-
lanta: Glenmary Research Center.

Brasher, Brenda. 1994. “The Hand that Rocks the Cradle? Ambiguous and Articu-
lated Instances of Women’s Authority and Women’s Power in Two Christian Fund-
amentalist Congregations.” Paper presented at the Association for the Sociology of
Religion meeting, Los Angeles, August.

Brereton, Virginia Lieson, and Christa Ressmeyer Klein. 1980. “American Women
in Ministry: A History of Protestant Beginning Points.” Pp. 171-90 in Women
in American Religion, edited by Janet Wilson James. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.

Buechler, Steven M. 1990. Women’s Movements in the United States. New Bruns-
wick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.

Burt, Ronald S. 1987. “Social Contagion and Innovation: Cohesion versus Structural
Equivalence.” American Journal of Sociology 92:1287-1335.

Carden, Maren Lockwood. 1989. “The Institutionalization of Social Movements in
Voluntary Organizations.” Research in Social Movements, Conflicts, and Change
11:143-61.

Carroll, Jackson W., and Robert L. Wilson. 1980. Too Many Pastors? The Clergy
Job Market. New York: Pilgrim.

Carroll, Jackson W., Barbara Hargrove, and Adair Lummis. 1983. Women of the
Cloth: A New Opportunity for the Churches. San Francisco: Harper & Row.

Chaves, Mark. 1995. “The Symbolic Significance of Women’s Ordination.” Manu-
script. University of Notre Dame, Department of Sociology.

Clemens, Elisabeth S. 1993. “Organizational Repertoires and Institutional Change:
Women’s Groups and the Transformation of U.S. Politics, 1890-1920.” American
Journal of Sociology 98:755—98.

Coleman, James, Elihu Katz, and Herbert Menzel. 1957. “The Diffusion of an Inno-
vation among Physicians.” Sociometry 20:253-69.

Davidman, Lynn. 1991. Tradition in a Rootless World: Women Turn to Orthodox
Judaism. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Davis, Gerald. 1991. “Agents without Principles? The Spread of the Poison Pill
through the Intercorporate Network.” Administrative Science Quarterly 36:
583-613.

Davis, James A., and Tom W. Smith. 1990. General Social Surveys, 1972-1990.
Machine-readable data file. Chicago: National Opinion Research Center. Available
from the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut,
Storrs.

DeBerg, Betty A. 1990. Ungodly Women: Gender and the First Wave of American
Fundamentalism. Minneapolis: Fortress.

Dennis, James S. 1902. Centennial Survey of Foreign Missions. New York: Fleming
H. Revell.

DiMaggio, Paul. 1988. “Interest and Agency in Institutional Theory.” Pp. 3-22 in
Institutional Patterns and Organizations, edited by Lynne G. Zucker. Cambridge,
Mass.: Ballinger.

Douglas, Mary. 1992. “The Debate on Women Priests.” Pp. 271-94 in Risk and
Blame: Essays in Cultural Theory. New York: Routledge.

Field-Bibb, Jacqueline. 1991. Women towards Priesthood: Ministerial Politics and
Feminist Praxis. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Flexner, Eleanor. 1974. Century of Struggie: The Woman’s Rights Movement in the
United States. New York: Atheneum.
Freedman, Estelle. 1979. “Separatism as Strategy: Female Institution Building and
American Feminism, 1870-1930.” Feminist Studies 5:512-29.

Galaskiewicz, Joseph, and Ronald S. Burt. 1991. “Interorganization Contagion in
Corporate Philanthropy.” Administrative Science Quarterly 36:88—105.

Gilkes, Cheryl Townsend. 1985. “‘Together and in Harness’: Women’s Traditions
in the Sanctified Church.” Signs 10:678-99.

Guth, James, John C. Green, Corwin E. Smidt, and Lyman A. Kellstedt. 1994.
“Women Clergy and the Political Transformation of Mainline Protestantism.”
Paper presented at the Social Science History Association meeting, Atlanta,
October.

Hamilton, Michael S. 1993. “Women, Public Ministry, and American Fundamental-
ism, 1920-1950.” Religion and American Culture: A Journal of Interpretation 3:
171-96.

Haunschild, Pamela R. 1993. “Interorganizational Imitation: The Impact of Inter-
locks on Corporate Acquisition Activity.” Administrative Science Quarterly 38:
564-92.

Hawley, John Stratton. 1994. Fundamentalism and Gender. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. 1993. Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement
in the Black Baptist Church, 1880-1920. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

Hill, Patricia. 1985. The World Their Household: The American Woman’s Foreign
Mission Movement and Cultural Transformation, 1870-1920. Ann Arbor: Univer-
sity of Michigan Press.

Hole, Judith, and Ellen Levine. 1971. Rebirth of Feminism. New York: Quadrangle
Books.

Hudson, Mary Lin. 1990. “‘Shall Women Preach?’ Louisa Woosley and the Cumber-
land Presbyterian Church.” American Presbyterians 68:221-30.

Jacquet, Constant H., ed. 1989. Yearbook of American and Canadian Churches. Nash-
ville: Abingdon.

Jay, Nancy. 1992. Throughout Your Generations Forever: Sacrifice, Religion, and
Paternity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

King, Gail Buchwalter, ed. 1994. Fact Book on Theological Education, 1993-1994.
Pittsburgh: Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada.
Kleinman, Sherryl. 1984. Equals before God: Seminarians as Humanistic Profession-

als, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lehman, Edward C., Jr. 1980. “Patterns of Lay Resistance to Women in Ministry.”
Sociological Analysis 41:317-38.

. 1981. “Organizational Resistance to Women in Ministry.” Sociological Anal-

ysis 42:101-18.

. 1987. “Sexism, Organizational Maintenance, and Localism: A Research

Note.” Sociological Analysis 48:274-82.

. 1993. Gender and Work: The Case of the Clergy. Albany: State University of
New York Press.

Lincoln, C. Eric, and Lawrence H. Mamiya. 1990. The Black Church in the African
American Experience. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.

Lynch, John E. 1975. “The Ordination of Women: Protestant Experience in Ecumeni-
cal Perspective.” Journal of Ecumenical Studies 12:173-97.

Marsden, George M. 1980. Fundamentalism and American Culture: The Shaping
of Twentieth-Century Evangelicalism, 1870-1925. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Marsden, Peter V., and Joel Podolny. 1990. “Dynamic Analysis of Network Diffusion
Processes.” Pp. 197-214 in Social Networks through Time, edited by Jeroen Weesie
and Henk Flap. Utrecht: ISOR.
McAnarney, Elizabeth R. 1977. “The Impact of Medical Women in United States
Medical Schools.” Pp. 9-66 in Women in Medicine, 1976, edited by Carolyn
Spieler. New York: Josiah Macy, Jr., Foundation.

McCarthy, John D., David W. Britt, and Mark Wolfson. 1991. “The Institutional
Channeling of Social Movements by the State in the United States.” Research in
Social Movements, Conflicts, and Change 13:45—76.

Melton, J. Gordon, ed. 1991. The Churches Speak On: Women’s Ordination. Detroit:
Gale Research.

Meyer, John W., John Boli, and George M. Thomas. 1994. “Ontology and Rational-
ization in the Western Cultural Account.” Pp. 9-27 in Institutional Environments
and Organizations: Structural Complexity and Individualism, by W. Richard Scott,
John W. Meyer, and Associates. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

Morello, Karen Berger. 1986. The Invisible Bar: The Woman Lawyer in America,
1638 to the Present. New York: Random House.

Nason-Clark, Nancy. 1987a. “Are Women Changing the Image of Ministry? A Com-
parison of British and American Realities.” Review of Religious Research 28:
330-40.

. 1987b. “Ordaining Women as Priests: Religious vs. Sexist Explanations for
Clerical Attitudes.” Sociological Analysis 48:259-73.

Nesbitt, Paula D. 1993. “Dual Ordination Tracks: Differential Benefits and Costs
for Men and Women Clergy.” Sociology of Religion 54:13-30.

Noble, David. 1992. A World without Women: The Christian Clerical Culture of
Western Science. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Noll, William T. 1992. “A Welcome in the Ministry: The 1920 and 1924 General
Conferences Debate Clergy Rights for Women.” Methodist History 30:91-99.

Powell, Walter W., and Paul J. DiMaggio, eds. 1991. The New Institutionalism in
Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Religious Bodies. 1941. Vol. 1, 1936. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Riesebrodt, Martin. 1993. Pious Passion: The Emergence of Modern Fundamentalism
in the United States and Ivan. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.

Riley, Janet. 1989. “The Ordination of Disciple Women: A Matter of Economy or
Theology?” Encounter 50:219-31.

Rose, Susan D. 1987. “Women Warriors: The Negotiation of Gender in a Charismatic
Community.” Sociological Analysis 48:245-58.

Royle, Marjorie H. 1987. “Using Bifocals to Overcome Blindspots: The Impact of
Women on the Military and the Ministry.” Review of Religious Research 28:
341-50.

Schoenherr, Richard A., and Lawrence A. Young. 1993. Full Pews and Empty Altars:
Demographics of the Priest Shortage in United States Catholic Dioceses. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

Scott, Anne Firor. 1991. Natural Allies: Women’s Associations in American History.
Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

Scott, W. Richard, John W. Meyer, and Associates. 1994. Institutional Environments
and Organizations: Structural Complexity and Individualism. Thousand Oaks,
Calif.: Sage.

Simon, Rita J., and Pamela S. Nadell. 1995. “In the Same Voice or Is It Different?
Gender and the Clergy.” Sociology of Religion 56:63—70.

Skocpol, Theda. 1992. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of
Social Policy in the United States. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

Smith, Frank. 1989. “Petticoat Presbyterianism: A Century of Debate in American
Presbyterianism on the Issue of the Ordination of Women.” Westminster Theologi-
cal Journal 51:51—76.
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, Susan B. Anthony, and Matilda Joslyn Gage, eds. 1881.
History of Woman Suffrage. Vol. 1, 1848-1861. Rochester, N.Y.: Charles Mann.
Strang, David. 1991. “Adding Social Structure to Diffusion Models: An Event History

Framework.” Sociological Methods and Research 19:324-53.

Strang, David, and John W. Meyer. 1994. “Institutional Conditions for Diffusion.”
Pp. 100-112 in Institutional Environments and Organizations: Structural Complex-
ity and Individualism, by W. Richard Scott, John W. Meyer, and Associates.
Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

Strang, David, and Nancy Brandon Tuma. 1993. “Spatial and Temporal Heterogene-
ity in Diffusion.” American Journal of Sociology 99:614-39.

Sutton, John R., Frank Dobbin, John W. Meyer, and W. Richard Scott. 1994. “The
Legalization of the Workplace.” American Journal of Sociology 99:944-71.

Tolbert, Pamela S., and Lynne G. Zucker. 1983. “Institutional Sources of Change
in the Formal Structure of Organizations: The Diffusion of Civil Service Reform,
1880-1935.” Administrative Science Quarterly 28:22-39.

Wallace, Ruth A. 1992. They Call Her Pastor: A New Role for Catholic Women.
Albany: State University of New York Press.

Ward, Gary L. 1991. “Introductory Essay: A Survey of the Women’s Ordination
Issue.” Pp. xiii-xxxv in The Churches Speak On: Women’s Ordination, edited by
J. Gordon Melton. Detroit: Gale Research.

Wuthnow, Robert. 1988. The Restructuring of American Religion. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.

Yamaguchi, Kazuo. 1991. Event History Analysis. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

Zikmund, Barbara Brown. 1981. “The Struggle for the Right to Preach.” Pp. 193-
206 in Women and Religion in America. Vol. 1, The Nineteenth Century, edited by
Rosemary Radford Ruether and Rosemary Skinner Keller. San Francisco: Harper &
Row.

 

1986. “Winning Ordination for Women in Mainstream Protestant
Churches.” Pp. 339-50 in Women and Religion in America. Vol. 3, 1900-1968,
edited by Rosemary Radford Ruether and Rosemary Skinner Keller. San Francisco:
Harper & Row.
