The Economics of Movement Success: Business Responses to Civil Rights Mobilization
Author(s): Joseph Luders

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 111, No. 4 (January 2006), pp. 963-998
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/498632

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:40 UTC
This article explores why movements are successful in obtaining
concessions from economic actors. While social movement theorists
have suggested that economic actors weigh the costliness of protests,
the author considers the vulnerability of movement targets to both
the cost of disruptions in routine transactions and the cost of con-
ceding to movement demands. By addressing the magnitude of these
costs and their interaction, the author derives an economic oppor-
tunity structure to predict the receptivity of economic actors to
movement demands and the likely struggles among them over the
decision to yield. Also, this cost-assessment approach reveals pat-
terns of vulnerability across economic sectors to the costs of dis-
ruptive mobilization. The author tests this analysis based on case
studies of the responses of economic actors to civil rights mobili-
zation in the 1960s in five Southern localities. These cases depict
how the character of protest and variation in the configuration of
business communities defined the range of movement outcomes from
relatively swift accommodation to persistent resistance.
sufficient to bring victory are often unclear (Koopmans and Statham 1999).
Moreover, confronted with ostensibly similar circumstances favorable to
success, social actors vary in their receptivity to movement demands
(Giugni 1999)’ This variation highlights the fundamental question at
issue: What explains the responses of targets and bystanders to movement
demands? It is only by devising a theoretical account of the conditions
under which these actors choose to yield that movement success or failure
can be explained.

Recent debates about social movement outcomes underscore the need
for further theoretical development in this area (Giugni, McAdam, and
Tilly 1999). For instance, there has been considerable disagreement over
whether disruptive or violent movements are more successful than those
that are less contentious. A related dispute concerns the significance of
the broader structural context in which a movement is situated. Some
argue that general external circumstances are determinative whereas oth-
ers suggest that internal, movement-controlled variables better explain
movement outcome. In assessing both debates, Giugni (1999) concludes
that the veracity of the competing positions “varies according to the sit-
uation.” What is needed, then, is a theory of how situations and actors
differ or, put another way, an account of the factors that make certain
movement targets more or less receptive to movement demands.

Previous studies have highlighted the importance of movement-
imposed costs, but the theoretical analysis has been narrow and limited.
I propose a consideration of these costs to enhance explanations of the
responsiveness of targets to movement demands. Since a general theory
that conflates the differing costs for diverse actors runs the risk of excessive
generality, I focus here on the responses of economic actors. Extending
the logic of prior studies, I advance three main propositions: first, economic
duress is a major proximate cause behind the decision of economic actors
EXPLAINING MOVEMENT OUTCOME

A partial explanation for receptivity to movement demands appears in
the existing literature. Gamson’s (1975) finding that unruly groups with
limited goals are highly successful is suggestive. Although much is left
untheorized, Piven and Cloward (1977) argue that political or economic
actors respond to the “institutional disruptions” resulting from insurgency.*
Likewise, Tilly (1999, p. 260) argues that power holders respond to move-
ment displays of “worthiness, unity, numbers and commitment.” Tilly
indicates that these factors are salient because their increase threatens
power holders—usually state actors—with more contentious behavior if
social movement demands are ignored. Again, responsiveness follows from
the perceived costliness of prolonged disruptions to routine social, political,
and economic transactions. Similarly, McAdam (1982, p. 30) states, “In
essence, what insurgents are seeking . . . is the ability to disrupt their
opponent’s interests to such an extent that the cessation of the offending
tactic becomes a sufficient inducement to grant concessions.” Although a
relationship between cost assessments and receptivity to movement de-
mands is indicated, this line of reasoning is not extended. Since the dis-
tinctive vulnerabilities of movement targets are not explored, it is unclear
why certain tactics might give more offense than others and therefore are
more likely to trigger the granting of concessions. To comprehend this
dependence and the decision to yield, it is necessary to shift away from
a movementcentric perspective to consider more fully the reasoning be-
hind the actions of movement targets.

Building on the insights of Wilson (1961), Lipsky (1968), and Burstein
et al. (1995), I propose a cost-assessment perspective that draws attention
to the dependence of movement targets on other actors (see also Terchek
1974). Burstein et al.’s approach usefully highlights the interactions among
social movement organizations, targets, and third parties: “Essentially, the
more dependent the target is on the SMO, the more power the SMO has
over the target, and the more likely it is to succeed. A central task for
any protest group, then, is to increase the target’s dependence, directly
or indirectly” (1995, p. 293). Although the clarity of this formulation rep-
resents a theoretical advance, virtually absent from the analysis is a con-
sideration of the factors that make targets dependent and more vulnerable.
Indeed, Burstein and his coauthors bemoan the lack of research on how
target characteristics affect movement outcome. The research presented
here is meant to redress this deficiency.

From the logic embedded in these previous studies, a rudimentary hy-
pothesis emerges to serve as a starting point for theory building: actors
weigh the effects of accepting or resisting change, and they accommodate
if they regard the costs of resistance as outweighing the costs of acceptance.
What counts as a cost depends on the type of actor. For political actors
in democratic regimes, social protest might cost an officeholder electoral
support and thereby elicit concessions. Among economic actors, the focus
of this study, I suggest that perceived threats to current or anticipated
profits must be central to explanations of accommodation or intransi-
gence." For instance, in the case of the civil rights movement, the operators
of segregated lunch counters evaluated the cost of serving African-
Americans against the losses from disruptive sit-ins, picketing, white vi-
olence, and reduced local consumption. Likewise, the manufacturers of
cosmetics consider the value of animal testing against the damage from
negative publicity and boycotts.’ This proposition is not meant to be
pathbreaking; labor activists have long appreciated that threats to profits
are a useful means to stimulate concessions. Labor economists (Hicks 1932;
Ashenfelter and Johnson 1969; Kennan 1986) have likewise demonstrated
in studies of bargaining theory that employers do indeed weigh the costs
of concessions against the disruption of strikes.° Yet, from this elementary
beginning, a more sophisticated set of propositions about the factors shap-
ing these cost calculations can be devised.

Among the costs that social movement activities directly or indirectly
impose upon economic actors, two general types should be distinguished.
First, by carrying out protests, demonstrations, picketing, litigation, and
so on, social movements can disrupt regular business activity, attract
negative publicity, or impose financial penalties upon recalcitrant firms.
Movements may also enlist the assistance of third parties, including state
actors, to impose costs upon targets or bystanders. These third parties
can, for instance, withdraw investments, support boycotts, reduce fund-
ing, or impose fines. The losses resulting directly and indirectly from
movement actions will be referred to as disruption costs. Most move-
ments—including environmentalism, animal-rights activism, antinuclear
activism, gun control advocacy, and others—have used similar tactics to
generate potent disruption costs. Second, acceding to movement demands
may also harm the profits of certain firms or sectors. The actual or an-
ticipated losses resulting from movement success are designated here as
concession costs. Included in the assessment of concession costs must be
a consideration of opposition to capitulation from private third parties or
public officials. For instance, white opponents of racial equality often
threatened store owners with retaliatory boycotts if they desegregated,
and local officials sometimes warned businesses of legal harassment should
they integrate their facilities. In weighing the decision to resist or yield
to movement demands, it is assumed that economic actors consider both
disruption and concession costs.
the specific combination of disruption and concession costs, economic
actors can be expected to respond differently to social protest.

From the convergence of aggregate disruption and concession costs, I
derive an economic opportunity structure to predict the responses of spe-
cific economic actors to social movement demands as well as the general
prospects of movement success. The economic opportunity structure can
be depicted in a schematic fashion by scaling the magnitude of disruption
and concession costs into low and high, and overlapping the two dimen-
sions (see fig. 1). Doing so generates four ideal-types from which I infer
the likely responses of economic actors to their circumstances.

With a convergence of both the low cost of movement acceptance and
high exposure to losses because of movement-initiated disruptions, eco-
nomic actors in cell 1 will prefer to make concessions and act on behalf
of accommodation. It is expected that these accommodators will act before
others to advocate concessions, sway community sentiment in favor of
reform, or serve as brokers of agreements.’ For economic actors capable
of responding unilaterally to protest demands, this location in the eco-
nomic opportunity structure is the most conducive to movement success.
However, unless additional gains might be expected, this logic suggests
that vulnerable economic actors will support the smallest compromise
necessary to bring about the cessation of protests and a restoration of
normal business activity. Next, vulnerability to both the costs of move-
ment success and movement-initiated disruptions (cell 2) makes these
economic actors an anxious lot. Without the choice of low-cost compro-
mise, but desiring a means to end disruptions, these vacillators lack an
optimal response. Depending on the formidability of the movement, they
will waver between repression, perhaps in alliance with other opponents
of change, engage in dilatory tactics (e.g., conducting protracted negoti-
ations), and make nominal concessions to halt protest activities. To escape
their situation, more mobile vacillators may pursue exit as an option by
relocating their business operation. Or, to the extent that their concession
costs are high because of fears of third-party reprisals, it is possible that
vacillators will seek to outmaneuver or overcome these opponents of ca-
pitulation. Next, unaffected by either movement success or disruptions,
the relatively comfortable position of actors in cell 3 allows them to re-
spond in a manner consistent with dominant community standards; they
will thus be conformers to local sentiment.* Finally, the high cost of social
movement success and the relative insulation of the economic actors in
cell 4 will encourage them to offer durable opposition to change; hence,
they are dubbed resisters. Like other opponents to movement ambitions,
resisters are predicted to attempt to suppress movements, encourage others
to do the same (including state authorities), and thwart the actions of
accommodators. Against these adversaries, movement success is least
likely.

Although thus far the calculation of disruption and concession costs by
individual actors has been presented as relatively clear and unequivocal,
three observations should be made about the impact of the social and
cultural definition of costs upon central hypotheses of this analysis. First,
while this analysis concerns individual decision makers, collective inter-
pretation and action among economic actors is expected. In weighing the
decision to make concessions, similarly situated economic actors likely to
share their cost perceptions deliberate together and seek to act in unison
to reduce their individual exposure to interpersonal sanctions and reprisals
by the opponents of change. In addition, coordinated action reduces the
social sanctions that might be applied to individual actors opting to de-
viate from local norms. It can be expected, then, that accommodators
seek to unite into broad coalitions under the auspices of extant business
groups such as local chambers of commerce or narrower sectoral
associations.
Next, to the extent that movement demands necessitate violations of
personal or cultural norms, economic cost considerations may be less
relevant. For example, in the case of the civil rights movement, an os-
tensible accommodator might respond as a vacillator because the cultural
cost of “race mixing” is regarded as high, or a prospective resister might
capitulate unexpectedly because of the perceived fairness of movement
demands. While it is conceptually possible to treat these breaches within
a broader definition of concession costs, doing so would violate the pre-
sumption of strategic behavior among economic actors. Ultimately, the
contribution of cultural norms to the responses of economic actors to
movement demands is an empirical question. If personal values or cultural
norms are significant, then the patterns of capitulation or resistance should
regularly deviate from the expectations based principally on disruption
and concession costs. In this regard, the observation that the overwhelm-
ing majority of Southern business concerns opted to accept desegregation
rather than close is suggestive.

Finally, cost interpretations can change over time. At the outset of a
movement campaign, the general impact of public disorder upon the
broader business climate may be relatively unclear, in particular for those
economic actors that are not direct targets of movement agitation. Com-
peting cost interpretations will be offered and debated. As time passes,
however, the acquisition of new information based upon the outcomes of
local or remote disturbances may enable actors to develop revised cost
assessments. For example, following the widely reported decline in outside
investment in Little Rock, Arkansas, after the 1957 school desegregation
crisis, many economic actors elsewhere reconsidered the costs of resistance.
The turmoil in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963 further reinforced the
interpretation that racial disruptions were inimical to economic devel-
opment. Likewise, after whites evinced a willingness to eat at integrated
lunch counters or to shop in fully integrated stores, most proprietors could
abandon the fear that accepting the civil rights agenda meant financial
disaster. The position of actors in the economic opportunity structure is
not fixed, but may shift as cost assessments are revised based on new
information during a cycle of protest. If the apparent concession costs
decline, vacillators might be expected to move toward accommodation.
Thus, an explanation of the behavior of economic actors must be sensitive
to the impact of cultural norms upon cost assessment as well as the chang-
ing interpretations of cost over time among individual decision makers
during a broader cycle of protest.
SECTORAL VARIATION IN COST EXPOSURE

Various studies demonstrate that the characteristics of economic sectors
shape the processes of democratic transitions, strike outcome, economic
development, and even the likelihood of civil wars (Shafer 1994; Card
and Olson 1995; Paige 1997; Ross 1999; Boix 2003). Following a similar
logic, a cost-assessment perspective also provides a basis for speculation
about variation in the vulnerability of specific types of enterprises to
disruption costs. For violent, revolutionary movements intent on sup-
planting the economic order, it is not surprising that the universal threat
posed to all eliminates most subtle distinctions among economic actors.
However, distinctions can be made for the more common situations found
in modern democratic polities in which reformist movements engage in
nonviolent protests, demonstrations, boycotts, picketing, and similar
forms of disruptive behavior. Under these more typical circumstances,
economic interests dependent on local consumption are especially vul-
nerable as consumers shy away from the sites of contention. Local con-
sumers might change their behavior to honor a boycott or to avoid ha-
rassment by picketers or boycotters, or they may refrain from consumption
because of anticipated inconvenience (e.g., extra traffic, crowds, etc.) or
violence. Thus, the interests most vulnerable to the disruption costs of
standard protest activities include retail merchants, hoteliers, restaura-
teurs, and tourist-related businesses. Similarly, the prospective profits of
interests reliant on local growth likewise suffer from protest activities that
attract negative publicity, frighten away new investment, and discourage
in-migration. These interests may include local financial institutions, real
estate brokers, developers, utilities, and various service-sector enterprises.
In general, then, relatively immobile, locally oriented, consumption- and
growth-dependent sectors are more susceptible to disruptions in routine
spending and investment behavior, and thus are more vulnerable to dis-
ruption costs. Although not necessarily troubled by local disorder, similarly
exposed to boycotts or reputational damage are makers of brand-name
products selling in consumer markets and national chain stores or
franchises.

By contrast, other interests are more insulated from disruption costs.
Although demonstrations, protests, boycotts, and pickets may be sufficient
to dampen ordinary consumption and local growth, they are less effective
at interrupting manufacturing processes unless the employees of the tar-
geted enterprises are rendered unwilling or unable to execute their routine
tasks (e.g., the sabotage of machinery, a strike among industrial workers,
etc.). Shielded from external disruption as well are those enterprises in
uncompetitive, high-demand markets (such as operators of key transpor-
tation nodes) and those selling undifferentiated goods or services in high-
demand nonlocal markets (e.g., petroleum).’ Also, economic actors that
do not depend on continued local growth or attracting new investment
such as those relying on prior capital investments—including heavy man-
ufacture, mineral extraction, and refining—may be less vulnerable to pro-
test activity.’ These more insulated economic actors either conform to
local custom or resist movement demands depending on the cost of of-
fering concessions. While this sketch is not exhaustive, these hypotheses
hint at distinctive patterns of sectoral vulnerability to disruption costs.

These general patterns of vulnerability also clarify the relationship be-
tween countermovements and concession costs. Like movements, coun-
termovements can exploit the same sectoral vulnerabilities to disrupt busi-
ness operations and raise the cost of conceding to movement demands.
Whereas interests insulated from movement disruptions will be similarly
untroubled by countermovement interference, those interests vulnerable
to disruption costs find themselves comparably exposed to greater con-
cession costs. A notable impact that countermovements have upon the
responses of economic actors to movement demands is the amplification
of concession costs to push prospective accommodators toward vacillation.

Although attention to the sectoral patterns of cost exposure should be
useful in clarifying the responsiveness of economic actors to movement
demands, cultural and political factors can complicate these predictions.
As noted above, fervent cultural commitments might induce vulnerable
or insulated actors to respond to movement demands in a manner incon-
sistent with their economic interests. State action that affects only certain
economic interests and not others, or that enables movements to inflict
costs upon actors otherwise insulated from disruption, can likewise in-
troduce variation in disruption cost exposure that is unrelated to sectoral
characteristics. An adequate account of movement success must be at-
tentive to how these cultural or governmental factors may affect the mag-
nitude of disruption costs in a manner inconsistent with predictions based
on sectoral vulnerabilities.

Using these predictions for receptivity to movement demands, this anal-
ysis has the potential to enhance explanations of movement outcomes in
several ways. Depending on the location of discrete actors within the
economic opportunity structure and their ability to offer unilateral redress
CIVIL RIGHTS AND SOUTHERN BUSINESS

To assess the merit of the hypotheses above, I consider the responses of
economic actors to Southern civil rights mobilization in five localities
during the 1960s. Although discrete economic actors are the units of anal-
ysis, local case studies are used for three reasons. First, since the behavior
of countermovements, other economic interests, and public officials can
affect the magnitude of both disruption and concession costs, economic
actors cannot be easily abstracted from their specific context without
omitting relevant considerations. Second, if a movement expands the
scope of conflict as suggested by Schattschneider (1960), additional actors
beyond the immediate targets may be drawn into the fray, and their
behavior, too, helps to substantiate the theoretical approach presented
here. To the extent that movement protests generate broader economic
disruptions, interests unharmed at the outset might become accommo-
dators urging conciliation. Also instructive is the constellation of actors
that continues to oppose the movement, and those that linger on the
sidelines as bystanders. Thus, an analysis that considers multiple interests
within a single locality can provide a more robust test of the hypotheses
about the relationship between cost assessments and responsiveness to
movement agitation as well as sectoral variation in cost exposure. Finally,
case studies are used because they can be sufficiently fine grained to
demonstrate the central hypotheses of this analysis: the perception of
financial duress is a major factor causing economic actors to support
concessions to movement demands; the variation in the behavior among
these actors is consistent with the predictions based upon their assessment
of aggregate disruption and concession costs (their position in the economic
opportunity structure); and economic interests in certain sectors are con-
sistently more likely to accept, ignore, or resist movement demands than
others.

Applied to this reform movement, a cost-assessment approach predicts
a set of responses based upon the specification of the impact of both
disruption and concession costs on local business enterprises. For the vast
majority of Southern economic actors, the cost of accepting the move-
ment’s principal goal of racial integration was low (Bloom 1987). Among
local consumption and most service-sector businesses, the magnitude of
the concession costs depended on the willingness of whites to continue to
patronize their establishments. Unless white bystanders or customers ac-
tively oppose integration, it is predicted that these vulnerable economic
actors will behave as accommodators and yield as disruption costs rise.
White countermobilization against integration will raise concession costs
and place these enterprises in the position of vacillators, as they cannot
integrate without incurring the wrath of organized whites, nor can they
refuse to do so as long as costly movement disruptions continue. Under
these conditions, repression, waffling, and temporizing are expected. In-
sulated from the costs of movement disruption, the preferences of man-
ufacturing interests likely varied depending upon local labor market con-
ditions. Whereas those that benefited from racially split labor markets to
keep overall labor costs down (Bonacich 1972) can be expected to behave
as resisters, manufacturing employers that did not benefit substantially
from these racial divisions are predicted to conform to dominant local
customs and remain indifferent to negotiations. Finally, for local interests
tied to labor-intensive agriculture and dependent upon black labor, racial
integration represented a broader threat, and strong resistance is expected.
Yet even for plantation interests, the swiftness of agricultural mechani-
zation and spread of the use of herbicides during this period was eroding
the economic imperatives for movement opposition (Payne 1995). Thus,
except for those agricultural localities where resisters continued to flourish,
differing combinations of accommodators, vacillators, and conformers
populated most Southern communities.

From a cost-assessment perspective, successful civil rights agitation
depended on the strategic targeting of vulnerable interests and imposing
sufficient economic burdens upon them. These accommodators might be
targeted not only to make unilateral concessions but also to push for a
negotiated settlement over potential opposition of other actors. Other
movement strategies might include increasing the magnitude of disruption
costs to shift conformers toward accommodation. Along these lines, ef-
fective mobilization may involve enlisting the support of national state
authorities or other third parties to intervene in a manner that modifies
the cost assessments of adversaries or bystanders. Conversely, both poor
target selection and the use of tactics that do not impose sufficient dis-
ruption costs upon targets reduce a movement’s prospects for success.

Drawing upon the many rich sources on the movement, I sketch the
interests and vulnerabilities of the key actors in each of the five cases.
Next, I describe movement activities as well as countermobilization in
these localities to estimate the magnitude of disruption and concession
costs for various economic actors. Finally, I document the responses of
local economic actors to civil rights mobilization and survey the evidence
for the proposed relationship between their cost assessments and respon-
siveness to movement demands. The cases—Greensboro, North Carolina;
New Orleans, Louisiana; Albany, Georgia; Birmingham, Alabama; and
Greenwood, Mississippi—were selected to capture variation in the ex-
posure of economic actors to disruption and concession costs.

The success against downtown merchants in Greensboro may be re-
garded as a case in which movement activists hit vulnerable interests with
severe disruption costs, and other insulated enterprises with low conces-
sion costs offered no opposition. By contrast, the initial sit-in movement
against local merchants in New Orleans faltered because of the inability
to impose potent disruption costs and third-party mobilization against
capitulation. The next agitation phase to integrate downtown facilities
benefited from the simultaneous federal judicial intervention to compel
public school desegregation, which generated massive tumult, negative
publicity, and a broader economic disruption. This combination of height-
ened civil rights protests and disorders stemming from school desegre-
gation placed not only merchants but also many other vulnerable interests
in tourism, real estate, services, development, and banking in the position
of reluctant accommodators. The civil rights defeat in Albany demon-
strates the simple point that strategic decisions matter. Whereas in New
Orleans, targeted and general disruptions brought victory, the movement’s
irregular and diffuse protests against downtown businesses in Albany
were insufficient to produce serious economic distress and ultimately led
to defeat. Other tactical mistakes and the general lack of exposure to
serious disruption costs encouraged economic interests to conform during
months of protest. Taking stock of the setback in Albany, movement
activists tried something different in Birmingham. Instead of concen-
trating on public officials, the movement targeted specific downtown busi-
nesses and enlisted the unwitting assistance of the intemperate chief of
local law enforcement to produce massive disorders and correspondingly
broad disruption costs. Although segregationist countermobilization and
resistance from the steel interests produced initial vacillation, the rapid
Greensboro, North Carolina

As a bustling center for textile manufacture and insurance, major eco-
nomic actors in Greensboro had neither a compelling interest in the de-
fense of Jim Crow nor considerable exposure to the disruption costs of
civil rights protests. Consequently, it is anticipated that these interests
will largely conform to dominant local customs. Downtown merchants
and other consumption-dependent enterprises are predicted to be vul-
nerable to protest events. Coupled with the weakness of Greensboro seg-
regationists and their inability to heighten concession costs, these vul-
nerable interests should behave as accommodators.

In this context, on February 1, 1960, four African-American college
students began a sit-in campaign to desegregate the downtown commer-
cial facilities. Despite the exposure of these businesses, lacking prior ex-
perience with the costs of this form of protest, downtown merchants
initially feared that integration “would lead to a major loss of profits and
disaffection of white customers” (Chafe 1980, p. 93). The merchants vac-
illated and, with protests suspended during the negotiation process, they
refused the April recommendations of a biracial committee for a trial
period of integration (Vew York Times, April 6, 1960). After protests re-
sumed and an economic boycott was instituted, however, these same in-
terests quickly relented. Woolworth’s managers estimated that protest
New Orleans, Louisiana

At the junction of the Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico, New
Orleans served as a major transportation node for the region. In addition,
petroleum refining, petrochemical production, natural gas industries, and
tourism contributed to the city’s economic base. None of these sectors
depended on Jim Crow for economic prosperity, and all but tourism were
insulated from the disruption costs that movements might impose. Not
only were industrial and shipping interests shielded from disruptions in
production processes, but they also lacked motivation to act as “boosters”
seeking out new investment. This combination of low vulnerability to
disruption costs and low concession costs vested key economic actors with
the capacity to conform to the dominant Jim Crow heritage and to remain
indifferent to the costs of racial turmoil. The exposure of the tourism
sector, downtown consumption interests, and a few progrowth boosters
provided civil rights activists with a weakness, but unlike Greensboro,
segregationist organizations exerted considerable leverage and had the
capacity to push prospective accommodators toward vacillation. The com-
bination of conformers and vacillators foreshadows a response not so
much of intense resistance as indecision, drift, and fecklessness.

With the onset of the 1960 sit-in movement in March, local economic
interests responded with indifference, abdicated a leadership role, and
ceded control over the local response to organized segregationists. Con-
sistent with predictions, these segregationist organizations emerged pri-
marily from the 22 parishes (counties) most committed to labor-intensive
cotton agriculture (McMillen 1971, p. 63)."’ Without any organized de-
mands for moderation, local authorities responded to student protests
against segregated seating arrangements and employment discrimination
with expulsion, fines, arrest, and imprisonment. At the urging of segre-
gationist organizations and members of the legislature, Governor Davis
introduced a set of “law and order” bills to further reinforce the legal
resources available to punish demonstrators (McCarrick 1964). The small-
scale pickets and sit-ins in 1960 generated enthusiasm, but the activities
of this fledgling chapter of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) failed
to operate at a scale sufficient to harm local merchants. At the close of
1960, as local merchants in other states desegregated their lunch counters,
the sit-in movement in New Orleans ended in failure (Oppenheimer 1989).
For those seeking to desegregate downtown facilities, the integration
of two public schools in November by federal court order was fortuitous
because it was far more disruptive to the city economy. This supportive
federal action, which was not aimed at particular economic actors but
instead at the local educational authorities, provoked a severe backlash.
The White Citizens’ Council promptly held a rally during which segre-
gationists called on the audience of five thousand to boycott the schools
and march on the offices of the school board to protest the board’s com-
pliance with the order (Keesing’s Research Reports 1970, p. 74). The next
day, thousands of whites walked through the downtown, passing through
the state supreme court, city hall, the federal courts, and the board of
education building. Later, the demonstration arrived in the business dis-
trict and there deteriorated into a riot in which whites made unprovoked
attacks upon blacks. After African-Americans began to fight back, law
enforcement intervened. Taking up the call to boycott the school, a crowd
of white women, who came to be known as the “cheerleaders,” gathered
to scream at and shove all who dared to enter. Verbal intimidation and
disorder around the school persisted for the entire academic year without
public officials offering any serious attempt to disperse the segregationists
despite national and international publicity of this horrific racial hatred
(Bartley [1969] 1999, p. 337). On the contrary, the city’s mayor refused
to intervene for the sake of protecting civil rights or quelling the public
disorders wrought by the segregationists (McCarrick 1964, p. 202).
These events are striking because they deviate from the conventional
expectation that disruptions in public order or negative publicity auto-
matically compelled Southern economic actors to capitulate to movement
demands (Ashmore 1958; Bloom 1987). Whereas in cities like Greensboro,
Atlanta, Dallas, and elsewhere, business fears about the economic con-
sequences of racial disturbances had prompted relatively rapid calls for
moderation or even advance preparation for integration, New Orleans
business leaders refused to accept any such leadership role for over a year.

Explanations for this lack of leadership in New Orleans typically high-
light the greater “traditionalism” of the New Orleans elite (Inger 1969).
Inger goes on to describe the New Orleans elite as closed, insular, and
uninterested in attracting new investment or engagement in civic affairs.
Likewise, Fairclough claims that “the city’s leaders did not fail to head
off the crisis simply through miscalculation or lack of nerve... . One
can argue that they indeed were more prejudiced than their counterparts
in more ‘progressive’ cities” (Fairclough 1995, pp. 261-62). Lacking guid-
ance from moderate business leaders, vehement organized segregationists
were capable of directing the local response toward intransigence and
tolerance for anti—civil rights disorders. Yet little evidence is offered to
demonstrate that New Orleans elites were more traditional than else-
where, and since similarly traditional elites capitulated to the civil rights
movement in other cities, something more is necessary.

A cost-assessment explanation of this unwillingness to act draws at-
tention to the exposure of economic actors to the costs of protest and
movement success. As indicated above, from this perspective, the con-
stituent elements of the “New Orleans elite” is perhaps less distinctive for
their traditionalism than for their peculiar insulation from both disruption
and concession costs of civil rights mobilization. The fundamental im-
portance of the port and shipping in New Orleans economy, the relative
insulation of these sectors from the costs of racial unrest, and the lack of
interest in attracting new investment allowed for disinterest in racial
equality. The major industries based on the extraction and processing of
natural resources (petroleum and natural gas) were similarly shielded.
With a strong market position, local and absentee owners or managers
of these firms had less reason to worry about the negative effects of racial
contention on routine economic transactions. Cobb (1988, p. 66) identifies
both New Orleans and Birmingham as cities “whose well-developed heavy
industrial base helped to make its Big Mule leadership less interested in
further growth.” Finally, the common description of these actors as “old
money” implies fortunes less dependent on robust local economic
development.

Since this ensemble of interests lacked compelling economic imperatives
to organize for the defense of Jim Crow institutions, a cost-assessment
analysis accounts for conformity to dominant community preferences.
Economic development, then, does not necessarily prompt local elites to
embrace liberal or democratic values; instead, certain forms of develop-
ment permit continued support of institutions and practices hostile to
these currents. The opposition to racial equality among these actors should
not be regarded simply as an expression of their traditionalism, but as
evidence of their unusual isolation from the disruption costs that precip-
itate moderation, as well as of the strength of segregationist mobilization.

Other business interests in New Orleans, however, suffered from the
costs of public disorders. Consistent with predictions, tourism and down-
town business activity fell with the escalation in black protest and press
coverage of contentious white countermobilization against school inte-
gration. By the end of 1960, these disruptions reportedly reduced sales at
the large department stores by as much as 40%, hotel and restaurant
business was down 20%, and other tourist-dependent interests were like-
wise feeling hardship (Inger 1969, pp. 61-62). Against the backdrop of
public school disorders, CORE’s 1961 resumption of sit-ins and picketing
in the downtown shopping section only intensified the financial pain of
resistance.

After the disastrous tumult of the 1960-61 academic year and amid
ongoing protests, these vulnerable economic actors in particular began to
show greater interest in accommodation. As Rogers notes (1993, p. 85),
“the events of 1960-1961 had made the city’s white economic elites ex-
tremely sensitive to the costs of racial disruption.” With the economic
situation worsening in early 1962, a representative of the Chamber of
Commerce implored Harry Kelleher, a respected corporate lawyer, to ne-
gotiate a compromise with black representatives. Major bankers likewise
supported action to head off further disruption. Describing the impetus
for this action, Kelleher (SIER 1997) observed, “The specter of economic
pressure certainly tipped the scales in favor of affirmative action.” At the
same time, fear of economic reprisals instigated by the Citizens’ Council
produced secrecy, hesitation, and delay, and discouraged overt support
for accommodation. Finally, after a visit from Martin Luther King, Jr.,
in late 1962, rising concern about strengthened sit-ins, pickets, and a
tightened boycott prompted downtown merchants finally and very quietly
to desegregate their lunch counters, toilets, and water fountains in Sep-
tember—two years after the onset of protests (Fairclough 1995, p. 284).”
Albany, Georgia

Situated in southwestern Georgia amid the vestiges of the Old South,
Albany served as a processing and transportation center for local agri-
cultural products such as cotton, pecans, corn, and peanuts. Light industry
and wholesale and retail enterprises also made up the core of the local
economy. Since few economic actors continued to depend on subordination
of black labor, most interests are predicted to conform to local Jim Crow
traditions. Downtown consumption and growth-dependent interests can
be expected to yield amid mounting protest. Also, the lack of strong
segregationist organization in Albany meant that local interests had less
fear of white reprisals. In some ways, then, Albany resembled Greensboro,
but the outcome of civil rights activity was markedly different.

Protests began in the late fall of 1961 and stretched into August 1962.
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) organizers arrived
in the summer of 1961 to begin a broad campaign against “all forms of
racial domination in Albany” (Morris 1984, p. 241). Although relations
between SNCC and the local chapter of the NAACP and other organi-
zations were tense, local activists formed the Albany Movement to bring
together and coordinate the competing elements. Attempts to integrate
the Albany bus terminal and train station resulted in the arrest of the
participants. To protest these arrests, hundreds marched to city hall and
were likewise arrested. Martin Luther King, Jr., and his organization, the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), joined the movement
in mid-December, at which time 500 people languished in jail. His arrest
generated a rush of enthusiasm, but his swift release two days later fol-
lowing a hollow truce confused and dispirited many. In January 1962,
SNCC launched a bus boycott that, three weeks later, resulted in the
closure of the bus line (Williams 1987, p. 171). Sporadic sit-ins were
staged in the early months of the year, and a general boycott of white
merchants was intensified in March. Further protest marches followed,
frequently targeting city hall and always resulting in mass arrests. During
these protests, police chief Laurie Pritchett made certain that the jails had
ample capacity for further arrests and that the police applied local laws
without resort to brutality or violence. After many months of agitation
and mass jailing, the movement floundered without achieving the inte-
gration of the city’s facilities.

Unlike the early explanations of this defeat, which pointed to squabbles
within the movement and poor planning, more recent commentary em-
phasizes Pritchett’s use of nonviolent, legal strategies of repression
(McAdam 1982; Barkan 1984). McAdam argues that Pritchett’s strategy
of repression denied civil rights activists the violent clashes with suprem-
acists that were necessary to compel federal action. Unable to provoke
the white violence necessary to cause federal intervention, “insurgents
lacked the leverage to achieve anything more than a standoff with the
local supremacist forces in Albany” (McAdam 1982, p. 177). Absent violent
countermovement reprisals to trigger federal intervention—McAdam’s
“critical dynamic”—he suggests that the movement failed because of in-
sufficient leverage. Barkan, too, points to Pritchett’s effective use of le-
galistic forms of repression, but Barkan’s analysis suggests a resource-
depletion hypothesis. The costs of fines, bail, legal representation, and
lower movement morale resulting from harassment arrests and incarcer-
ation, Barkan argues, drained resources and thus administered the “de-
cisive blow” against the Albany Movement. While valid, both accounts
overlook a key component in the explanation of the defeat: the inability
of the movement to impose substantial costs upon vulnerable local actors.

The cost-assessment hypothesis refines McAdam’s and Barkan’s in-
vestigations of the Albany defeat in several ways. First, this analysis
clarifies how the federal government contributes to “movement leverage.”
Although McAdam does not elaborate upon the concept of movement
leverage below the national level, this analysis indicates that federal sup-
port transforms the cost calculations of movement opponents. Federal
intervention not only involves the obvious use of coercive capacity; the
central state can also impose fines and penalties and necessitate costly
litigation or withhold valued expenditures. Movement opponents must
consider whether or not these added costs outweigh the benefits of con-
tinued resistance. Second, absent federal involvement, a cost-assessment
analysis suggests that the task of imposing costs upon local actors fell
solely upon the movement and the tactical ingenuity of the activists. In
contrast to McAdam, who appears to assume that the movement was
incapable of victory in Albany without federal intervention, this approach
suggests instead that closer attention to the effect of movement tactics
upon local actors is necessary.

A cost-assessment approach implies that an optimal movement strategy
must involve selecting the proper targets (who are both vulnerable and
potentially amenable to making concessions) and then mounting a serious
and sustained disruption of their operations. In identifying the best targets
and generating disruption costs, Albany Movement leaders made a series
of tactical mistakes. The erratic choice of targets and the general lack of
focus made the effective imposition of disruption costs virtually impos-
sible. This interpretation echoes King’s own assessment and others who
have suggested that the disparate goals “spread the Movement too thinly”
(Barkan 1984, p. 557).

In particular, to the extent that movement leaders fixed upon any target,
they chose the wrong one: elected officials. Members of the city govern-
ment had few reasons for entering into good-faith negotiations or making
substantive concessions. Lacking a strident clamor from vulnerable eco-
nomic actors, federal coercion, or a plausible threat of political reprisals,
these officials had many reasons to resist capitulation. Thus the move-
ment’s irregular targeting of city officials wasted precious resources bailing
out and defending those who marched to and demonstrated in front of
city hall. Relatively few direct action events disrupted business operations
and, to the extent that they were tried, they were uncoordinated with
other efforts and used only after the movement was already reeling from
prior setbacks. As Lewis notes (1970, p. 155), the boycott “pained. . .
but did not seriously cripple the merchants.” Had the many hundreds
who were arrested in large demonstrations before city hall targeted those
likely to be accommodators, the outcome of the Albany Movement might
have been substantially different even without federal intervention.

Indeed, King ultimately arrived at strikingly similar conclusions about
the failure of the Albany Movement. Summing up King’s analysis, Garrow
states that the Albany Movement would have been more successful “if
the movement had targeted Albany’s business leaders, rather than the
city’s elected officials. The boycott of downtown stores had been an ef-
fective but limited tactic, King decided, because the movement’s direct
action efforts had not been combined with the boycott so as to inflict a
maximum penalty upon those business leaders” (Garrow 1986, p. 226).
King likewise argued that the marches to city hall were misplaced. Instead,
he suggested that, because of the political weakness of blacks in Albany,
the marches should have been directed at “the businesses in the city”
because “the political power structure listens to the economic power struc-
ture” (King quoted in Garrow 1986, p. 226). While Pritchett’s strategies
Birmingham, Alabama

As the “the Pittsburgh of the South,” Birmingham’s iron and steel interests
dominated this industrial city. The local managers and owners of these
enterprises supported Jim Crow as a means of keeping wages low, and
they opposed efforts to attract new industry to Birmingham, as this was
thought to increase the competition for workers and raise labor costs.
These industrialists had supported the election of the notorious T. Eugene
“Bull” Connor in the 1930s to the city commission “to crush the Com-
munist-integrationist menace” represented by the Congress of Industrial
Organizations (Thornton 1991, p. 47). Absentee ownership of the United
States Steel Corporation and its subsidiaries, which overshadowed the
urban political economy, further reduced the potential for indigenous re-
form leadership. These interests, unconcerned about attracting external
investment and shielded from the disruptions of movement agitation,
lacked incentives to bargain or compromise. Along with the backing of
working-class whites, these sectoral interests bolstered local resistance to
racial equality and refused the path of moderation.

While iron and steel interests benefited from sectoral insulation, other
actors were far less sheltered, and movement activists appreciated this
weakness (McWhorter 2001). As elsewhere, a worsening racial situation
caused growing concern among consumer and service interests, and it
was from these sectors that opposition to the likes of Bull Connor even-
tually coalesced (Eskew 1997). These interests, concentrated in real estate,
services, and downtown consumption, sought to expand and diversify the
city’s economic base. Sidney Smyer, a real-estate executive and former
head of the local Chamber of Commerce, organized the successful political
drive to change the structure of city government in an indirect move to
unseat reactionary elements like Connor. After Connor lost the 1963 elec-
tion, he, along with the other city commissioners, refused to step down;
consequently, for several months, the city had two separate governments
representing differing economic elite factions. As Bartley explains (1995,
pp. 332-33), “The basic rift was between the iron aristocracy, which iden-
tified segregation with low wages and a docile work force, and service-
sector businessmen, whose goals were economic growth and maximizing
of real estate values.”
The rise of mass protest in 1963 widened this split. As demonstrations,
boycotts, and general disorder continued from April through May, graphic
incidents of police repression drew enormous negative publicity and cost
downtown retailers an estimated weekly loss of $750,000." Continued
disorder, the trade association of the merchants concluded, “would have
a drastic and far-reaching economic effect on the metropolitan area”
(McWhorter 2001, p. 268). Having learned from the defeat in Albany,
King explained that these economic consequences were deliberate: “You
don’t win against a political power structure where you don’t have the
votes. But you can win against an economic power structure when you
have the economic power to make the difference between a merchant’s
profit and loss” (King quoted in Bloom 1987, p. 174). Even as regular
operations for iron and steel interests continued, the racial crisis engulfing
the city devastated downtown commercial activity.

After hesitating because of fear of white reprisals, deteriorating eco-
nomic conditions eventually compelled beleaguered merchants to agree
to a settlement on the condition that the city’s economic leadership pub-
licly support the agreement (Eskew 1997; Morris 1993). Although steel
interests resisted concessions, a committee of economic elites eventually
endorsed the agreement that accepted the movement’s principal demands:
the desegregation of various downtown facilities, the hiring of more blacks
in nonmenial positions, job promotions for blacks, the release of jailed
demonstrators, and the creation of a biracial committee to continue dis-
cussions. With the endorsement of a major faction of the city’s economic
leadership and additional disruptive protests to compel compliance, vac-
illating interests reduced their exposure to concession costs and charted
a jagged course to a position of accommodation.

The Birmingham case corroborates key elements of the cost-assessment
logic. Iron and steel manufacturers, being insulated from disruption costs,
behaved principally as resisters opposed to concessions. Also, after initial
vacillation, downtown merchants, service, and real-estate interests, among
others, rebelled against these resisters and shifted toward accommodation
to negotiate an agreement under as much collective cover as possible. The
accommodators were, as predicted, clustered in those sectors that were
most sensitive to disruption costs, most eager to promote local growth,
and lacking an economic interest in defending segregation. Lastly, the fate
of the Birmingham struggle demonstrated the value of targeting vulner-
able interests with severe disruption.
Greenwood, Mississippi

While the dramatic clashes in Birmingham are widely remembered, a
band of dedicated activists and their supporters encountered strong op-
position in Greenwood. Situated in Leflore County at the edge of the vast
plantations of the Delta, Greenwood served as a major center for the
cultivation and trading of cotton. With Delta planters dependent upon
cheap black agricultural labor, the civil rights movement potentially posed
a fundamental challenge to these economic interests. At the same time,
however, the mechanization of cotton agriculture was rapidly reducing
the demand for farm labor. In 1954, the year of the Brown v. Board of
Education decision, over 85% of the cotton harvest in Mississippi was
still picked by hand, and therefore, the concession costs of the nascent
civil rights movement were initially quite high, but by 1965, the proportion
of the cotton crop picked by hand had plummeted to only about 25%
(Wright 1991, p. 182). Thus, concession costs were declining swiftly in
this period as planters became far less dependent upon African-American
agricultural workers. On the other side, declining dependence on black
labor and the corresponding economic vulnerability of tenant farmers and
sharecroppers meant that the local movement was unable to impose dis-
ruption costs upon planters to coerce capitulation.'* This convergence of
factors predicts resistance from plantation interests that declines in fervor
as agricultural mechanization shifts their position from staunch resisters
to conformers. As elsewhere, downtown merchants, especially in a city
with a large black population, were vulnerable to disruption costs. To the
extent that organized white resistance elevated the costs of conceding to
movement demands, vacillation can be expected. With this mixture of
resisters and vacillators, movement success depended upon external in-
tervention or a weakening of resistance among the opponents to change
based upon declining concession costs.

Consistent with these expectations, Greenwood economic actors resisted
change at the outset, indeed long before protests even began. In the wake
of the 1954 Brown decision, local planters and their allies enthusiastically
organized a chapter of the segregationist White Citizens’ Council, which
later served as state headquarters in the 1960s."° Nor was this pattern

exceptional among plantation counties. Across the South, it was in those
localities most dependent on labor-intensive agriculture that the Citizens’
Council found the greatest support and where the defense of white su-
premacy was most entrenched (McMillen 1971; James 1988). As a Mis-
sissippi Councilor candidly explained: “The NAACP’s motto is ‘The Ne-
gro shall be free by 1963’—and shall we accept that? We can’t have it,
for if we do, it would ruin the economic system of the South. The men
of the South are either for our council or against it. There can be no fence
straddling” (Vander Zanden 1965, p. 28). Often depicted as the upper-
class variant of the Ku Klux Klan, the council relied upon more sophis-
ticated modes of coercion. Whereas Klansmen resorted to private violence,
Councilors used their influence over local livelihoods and law enforcement
as weapons against agitators and to keep whites in line.'’ In the years
after Brown, such threats of economic reprisal against those involved in
civil rights activities were especially common in plantation counties (Vew
York Times, April 9, 1955). Further bolstering planter political leverage
in Greenwood was the election of Charles Sampson as mayor in 1957, a
Citizens’ Council member and representative of plantation interests
(Payne 1995, p. 135). Thus, SNCC’s foray into the Mississippi Delta “ap-
peared foolhardy, if not suicidal” (Dittmer 1995, p. 124).

Despite this resistance and enticed by the possibility of breaching this
fortress of white supremacy, SNCC chose Greenwood to be the site of a
major voter-registration campaign in 1962 and the state headquarters in
1964. Yet rather than protesting for the integration of public accommo-
dations, SNCC activists were instead committed to grassroots organizing
and the cultivation of local leadership for durable political engagement.
Eschewing sit-in demonstrations and the like, key organizers believed
that white dominance in black majority counties was “most vulnerable—
at the ballot box” (Dittmer 1995, p. 124). Greenwood organizers canvassed
local residents to encourage them to register to vote, held regular meetings,
and marched to the courthouse with potential registrants. All of these
activities helped to build up an organizational base, fostered a greater
sense of solidarity, and reduced fears of challenging the status quo. How-
ever, as in Albany, the targeting of political actors was ineffective at
achieving movement goals. After a year of struggle, some 1,500 local
blacks had attempted to register, but only 50 had been added to the voting
rolls (Branch 1988, p. 725). Perhaps not surprisingly, Dittmer (1995, p.
213) reports that by the end of 1963 the local movement was thoroughly
demoralized.

The registration drives in 1963 and 1964 produced some disruptions in
public order and generated media coverage of antirights intimidation and
violence, but they were insufficient to harm enterprises that were poten-
tially vulnerable. As a newspaper correspondent reported in 1963: “Green-
wood has felt no repercussions from the unfavorable headlines it has been
winning in the Northern press because it is not making any real effort to
attract new industry.” Rather, the manufacturing industries that had al-
ready been lured to Leflore County “seemed happy enough” (New York
Times, July 9, 1963). Commenting the following year on the difficulties
of bringing about change in places such as Greenwood, a staff member
of the U.S. Civil Rights Commission noted, “The process of change usually
begins when community leadership decides the price of keeping the status
quo is too high. Unfortunately, the price can be quite low in a small town
where the loss of new industry or convention business may not be im-
portant factors” (Wall Street Journal, August 27, 1964). Despite the con-
tinued willingness of hundreds of locals to brave the threats associated
with attempting to register to vote, the absence of significant costs imposed
on vulnerable business interests, the reticence of the federal government,
and the corresponding intransigence of local public officials made even
modest gains elusive.

The enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 furnished activists with
new weapons to impose greater costs upon noncompliant enterprises, but
resistance continued. As Jim Crow barriers fell across the South, including
in Jackson, the new civil rights law failed to sweep away segregation in
Greenwood. To “test” for compliance with the newly enacted law, a few
local activists unaffiliated with SNCC—the McGhee brothers and their
followers—attempted to desegregate public accommodations through di-
rect action. In response, restaurant owners converted their establishments
to private clubs; lunch counters and soda fountains were removed for fear
of a loss of white business (New York Times, August 27, 1964). A single
movie theater, belonging to a larger chain, integrated only to have or-
ganized segregationists form a picket to accost both black and white
patrons. During several visits to the theater, maverick activists had re-
peated encounters with a hostile crowd of three hundred whites. On one
occasion, Jake McGhee was dragged from his seat and beaten; a few
weeks later he was again injured by flying glass when a bottle crashed
through the window of the car taking their group from the theater. Days
later, three whites abducted and beat Silas McGhee, and, in a separate
incident, an unidentified white shot him in the head as he sat in his car.
Not only blacks were terrorized. Threats of violent reprisal forced the
newspaper editor of the Greenwood Commonwealth to leave town after
he mildly criticized extremism in print and crossed the picket line at the
theater (Vew York Times, November 8, 1964). Caught between the move-
ment and recalcitrant whites, the theater eventually closed.

As SNCC disintegrated in Greenwood in 1965, local activists, under a
variety of organizational auspices, intermittently targeted economic actors
with picketing and boycotts. As was the case elsewhere in the Mississippi
Delta, the amplification of disruption costs slowly widened an emerging
factional split between “the new merchant-oriented upper class” in favor
of adherence to federal law and plantation elites opposed to making con-
cessions (Luce 1983, p. 359). This division appears clearly in a description
offered by the state director of the segregationist State Sovereignty Com-
mission of a comparable boycott in nearby Canton. Entreated to negotiate
a settlement between the merchants suffering from a black boycott and
the executive committee of the Canton Citizens’ Council, the director
began the meeting by asking the council members to stand up and state
their occupation. Upon doing so, Johnston declared (1990, p. 332), “Not
a single one of you is affected by the boycott. You are farming, or in
various professions, and do not depend on retail trade for your liveli-
hoods!” Johnston’s account reveals the differences in cost exposure un-
derlying this split within the business community with vacillating mer-
chants, on one side, and an alliance between resisters and conformers, on
the other.

The assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., in 1968 vastly strength-
ened a boycott begun by the Greenwood Movement the prior fall. Local
movement leaders channeled the anger into a highly organized campaign
to gain the use of courtesy titles and better jobs in downtown stores, and
to prompt local business leaders to pressure city hall into negotiations for
jobs and better services. Like many others that had been organized across
Mississippi, this boycott “crippled business” in the downtown center (Vew
York Times, April 29, 1968). Remarking upon the efficacy of the boycott,
one local merchant speculated: “As far as I can tell, it’s 100 per cent
effective” Jackson Daily News, April 29, 1968). Similarly, the head of the
local chamber of commerce retail committee explained, “All the damn
stores [were] going broke. Retail stores. Not all of them but a great many
of them. All of them suffering” (Alex Malouf, interview, August 31, 2003).
Not long after the intensification of the boycott, the poorer storeowners
and those most dependent upon black business began conceding to move-
ment demands (Booth 1968). In addition to agreeing to the use of courtesy
titles and hiring more blacks, several boycotted merchants sent a petition
to the city council to encourage a meeting with movement leaders.

This time, segregationists offered no organized resistance to change,
and white moderates became increasingly critical of the mayor’s lackluster
record in promoting economic development and his intransigence amid
painful boycotts. In 1969, the mayor ultimately lost his reelection bid
against “a coalition of white merchants and blacks” (Luce 1983, p. 338).
The ongoing decline in planter dependence upon black agricultural labor
contributed to the shift of these die-hard resisters to the position of con-
formers. Describing the comparable mechanization of cotton agriculture
in Alabama, an officer of the state Farm Bureau observed: “I don’t find
farm labor the big problem it used to be” (Greenberg 1980, p. 125). Co-
inciding with this transformation was the decline of the Citizens’ Council
and a business-led shift in state politics away from reactionary extrem-
ism.'* Greenberg’s (1980, p. 125) eloquent depiction of this shift in Ala-
bama is fitting for Mississippi as well: “The end was unheralded. There
was no advertisement in twenty-two Alabama newspapers, like the one
sponsored by the major business associations in 1965, announcing the
demise of the racial order. By the late sixties, the Farm Bureau and white
farmers had unobtrusively given up the race question; without share-
croppers, with machines, beef and soybeans, they could afford to.” After
years of vacillation, heightened disruption and falling concession costs
allowed downtown interests to respond to movement demands. Although
the enactment of federal legislation no doubt strengthened the hand of
local activists, Payne notes that (1995, p. 328) “most Greenwood activists
feel strongly that the immediate cause of real change, change that they
could feel in their daily lives, came in response to economic pressure.”
The principal white representative for the merchants likewise concluded
in retrospect that it was the boycott that “ended that whole era” (Malouf,
interview, August 31, 2003).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

While not an exhaustive treatment of these local struggles, the case studies
support the basic proposition that economic actors weigh the financial
impact of disruption and concession costs. Going beyond the simple as-
sertion that costs matter, this analysis refines the distinctions among these
costs and offers a set of propositions about how their convergence affects
responsiveness to movement demands. Numerous historical studies of the
responses of Southern business leaders to the civil rights movement further
corroborate the hypothesis that the patterns of cost exposure stimulated
concessions (e.g., Jacoway and Colburn 1982). This analysis comports also
with studies of Southern political development that highlight the struggles
between Old South plantation interests and modernizing New South in-
terests dedicated to the promotion of Southern industrial development
and economic growth (Nicholls 1960; Greenberg 1980; Luebke 1990; Cobb
1993; Wright 1996). Based on a consideration of the economic opportunity
structure, the findings presented here suggest that the distinctive char-
acteristic of these modernizers was not simply their commitment to in-
dustrial growth (since many industrial interests happily conformed to the
regional norm of Jim Crow and low wages), but also the vulnerability of
their agenda to economic disruptions and negative publicity of the sort
that the civil rights movement produced. Next, the extreme rarity of
Southern business closures in response to threatened integration suggests
that economic interests generally trumped personal preferences or local
cultural norms.’’ Even as the economic actors in these case studies be-
haved strategically to protect their business interests largely irrespective
of their personal views, more research on the impact of cultural norms
upon the responsiveness of economic actors to other movements is
necessary.

The case studies further demonstrate that, while exposure to disruption
and concession costs is not structurally predetermined, sectoral regularities
can be detected. The relatively immobile, local consumption, service, and
growth-dependent sectors, for which disruption costs were generally far
higher than concession costs, came forward to make concessions. Despite
considerable unrest and negative publicity, the conspicuous lack of sup-
port for yielding in New Orleans among industrial firms outside local
consumer markets, commercial-transportation interests, and “old money”
notables evinced the predicted responses of conformers. Threats to the
racially split labor market placed Birmingham iron and steel interests in
opposition to integration, and, consistent with findings regarding the re-
actionary commitments of labor-intensive agriculture, plantation interests
provided the staunchest support for the preservation of Jim Crow (James
1988). Explanations of the responses of economic actors to protest activity
must address variation in sectoral vulnerability, and additional research
might offer further refinements.

Finally, these vulnerabilities to disruption and concession costs con-
dition not only the preferences and unilateral behavior of economic actors,
but also the probable struggles among them and the general likelihood
of winning concessions from these targets. As depicted in all of the case
studies, vulnerable actors negotiated compromises with movement activ-
ists. Insulated segments of the business community conformed and some-
times obstructed bargaining and conciliation. As expected, the struggles
among economic actors and countermovement agitation shaped the bar-
gaining process. In Greensboro, the weakness of white countermobiliza-
tion allowed accommodators to respond with relative swiftness and ease
to movement demands. By contrast, similarly positioned interests in New
Orleans and Birmingham vacillated amid threats of reprisal. It is a curious
paradox that the same racist violence that furthered the enactment of
national civil rights legislation (McAdam 1982) deterred ostensible ac-
commodators from making concessions and thereby reduced the local
movement’s immediate prospects for success. In any case, these findings
reinforce the proposition that explaining movement success involves a
consideration of the extent of countermovement opposition (Meyer and
Staggenborg 1996) and of how this agitation affects the cost calculations
of movement targets. By revealing these factors, a cost-assessment per-
spective clarifies the underlying dynamics affecting the behavior of eco-
nomic actors and, more generally, movement outcome.

While this investigation concentrates on the civil rights movement, the
pattern should apply to other comparable movements as well. For in-
stance, antinuclear activists often used the formal licensing procedure,
which includes hearings and opportunities for legal challenges, to delay
the construction of new facilities and thereby cause “financial problems
for the utility” (Riidig 1990, p. 308). Describing the activities of British
environmentalists, Seel and Plows (2000, p. 126) observe that “the basis
of the cost escalation strategy is that while corporations often do not want
to understand the arguments or values of radical environmentalists, the
one thing they do understand very well is a balance sheet.” Similarly,
recent fears about negative publicity and boycotts over labor conditions
in overseas factories have caused many American corporations to propose
and adopt new codes of conduct to reduce their exposure to such accu-
sations (Spar 1998). Economic disruptions have often been important con-
siderations for those seeking political changes as well. With some success,
gay and black civil rights activists have urged sympathetic groups to
boycott certain inhospitable states.’” While many examples might be cited,
the economic motivations for responsiveness are unmistakable.

This analysis also reveals that protest has limits for bringing about
substantive change. While disruptive protests were effective at compelling
vulnerable interests to desegregate, they had less impact on the many
other economic actors shielded from these costs. Unable to threaten these
other targets with economic harm, the effectiveness of movement agitation
for bringing about racial equality had severe limitations. Without greater
support from the federal government after 1964 and the creation of new
legal weapons to impose costs upon the intransigent, movement contention
would likely have obtained far fewer gains (Heckman and Paynor 1989).
Also, had the ambitions of the civil rights movement been more threat-
ening to Southern economic interests, the demolition of Jim Crow insti-
tutions would have been much more difficult to achieve. Indeed, the many
successes of the civil rights movement must be attributed in no small
measure to the disappearance of resisters from the region (Piven and
Cloward 1977; James 1988).

This analysis suggests other possibilities for future research as well.
Analogous to the economic cost-assessment hypothesis proposed here, a
similar political cost-assessment approach might be developed to refine
the concept of political opportunity structure (POS). While research on
the concept of POS has produced many useful speculations and some
generalizations about the responses of government authorities to move-
ment mobilization (Tarrow 1994), POS is often less a predictive theory
than a device to draw attention to a cluster of salient variables. Thus
POS highlights factors such as the presence of elite allies, but the avail-
ability of these benefactors is treated as exogenous. Left relatively unex-
amined is how political opportunities are enlarged or why certain dis-
ruptions, and not others, should be advantageous to specific movements.”
To account for the ability of movements to cultivate alliances, garner
broader political support, and convert disruptive behavior into “political
pressure,” a theoretical description of the general structure of motives
among public officials is necessary (Mayhew 1974; Arnold 1990). While
this investigation has concentrated on the behavior of economic actors,
prior research on political cost assessment might be usefully combined
with social movement theory to produce more robust accounts of move-
ment outcome. With a few exceptions (e.g., Burstein 1985), this sort of
cross-fertilization has seldom been undertaken. Similarly, additional the-
oretical speculation might delineate the interaction between the economic
and political structures of opportunity. In several cases, the escalation of
disruption costs triggered political mobilization of vulnerable economic
actors that, in turn, contributed to an expansion in political opportunities.
Favorable legislation or judicial rulings can furnish activists with new
weapons to impose costs upon recalcitrant targets. To tease out these
interactions, further research might join studies of movement outcome
with theories concerning variation in political influence based on the struc-
ture of economic sectors (Gourevitch 1977; Shafer 1994; Boix 2003) or on
social network analysis (Knoke 1990).

My aim here has been simply to derive a more precise theoretical ex-
planation of the responses of economic actors to social movement demands
based on a set of rudimentary assumptions about variation in cost ex-
posure. Refining prior theories, I argued that the vulnerability to disrup-
tion and concession costs define an economic opportunity structure that
clarifies the prospects for the success of movements targeting economic
actors. Further, I speculated that a pattern of sectoral exposure helps to
explain why certain economic actors regularly respond more favorably to
protest movement demands than others. While structural conditions may
be conducive to movement success, taking advantage of these vulnera-
bilities depends on choosing the proper target and generating protests of
sufficient magnitude to threaten the profit of these interests. By appre-
ciating the specific costs that diverse movements impose and their vari-
ation across targets, the patterns of movement success and failure can be
better understood.
REFERENCES

Amenta, Edwin, and Michael P. Young. 1999. “Making an Impact: Conceptual and
Methodological Implications of the Collective Goods Criterion.” Pp. 22-41 in How
Social Movements Matter, edited by M. Giugni, D. McAdam, and C. Tilly.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Andrews, Kenneth T. 2001. “Social Movements and Policy Implementation: The
Mi ppi Civil Rights Movement and the War on Poverty, 1965-1971.” American
Sociological Review 66:71-95.

Arnold, R. Douglas. 1990. The Logic of Congressional Action. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and George E. Johnson. 1969. “Bargaining Theory, Trade Unions,
and Industrial Strike Activity.” American Economic Review 59:35-49.

Ashmore, Harry S. 1958. An Epitaph for Dixie. New York: Norton.

Baker, Liva. 1996. The Second Battle of New Orleans: The Hundred-Year Struggle to
Integrate the Schools. New York: Harper Collins.

Barkan, Steven E. 1984. “Legal Control of the Civil Rights Movement.” American
Sociological Review 49:552-62.

Bartley, Numan V. (1969) 1999. The Rise of Massive Resistance: Race and Politics in
the South during the 1950s. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

. 1995. The New South, 1945-1980. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press.

Bloom, Jack S. 1987. Class, Race, and the Civil Rights Movement. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.

Boix, Charles. 2003. Democracy and Redistribution. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Bonacich, Edna. 1972. “A Theory of Ethnic Antagonism: The Split Labor Market.”
American Sociological Review 37:547-59.

Booth, Mary. 1968. Interview by Robert Wright, Greenwood, Miss., August 7. Howard
University, Ralph J. Bunche Oral History Collection.

Branch, Taylor. 1988. Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954-1963. New
York: Simon & Schuster.

Burstein, Paul. 1985. Discrimination, Jobs, and Politics: The Struggle for Equal
Employment Opportunity in the United States since the New Deal. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Burstein, Paul, Rachel L. Einwohner, and Jocelyn A. Hollander. 1995. “The Success
of Political Movements: A Bargaining Perspective.” Pp. 275-95 in The Politics of
Social Protest: Comparative Studies of States and Social Movements, edited by
J. C. Jenkins and B. Klandermans. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Card, David, and Craig A. Olson. 1995. “Bargaining Power, Strike Durations, and
Wage Outcomes: An Analysis of Strikes in the 1880s.” Journal of Labor Economics
13:32-61.

Chafe, William H. 1980. Civilities and Civil Rights: Greensboro, North Carolina, and
the Black Struggle for Freedom. New York: Oxford University Press.

Cobb, James C. 1988. “Beyond Planters and Industrialists: A New Perspective on the
New South.” Journal of Southern History 54:45-68.

. 1990. “Somebody Done Nailed Us on the Cross’: Federal Farm and Welfare

Policy and the Civil Rights Movement in the Mississippi Delta.” Journal of American

History 77:912-36.

. 1993. The Selling of the South: The Southern Crusade for Industrial
Development, 1936-1990. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Dittmer, John. 1995. Local People: The Struggle for Civil Rights in Mississippi. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Edwards, Richard. 1979. Contested Terrain: The Transformation of the Workplace in
the Twentieth Century. New York: Basic Books.

Eskew, Glenn T. 1997. But for Birmingham: The Local and National Movements in
the Civil Rights Struggle. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Fairclough, Adam. 1995. Race and Democracy: The Civil Rights Struggle in Louisiana,
1915-1972. Athens: University of Georgia Press.

Friedman, Gerald. 1988. “Strike Success and Union Ideology: The United States and
France, 1880-1914.” Journal of Economic History 48:1-25.

Gamson, William A. 1975. The Strategy of Social Protest. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey.

Garrow, David J. 1986. Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jv. and the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference. New York: Vintage.

Giugni, Marco. 1999. “How Social Movements Matter: Past Research, Present
Problems, Future Developments.” Pp. xiii-xxxiii in How Social Movements Matter,
edited by M. Giugni, D. McAdam, and C. Tilly. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.

Giugni, Marco, Doug McAdam, and Charles Tilly, eds. 1999. How Social Movements
Matter. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Gourevitch, Peter A. 1977. “International Trade, Domestic Coalitions, and Liberty:
Comparative Reponses to the Crisis of 1973-1896.” Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 8:281-313.

Greenberg, Stanley B. 1980. Race and State in Capitalist Development: Comparative
Perspectives. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Hansen, John Mark. 1985. “The Political Economy of Group Membership.” American
Political Science Review 79:79-96.

Heckman, James J., and Brook J. Paynor. 1989. “Determining the Impact of Federal
Anti crimination Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South
Carolina.” American Economic Review 79:138-77.

Hicks, John. (1932) 1963. The Theory of Wages. New York: Macmillan.

Inger, Morton. 1969. Politics and Reality in an American City: The New Orleans School
Crisis of 1960. New York: Center for Urban Education.

Jacoway, Elizabeth, and David R. Colburn, eds. 1982. Southern Businessmen and
Desegregation. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

James, David R. 1988. “The Transformation of the Southern Racial State: Class and
Race Determinants of Local-State Structures.” American Sociological Review 53:
191-208.

Johnston, Erle. 1990. Mississippi’s Defiant Years. Forest, Miss.: Lake Harbor.

Keesing’s Research Reports. 1970. Race Relations in the USA, 1954-1968. New York:
Charles Scribner.

Kennan, John. 1986. “The Economics of Strikes.” Pp. 1091-1137 in Handbook of Labor
Economics, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. New York: North-
Holland.

Kitschelt, Herbert. 1986. “Political Opportunity Structures and Political Protest: Anti-
nuclear Movements in Four Democracies.” British Journal of Political Science 16:
57-85.

Knoke, David. 1990. Political Networks: The Structural Perspective. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Koopmans, Ruud, and Paul Statham. 1999. “Ethnic and Civic Conceptions of
Nationhood and Differential Success of the Extreme Right in Germany and Italy.”
Pp. 225-52 in How Social Movements Matter, edited by M. Giugni, D. McAdam,
and C. Tilly. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Lewis, David L. 1970. King: A Critical Biography. New York: Praeger.

Lipsky, Michael. 1968. “Protest as a Political Resource.” American Political Science
Review 62:1144-58.

Luce, Randall Craig. 1983. “Racial Relations and Political Change: A Social History
of a Southern County, 1886-1981.” Ph.D. dissertation. University of California, Santa
Barbara, Department of Anthropology.

Luebke, Paul. 1990. Tar Heel Politics: Myths and Realities. Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press.

Mayhew, David R. 1974. Congress: The Electoral Connection. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press.

McAdam, Doug. 1982. Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency,
1930-1970. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

McCarrick, Earlean Mary. 1964. “Louisiana’s Official Resistance to Desegregation.”
Ph.D. dissertation. Vanderbilt University, Department of Political Science.

McMillen, Neil R. 1971. The Citizens’ Council: Resistance to the Second
Reconstruction. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

. 1973. “Development of Civil Rights, 1956-1970.” Pp. 154-76 in A History of

Mississippi, vol 2. Edited by Richard Aubrey McLemore. Jackson: University and

College Press of Mississippi.

. 1977. “Black Enfranchisement in Mississippi: Federal Enforcement and Black
Protest in the 1960s.” Journal of Southern History 43:351-72.

McVeigh, Rory. 1999. “Structural Incentives for Conservative Mobilization: Power
Devaluation and the Rise of the Ku Klux Klan, 1915-1925.” Social Forces 77:
1461-96.

McWhorter, Diane. 2001. Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama, the Climactic Battle
of the Civil Rights Revolution. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Meyer, David S., and Suzanne Staggenborg. 1996. “Movements, Countermovements,
and the Structure of Economic Opportunity.” American Journal of Sociology 101:
1628-60.

Montgomery, David. 1979. Workers Control in America: Studies in the History of
Work, Techonology, and Labor Struggles. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Morris, Aldon. 1984. The Origins of the Civil Rights Movement: Black Communities
Organizing for Change. New York: Free Press.

. 1993. “Birmingham Confrontation Reconsidered: An Analysis of Dynamics
and Tactics of Mobilization.” American Sociological Review 58:621-36.

Nicholls, William H. 1960. Southern Tradition and Regional Progress. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Oppenheimer, Martin. 1989. The Sit-In Movement of 1960. New York: Carlson.

Paige, Jeffery. 1997. Coffee and Power: Revolution and the Rise of Democracy in Latin
America. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Patterson, Barbara. 1964. The Price We Pay. Southern Regional Council and the Anti-
Defamation League.

Payne, Charles M. 1995. I’ve Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition and
the Mississippi Freedom Struggle. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.

Piven, Frances Fox, and Richard Cloward. (1979) 1977. Poor People’s Movements:
Why They Succeed, How They Fail. New York: Vintage Books.

Rogers, Kim Lacy. 1993. Righteous Lives: Narratives of the New Orleans Civil Rights
Movement. New York: New York University Press.

Ross, Michael L. 1999. “The Political Economy of the Resource Curse.” World Politics
51:297-322.

Riidig, Wolfgang, ed. 1990. Anti-nuclear Movements: A World Survey of Opposition
to Nuclear Energy. Essex: Longman.

Schattschneider. 1960. The Semisovereign People: A Realist’s View of Democracy in
America. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.

Seel, Benjamin, and Alex Plows. 2000. “Coming Live and Direct: Strategies of Earth
First!” Pp. 112-32 in Direct Action in British Environmentalism, edited by Benjamin
Seel, Matthew Paterson, and Brian Doherty. New York: Routledge.

Shafer, D. Michael. 1994. Winners and Losers: How Sectors Shape the Development
Prospects of States. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

SIER (Southern Institute for Education and Research). 1997. A House Divided. VHS.
New Orleans: Tulane University.

Spar, Debora L. 1998. “The Spotlight on the Bottom Line: How Corporations Export
Human Rights.” Foreign Affairs 77:7-12.

Tarrow, Sidney. 1994. Power in Movement. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Terchek, Ronald J. 1974. “Protest and Bargaining.” Journal of Peace Research 11:
133-44.

Thornton III, J. Mills. 1991. “Municipal Politics and the Course of the Movement.”
In New Directions in Civil Rights Studies, edited by A. Robinson and P. Sullivan.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

Tilly, Charles. 1999. “From Interactions to Outcomes in Social Movements.” Pp. 253-70
in How Social Movements Matter, edited by M. Giugni, D. McAdam, and C. Tilly.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1991. “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A
Reference-Dependent Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:1039-61.

Vander Zanden, James W. 1965. Race Relations in Transition. New York: Random
House.

Williams, Juan. 1987. Eyes on the Prize: America’s Civil Rights Years, 1954-1965.
New York: Viking.

Wilson, James Q. 1961. “The Strategy of Protest: Problems of Negro Civic Action.”
Journal of Conflict Resolution 3:291-303.

. 1984. “The Politics of Regulation.” Pp. 82-103 in The Political Economy:
Readings in the Politics and Economics of American Public Policy, edited by
Thomas Ferguson and Joel Rogers. New York: M. E. Sharpe.

Wolff, Miles. 1970. Lunch at the Five and Ten. New York: Stein & Day.

Wright, Gavin. 1991. “Economic Aspects of the Civil Rights Movement.” Pp. 175-83
in New Directions in Civil Rights Studies, edited by Armstead L. Robinson and
Patricia Sullivan. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.

. 1996. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy since the

Civil War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
