Kinship, Marriage, and the Family: An Operational Approach

Author(s): Michel Verdon

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 86, No. 4 (Jan., 1981), pp. 796-818
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2778343

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:35 UTC
The literature of the past two or three decades in social and cultural an-
thropology testifies to a growing conceptual malaise; such concepts as de-
scent, kinship, and residence, to name but a few, are subject to regular
reassessment, but to little avail, it seems, since these periodic introspec-
tions have failed to yield any consensus about our basic definitions. The
“universal” concepts, without which our comparative project remains futile,
are still wanting. In this paper, I wish to investigate the reasons for this
failure and to propose a solution. The solution, which hinges on a new,
“operational” notion of group, could in fact be applied to all the concepts
used in the analysis of social organization. Elsewhere, I have applied it to
the notions of residence and descent (Verdon 1980a, 1980), and in this
essay I seek to extend it to the ideas of kinship, marriage, and the family,
which anthropologists have treated as an inseparable trinity.

I regard these “anthropological” concepts (residence, descent, kinship,
and so on) as “secondary” or “derivative” concepts, for the simple reason
that they are derived from a more implicit, more fundamental notion of
group. This is not to deny that, prior to their utilization for anthropologi-
cal analysis, these notions were rooted in empirical and cultural experience.
Certainly, “kinship” and “marriage” refer to something “out there” which
has received diverse interpretations in different cultural surroundings. But
the manner in which these commonsense notions, borrowed from the every-
day language, have been redefined as “‘scientific concepts” for the com-
parative analysis of sociocultural systems has been, I believe, directly de-
termined by the analysts’ representation of what groups are.

I argue that the few notions of group which currently dominate social
and cultural anthropology render groups “ontologically variable” and
therefore unfit for rigorous comparative analysis, since they thwart the
emergence of universal concepts necessary for our comparative discourse.
This stultifying action, I believe, stems from the fact that anthropologists
have implicitly or explicitly defined groups by mingling three separate
layers of reality: the behavioral, the normative, and the group levels. In
this confusion, social and cultural anthropology (the “science of man’’)
resemble Aristotelian physics (the “science of change”), which conflated
phenomena of kinematics, biology, and chemistry as various instances of
“change.” The scientific revolution in the 17th century could be achieved
only through the initial separation of these separate levels of reality; simi-
larly, I believe a more rigorous comparative study of society to be possible
only if and when the level of “group” is divorced from the realms of inter-
personal behavior and normative phenomena.” I consequently see the main
task of a conceptual revision as beginning with a new definition of group,
disentangled from considerations of interpersonal behavior and normative
representations. This I endeavor to achieve by suggesting an operational
notion of group, from which it is then possible to derive new and, I hope,
more universal definitions of our main concepts, namely, descent, residence,
kinship, and so on.

In this paper, I will limit myself to a redefinition of the concepts of kin-
ship, marriage, and the family and open the investigation with a brief re-
view of what I regard as the two dominant conceptual paradigms in the
social anthropological study of these concepts—namely, the structural-
functionalist and the structuralist.
must interact, and their interaction presupposes some standardization or
patterning of behavior (Radcliffe-Brown 1957). Like most functionalists,
Radcliffe-Brown postulated that individual behavior must be somewhat
constrained or regulated (i.e., share a common element by reducing its
idiosyncratic nature) for interpersonal relationships to take place and that
this regulation is achieved through the action of “binding” or coercive
mental representations—namely, norms, values, rights, duties, beliefs, and
so on.

Against this undifferentiated background of interpersonal ties, Radcliffe-
Brown also sought a formula to conceptualize the discreteness of the cor-
porate groupings which constitute society’s internal subdivisions. Individ-
uals within a society interact, but they also form groups with diverging
loyalties which unite subsets of individuals but divide them from other
subsets. In order to reconcile these two levels of interpersonal and group
ties, Radcliffe-Brown resorted to the Durkheimian distinction between
solidarity and its jural expression. The standardization of behavior found
in interpersonal relationships is concretely expressed in specific rights and
duties (Radcliffe-Brown [1935] 1952), and the rights and duties pertain-
ing to the reciprocal positions in a given relationship form identifiable
“roles.” A group may therefore be represented as a “bounded” and inter-
connected set of social relations, which are crystallized in terms of roles.
It is further possible to represent the set of roles within a group as some-
thing which belongs to the group, as the group’s “estate,” and to picture
groups accordingly as “corporations” owning estates comprised of both a
territory and a set of roles. To perpetuate themselves groups must avoid
disputes over membership and must therefore own their roles exclusively
(and the members who occupy them), thereby delineating the boundaries
which distinguish them from other groups.

Against this general notion of group, kinship is presented as a fact of
nature, a physiological fact (the fact of consanguinity) selectively empha-
sized by society and endowed by the latter with a set of norms or jural
sanctions which make it binding on individuals. Once made binding or
normative through “social recognition” or “institutional arrangement,”
kinship then operates to constrain and regulate behavior in interpersonal
relationships. By the same token, it also serves to define statuses, there-
by functioning to give “kinship status’—bearers membership in the
group. Because Radcliffe-Brown conceptualized groups in terms of corpo-
rations which are differentiated from others (are bounded and therefore
only allow people in under certain conditions) and also internally “orga-
nized” insofar as the interaction of members is regulated, kinship came
to be represented both (a) as a rule of group membership (often known
as “descent” in this instance), and (5) as a regulator of behavior. And
because anthropologists believed groups in simpler societies to be based
mostly on kinship, the family came to take a dominant position in struc-
tural-functional thinking as the very workshop where the raw, natural
datum of consanguinity is processed to produce the social ties of kinship.
The family operated to generate kinship, to manufacture the glue which
organizes these simple societies; as a result, marriage was given a deriva-
tive importance, being completely subsumed under the family. For the
structural-functionalists, marriage derives its significance from the unique
position of the family, and it is defined in a teleological manner, with the
family as its purpose. Since the latter institution serves for social place-
ment, marriage appears as a means of legitimizing children.?

The main challenge to the structural-functionalist model came from
Lévi-Strauss (1945, 1949). Lévi-Strauss elaborated his model from the
initial intuition that kinship statuses ought to be treated like symbols, not
to be defined “substantively” with reference to themselves, but only
through their relation to other statuses (Lévi-Strauss 1945). A man, for
instance, is not a “father” when studied with reference to himself, but
only in relation to his child(ren). This notion was later extended to groups,
and Lévi-Strauss postulated that groups gain their identity and reality only
in relation to other groups, through exchange. Such an idea ran counter to
all the established dogmas, if only because it appeared to do away with
the elements of behavior and their jural expression so crucial to the struc-
tural-functionalist credo. It provided a new concept of group which strove
to be operational, in that a knowledge of the rules specifying the relation
between groups should allow the analyst to infer the type of social struc-
ture. This innovation reverberated throughout his conceptualization of kin-
ship, marriage, and the family.

Marriage, to Lévi-Strauss, came to represent the main expression of the
principle of exchange upon which social life rests because of the alliance
that it creates between exchanging units, an alliance which actually defines
the very identity of these units or groups. From this equation, Lévi-Strauss
inverted the common assumption that the purpose of marriage is to found
a family through the procreation of children, contending instead that the
creation of families (or the production of children) is only accomplished
for the purpose of marriage! If groups derive their reality and identity
through exchange, they must keep the exchange going, and the only solu-
tion is to procreate. Consequently, groups reproduce themselves physically
only with a mind to break even in the eternal game of exchange, which re-
quires a bilateral flow of gifts. Kinship is therefore a simple by-product of
alliance and is geared at the outset to the maintenance and furtherance of
alliances. As a result, the structural-functionalist “elementary family” lost
its unique status of irreducible kinship group, to be replaced by the struc-
turalist “atom of kinship,” which included the mother’s brother as a neces-
sary representation of the principle of exchange.*

Despite its brevity, this sketch illustrates how the concepts under investi-
gation, insofar as they have been endowed with a specialized content to
serve as anthropological or sociological tools, are derived from a more
fundamental notion of group. In the following part, I wish to assess the
usefulness of these notions of group in the light of social anthropology’s
avowed purpose, comparative analysis.
zation. How are the people forming this external, ordered, all-encompassing
group themselves adjusted behaviorally before being empowered to recog-
nize any norms as binding? In other words, that which we are trying to
explain is itself used in the explanation, and the formulation is circular.

A more important shortcoming of the structural-functionalist model,
however, is the ontological variability of statuses and groups which is
attendant upon its application. Indeed, the first question which springs
to mind in the jural definition of status is the number of rights required to
define a status. If statuses are clusters of rights, it is legitimate to infer
that all British citizens who are not eligible to the Crown suffer some po-
litico-jural disability and are “‘less citizens” than the royal family. Convicts
debarred from public office will also partake of a lesser degree of citizen-
ship. Indeed, a definition of statuses in terms of rights and duties can yield
only different degrees of the same status since rights and duties, like their
cognate norms, are only binding mental representations, or regulators of
behavior (Fortes 1949, p. 346).5 It is commonly acknowledged that nor-
mative mental representations are not equally binding on every individual
and at different times in the life of the same individual. If there are vary-
ing degrees of conformity to normative mental representations, the same
statuses (those of “agnate” or “citizen,” for instance) will vary both in the
number of their rights and duties and in conformity to the latter. This is
the direct cause of the statuses’ ontological variability (the fact that they
appear in degrees). What applies to statuses also extends to groups. If the
rights that a corporation wields over its members vary both in their num-
ber and in their degree of possessiveness (Schneider 1965), so do the
groups they define.® The jural model of group, like that of statuses, can
generate only “degrees of groupness” (like the “strong” and “weak” de-
scent groups, or the “more or less” patrilocal groups of anthropological
literature).

In short, the jural notion of group is ontologically variable because, in
this framework, groups are deprived of an independent ontological status.
Groups, jurally defined, do not exist as a separate level of reality, because
5 The best illustration of this assertion will be found in the debate over the definition
of marriage, where Leach opposed any attempt at devising a universal definition of
marriage on the basis that the latter institution was a “bundle of rights” which varied
from culture to culture (Leach [1956] 1961). This jural equation, he concluded rightly,
implies an intrinsic variability of the statuses of “spouse” across and within cultures.

From this correct assessment, it is only unfortunate that Leach failed to draw a more
important inference, namely, that the jural definition ought to be abandoned!

6 This particular problem came very strongly into relief in the debate on the relative
“strength” of patrilinearity and the acquisition of rights over the bride through bride-
wealth (Gluckman 1950; Fallers 1957; Leach [1956] 1961; Lewis 1965), in which “strong
agnatic descent” was read in opposite situations, namely, where women are “absorbed”
into their father’s group, or into their husband’s. Barnes (1967) has already drawn the
right conclusion: if radically opposite interpretations are derived from the same fact,
is it not time that this type of formulation of the problem be altogether abandoned?
they are always reducible to the notion of “regulated interpersonal behav-
ior.’ Murphy has best demonstrated this contention by showing how the
“social” dimension is never extricated from the cultural in anthropological
literature (1971). Despite more than a century of constant efforts, we have
systematically failed to devise a notion of group which is not immediately
translated in terms of psychology (interpersonal behavior) and culture
(normative mental representations). The social level has never managed to
acquire an independent ontological status, and this, in my opinion, is the
ultimate cause of our conceptual malaise. There is only one alternative:
either it is impossible to define groups as a distinct and autonomous level
of reality, and our concepts will retain their intrinsic ontological variabil-
ity, or it is possible, and we will be able to formulate the universal concepts
so urgently needed.

2. In my view, Lévi-Strauss’s greatest achievement was to catch a
glimpse of what an operational definition of group (i.e., one in which the
social is disentangled from the psychological and cultural) could be. His
own notion came very close to being operational, because it almost ob-
viated the two most dangerous pitfalls of structural-functionalism—name-
ly, the behavioral and normative referents in the notion of group. By posit-
ing the primacy of the relation over the terms it relates, Lévi-Strauss at-
tempted to give the concept of “relation” a purely logical or mathematical
meaning, seemingly extracting groups from purely behavioral social rela-
tionships. His paradigm, however, did not completely elude the jural
model’s predicament. In the first instance, the logical relation by which
groups are given their identity cannot be one of degrees; it has to be speci-
fied by a rule, since only a rule can define a logical or mathematical class.

The key relation between social groups in simple societies being one of
marriage, it follows logically that marriage rules alone can give rise to
groups. A class or group which acquires its very identity through a logical
relation or axiom cannot tolerate mere preferences.” Consequently, Lévi-
Strauss’s framework applies only to societies with marriage prescriptions.
On this point I believe Needham (1971) to be right. Nothing short of a
prescription can define a group in terms of a relation. Degrees of “norma-
tiveness” in the rules (i.e., simple preferences) can only engender degrees
of precision and identity of the group. The groups would therefore vary
(as groups) with the changing bindingness of the relation. There is thus
only one alternative: either the model yields the same ontological variabil-
ity of groups, if one is to believe Lévi-Strauss’s later statement (1965), or
its use is limited to the study of a tiny fraction of the societies investigated
by social anthropologists (if one is to believe Lévi-Strauss’s original state-
ment [1949]).

Moreover, it is logically unwarranted to postulate the anteriority of the
relation over the terms it relates (the anteriority of the principle of ex-
change over the exchanging units). Groups cannot emerge ex nihilo, spon-
taneously and reciprocally defined through their relation. Groups must pre-
exist the exchange, a fact which is implicitly acknowledged by Lévi-Strauss
when he introduces “rules of descent and residence” before being able to
deal with marriage prescriptions. If groups precede their relation and are
above all defined by rules of descent and residence, Lévi-Strauss has not
contributed anything new to the notion of group; if he claims that groups
are completely defined through their relation, he is indeed saying something
radically new, but unfortunately untenable.

But, above all, Lévi-Strauss’s model has never completely severed its
links with the behavioral and normative dimensions. His central notion,
that of exchange, is defined in behavioral and normative terms from purely
interpretative considerations about the behavior of individuals engaged in
interpersonal relationships involving exchange (1949). His notion of rela-
tion also ambiguously straddles the logical and behavioral domains, here a
logical operation and there a behavioral relationship. It could hardly have
been otherwise, since Lévi-Strauss shares the structural-functional assump-
tion about the problematic nature of solidarity. Positing that one (emo-
tional) part of the individual is abhorrent to social life, Lévi-Strauss had
to find a mechanism to generate the solidarity which makes society pos-
sible. Whereas Radcliffe-Brown located this mechanism in society at large,
Lévi-Strauss placed it in man’s mind. Not completely so, however, since
the mind can only be operative, in the Lévi-Straussian model, if it gener-
ates a number of representations which are normative (the rule). Like
Radcliffe-Brown, Lévi-Strauss needs the mind and rules shared by the
group because he is addressing himself to the same fundamental problem,
namely, the regulation of interpersonal behavior. Any theory which postu-
lates that solidarity is a phenomenon to be explained is logically insepa-
rable from a behavioral notion of group, since solidarity is essentially a
psychological phenomenon.

In other words, all theories which posit the problematic nature of soli-
darity as a foundation for conceptualizing the social can breed only onto-
logically variable groups, because they unwittingly deprive the notion of
group (or the social) of its specificity, its ontological autonomy. Con-
versely, any attempt to endow the social dimension with a separate reality
will have to set aside the representation of groups in terms of social rela-
tionships. Indeed, if social is equated with social (meaning “interpersonal” )
relationships, I would also conclude the impossibility of divorcing the so-
cial from the cultural. What is needed, in fact, is a break with tradition
and common wisdom, and if this were achieved by suggesting a new notion
of group which were not ultimately reducible to the regulation of inter-
personal behavior, it might then be possible analytically to isolate the so-
cial. Before putting forth such a notion, however, I will first identify a
further source of ontological variability in the current notions of group.

The contemporary models also posit groups as being involved in many
different activities (i.e., groups are said to have many functions—ritual,
economic, judicial, and so on; they are defined as “multifunctional”’). This
only raises further problems, insofar as groups labeled in the same way
(such as “lineages,” let us say) may have radically different functions in
various societies. If the group’s solidarity is itself linked to the importance
of these functions, and it is in the jural model, the groups will also vary
in their “degree of groupness” according to the combination of functions
that they perform. In other words, the groups’ multifunctionality is a fur-
ther source of ontological variability.

In the light of this assessment, it appears that, in order to define groups
in a way that endows them with a full, separate ontological status (and
does not reduce them to the regulation of interpersonal behavior) and that
consequently rids them of any ontological variability, we will have (a) to
divorce them from the problem of patterning or regulation of interpersonal
behavior, that is, from the question of solidarity, and (5) to separate ana-
lytically the different activities in which groups are involved.
individuals form the same group in different types of activities. In the per-
formance of a given type of activities, moreover, an individual may allow
anybody to join him or her. The resulting collection of individuals, in this
instance, would form a crowd. On the other hand, where the individual(s)
involved in an activity use(s) specific criteria (such as sex, age, type of
filiation, whatnot) to discriminate between those individuals who can join
and those who cannot, we will call the resulting unit a group if the criteria
of membership are defined with respect to the individual(s) already in-
volved in the activity. However, where discriminating criteria are employed
which are defined with respect to individual(s) not involved in the activity,
the resulting assemblage will be dubbed a social category.® In other words,
a group presupposes both one type of activity (and only one) and one (or
many) criteria of membership.

In this definition, there enters no notion of “corporateness” or owner-
ship. The corporateness, if it refers to collective action and solidarity, is
simply taken for granted and posited as unproblematic. If it refers to own-
ership of an estate, however, it suggests something quite different which,
in my opinion, warrants a separate definition. Whenever individuals dis-
tinguish themselves from the rest of the world by a set of criteria which
gives them exclusive access to specific natural or man-made resources (tan-
gible or intangible, although statuses are not counted among resources),
the unit thus formed will be designated a corporation. Analytically speak-
ing, a corporation is not a group; the members of a corporation qua mem-
bers of a corporation are not involved in any activity, but in ownership.
Similarly, groups are not corporations, although the two may overlap.

For every separate type of activity, it is therefore the existence of cri-
teria of membership, and the points of reference with respect to which they
are defined, which distinguishes analytically between different collections
of individuals (such as crowds, groups, and social categories) .1° The struc-
tural-functional model also makes use of “rules of membership” which
govern the entrance to groups. But because the structural-functionalists
11 Rivers (1924) had made clear the analytical distinction between the definition of
the group’s boundary and the organization of the behavior of its members, but this
distinction was blurred by Radcliffe-Brown and his followers.

12] wish to make it absolutely clear that beliefs can often be used as criteria of mem-
bership. Belief in a flat earth, for instance, may be used as the basis to form a club;
in itself, it says nothing about the organization of interpersonal behavior within the
group. Some may also wish to argue that any criterion of membership has to be sup-
plemented with a certain code of conduct. I do not deny the ubiquitous presence of
codes of conduct, but I question their relevance to the analytical task of isolating what
is specific to groups. Let us take the example of a group of production, membership
in which can be gained through patrifiliation and male gender (i.e., sons may join
their father’s group of production). It could be tempting to list obedience and respect
as further criteria of membership, since disobedient and disrespectful sons will be
ejected from the group. In order to understand the implications of such a position,
let us reexamine the root of the problem. The structural-functionalists have repre-
sented agnatic descent groups, for instance, in terms of “norms of agnatic descent”
pulling agnates together, these norms, however, operating with a differential strength
(or pull) in different societies. No one, however, has ever dreamt of writing of the
“norms of respect and obedience” pulling respectful and obedient individuals together,
for the simple reason that respect and obedience, unlike such criteria as filiation, male
gender, and so on, are not found systematically present with some and absent with
others. They cannot be used to discriminate among individuals, since everyone can,
if he so wishes, be respectful and obedient. Moreover, one who is disobedient today
may be reformed tomorrow, so that his ejection would not be lasting. Finally, the
same code of conduct is not limited to a particular group, but applies to all the rela-
tionships that any Ego can have with people who are senior in age or status. In other
words, it is quite obvious that all individuals who activate their membership in a
group are going to accept its code of conduct, but this cannot be taken to generate
ontological variability in the group. Anthropologists have written about descent groups
varying in degrees, because they assume that descent is one of the elements that can
pull individuals together in groups and contrast them to other groups. But nobody
has yet written about “obedient groups” or “respectful groups,” because no one has
ever considered respect and obedience to be criteria of membership. If they were to
enter the definition of groups, we ought to write of “patrifiliative obedient groups,”
implying that one can also find “patrifiliative disobedient groups”! If this appears like
nonsense to everybody, it follows that the code of conduct cannot enter the definition
of the group.
ontological status.1? A mathematician may select axioms because they high-
light problems in which he is interested, but the value he attaches to these
axioms does not in any way affect the ontological status of the subsets they
define. Moreover, the number of axioms selected does not change anything
in the set’s ontological status; whether one or 10 axioms are applied, the
subset is not more or less of a subset. The subset will certainly have dif-
ferent properties according to the axioms chosen, but it will not vary in
degrees. In other words, this operational definition of group seems to rid
groups of their ontological variability, because it endows them with a sepa-
rate ontological status. Operationally defined, groups have a reality of their
own and cannot be reduced to behavior or culture. Ontologically speaking,
all activities or sets of interconnected activities, as well as all criteria, are
equal. There are no “degrees” of activities or criteria, so that collections
of individuals defined for every separate type of activities, in terms of cri-
teria of membership, cannot vary in degrees.!4

13 Tt is also quite obvious that, in every population, individuals attach specific sym-
bols to the various features which they select as criteria of membership, but I contend
that this level of “meaning,” this cultural coefficient, is also irrelevant in the definition
of groups themselves. To illustrate my point, let us imagine two basketball team
leaders who have to choose from a large number of individuals to form their teams.
Let us assume that the two leaders decide upon height as the main criterion in their
selection. It is beyond doubt that the notion of height is associated with a number of
symbols and values (masculinity, power, endurance, good feeding habits, perhaps
wealth, special blessing of the god, and so on). The team leaders will also have a cer-
tain purpose in choosing height as the main criterion, since tall people will presumably
be better basketball players. Insofar as the teams are defined as groups, however,
these values and symbols are not pertinent (ie., they do not enter the definition of
the group). Operationally speaking, height is simply an element, a feature exclusive to
some and which may be used to discriminate among a large number of individuals in
the formation of a team. It does not intimate anything about the behavior expected
of the members of the team (such as aggressiveness, cooperation, etc.), or about their
idea of what the group is.

14 Groups thus defined resemble mathematical subsets; they can be fuzzy because the
axiom allows for some probability in the occurrence of events, but the axioms them-
selves remain axiomatic and are not fuzzy. Also, the definition of groups as multifunc-
tional automatically raises the question of a “hierarchy of functions.” If one defines
a “domestic group” as united through sexual intercourse, reproduction, coresidence,
biological maintenance, socialization of the children, production, and distribution
(among other things), it is legitimate to inquire whether the individuals which form
this group have started to mate, produce, and raise children simply because they hap-
pened to coreside, or if they perform all these activities because they have come to-
gether to raise children. In my view, there have been three dominant opinions about
this hierarchy of functions: (1) the Marxist one, which views all functions or activi-
ties as derived from the essential need of biological maintenance and reproduction;
(2) the structural-functional one, which regards physical reproduction and the social-
ization of children (altogether, social reproduction) as the key function from which
all others stem; and (3) the structuralist one, which conceives all functions as spring-
ing from the universal tendency to exchange: people produce and reproduce only to
keep the exchange going. These privileged functions, in turn, delineate privileged
frames of reference: (1) groups of production in Marxist theory; (2) groups of social
reproduction, or families, in structural-functional theory; and (3) groups of matri-
monial exchange in Lévi-Strauss’s theory. Such hierarchies, incidentally, are permanent
Since the question of interpersonal adjustment is set aside, the notion of
“group structure” takes on a different meaning. In an operational perspec-
tive, a group is structured only when different interconnected activities (as
in production, for instance) are performed by different individuals of the
same group, that is, when there is a division of labor. Since some groups
do not have any division of labor, insofar as all their members perform the
same activity, the notion of structure is consequently not intrinsic to the
notion of group.

By obviating the question of interpersonal behavior and its patterning
through the agency of normative mental representations, and by postu-
lating a group for every different type of activities, I believe this opera-
tional notion of group to solve the problem of ontological variability. If
this is so, it should now be possible to derive operational definitions of kin-
ship, marriage, and the family which ought to be more universal and there-
fore more suited to the task of comparative analysis.'®
therefore an aggregated group which makes use of territoriality as the ele-
ment to achieve its aggregation. Descent groups belong to the same cate-
gory; they are groups of groups which utilize the fact of descent (putative
or real) to merge smaller groups. In such instances, there is “individual
membership” only in the elementary or simple groups merged into the de-
scent group; above that level we are not dealing with group membership,
but with group aggregation.

Kinship therefore appears as a criterion of group membership, whereas
descent is a criterion of group aggregation. Operationally speaking, kinship
is thus simply the fact of consanguinity used as a discriminating criterion
in the formation of groups, social categories, and corporations. As such,
it is not held to regulate behavior, or to carry with it specific rights and
duties, defining statuses. It is simply like an axiom defining a subset. From
this simple definition, there nevertheless follow a number of important
corollaries.

First of all, kinship is an all-embracing concept. It implies that two or
more individuals can trace links of consanguinity either to a common an-
cestor, or lineally to one another, through single or cumulative links of
filiation. Criteria of membership, however, are usually much more specific
than that and usually bear on precise links, such as matrifiliation, patri-
filiation, filiation, agnation, and so on. In other words, kinship can be said
to be a criterion of membership in a given group only when it is specified
that cognatic links give membership. Such a criterion, however, is not com-
monly found, and the notion of “kinship group” has been indiscriminately
applied to (a) descent groups, (5) groups where specific links of consan-
guinity other than cognation have been used, and (c) groups where cog-
nation is specified as the criterion of membership. Our usage dispels such
confusion but seriously restricts the application of “kinship groups” to
category c.

Second, it is also very uncommon to find only one criterion of member-
ship operating in the formation of groups. In New Guinea, for instance,
recruitment to some groups can be achieved either through patrifiliation or
through residence. Among the Abutia Ewe of Ghana, membership in ele-
mentary political groups is activated through patrifiliation, but also
through matrifiliation in specific circumstances. In every society there are
circumstances (such as illegitimacy, divorce of the parents, death of both
parents, and so on) in which additional criteria come into play. Conse-
quently, to characterize the Melanesian or Abutia groups by reference to
only one of their several criteria would be misleading. They cannot be
labeled “patrifiliative groups” (and still less “kinship groups”), because
they recognize other criteria in addition to patrifiliation. This unfortunate
tendency to conceptualize groups with reference to one dominant rule
(usually kinship) has only yielded paradoxes: when other rules are dis-
covered, which operate together with kinship, anthropologists have tended
to represent the characteristic rule as “weak.” In my view, these problems
need not be; they are the direct outcome of the manner in which groups
are conceptualized. If the conceptualization is changed, the problems will
disappear.

Furthermore, social anthropologists have indiscriminately characterized
groups by their activities (such as “political groups” or “groups of pro-
duction’’), or by one (and only one) of their criteria of membership (such
as kinship groups). In a comparative perspective, it seems that the activi-
ties represent the invariant part, whereas the criteria vary widely from one
society to the next. I would therefore deem it more useful to characterize
groups with respect to the activities in which their members are involved.
It would only be warranted to label groups with reference to their criteria
of membership when only one criterion is used (as in the case of age
groups). Such instances, however, are rare.

In other words, the locution “kinship group” ought to be restricted to
groups which select cognation as their only criterion of membership. Since
these groups could adequately be described as “cognatic’”’ and are not fre-
quently found, the whole notion of kinship group would more or less vanish
from an operational model. This disappearance would also precipitate the
demise of the family as a privileged group of reference, thereby severing
the implicit connection between kinship, on the one hand, and marriage
and the family, on the other. Kinship, operationally defined, is simply a
criterion of group membership and not a general idiom of social relation-
ships.
If the sexual involvement is not used as a discriminating criterion, the
individuals concerned do not form a mating group (as with involvement
with prostitutes, or collective sex, or generally promiscuous relations). It
follows from this definition that the sexual involvement of one of the
members of the mating group with someone outside the group blurs the
discrimination between member and nonmember and is likely to result in
the disruption of the original group if this involvement is known to the
other member (unless this outside involvement is with another spouse;
as we shall see, conjugal relations are not purely sexual). Sex outside the
mating group jeopardizes its existence since it contradicts its criterion of
membership.

A second corollary of this approach is that mating groups can only
be “mating pairs.” Empirically, it is obvious that the original pair does
not necessarily break up if one member forms another pair outside, but
this situation would have to be accounted for in terms of personal and
individual decisions (because money is involved, for instance); it does
not affect the analytical postulate. The resulting “triangle” would be
analytically described as two mating groups overlapping in one of their
members, and not as a mating group of three individuals. This overlap
would be purely circumstantial.

A mating group, however, is not necessarily a conjugal group, and I
do not believe that conjugal groups can be defined with reference to sexual
activities only. There are good reasons, which have been reiterated many
times in the literature, for wanting to separate sex and marriage analytical-
ly, since there are conjugal groups in which no sex is involved between
the partners (ghost-marriage, woman-marriage, or simply sexless marriage)
and there are mating groups which are manifestly not married (such as
instances of Nigerian Plateau sigisbeism, or the lover-mistress institution
of Western Europe), but there are no mating groups without any sex.
The conjugal group (as distinct from the mating group) seems indeed to
be formed around two distinct sets of activities, namely, sex and reproduc-
tion, with the emphasis on the latter. Reproduction, however, is a natural
activity (an activity performed by nature, and not by people; only copula-
tion is performed by people) which is also internal to women.!¢ Individ-

16 Some may wish to argue that it is also external to women insofar as other individ-
uals think they can influence reproduction by the use of special foods, special mas-
sages, or special rituals. This position is unfortunately untenable. The growth of
plants, for instance, is another natural activity internal to a natural environment.
People may form groups in the activities of planting, weeding, harvesting, and may
also perform rituals to influence the land’s fertility. They thus form groups of pro-
duction and ritual groups to assist the growth of plants, but do not form groups in
the process of growth itself, since they are not direct agents in it. Furthermore, there
is strictly no scientific value in trying to conflate activities or groups. Otherwise, one
ends up calling a group of production the group of individuals associated in the per-
formance of a fertility ritual.
uals cannot therefore form groups in the activity of reproduction itself
(they can in copulation, in child care, or in the rituals surrounding preg-
nancy, but not in reproduction itself), because they are not agents in it
(it is achieved without their direct intervention, only as a result of in-
direct action). There is nevertheless a universal connection between sexual
activities and reproduction, whether based on spiritual or physical pos-
tulates. Genitors are indeed recognized universally (Scheffler 1974).

This connection between the two activities is associated with the woman
only, since reproduction is internal to women. Conjugal groups thus seem
to be formed around the sexual activities of women, insofar as sex is linked
to reproduction, and “marriage” would then be the criterion of member-
ship of conjugal groups. I would suggest the following operational defini-
tion of marriage. First of all, conjugal groups are formed between one
or many persons of any sex, on the one hand, and one woman, on the
other, around the sexual activities of that woman insofar as they are con-
nected with reproduction. Second, the group needs a criterion of member-
ship. In fact, we find a conjugal group when two conditions are met: (a)
children born to the woman around whose reproduction the group has
been formed will not intrinsically transform or disrupt the group, and (5)
these children will gain membership in the main religious and/or political
groups of their mother, or of the person(s) (spouse) who has (have)
formed a group around the reproduction of that woman. Any fact or set
of facts (such as a ceremony, night visitations made public, cohabitation,
and so on [see Goodenough 1970]) which serve in the formation of groups
which meet these two conditions (i.e., conjugal groups) thus constitute
the conjugal group’s criteria of membership, and I define them as “mar-
riage.’”17

In many societies, the child is assured of membership in a political group
(as well as all other groups) whether or not his mother is married to his
genitor. Marriage, consequently, is not everywhere necessary for social
placement; nevertheless, where a woman’s relationship to a man is not
disrupted by the birth of a child, they form a conjugal group only if their
child can find social placement through them. If it cannot, there is no
marriage.18 Furthermore, a child born to an “unmarried pair” will trigger
off a change in that pair. They may be requested to stop their involve-
ment, or it may be terminated by itself, or the child may be killed, or the
man may be asked to marry the girl, or they may be punished, and so on.
If, after the birth of a child, a group organized around the sexual activities
of the woman (whether it is mating or not) remains intrinsically un-
changed and the child can trace political group membership through any
member of that group, the group can be treated analytically as a conjugal
group, and the fact which gave it these two properties can be identified
as marriage.1® Operationally speaking, marriage is somehow defined like
the notion of force in physics; it is not defined substantively, but through
its effects. If the effects are observed, we can then infer the existence of
marriage and attempt to identify it. By removing the need to list the
bundle of rights and duties which enters the definition of marriage, this
approach seems to have wider applicability. It easily extends to include
woman-marriage, leviratic marriage, Caribbean marriage, Nayar marriage,
and even marriage between two ghosts as practiced by the Singapore
Chinese (Topley 1955, p. 35), with only one exception known to me, name-
ly, homosexual unions. Where “married” homosexuals are allowed to adopt
children, there is a fiction of reproduction, and the resulting group could
by extension be considered a conjugal one. Where “married” homosexuals
are barred from adopting, however, they do not form a conjugal group,
and, whatever the actors say, their union is not to be treated analytically
as a marriage.?°

Within the same population, different facts are sometimes used in the
formation of conjugal groups (i.e., there are different types of marriage).
These differences, moreover, appear to be associated with concomitant
divergences in the women’s (and children’s) general social status. This
stems from the fact that marriage (or, more accurately, membership in
a conjugal group) is itself a criterion of membership in other groups.
Where different facts are used in the formation of conjugal groups within
the same society (i.e., where there are different types of marriage), one
usually finds that they are used differentially in giving access to other
groups or corporations. This is the operational equivalent of Leach’s notion
of bundle of rights. The manner in which different types of marriage in-
AN OPERATIONAL DEFINITION OF THE FAMILY

The family consists of a conjugal group and a child born or adopted to
them. In my opinion, there is not a single set of activities in which this
assemblage of individuals is universally involved. Sex only takes place
between the parents, and socialization and biological maintenance can be
and often are performed by the mother alone or by other agents. Family
members are often scattered over many residential groups and often form
different groups of production and distribution of products. The only
activity associated with the family, once more, seems to be reproduction.
Reproduction takes place within the woman and stops at birth. After that
we are dealing with biological maintenance, child care, socialization, but
not reproduction. The family is thus a set of individuals, membership in
which is defined with respect to an activity which is internal to one of
them, but in which none of them has been directly involved. Analytically
speaking, therefore, the family is not involved in any activity (Bender
[1967] has already concluded that the family has no function) and thus
is not a group as defined operationally.

Consequently, the collection of individuals delineated through the re-
production of a mating group will be designated a “biological set,” and
the collection of individuals delineated through the reproduction of a
conjugal group will be termed a “family.” A first corollary of this defini-
tion is that the family has neither function nor structure. Since its mem-
bers are not involved in any activity, it has no “definitional function” ;??
and without activities, there can be no division of labor. Hence the ab-
sence of structure. At the phenomenological level the family may appear
structured because of its overlap with other groups involved in specific
activities and internally structured, such as groups of production, of so-
cialization, and so on. When the family is isolated analytically, however,
it cannot logically be structured. Among some of the implications of this
definition, we will note only the following.

1. Adoption is an inverted way in which individuals can gain member-
ship in a family. It presupposes that the actual links of consanguinity of
a person are either unknown, completely ignored, or rendered useless, so
that he or she can then be “grafted” onto a conjugal group as if he or
she had been born to this group through reproduction. Consequently, if
a woman’s husband raises those children of his wife who are not born to
him, but the children can still activate their links to their genitor to gain
group membership, the situation will be defined as a case of fostering of
one’s wife’s child(ren), and the resulting set is not a family. If, however,
the links of consanguinity to the genitor (when the genitor is different
from the mother’s husband) are either unknown or completely ignored,
and the child gains membership in most groups through its mother’s hus-
band only, this represents a case of semiadoption, and the resulting unit
is a family.

2. Since the family is formed through the birth or adoption of children
to a conjugal group, it can break in only two ways: (a) by the death of
all children or the repudiation of any kinship links with them (as when
they are given in adoption or sold into slavery), or (b) by the termination
of the conjugal group itself (through death or divorce). If the death of
the father does not terminate the conjugal group, leviratic children will
belong to the family of their late father, if their links to their father are
used to gain membership in some groups.?°
to question our reliance on the intuitive, commonsense ideas of social
relationships, behavioral adjustment, and solidarity.

All social theorists who hoped that their discipline would eventually
share some of the rigor of the natural sciences have attempted to isolate
the social level, but have in fact failed to achieve this, because they all
assumed sociability, or solidarity, to be problematic. This premise prompted
them to define the social in terms of the regulation that norms, beliefs,
tules, rights, and duties exert on the behavior of interacting individuals.
By doing so, they reduced groups to behavior, or subsumed them under
culture, and denied them any separate ontological reality. This is what
I identified as the main source of the conceptual malaise which is now,
more than ever, bedeviling social and cultural anthropology, as well as
comparative sociology.

As an attempt to solve this conceptual predicament, I have proposed
an operational approach. I am eminently aware that, at the theoretical
level, one set of definitions equals another and that this approach’s analyti-
cal validity will only be proved if it stands the test of reality. This has
already been done successfully with a number of ethnographic problems,
the results of which are not yet in print. But if only the operational
notion of marriage, for instance, can serve to clarify the question of mar-
riage among the Nayars or in the Caribbeans, as I believe it does, this
can serve as a first demonstration that it takes us a bit further. More
exhaustive comparative analyses, unfortunately, remain a task which lies
ahead.

Many, if not all, will doubt the possibility of extricating the social from
the psychological and the cultural and thereby laying the foundations for
a more rigorous study of social organization. For almost two centuries, if
not more, this objective has remained the constant aspiration of sociologists
and anthropologists alike; that they have failed, however, should not be
construed as an indication that the project itself is intrinsically doomed
and that we ought to steer into phenomenology. It is rather evidence that
we ought to keep trying!
Bender, Donald R. 1967. “A Refinement of the Concept of Household: Families, Co-
residence, and Domestic Functions.” American Anthropologist 69:493-504.

Bohannan, Paul. 1963. Social Anthropology. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Buchler, Ira R., and Henry A. Selby. 1968. Kinship and Social Organization. New
York: Macmillan.

Burgess, Ernest W., Harvey J. Locke, and Mary M. Thomas. 1971. The Family. New
York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.

Christensen, Harold T. 1964. “Development of the Family Field of Study.” Pp. 1-33
in Handbook of Marriage and the Family, edited by Harold T. Christensen. Chi-
cago: Rand McNally.

Fallers, Lloyd A. 1957. “Some Determinants of Marriage Stability in Busoga: A Re-
formulation of Gluckman’s Hypothesis.” Africa 27:106-23.

Fischer, H. T. 1952. “Polyandry.” International Archives of Ethnography vol. 46, no. 1.

. 1956. “For a New Definition of Marriage.” Man 56:92.

Fortes, Meyer. 1949. The Web of Kinship among the Tallensi. London: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

. 1962. “Introduction.” Pp. 1-13 in Marriage in Tribal Societies, edited by
Meyer Fortes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gellner, Ernest. 1957. “Ideal Language and Kinship Terms.” Philosophy of Science 24:
235-43.

. 1960. “The Concept of Kinship.” Philosophy of Science 27:187-204.

. 1963. “Nature and Society in Social Anthropology.” Philosophy of Science 30:
236-51.

Gluckman, Max. 1950. “Kinship and Marriage among the Lozi of Northern Rhodesia
and the Zulu of Natal.” Pp. 166-206 in African Systems of Kinship and Marriage,
edited by Alfred Reginald Radcliffe-Brown and Daryll Forde. London: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Goode, William J. 1959. “The Sociology of the Family.” Pp. 178-96 in Sociology
Today, edited by Robert K. Merton, Leonard Broom, and Leonard S. Cottrell, Jr.
New York: Harper & Row.

Goodenough, Ward H. 1970. Description and Comparison in Cultural Anthropology.
Chicago: Aldine.

Gough, E. Kathleen. (1959) 1968. “The Nayars and the Definition of Marriage.” Pp.
49-72 in Marriage, Family and Residence, edited by Paul Bohannan and John Mid-
dleton. New York: Natural History Press.

Harris, C. C. 1969. The Family: An Introduction. London: Allen & Unwin.

Hays, William C. 1977. “Theorists and Theoretical Frameworks Identified by Family
Sociologists.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 39:59-66.

Hill, Reuben, and Donald A. Hansen. 1960. “The Identification of Conceptual Frame-
works Utilized in Family Study.” Marriage and Family Living 22:229-311.

Hsu, Francis L. K. 1965. “The Effect of Dominant Kin Relationships on Kin and
Non-Kin Behavior: A Hypothesis.” American Anthropologist 67:638-61.

Klein, John F., Gene P. Calvert, T. Neil Garland, and Margaret M. Poloma. 1969.
“Pilgrim’s Progress I: Recent Developments in Family Theory.” Journal of Marriage
and the Family 31:677-87.

Krige, Eileen Jensen. 1974. “Woman-Marriage, with Special Reference to the Lovedu—
Its Significance for the Definition of Marriage.” Africa 44:11-37.

Leach, Sir Edmund R. (1956) 1961. “Polyandry, Inheritance and the Definition of
Marriage.” Pp. 1-27 in Rethinking Anthropology. London: Athlone.

. 1961. “Aspects of Bridewealth and Marriage Stability among the Kachin and
Lakher.” Pp. 114-23 in Rethinking Anthropology. London: Athlone.

Lévi-Strauss, Claude. 1945. “L’Analyse structurale en linguistique et en anthropologie.
Pp. 37-62 in Anthropologie structurale. Paris: Plon.

. 1949. Les Structures élémentaires de la parenté. Paris: Presses Universitaires

de France.

. 1965. “The Future of Kinship Studies.” Proceedings of the Royal Anthropo-

logical Institute, pp. 13-22.

 

 

 

 

 

”
Levy, Marion J., and Lloyd A. Fallers. 1959. “The Family: Some Comparative Con-
siderations.” American Anthropologist 61:647-51.

Lewis, Ioan M. 1965. “Problems in the Comparative Study of Unilineal Descent.” Pp.
87-112 in The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology, edited by Michael
Banton. ASA Monograph 1. London: Tavistock.

Marshall, Gloria. 1968. “Marriage. II. Comparative Analysis.” Pp. 9-18 in Interna-
tional Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, edited by D. Sills. Vol. 10. New York:
Macmillan.

Mead, Margaret. 1931. “Family.” Pp. 65-67 in Encylcopedia of the Social Sciences,
edited by R. A. Seligman. Vol. 6. New York: Macmillan.

Mogey, John M. 1969. “Research on the Family: The Search for World Trends.”
Journal of Marriage and the Family 31:225-32.

Morgan, David H. J. 1975. Social Theory and the Family. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.

Murdock, George Peter. 1949. Social Structure. New York: Macmillan.

Murphy, Robert F. 1971. The Dialects of Social Life. New York: Basic.

Needham, Rodney. 1960. “Descent Systems and Ideal Language.” Philosophy of Sci-
ence 27:96-101.

. 1971. “Introduction.” Pp. xiii-cvii in Rethinking Kinship and Marriage, edited
by Rodney Needham. London: Tavistock.

Nye, Ivan F., and Felix M. Berardo. 1973. The Family. New York: Macmillan.

Peter, Prince of Greece and Denmark. 1956. “For a New Definition of Marriage.” Man
56:46,

Radcliffe-Brown, Alfred Reginald. (1935) 1952. “Patrilineal and Matrilineal Succes-
sion.” Pp. 32-48 in Structure and Function in Primitive Society. Glencoe, Ill.: Free
Press.

. 1957. A Natural Science of Society. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Reiss, Ira L. 1965. “The Universality of the Family: A Conceptual Analysis.” Journal
of Marriage and the Family 27:443-53.

Richards, Audrey. 1950. “Some Types of Family Structure among the Central Bantu.”
Pp. 207-51 in African Systems of Kinship and Marriage, edited by Alfred Reginald
Radcliffe-Brown and Daryll Forde. London: Oxford University Press.

Rivers, William H. R. 1924. Social Organization. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.

Riviére, Peter G. 1971. “Marriage: A Reassessment.” Pp. 57-74 in Rethinking Kinship
and Marriage, edited by Rodney Needham. London: Tavistock.

Scheffler, Harold W. 1974. “Kinship, Descent and Alliance.” Pp. 747-93 in Handbook
of Social and Cultural Anthropology, edited by John J. Honigmann. Chicago:
Rand McNally.

Schneider, David M. 1965. “Some Muddles in the Models: Or, How the System Really
Works.” Pp. 25-85 in The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology, edited by
Michael Banton. London: Tavistock.

. 1967. “Kinship and Culture: Descent and Filiation as Cultural Constructs.”

Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 23:65-73.

. 1968. American Kinship. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

. 1972. “What Is Kinship All About?” Pp. 32-63 in Kinship Studies in the
Morgan Centennial Year, edited by Priscilla Reining. Washington, D.C.: Anthropo-
logical Society of Washington.

Smith, Raymond T. 1968. “Family. I. Comparative Structure.” Pp. 301-12 in Inter-
national Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, edited by D. Sills. Vol. 10. New York:
Macmillan.

Topley, Marjorie. 1955. “Ghost Marriages among the Singapore Chinese.” Man 55:35.

Verdon, Michel. 1980a. “Descent: An Operational View.” Man 15:129-50.

. 1980b. “Shaking off the Domestic Yoke, or the Sociological Significance of
Residence.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 22:109-32.

Winch, Robert F. 1968. “Marriage. I. Family Formation.” Pp. 1-8 in International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, edited by D. Sills. Vol. 10. New York: Mac-
millan.
