Income Inequality and Income Segregation

Author(s): Sean F. Reardon and Kendra Bischoff

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 116, No. 4 (January 2011), pp. 1092-1153
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/657 114

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:51 UTC
‘ An earlier version of this article was presented at the annual meeting of the American
Sociological Association (Boston, August 2008) and the meeting of the International
Sociological Association Research Committee on Social Stratification and Mobility
(RC28; Stanford University, August 2008). We thank participants in the University of
Chicago’s Sociology Workshop for helpful feedback. We thank Steve Graham and
Yosef Bodovski for programming assistance. Research for this article was supported
by the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0520400 to Reardon and a graduate
research fellowship to Bischoff) and the William T. Grant Foundation (Reardon). Direct
correspondence to Sean F. Reardon, School of Education, Stanford University, 520
Galvez Mall, Stanford, California 94305. E-mail: sean.reardon@stanford.edu

* See http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/household/index.html,
table H-4.
and why income segregation has grown have been much less thoroughly
investigated than they have been for income inequality. Common sense
and empirical evidence suggest that these trends are linked—greater in-
equality in incomes implies greater inequality in the housing and neigh-
borhood “quality” that families or individuals can afford—but it is less
clear in what specific ways income inequality affects income segregation.

Income segregation—by which we mean the uneven geographic dis-
tribution of income groups within a certain area—is a complex, multi-
dimensional phenomenon.’ In particular, income segregation may be char-
acterized by the spatial segregation of poverty (the extent to which the
lowest-income households are isolated from middle- and upper-income
households) and/or the spatial segregation of affluence (the extent to which
the highest-income households are isolated from middle- and lower-
income households). In addition, income segregation may occur at dif-
ferent geographic scales. High- and low-income households may be spa-
tially far from one another or may be in economically homogeneous
neighborhoods that are spatially near one another (Reardon et al. 2008).
And given the strong correlation between income and race in the United
States, income segregation is often empirically entangled with racial seg-
regation, implying the necessity of examining income segregation sepa-
rately by race as well as for the population as a whole.

Income segregation—and its causes and trends—is of interest to soci-
ologists because it may lead to inequality in social outcomes. Income
segregation implies, by definition, that lower-income households will live,
on average, in neighborhoods with lower average incomes than higher-
income households do. If the average income of one’s neighbors (and/or
its correlates) indirectly affects one’s own social, economic, or physical
outcomes (and a large range of sociological theories predict such contextual
effects; see, e.g., Jencks and Mayer 1990; Sampson, Raudenbush, and
Earls 1997; Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn 2000; Morenoff 2003; Sampson,
Raudenbush, and Sharkey 2008), then income segregation will lead to
more unequal outcomes between low- and high-income households than
their differences in income alone would predict. In a highly segregated
region, then, higher-income households may be advantaged relative to
lower-income households not only by the difference in their own incomes
but by the differences in their respective neighbors’ incomes.

Given the potential consequences of income segregation on social, po-
litical, and health-related outcomes, it is important to understand how it
is produced. In this article, we seek to understand whether and how
income inequality leads to income segregation. More specifically, we seek
to understand if and how variation in income inequality—including var-
iation in inequality among metropolitan areas, between racial groups, and
over time—has shaped patterns of income segregation in the years 1970-
2000. Despite the importance of understanding the connection between
income inequality and income segregation, few studies have addressed
these questions (for exceptions, see Mayer [2000] and Watson [2009]).
Moreover, while these studies find that increasing income inequality leads
to (or is at least correlated with) increasing income segregation, they do
not investigate the ways in which income inequality is linked to income
segregation in depth. As a result, these studies provide little or no infor-
mation about income inequality’s effects on the segregation of poverty
and/or affluence, about racial differences in income segregation, or about
how income inequality affects the spatial scale of income segregation.

The research presented here investigates these issues. First, we describe
a set of trends in average metropolitan area income segregation from 1970
to 2000, including overall trends, trends among white and black families
separately, trends in the segregation of poverty and affluence, and trends
in the geographic scale of segregation. We use a newly developed measure
of rank-order income segregation that avoids the confounding of changes
in the income distribution with changes in income segregation. Second,
we estimate the effect of metropolitan area income inequality on overall
metropolitan area income segregation during this time period. Third, we
investigate in more detail how income inequality affects the geographic
segregation of poverty and affluence, the extent to which it affects income
segregation among white and black families differently, and the ways in
which it affects the geographic scale of income segregation.
and by 1970, this figure was below 8%, a 60% decline from its high in
1928. In the 1970s and 1980s, income inequality began to rise again. By
2006, the share of income held by the top decile was 45% and the share
held by the top 1% of earners was 18%, approaching inequality levels
similar to the pre-World War II highs (Piketty and Saez 2003, 2008;
Burkhauser et al. 2009).

The growth in income inequality in the past four decades has been
driven largely by the growth of “upper-tail inequality”—dispersion in the
relative incomes of those in the upper half of the income distribution—
rather than by growth in “lower-tail inequality” (Piketty and Saez 2003;
Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2006, 2008). This pattern is illustrated in figure
1, which shows the changes in the household Gini index (a standard
summary measure of income inequality), the 90/50 household income ratio
(the ratio of the income of the household at the 90th percentile of the
income distribution to that of the household at the 50th percentile), and
the 50/10 household income ratio. The 90/50 ratio was 30% larger in 2007
than it was in 1967, whereas the 50/10 ratio was actually 6%-7% smaller.
This implies that the lower tail of the income distribution was compressed
slightly (particularly in the early 1970s) whereas the upper tail was
stretched.* Moreover, the growth in the household Gini index over the
period very closely tracks the growth in the 90/50 ratio, indicating that
the trend in the Gini index was driven largely—if not entirely—by growth
in upper-tail inequality. Piketty and Saez (2003) argue that the notoriously
sharp increase in chief executive officer pay evident in recent decades is
indicative of a general shift from an elite rentier class in the beginning
of the 20th century to an elite “working rich” class today, leading to the
exceptional rise in inequality in the upper tail of the distribution.” As we
discuss below, this pattern of growth in income inequality has important
implications for the effects of income inequality on income segregation.
Jea,

OL0z so0z 000z S661 0661 S@6L Og6L Sl6L O/6L S961

pr anne Leanne enennenennsnesenneeet nesses enenesenessssneeel nssonensesssseseseses senses leseneenssenensssesstlessenenmensssnsesssselny

 

 

  

xapul lulg -————
oneY OL/0S
OneY OS/06

 

 

 

 

-s8'0

+060

- S60

— 001

-SO'b

robb

Shh

F072 b

rScb

-Oe'l

 

 

ZLOGBL 0} BAHE|aY ‘Ayjenbau awoou) pjoyasnoy
Dimensions of Income Segregation

Income segregation—the uneven sorting of households or families among
neighborhoods by income—is relatively ubiquitous in the United States.°
Anyone who has rented an apartment or bought a house understands
that housing costs more in some neighborhoods than it does in others.
Except for those few with liquid wealth, income is a primary determinant
of neighborhood affordability. Moreover, housing prices are tightly linked
to the cost of nearby housing. Realtors, appraisers, and home buyers use
recent sale prices of comparable neighborhood real estate to gauge ap-
propriate sale prices for nearby properties, which leads to positive feed-
back in local housing markets. And because mortgage loans are tied to
income (the last few years notwithstanding), home buyers’ neighborhood
options are constrained by their incomes. In principle, these mechanisms
operate to place a (somewhat permeable) floor on the incomes of indi-
viduals who can afford to live in a given neighborhood, leading to a
certain degree of residential sorting by income.

Income segregation has multiple dimensions. First, neighborhood sort-
ing of families or households by income may produce the segregation of
affluence and/or the segregation of poverty (by “segregation of affluence,”
we mean the uneven distribution of high-income and non-high-income
households among neighborhoods, and by “segregation of poverty,” we
likewise mean the uneven distribution of low- and non-low-income house-
holds among neighborhoods).’ Consider a stylized population made up of
three types of families—high, middle, and low income—who are distrib-
uted among three neighborhoods (see table 1). Under scenario 1, the low-
income families all live in a single neighborhood, with no middle- or high-
income neighbors, whereas the middle- and high-income families are
evenly distributed between the other two neighborhoods—a situation in
which the segregation of poverty is greater than the segregation of afflu-
ence (high-income families have some non-high-income neighbors, but
low-income families have only low-income neighbors). Under scenario 2,
the situation is reversed: the segregation of affluence is greater than the
segregation of poverty. And finally, in scenario 3, the segregation of both
poverty and affluence is very high.

A second important dimension of income segregation is its relationship
to patterns of racial segregation. Given the correlation of race and income
in the United States and the high levels of racial segregation in many
metropolitan areas, racial segregation alone could produce a certain degree
of income segregation, even if there were no within-race income segre-
gation at all. Moreover, the factors that affect income segregation and
that link income inequality to income segregation may differ importantly
across race/ethnic groups. Housing discrimination and residents’ prefer-
ences for same- or different-race neighbors, for example, may also affect
residential sorting. Until relatively recently, black families’ neighborhood
options were severely constrained by various discriminatory housing prac-
tices (steering by realtors, redlining by banks, rental discrimination, etc.),
and even now these processes have not been entirely eradicated (Yinger
1995; South and Crowder 1998; Turner et al. 2002; Ross and Turner 2005;
Turner and Ross 2005). Such practices meant that black and white families
with identical incomes and assets, for example, had a very different set
of residential options. This also likely meant that, historically, income
inequality was not as tightly linked to income segregation for black fam-
ilies as it was for white families.

A third dimension of income segregation is its geographic scale (Reardon
et al. 2008, 2009). This refers to the extent to which the neighborhood
sorting of households by income results from large-scale patterns of res-
idential sorting (as would be the case if all high-income families live in
the suburbs and all low-income families live in the city) or from small-
scale patterns of residential sorting (as would be the case if high- and
low-income residents were distributed in a checkerboard pattern through-
out a metropolis, with homogeneously wealthy neighborhoods adjacent
to homogeneously poor neighborhoods throughout the area). The extent

2004). We can have high levels of segregation of poverty without the spatial concen-
tration of poor households within one area of a region (e.g., if low-income families live
in many neighborhoods scattered throughout a metropolitan area but not in the same
census tracts as higher-income families).
Patterns and Trends in Income Segregation

Most prior research on income segregation has focused on measuring
overall income segregation and has attended little to either the geographic
scale of income segregation or the extent to which it is characterized by
the segregation of poverty and/or affluence. Research on the trends in
overall household or family income segregation generally indicate that
metropolitan area income segregation grew, on average, from 1970 to 2000,
though studies differ on the details of the timing and magnitude of the
increase because of differences in the measures of income segregation used
and the sample of metropolitan areas included (see Jargowsky 1996, 2003;
Mayer 2001b; Massey and Fischer 2003; Wheeler and La Jeunesse 2006;
Watson 2009). In particular, income segregation appears to have grown
most sharply in the 1980s. By many measures, income segregation, and
particularly the segregation of poverty, declined in the 1990s (Jargowsky
Potential Consequences of Income Segregation

There are many mechanisms through which income segregation might
affect individual outcomes. The quality of public goods and local social
institutions is affected by a jurisdiction’s tax base and by the involvement
of the community in the maintenance and investment of these public
resources. If high-income households cluster together within a small num-
ber of neighborhoods or municipalities, they may be able to collectively
better their own outcomes by pooling their extensive financial and social
capital to generate resources of which only they can take advantage. Such
income segregation may be self-reinforcing: low-income communities are
often unable to generate enough social and human capital to overcome
the strong incentive for wealthy communities to isolate themselves, be-
cause in homogeneously high-income communities, residents may be able
to capitalize on their ability to provide high-quality public services at the
lowest cost. Higher-income neighborhoods, therefore, may have more
green space, better-funded schools, better social services, or more of any
number of other amenities that affect quality of life. In addition, high-
and low-income neighborhoods may differ in their social processes, norms,
and social environments (Sampson et al. 1997; Sampson, Morenoff, and
Earls 1999). Conversely, if high-income households are not clustered to-
gether, then they may help to fund social services and institutions that
serve lower-income populations. Thus, the ability of high-income house-
holds to self-segregate affects the welfare of poor people and the neigh-
borhoods in which they reside. Not only does this resource problem affect
residents’ current quality of life and opportunities, but it can also bridge
generations: the income distribution in a community may affect the in-
tergenerational transfer of occupational status through investment in lo-
cally financed institutions that serve children, such as schools (Durlauf
1996).

Nonetheless, relatively little prior research has directly assessed the
impacts of income segregation on individual outcomes. Several studies
show that income segregation within states or metropolitan areas is as-
sociated with greater inequality in educational attainment between poor
and nonpoor individuals (Mayer 2000; Quillian 2007). Likewise, Mayer
and Sarin (2005) show that greater state-level income segregation is as-
sociated with higher rates of infant mortality. A related body of research
finds that metropolitan area racial segregation leads to greater racial in-
equality in labor market, educational, and health outcomes (Cutler and
Glaeser 1997; Ellen 2000; Ananat 2007; Osypuk and Acevedo-Garcia
2008). Because racial segregation implies some level of income segregation
(given the relatively large racial differences in income) and because income
segregation is one plausible mechanism through which racial segregation
may lead to racial inequality, the research showing that racial segregation
increases racial disparities is consistent with the hypothesis that income
segregation may lead to inequality of outcomes. In addition to the rela-
tively small body of research directly investigating the effects of income
segregation, a large body of recent research has attempted to investigate
one potential mechanism through which segregation may affect individ-
uals—the effect of living in a neighborhood with a high poverty rate. The
empirical evidence for such “neighborhood effects,” however, remains both
mixed and contested (see, e.g., Jencks and Mayer 1990; Rosenbaum and
Popkin 1991; Sampson et al. 1997, 2008; Waitzman and Smith 1998a,
19980; Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn 2000; Katz, Kling, and Liebman 2007;
Clampet-Lundquist and Massey 2008; Ludwig et al. 2008; Sampson 2008).
Nonetheless, a recent review of the neighborhood effects literature con-
cludes that residential context does indeed matter for at least one out-
come—children’s test scores—albeit in somewhat complex ways: these
neighborhood effects may be nonlinear with respect to baseline disad-
vantage and may depend on children’s age and the level of community
violence that is experienced by the child (Burdick-Will et al., in press).
In sum, while theoretical arguments suggest that income segregation likely
produces inequality in social outcomes, empirical research has yet to con-
clusively demonstrate this or to confirm its mechanisms.
there could be no income segregation because all individuals would have
the same income and thus all neighborhoods would have the same income
distribution. Nonetheless, income inequality is not alone sufficient to cre-
ate income segregation. Rather, income segregation also requires the pres-
ence of income-correlated residential preferences, an income-based hous-
ing market, and/or housing policies that link income to residential location.

Three kinds of income-correlated residential preferences may lead to
income segregation in the presence of income inequality: preferences re-
garding the socioeconomic characteristics of one’s neighbors, preferences
regarding characteristics of one’s neighbors that are correlated with their
income, and preferences regarding local public goods. If some or all house-
holds have preferences regarding the income level, educational attain-
ment, or occupational status of their neighbors (i.e., if at least some house-
holds prefer higher-income neighbors to lower-income neighbors), then
households with similar incomes will be more likely to be neighbors than
is expected by chance. Likewise, residential preferences based on neigh-
borhood characteristics that are correlated with income may also produce
income segregation. One obvious example is race. If households select
neighborhoods on the basis of the racial composition of that neighborhood
and household income is correlated with race, then this would also pro-
duce income segregation, even in the absence of income-specific prefer-
ences.

Preferences for public goods refer to the value households place on
amenities that can be collectively purchased (e.g., public school quality,
public parks, police services). Households that value such public goods
will have incentives to live in communities with neighbors who both share
these preferences and have high enough incomes to contribute to their
collective purchase (through property taxes, e.g.). This can be seen as a
manifestation of the Tiebout model of residential sorting, in which resi-
dents choose to live in municipalities that most closely match their ideal
set of government services with their ability to pay (Tiebout 1956). The
Tiebout model predicts income segregation because households with sim-
ilar preferences and ability to pay tend to form homogeneous communities.
Differences among communities in public goods, income-related demo-
graphic characteristics, and other social and cultural amenities may also
lead to the development of neighborhood status hierarchies, or what one
might call “neighborhood brands.” The differentiation of communities
along a status dimension in turn raises demand for those neighborhoods
with the most desirable brands (and lowers demand for those with the
least desirable brands). Thus, income differences may lead to the devel-
opment of a rough status hierarchy among residential locations; this status
hierarchy in turn may perpetuate income segregation by shaping house-
hold preferences.
Even in the presence of sizable income inequality, however, the income-
correlated preferences outlined above may be insufficient to produce in-
come segregation. Income segregation requires as well the existence of a
housing market based on residents’ ability to pay or housing policies that
sort households by income. For example, housing policies that constrain
residential options for low-income households to public housing devel-
opments may directly affect the segregation of poverty by virtue of the
spatial density and distribution of those options. More generally, income
segregation results from a residential allocation or sorting process, which,
in principle, is constrained by housing policy. Under a housing policy that
allows sorting on the basis of preferences and ability to pay, residential
segregation will likely be highly sensitive to changes in income inequality
and income-related residential preferences because, in such a society,
higher-income households will be able to outbid lower-income households
for access to preferred neighborhoods. In addition, when higher-income
households have greater influence than lower-income households over
local political processes, they may have the capacity to create housing
policies that perpetuate segregation by income, such as zoning laws that
prohibit multifamily housing or require minimum lot sizes to build new
structures.
@'Z = ONY OL/0S 87 = ONY OL/0S
97 = oneY OS/I06 --——— V'Z = ney OS/06
OF ‘0 = Xepul 1UId) vE'0 = Xepu

 

 

 

 

aljuedieg uoleindog (spuesnoy,) ewoduy

0 Wook =owsz = OS wsZ™CO SKY SF SF @e

  

&
°
€
2 FS
<p es
= 3
3 33
a 5
s 2 S ?
@ 5
°Q
2 :
st 3 ge
3
° e
s

 

 

 

Aysuaqg awoou] eayeinuund aesieAu|

Ayisueg ewoou
distributions depicted here differ only in the level of upper-tail inequality:
the 50/10 income ratio is identical in both cases, but the 90/50 income
ratio is 35% larger in the high-inequality case than in the low-inequality
case.’ Note that the income distributions described in figure 2 are not
based on actual data. Rather they are stylized distributions that exemplify
typical differences in income distributions—an exercise that highlights
how the type and magnitude of inequality relate to important features of
income distributions.

The left-hand panel of figure 2 shows that the income distribution is
more spread out at the high end under conditions of greater inequality.
There is greater variation in income among high earners in the higher-
inequality distribution than in the lower-inequality distribution. At the
low end of the income distribution, however, increasing inequality actually
compresses the income distribution, a result of the fact that income must
be nonnegative (at least in our stylized figures here).'°

The difference in the effect of income inequality at the high and low
ends of the income distributions is evident in the middle panel of figure
2. For example, it is instructive to compare the incomes of households at
the 20th and 30th percentiles in each scenario. In the lower-inequality
distribution (solid line), the household at the 20th percentile has an income
of $33,500 and the household at the 30th percentile has an income of
$43,000, a difference of $9,500 and a ratio of 1.28. In the higher-inequality
distribution (dashed line), the 20th- and 30th-percentile households have
incomes of $29,000 and $37,000, respectively, a difference of $8,000 and
a ratio of 1.28. That is, under high inequality, low- to moderate-income
households of a given distance apart in income ranks have incomes that
are actually closer together (and equally far apart if comparing incomes
using ratios) than under low inequality. This implies that increases in
income inequality of the type depicted here (i.e., increases in inequality
that leave the 50/10 ratio unchanged) will not increase and may actually
decrease income segregation among low-income households (segregation
of poverty). The reason is that increasing inequality (somewhat paradox-
ically) makes the incomes of low-income households more similar to one
another.

The opposite is true at the high end of the income distribution. When
the incomes of the 70th- and 80th-percentile households under both the
higher- and lower-inequality distributions are compared, it is apparent
Racial Differences in the Effects of Income Inequality

As we suggested above, income inequality may affect income segregation
differently among black and white households because of the variation
in housing markets available to each group. Racial discrimination in the
housing market has meant that, historically at least, minority households
(particularly black households) have had fewer residential options than
white households with similar income and wealth. Even if black house-
holds had the same preferences and the same level of income inequality
as white households, the racially discriminatory aspects of the housing
market likely led to lower levels of income segregation among black house-
holds than among white households. The reason is that the segregation
of black households compelled higher- and lower-income black households
to live close to one another.

The black middle class grew rapidly from 1940 to 1990," resulting in
rising income inequality among black households (Son, Model, and Fisher
1989; Farley and Frey 1994). Until the passage of the Fair Housing Act
in 1968 and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act in 1975, however, dis-
criminatory housing practices severely limited the residential mobility of
middle-class black families (Farley and Frey 1994). As a result, prior to
1970, income inequality among blacks was probably less tightly linked
to income segregation than it was for whites. In the period from 1970 to
2000, however, the housing options available to middle-class blacks
Empirical Predictions

The above arguments suggest several testable hypotheses. First, because
the U.S. housing market is largely based on ability to pay, we predict that
income inequality will be positively correlated with income segregation
and that changes in income inequality with be positively associated with
changes in income segregation. Second, because most of the change in
income inequality has been the result of growth in upper-tail inequality,
we predict that changes in income inequality will affect the segregation
of affluence to a greater degree than it affects the segregation of poverty.
Third, we predict that income inequality will have a stronger relationship
with income segregation among black families than among white families
during the period 1970-2000, when housing market constraints were sub-
stantially reduced for black households. Finally, although there is no ex-
isting research on the geographic scale of income segregation, we expect
that income inequality leads to income segregation primarily by increasing
the spatial distance between high- and low-income households (due to
suburbanization of middle- and upper-income households, e.g.). Thus, we
predict that income inequality will have a stronger relationship with
macro-scale segregation patterns than with micro-scale segregation pat-
terns.

There is little prior research regarding most of these hypotheses. Several
existing studies demonstrate a positive association between income in-
equality and income segregation. Mayer (2001b) shows that the well-
documented increase in income inequality from 1970 to 1990 resulted in
an increase in segregation between census tracts within states: although
the income variance within census tracts remained stable, the income
variance between tracts grew, indicating an increase in between-tract
income segregation. Wheeler and La Jeunesse (2008) largely corroborate
these findings using metropolitan areas, rather than states, as the unit of
analysis. They find that the average level of income segregation (measured
as the between-block group share of income inequality) within metro-
politan areas grew sharply in the 1980s and declined slightly in the 1990s,
a pattern that is only partly consistent with the trend in steadily rising
income inequality over the same period. Because their analysis is based
on a simple comparison of trends, however, it indicates little about the
causal relationship between income inequality and segregation.

A third recent study uses metropolitan area fixed-effects regression mod-
els to estimate the causal effect of metropolitan area income inequality
on income segregation, demonstrating that income inequality has a strong
effect on income segregation (Watson 2009). Specifically, Watson finds that
a 1-SD rise in income inequality leads to a 0.4-0.9-SD rise in income
segregation. Moreover, Watson briefly investigates several additional as-
pects of the relationship between income inequality and income segre-
gation. First, she finds that income inequality leads to increases in the
segregation of both poverty and affluence (though the effect is slightly
larger on the segregation of affluence). Second, she finds that income
inequality has a weaker effect on income segregation among black families
than in the population as a whole (contrary to our hypothesis above).
Finally, her results suggest no effect of income inequality on suburbani-
zation rates from 1970 to 2000, implying, perhaps, that income inequality
does not affect the geographic scale of income segregation (though Watson
notes that data limitations render these results merely “suggestive”). None-
theless, while each of these three analyses provides some evidence re-
garding our hypotheses, they each rely on segregation measures that are
not ideal. As we describe below, her preferred measure of segregation, the
centile gap index, does not allow clear comparisons across metro areas
and years and it cannot be used to measure geographic scale. In our
analyses below, we use a more appropriate measure of income segregation
that allows us to more directly estimate the effects of inequality on the
segregation of affluence and poverty and on the geographic scale of seg-
regation.
to measuring income segregation and then describe the measure we will
rely on, the rank-order information theory index (Reardon et al. 2006).

Much of the small body of existing literature on income segregation in
sociology has measured income segregation by using established measures
of racial segregation, such as the dissimilarity index, applied to a small
set of crude income categories (poor vs. nonpoor or upper, middle, and
lower income). Examples of this approach are found in the literature in
sociology (Massey and Eggers 1993; Massey 1996; Fong and Shibuya 2000;
Massey and Fischer 2003), urban planning (Coulton et al. 1996; Pendall
and Carruthers 2003), economics (Jenkins, Micklewright, and Schnepf
2006), and public health (Waitzman and Smith 19980). There are a number
of serious deficiencies with this technique, including the substantial loss
of information that results from treating income as categorical and the
arbitrary nature of selecting a small number of cut points to categorize
the data. Even if the exact income of families is unknown, the 16 income
categories reported in the 2000 U.S. census, for example, contain far more
information than two or even four categories. Moreover, the income cat-
egories (as well as the meaning of a given dollar amount of income) change
over time, so that categories defined in one decennial census cannot be
replicated in another.

A second approach to measuring income segregation defines segregation
as a ratio of the between-neighborhood variation in mean income to the
total population variation in income. Income segregation measures de-
rived from this approach have used a number of different measures of
income variation, including the variance of incomes (Davidoff 2005;
Wheeler 2006; Wheeler and La Jeunesse 2006), the standard deviation of
incomes (Jargowsky 1996, 1997), the variance of logged incomes (Ioan-
nides 2004), the coefficient of variation of incomes (Hardman and Ioan-
nides 2004), and Bourguignon’s income inequality index (Ioannides and
Seslen 2002). Similarly, the centile gap index (CGI) measures segregation
as one minus the ratio of within-neighborhood variation in income per-
centile ranks to the overall variation in percentile ranks (Watson 2006,
2009). Most well known in sociology is Jargowsky’s (1996, 1997) neigh-
borhood sorting index (NSI), which is defined as the square root of the
ratio of the between-unit income variance to the total income variance.

Although the NSI and measures like it improve on categorical measures
of income segregation because they do not rely on arbitrary and changing
dichotomizations of income distributions, they lack a key feature that is
necessary for our purposes in this article. In order to distinguish income
segregation (the sorting of households by income among census tracts,
independent of the income distribution) from income inequality (the un-
even distribution of income among families), a measure of income seg-
regation is required that is independent of income inequality. One way
The Rank-Order Information Theory Index

Reardon et al. (2006) describe the rank-order information theory index in
detail; we summarize its key features here. First, let p denote income
percentile ranks (scaled to range from zero to one) in a given income
distribution (i.e., = F(Y), where Y measures income and F is the cu-
mulative income density function). Now, for any given value of p, we can
dichotomize the income distribution at p and compute the residential
(pairwise) segregation between those with income ranks less than p and
those with income ranks greater than or equal to p. Let H(p) denote the
value of the traditional information theory index (Theil and Finezza 1971;
Theil 1972; Zoloth 1976; James and Taeuber 1985) of segregation com-
puted between the two groups so defined. Likewise, let E(p) denote the
entropy of the population when divided into these two groups (Theil and
Finezza 1971; Theil 1972; Pielou 1977). That is,
HR = zinc f E(p)H(p)dp. (3)

The rank-order information theory index ranges from a minimum of
zero, obtained in the case of no income segregation (when the income
distribution in each local environment [e.g., census tract] mirrors that of
the region as a whole), to a maximum of one, obtained in the case of
complete income segregation (when there is no income variation in any
local environment). Because the measure uses only information on the
rank ordering of household incomes within a metropolitan area, it is
independent of the income distribution. As a result, it is possible to make
meaningful comparisons across time, regardless of monetary inflation and
changes in income inequality, and across metropolitan areas and popu-
lation subgroups (such as racial groups), regardless of differences in their
income distributions. To compare the levels of within-group income seg-
regation among racial groups, we compute the rank-order information
theory index for each racial group separately. For a detailed description
of the computation of H* from census data, see appendix A.

Note that equation (3) defines H* as a weighted average of the binary
income segregation at each point in the income distribution. The weights
are proportional to the entropy E(p), which is maximized when p = 0.5
and minimized at p = 0 or p = 1. In other words, if we computed the
segregation between those families above and below each point in the
income distribution and averaged these segregation values, weighting the
segregation between families with above-median income and _ below-
median income the most, we get the rank-order information theory index."
These weights have an intuitive appeal since they imply that the extent
of segregation between those above and below the median is more in-
formative about overall residential sorting by income than the extent of
segregation between those above and below the 90th percentile, for ex-
ample.

Figure 3 provides an illustration of the information used in the cal-
culation of H® (see eq. [3] and app. A), using family income data from
the Chicago metropolitan area in 2000. The x-axis of figure 3 corresponds
to percentiles of the family income distribution in Chicago in the 2000
census, with the values of the 15 specific census income category thresholds
marked for reference. For example, roughly 5% of families in Chicago
had incomes less than $10,000 and roughly 50% had incomes less than
$60,000. The circular markers at each income threshold indicate the
between-tract segregation computed between two groups of families—
those with incomes below the threshold and those with incomes equal to
or greater than the threshold. So, for example, the value of the information
theory index of segregation between families earning less than $10,000
and those earning greater than or equal to $10,000 was roughly 0.45 in
Chicago in 2000. The markers indicate segregation levels for the 15 thresh-
olds available in the 2000 census. The solid line describes a fitted fourth-
order polynomial (our estimate of the function H(p); see app. A) through
the measured segregation levels. In this example, the estimated rank-order
information theory index is 0.298 (computed as the weighted average of
the value of the fitted line over the range of percentiles from zero to one;
see eq. [3]). It is possible to compute a segregation profile like this for any
metropolitan area in any year. More important, because H(p) is a function
of income percentiles rather than actual incomes, we can compare these
profiles across metropolitan areas, racial groups, or years despite differ-
ences in their underlying income distributions.

Once we have estimated the function H(p) (as described in app. A, eq.
[A1}), we can also compute estimated values of segregation at any desired
threshold. Suppose, for example, that we wish to estimate the segregation
between families in the top 10% of the income distribution and all others.
Even if there is not an income threshold in the census data that corre-
sponds exactly to the 90th percentile, we can estimate H(.9) from the fitted
polynomial (eq. [A1]). For example, even though there is no income thresh-
old in Chicago that corresponds exactly to the 90th income percentile, we
can compute the estimated value of H(.9) = 0.370 from the estimated
parameters of the fitted H(p) profile in figure 3. This will enable us to
compute and compare the segregation levels of well-defined income groups
even when the census does not provide the exact information needed.

Finally, as Reardon et al. (2006) note, equation (3) implies that we can
easily compute spatial measures of income segregation by replacing
H(p) in (3) with its spatial analogue, the spatial information theory index,
H(p) (Reardon and O’Sullivan 2004). The spatial information theory index
takes into account the spatial proximity of neighborhoods and computes
—— —— © Estimated Segregation at Census Category Threshold

Fitted Profile (4th-order polynomial)

   

 

 

@xH

0.304
0.204
o.10-+
0.00-+{ ,
0

@
°o

‘xepul AloayL uolewoju|

00'sz5

00005

Family Income (Dollars and Population Percentile)
Measuring Income Inequality

We measure income inequality within each race group-metro-year with
the Gini index (G). The Gini index measures the extent to which the actual
income distribution deviates from a hypothetical distribution in which
each person receives an identical share of total income. The measure
ranges from zero, indicating perfect equality (where each individual re-
ceives an identical share of the distribution), to one, indicating maximum
inequality (where one individual holds all of the income). The estimation
of G usually requires individual-level income data so that the cumulative
income shares of individuals can be plotted against the cumulative pop-
ulation shares. However, publically available census data provide income
data in categories, or bins, instead of as a metric measure. Thus, we
compute the Gini index from census data using a procedure described in
detail in Nielsen and Alderson (1997)."®
“ These 100 metropolitan areas together were home to 173 million residents in 2000,
62% of the US. total population, including 70% of non-Hispanic blacks (23.6 million),
78% of Hispanics (27.6 million), and 89% of Asians (9 million). The metropolitan areas
range in population from 11.3 million (New York—White Plains, New York-New
Jersey) to 561,000 (Scranton—Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania).

‘S For our analyses using spatial segregation measures, we use data from the 1980,
1990, and 2000 censuses only, because large parts of many metropolitan areas were
not tracted by the census in 1970, making the computation of metropolitan area
spatial segregation measures from 1970 error prone. Although some parts of met-
ropolitan areas were not fully tracted in 1980, untracted regions constitute only a
small part of most metropolitan areas in 1980. Our results are robust to the exclusion
of 1980 data.

* Family income data are not available separately for Hispanic and Asian families in
1970. In addition, because only 13 metropolitan areas contained at least 10,000 Asian
families in 1980, 1990, and 2000 and only 36 of the 100 largest metropolitan areas
contained at least 10,000 Hispanic families in 1980, 1990, and 2000, we do not include
Asian and Hispanic families in our analyses (except insofar as they are included in
the total population analyses).
ularly in the 1970s, a pattern that reflects the continuing growth of the
black middle class that began in the 1960s.

Average metropolitan area income segregation followed a similar pat-
tern, growing from 1970 to 2000, with the fastest increase occurring in
the 1980s. For black families, income segregation grew rapidly in the
1970s and 1980s, at a rate more than three times faster than the corre-
sponding growth of white income segregation. In fact, average black in-
come segregation was about 1/3 SD lower than white income segregation
in 1970 but was about 1 SD higher than white income segregation by
1990. As figure 4 shows, these patterns suggest a relationship between
income inequality and income segregation; for both black and white fam-
ilies, as well as for the total population, changes in income segregation
appear to roughly mirror changes in income inequality.

The trends in metropolitan area income segregation reported in table
2 and figure 4 do not match the patterns found in some prior research.
Watson (2009), for example, found that average metropolitan area income
segregation of all families, as measured by the CGI, declined slightly in
the 1970s and 1990s but rose sharply in the 1980s. Jargowsky (1996) and
Yang and Jargowsky (2006), however, found that average metropolitan
area income segregation of both white and black families, as measured
by the NSI, rose in the 1970s and 1980s but declined sharply in the 1990s.
Our estimated trends differ from these for two primary reasons. First, we
use a different measure of income segregation than these prior studies,
for reasons we describe above. Second, our estimates are based on the
100 largest metropolitan areas, whereas Watson (2009) uses 216 metro
areas; Jargowsky (1996) uses 228 and 76 metropolitan areas for the white
90°0

+ an oO oO
= = = 2
oO oO oO oO

( (\H Japio-yuey) uonebasGasg awoou|
o
S

slo

 

 

 

 

 

 

yoeld oyUM soles |IV
000Z 066 O86! OL6l 0002 066} 0861 O46} 000% O66! 0861 OZ6L
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Lpe'o
| |
I |
I | .
| i + 9¢'0
| |
| |
| | .
| | + 8c'0
I |
| a |
| — |
I 2 I + Ob'0
| f | v7?
| as | Pa
| = I 2
. 4 .
| © | 7 + zb'0
| | 7
I I 7
| | --s
| | ° L ro
| | uonebaibag -—-e——
| |
| | Ayyenbau; —~e—
| i + 9r'0

 

 

(xepuy 1uId) Ayyjenbau; ewoouy
and black trends, respectively, from 1970 to 1990; and Yang and Jar-
gowsky (2006) use 324 and 130 metropolitan areas for the white and black
trends, respectively, from 1990 to 2000. Our restriction to the 100 largest
metropolitan areas has substantial implications for the estimated trends,
as is evident in figure 5, which shows trends in income inequality and
segregation for smaller metropolitan areas (those with at least 10,000
families of the relevant group in each year, excluding the 100 largest
metropolitan areas). For small metropolitan areas, the trends in income
inequality are very similar to those for large metropolitan areas, but the
trends in income segregation are quite different. Income segregation in
small metropolitan areas is, on average, much lower than for large met-
ropolitan areas. In addition, income segregation in small metropolitan
areas declined in both the 1970s and 1990s (among all families and for
white families). Pooling the trends for large and small metropolitan areas
would yield a trend similar to that described by Watson (2009)—declining
average income segregation in the 1970s and 1990s and a sharp increase
in average income segregation in the 1980s.

Although table 2 and figure 4 show changes in the average values of
the rank-order information theory index from 1970 to 2000, they do not
provide detail on the extent to which changes in income segregation are
due to changes in the segregation of affluence and poverty. Figures 6-8
(for details, see app. table C1) show average metropolitan area segregation
profiles for 1970-2000. These enable us to examine the extent to which
segregation has changed between the poor and nonpoor and the rich and
nonrich, for example.

Figure 6 shows the trend in the average income segregation profile
across the 100 largest metropolitan areas from 1970 to 2000. First, note
that in 1970, the poor were much less segregated from the nonpoor than
the rich were from the nonrich. Income segregation between the poor and
nonpoor (segregation of poverty) grew sharply between 1970 and 1980,
however, whereas income segregation of the rich and nonrich (segregation
of affluence) did not. In the 1980s, however, income segregation grew at
all parts of the income distribution. In the 1990s, in contrast, income
segregation grew only modestly, and only between families in the middle
part of the income distribution. On average, the segregation of poverty
and the segregation of affluence were relatively unchanged in the 1990s.
These figures demonstrate that a single measure of income segregation
may not fully convey the pattern of changes.

Figures 7 and 8 show the corresponding trends for white (fig. 7) and
black families (fig. 8) separately. As we would expect, given the size of
the white population, the trends for white income segregation are similar
to those of the population as a whole. The trends in black family income
segregation, however, are rather different. Black income segregation grew
90°0

+ a o oO
= = = 2
Ss S S S

( (\H Japio-yuey) uonebeibas awoou|
©
S

slo

 

 

 

 

 

 

yoeld oHwUM sollwer |IV
0002 066 0861 O46 0002 066 0861 O46 0002 066} O086l OL6L
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
| L¢e'o
f | |
v I I
’ | I .
Zc \ \ + 9¢'0
? I |
/ | I
| I
/ I I + seo
So
NS I |
» | I + OF'0
| I
| I
| I
+ cro
| I
| I
| I | pro
| I
| | uonebeibes -—-»——
|
| | Ayyenbou| —e— ||
I i + 9r'0

 

 

(xapuy 1uId) Ayyenbauy awoou]
UOHINGUISIG eUodU| URWOdoujoyy JO aIIJUSDIEG

 

 

 

 

 

oor og 09 oY

| goo

zbo

oro

+020

trz0
oocz
066
oveL
ozet

+ 8z'0

 

 

 

 

 

(@p) uoneBeiBeg ewosu]
UoRNqUISsIG eUCoU| Ues|odojeYy Jo a]UEDEq

 

 

 

 

 

oot og 9 OF

| goo

EzLo

9L0

+020

+ z0
007
0661
og6)
ou6l

+8z0

 

 

 

 

 

(@p) uoneBeiBeg ewosu]
UOINGUISIG eWICSU] UeYJodosJEY JO eI]UEDIEq
09 ov

 

OL og 0z 0
eb
Leoo
rzro
+910
+020
+Pz'0
o00z
0661
oe6L
ou6)
F870

 

 

 

 

 

 

(@H) uoneBeiBeg ewoouj
rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s at all parts of the black income distribution.
Not only did low-income black families become more isolated from mid-
dle- and higher-income black families, but higher-income blacks became
increasingly segregated from lower-and middle-income black families as
well. In the 1990s, this trend ceased abruptly. In fact, the segregation of
lower- and moderate-income black families from higher-income black
families declined slightly in the 1990s.

The tables and figures above describe patterns and trends in income
segregation using “aspatial” measures of segregation. These measures treat
census tracts as discrete, spatially anonymous units and so are not fully
sensitive to changing spatial patterns of segregation. In particular, they
are insensitive to the spatial scale of segregation: they do not indicate the
extent to which segregation levels are due to the large- or small-scale
spatial patterning of families in residential space. Figure 9 reports average
segregation profiles similar to those in figures 6-8 but using the spatial
information theory index (Reardon and O’Sullivan 2004) computed at a
range of spatial scales instead of the tract-based information theory index
used in the figures above.

In particular, figure 9 shows the average spatial information theory
index household income segregation threshold profile computed using ra-
dii of 500, 1,000, 2,000, and 4,000 meters for the 100 largest metropolitan
areas in 2000.” These radii correspond roughly to local environments
ranging from “pedestrian” in size (500-meter radius) to those that are
considerably larger (4,000-meter radius)—the size of a large high school
attendance zone, for example—in scale than the neighborhoods in which
most people attend church, shop, and do much of their socializing (Rear-
don et al. 2008). In addition, figure 9 shows the macro/micro segregation
ratio (dashed line, with scale on the right-hand axis), which measures the
proportion of micro-scale segregation (segregation among 500-meter ra-
dius local environments) that is due to macro-scale segregation patterns
(segregation among 4,000-meter radius environments). This ratio can be
interpreted as a measure of the geographic scale of segregation, with larger
values indicating that more of the measured segregation is due to the
separation of groups over large distances (Reardon et al. 2008, 2009).

Two key patterns are evident in figure 9. First, spatial income segre-
gation patterns are very similar to the aspatial patterns shown in figure
6. Segregation of high-income households from other households is, in
general, higher than the segregation of low-income households from other
households, regardless of the radius at which segregation is measured.
OOoL
1

UOHNGLISIG awWooU] UeWOdoJOW JO BIUBDIEg

08 09 or
1 1

02 0

 

seo 4

g

g
2

(09s 4/0007) OEY OJOIA/OLDe YI
B 8
e 8

09°04

S904

 

   

 

 

WOOGHIWO00bH -————
snipey Woody
snipey WO00Z
‘snipey WOOO}
snipey WOOS

 

 

+ 00°0

+700

+ 800

clo

+ 9loO

+ 02'0

 

mca)

 

((2)H) uoneBes6ag awooy jeneds
Second, this pattern appears to be largely, if not entirely, due to the fact
that upper-income households are much more segregated at a large geo-
graphic scale than lower-income households. For high-income households,
60% or more of segregation patterns are due to macro-scale segregation—
presumably the concentration of high-income households in wealthy sub-
urban and exurban areas. For low-income households, 40% or less of
segregation patterns are due to macro-scale segregation; this implies that
the poor are less concentrated spatially than the wealthy in most met-
ropolitan areas.

In sum, our descriptive analyses reveal several important trends. First,
average metropolitan area income inequality and segregation both grew
from 1970 to 2000, though the growth in income segregation was much
larger for black families than for white families. Second, income segre-
gation grew at all parts of the income distribution from 1970 to 2000,
though at different times and at different rates for black and white fam-
ilies. Most of the growth in income segregation occurred between 1970
and 1990. Nonetheless, both the segregation of poverty and the segregation
of affluence were much higher in 2000 than they had been in 1970 for
white and black families alike. And third, the segregation of affluence is
generally greater than the segregation of poverty in the 100 largest met-
ropolitan areas, a pattern that appears to be driven by the macro-scale
segregation of the highest earners from others. In the next section of the
article, we investigate the extent to which variation in income inequality
can explain these patterns.
In addition, we wish to ensure that our estimates of the effect of in-
equality on segregation are not biased by any confounding metropolitan-
level covariates that are correlated with both inequality and segregation.
On the basis of previous research, we control for metropolitan demo-
graphic characteristics, housing market pressures and housing stock, intra-
and intermetropolitan mobility, population growth, labor market char-
acteristics, and family structure’ (Wilson 1987; Massey and Eggers 1993;
Abramson, Tobin, and VanderGoot 1995; Jargowsky 1996; Pendall and
Carruthers 2003; Wheeler 2006; Watson 2009). Notably, because the U.S.
census does not provide information on family wealth, we are unable to
include controls for metro-, year-, and race-specific aspects of the distri-
bution of wealth in our models. Although wealth is only modestly cor-
related with income, it plays a key role in residential location because it
enables families to buy housing in communities where their current income
may be insufficient and provides a financial cushion during unstable times,
such as temporary unemployment, illness, or divorce, and so enables fam-
ilies to remain in their home when their income cannot support them
(Wolff 2006). Nonetheless, research suggests that wealth may not be a
significant factor in neighborhood migration patterns (Sharkey 2008), al-
though it is a stronger predictor of neighborhood choice for blacks than
it is for non-Hispanic whites (Crowder, South, and Chavez 2006).

In the first set of regression models (models 1 and 2), we estimate the
effect of changes in inequality on changes in segregation, including both
metropolitan area x group fixed effects and decade fixed effects. These
models have the form

Fingy = 0° 1

mgy

+ Due +A, + XinyB + Wry + Emgys (4)

mgy mgy

where m indexes metropolitan areas, g indexes race groups, y indexes
census years, and H,,,, and J,,,, indicate the rank-order segregation and
income inequality, respectively, in metropolitan area m for group g in year
y. The models include metropolitan area x group (I,,,) and decade (A,)
fixed effects. The coefficient a on inequality from this model indicates the
average within-metro-group association (over time) between inequality
and segregation, net of any secular trend common to all metropolitan

areas and race groups. Model 2 includes a set of metro-year and group-
metro-year covariates (X,,, and W,,,,) as control variables in addition to
the fixed effects. We compute bootstrapped standard errors in all of the
regression models to take into account the clustered nature of the obser-
vations.

In the second set of models (models 3 and 4), we estimate the effect of
differences in income inequality between race groups on income segre-
gation, using metropolitan area x year fixed effects and group-specific

dummy variables. These models have the form

Foygy = 0+ Lygy +B yy + Ay + Wool + €ngys (5)

mgy mgy my

where I, and A, are metropolitan area x year and group-specific fixed
effects, respectively. The coefficient a on inequality from this model in-
dicates the average within-metro-year association (between race groups)
between inequality and segregation, net of any average differences in
inequality and segregation between race groups across metropolitan areas
and time. Model 4 includes a small set of group-metro-year covariates as
control variables as well as the fixed effects.

In the third set of models (models 5 and 6), we estimate the effect of
differences in income inequality among racial groups on income segre-
gation, using metropolitan area and group x year fixed effects. These mod-
els have the form

Fingy = O° Tngy

+ Ty + An + Xny BA Wreyl + €neys (6)

mey
where I, and A,, are group x year and metropolitan area fixed effects,
respectively. The coefficient a on inequality from this model indicates the
average within-group-year association (across metropolitan areas) be-
tween inequality and segregation, net of any average differences in in-
equality and segregation among metropolitan areas across groups and
decades. Model 6 includes a set of group-metro-year and metro-year co-
variates as control variables as well as the fixed effects. Because the three
models rely on different sources of variation in income inequality, each
relies on a different key assumption in order to support a causal claim
about the effect of income inequality on income segregation.” As a result,
Main Effects of Income Inequality on Income Segregation

Table 3 reports the estimates from the models described in equations (4)—
(6) above. Of primary interest here are the estimated coefficients on the
Gini index in models 2, 4, and 6, which include the full set of covariates
as well as the fixed effects. Model 2 yields an estimated association of
0.467 (SE = 0.060; P < .001) between income inequality and income
segregation, net of the model’s fixed effects and covariates. In other words,
a change of one point in a group’s income inequality is associated with
a change of roughly half a point in income segregation. Note also that
model 1 implies that changes in income inequality alone do not fully
explain the trends in income segregation; even after controlling for income
inequality, within-group income segregation grew, on average, by 0.013
points in the 1970s and by another 0.015 points in the 1980s.

Model 4, which relies on variation in income inequality between white
and black families within the same metropolitan area and year, yields an
estimated association between inequality and segregation of 0.783 (SE =
0.125; P < .001), somewhat larger than the estimate from model 2. Note
that model 3 implies that income inequality alone more than accounts for
the differences in income segregation between black and white families.
Model 3 implies that income segregation among black families is lower,
on average, than among white families within the same metropolitan area
and year, given the same level of income inequality.

Finally, model 6 yields an estimated association between income in-
equality and income segregation of 0.502 (SE = 0.110; P < .001). Thus,
each of the three models yields estimated coefficients on income inequality
that imply that inequality has a positive effect on income segregation. To
get a sense of the magnitude of these effects, note that an effect of 0.500
(roughly that found in models 2 and 6) implies that the changes in income

ropolitan areas and differences associated with the covariates in the model. None of
these three assumptions are likely to be perfectly true, but each model is somewhat
insulated against threats to another. If we are worried about temporal confounding
biasing the estimates from the first models, e.g., we can examine the second and third
sets of models, each of which relies on cross-sectional variation across groups or met-
ropolitan areas. If we are worried about unobserved group-specific factors, such as a
correlation between employment sector and preferences for neighbors, biasing the
estimates in the second set of models, we can look to the first and third sets of models,
each of which relies only on within-group variation (over time or across metropolitan
areas).
Model specification:
Metro-year co-
variates ........
Group-metro-year
covariates .....
Metro x group
fixed effects ... ‘Yes
Metro x year
fixed effects ...
Group x year
fixed effects ...

 

Metro fixed
effects .
Adjusted R’ . 879
Observations ....... 644

Aes Aen

Yes
Yes Yes
Yes
Yes Yes
-933 691 770
644 488 488

644

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
883
644

 

NotEe.—Bootstrapped SEs are in parentheses. The sample includes observations from
the 100 largest metropolitan areas in 2000, excluding black observations from 39 metro-
politan areas with fewer than 10,000 black families in 1970. Coefficients on covariates and
fixed effects are not shown. Metro-year covariates include metro population; unemployment
rate; proportion under age 18; proportion over age 65; proportion with high school diploma;
proportion foreign born; proportion female-headed families; per capita income; proportions
employed in manufacturing, construction, financial and real estate, professional, and man-
agerial jobs; and proportions of housing built within 10, five, and one years. Group-metro-
year covariates include race-group-specific population, per capita income, proportion with

high school diploma, proportion female-headed families, and unemployment rate.

*P <.05.
P< O01.
wee P< O01.
inequality from 1970 to 2000 shown in table 2 account for roughly 40%
of the average change in black income segregation, 80% of the average
change in white income segregation, and 60% of the average change in
overall income segregation. Put differently, a 1-SD change in income in-
equality leads to roughly a 0.25-SD change in income segregation.”

To ensure that the estimates from models 2, 4, and 6 are not driven by
one particular race group or decade, we fit an additional set of models
for each race group separately and another set of models for each decade
separately. The results of these models are shown in table 4. In each model,
the coefficient on inequality is positive and statistically significant. In the
group-specific models, the coefficients range from 0.450 to 0.561; in the
decade-specific models, the coefficients range from 0.624 to 0.732. Thus,
across all the models shown in tables 3 and 4, we find that income in-
equality has a large and positive association with income segregation,
regardless of whether we rely on temporal, between-group, or between—
metropolitan area variation to identify this association and regardless of
which groups or decades we use in the sample.**
Metro-year
covariates ..
Group-metro-year

 

  

covariates ....... ‘Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Metro fixed effects ‘Yes ‘Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Adjusted R? 959 921 689 789 821 866
Observations 400 244 161 161 161 161

 

 

NotEe.—Bootstrapped SEs are in parentheses. The sample includes observations from
the 100 largest metropolitan areas in 2000, excluding black observations from 39 metro-
politan areas with fewer than 10,000 black families in 1970. Coefficients on covariates and
fixed effects are not shown. Metro-year covariates include metro population; unemployment
rate; proportion under age 18; proportion over age 65; proportion with a high school diploma;
proportion foreign born; proportion female-headed families; per capita income; proportions
employed in manufacturing, construction, financial and real estate, professional, and man-
agerial jobs; and proportions of housing built within 10, five, and one years. Group-metro-
year covariates include race-group-specific population, per capita income, proportion with
high school diploma, proportion female-headed families, and unemployment rate.

*P <.05.

P< O1.

we P< O01.
Japoy oujay-usemjog J2POW dnoig-usemjog Japoy epeceq-usemjog
sé cL os sz Ss sé GL os Gz Ss sé GL os Gz Ss
L ! 1 ! 1 L ! L ! L 1 ! \ L L

 

-S0-

00

 

 

rso

Pol

rgb

 

 

pos peyeulysy
sé

cL

yoeld
os

SL os

soles |IV
sz
1 1

 

l s‘o-

p00

SO

Fol

Sl

 

 

popA peyeullysy
Effects of Income Inequality on Spatial Segregation Patterns

Our third set of analyses investigates whether income inequality produces
macro- and/or micro-scale income segregation patterns. For these anal-
yses, we focus on the relationship between overall income inequality and
household income segregation rather than race-specific family income in-
equality and segregation. As above, we focus on the 100 largest metro-
politan areas in 2000. We fit models that include metropolitan area and
year fixed effects and a set of metropolitan area x year covariates (the
models are identical to those specified in col. 1 of table 4, except for the
different outcome and the fact that we use data only from years 1980 to
2000).

In order to investigate the geographic scale of the effects of income
inequality, we fit these models using five different measures of spatial
segregation: four using different radii and one using the measure of “net
micro segregation” described by Lee et al. (2008). Our rationale for this
is as follows. The level of segregation among micro environments (local
environments of 500-meter radius) can be thought of as made up of two
nonnegative components: a component that is due to macro-scale segre-
gation patterns—that is, segregation among macro environments (local
environments of 4,000-meter radius)—plus a component that is due to
micro-scale variation in neighborhood composition over and above the
macro-scale patterns. By definition, then, the effect of inequality on seg-
regation among micro-scale environments will be equal to the sum of its
effect on macro-scale segregation and its effect on net micro segregation.
Thus, by comparing the effect estimates across the outcome measures, we
can infer the geographic scale at which income inequality affects segre-
gation. For example, if inequality affects segregation among micro en-
vironments much more than it affects segregation among macro environ-
ments, then the effect of segregation must operate primarily to increase
the small-scale spatial patterning of income (net micro segregation). Con-
versely, if inequality affects segregation among micro- and macro-scale
environments equally, then the effect of segregation must operate pri-
marily to increase the macro-scale spatial patterning of income (and have
no effect on small-scale pattering).

Our estimates of these different effects are shown in table 5. The key
result in table 5 is the consistency of the point estimates of the effect of
inequality (reading across rows of the table), regardless of the radius used
to define a household’s local environment. In each model, and regardless
of the span of years, income inequality has a significant effect on macro-
scale segregation (4,000-meter radius local environments) and a roughly
similar-sized effect on smaller-scale segregation (though the latter esti-
mates are not always statistically significant because of large standard
errors). Moreover, the effect of income inequality on net micro-scale seg-
regation (the difference between 500-meter and 4,000-meter radius seg-
regation, shown in col. 5 of table 5) is indistinguishable from zero in these
models, implying that the effect of income inequality on segregation op-
erates entirely through its effect on macro segregation. In other words,
income inequality affects income segregation by shaping residential pat-
terns at a large spatial scale rather than by increasing the block-to-block
sorting of households by income.

In figure 12, we present the results of an analysis that combines features
of two of the preceding analyses. Here we report the effects of income
inequality on spatial household income segregation at specific percentiles
of the income distribution and using different local environment radii to
compute spatial segregation. The left-hand panel of figure 12 shows that
income inequality has a large positive effect on the spatial segregation of
affluence but a negative effect on the spatial segregation of extreme pov-
erty (the bottom 5% of the income distribution) when segregation is com-
puted among local environments of 500-meter radius. The center panel
indicates that income inequality has a similar effect on macro-scale seg-
regation except in the bottom quartile of the income distribution. The
right-hand panel of figure 12 describes the portion of the effect of income
inequality on 500-meter radius segregation that is not due to macro-scale
segregation effects (mathematically, this effect is the difference between
the two effects in the left and center of the figure). Except for the effects
on the segregation of poverty, these net micro-scale effects are indistin-
guishable from zero. Income inequality does, however, appear to reduce
the segregation of extreme poverty by reducing the small-scale patterning
of the segregation of the very poor, a finding consistent with the fact that
income inequality may actually compress the lower part of the income
distribution. As we note above, when the lower part of the income dis-
tribution is compressed, low-income households at different percentiles of
the income distribution may be more likely to be able to afford to live in
the same neighborhoods, leading to lower income segregation. In sum,
figure 12 suggests that income inequality affects income segregation pri-
TABLE 5

ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF INCOME INEQUALITY ON SPATIAL INCOME SEGREGATION, 100

LarGEST METROPOLITAN AREAS, 1980-2000

 

 

SAMPLE: OUTCOME (Radius)

 

 

YEARS INCLUDED (500m) (1,000m) A(2,000m) A(4,000m) A(diff)
1980-2000 (V = 300) ... 377 355 All 414* —.036
(.247) (.213) (.214) (.194) (.089)

915 894 874 852 -909

1990-2000 (NV = 200) ... 396* 401* 385 HE -368** 028
(.185) (.160) (114) (.140) (.112)

-940 942 -942 -940 -890

1980 (N = 100).......... 351* 3647 416% 366** —.016
(.169) (133) (.109) (.133) (.076)

629 621 585 586 .235

1990 (N = 100).......... 466** A486 AQT RE 458% 008
(.147) (139) (137) (.152) (.062)

563 550 504 444 462

2000 (N = 100).......... .270 .299* .260* 009
(.148) (119) (117) (.065)

385 388 369 268

 

 

NoTeE.—Bootstrapped SEs are in parentheses below estimated coefficients. Adjusted R’’s
are reported below the SEs. The top two rows are based on models that include metropolitan
area and year fixed effects and the set of metro x year covariates described in the text. The
bottom three rows are based on models that include metro-year covariates but no fixed

effects.
*P <.05.
P< O1.
we P< O01.
sé
L

32949 9[29S-O191 JON

SZ
L

0s
Ll

se
L

Ss
L

(WOQOOPH) 1993 a1eoS-o10e,

sé
1

SL
L

os
1

sz
1

s
L

s6
L

(WOOSH) 23 12}0L

SZ
L

os
L

gz
L

s

 

—

Lol

+S0-

 

ft

00

so

rol

rst

 

 

poy peyewijsy
they imply that increasing income inequality was responsible for 40%-
80% of the changes in income segregation from 1970 to 2000. The strength
and consistency of our results across a wide range of model specifications
suggest that this is a robust relationship, at least among large metropolitan
areas in the decades from 1970 to 2000. The estimated effect, however,
is much weaker among small metropolitan areas. Moreover, it is important
to keep in mind that this analysis investigates the effect of income in-
equality in an era of rising inequality. It is not clear to what extent these
findings generalize to eras of lower, or stable, inequality.

One might be concerned that our estimated effects are subject to various
forms of bias. For example, despite our efforts to use a range of modeling
strategies to protect our estimates from unobserved confounding, the es-
timated associations here may nonetheless be biased by the presence of
some unaccounted-for factors that shape both income inequality and in-
come segregation. The consistency of the results across three sources of
variation, however, strongly suggests a causal relationship. More impor-
tant, one might worry that the estimated associations represent the effects
of segregation on inequality rather than the other way around. Certainly
there is reason to suspect that income segregation may engender increased
income inequality by providing differential access to quality schooling,
high-paying labor markets, and differential social capital. However, many
mechanisms that would drive such effects would require considerable time
to take effect (schooling effects would not manifest as increased income
inequality for many years, e.g.), so we think that these are less plausible
explanations for our findings. Nonetheless, we test the hypothesis of re-
verse causality by reversing our regressions (using inequality as the de-
pendent variable and segregation as an independent variable in models
2, 4, and 6). In each case, the estimated associations between segregation
and inequality are positive and statistically significant but much smaller
in magnitude than the effects we report.”®

Our second main finding is that income inequality affects income seg-
regation primarily by affecting the segregation of affluence rather than
the segregation of poverty. Although the segregation of poverty increased
from 1970 to 2000 for both white and black families as well as for all
families, very little of this change is attributable to changes in income
inequality. Indeed, income inequality affects the relative incomes of lower-
income households only to a small degree and may actually compress the
low end of the income distribution. This suggests that changes in income
inequality would be expected to have little effect on the segregation of
poverty. Our estimates of the effect of income inequality on spatial seg-
regation, in fact, suggest that income inequality may slightly reduce the
spatial segregation of low-income households. Given that income in-
equality does not seem to drive the patterns of the segregation of poverty,
we suspect that the segregation of poverty is more a result of housing
policy than of income inequality. Through the 1980s, federal and met-
ropolitan housing policies fostered the development of high-density hous-
ing for low-income families. These policies are likely responsible for much
of the growth of the segregation of poverty over that time. Likewise, the
growth in scattered-site low-income and mixed-income housing in the
1990s, coupled with the demolition of some large, high-density public
housing projects, may account for the stabilization of the segregation of
poverty in the 1990s.

Third, we find that the relationship between income inequality and
income segregation differs for black and white families. In 1970, income
segregation among black families was lower than among white families.
This is likely the result of the ghettoization of minorities that took place,
particularly in northern and midwestern American cities, during the post-
World War II suburbanization boom. Because of housing discrimination,
black families were largely denied access to suburban areas, leaving both
middle- and lower-income black families living in relative proximity in
urban areas. The passage of housing and lending antidiscrimination leg-
islation in the 1970s, however, began to reduce the prevalence of housing
discrimination, making a wider range of neighborhood options available
to middle-income black families. As a result, income segregation among
black families rose steeply from 1970 to 1990, as the growing black middle
class was able to move into previously inaccessible suburban areas. By
1980, in fact, income segregation among black families was higher than
among white families. In this era, black income inequality is strongly
related to the segregation of high-income black families in neighborhoods
separate from lower-income black families. Although this growth in in-
come segregation among black families is a result of both the growing
black middle class and reductions in housing discrimination—both signs
of progress since the 1960s—it nonetheless may have negative conse-
quences. Given high levels of racial segregation in U.S. cities, the growth
of income segregation among black families results in the increasing racial
and socioeconomic isolation of lower-income black families in neighbor-
hoods of concentrated disadvantage (Wilson 1987).

Finally, we find that the effects of income inequality on income seg-
regation are driven primarily by the effects of inequality on macro-scale
patterns of segregation. Coupled with our earlier finding regarding the
effects of inequality on the segregation of affluence, this means that income
inequality appears to increase income segregation largely by inducing the
highest-earning families to move far away from lower-income households.
The expansion of suburban and exurban areas in the last few decades,
facilitated by the growth of the highway system and the movement of
many high-skill industries to the suburban ring, has allowed families to
move farther away from metropolitan cores while still engaging in the
high-skill labor market. The fact that the effect of income inequality on
income segregation is much weaker in small metropolitan areas is con-
sistent with this explanation. Because macro-scale segregation is often not
possible in small metropolitan areas, inequality may have little room to
affect income segregation. If one of the key amenities that high-income
families desire to purchase is space—large lots, very low-density housing,
and access to parks and undeveloped open space—then they will be much
more able to do so in large metropolitan areas.

In sum, our analyses show that income inequality has a strong and
robust effect on income segregation but that this effect is more nuanced
in form than one might initially expect. In fact, income inequality appears
to be responsible for a specific aspect of income segregation—the large-
scale separation of the affluent from lower-income households and fam-
ilies. It does not, however, appear to be responsible for patterns of seg-
regation of poverty (for that, housing policy is likely to blame). Nor is it
responsible for patterns of small-scale income segregation, such as those
seen resulting from the gentrification of urban neighborhoods adjacent to
poor, nongentrifying neighborhoods.

The macro-scale spatial segregation of high-income households from
middle- and low-income households may have important and far-reaching
consequences, particularly given that the top 10% of earners in the United
States now receive 45% of all income. The segregation of these high-
income households in communities spatially far from lower-income house-
holds may reduce the likelihood that high-income residents will have
social, or even casual, contact with lower-income residents. This in turn
may make it less likely that they are willing to invest in metropolitan-
wide public resources that would benefit residents of all income levels,
such as transportation networks, utilities, parks, services, and cultural
amenities. Moreover, the spatial separation of the affluent and poor implies
that there will be few opportunities for disadvantaged families to benefit
from local spillover of public goods. The distance between affluent and
lower-income communities makes it unlikely that disadvantaged families
will be able to take advantage of the local schools, parks, and services in
which affluent communities invest. Although most sociological theory and
research regarding the spatial distribution of income have focused on the
effects of concentrated poverty on residents of poor neighborhoods, the
findings here suggest that a better understanding of the effects of con-
centrated affluence on residents far from affluent communities is needed
as well. The segregation of affluence may directly affect the resources
available to residents of both poor and lower-income neighborhoods.
Given the evidence that income inequality has sizable effects on income
segregation, it is plausible that income segregation may mediate the effects
of income inequality on social outcomes. A large body of research has
linked income inequality to negative health outcomes such as increased
morbidity, mortality, and infant death as well as to negative effects on
educational attainment, crime rates, social capital, network ties, and po-
litical institutions (see Neckerman and Torche [2007] for a review). Al-
though some scholars have argued that income segregation may serve as
a mechanism that links income inequality to some of these negative social
outcomes (Mayer 2002; Mayer and Sarin 2005; Neckerman and Torche
2007), the scant research on this topic has produced mixed results. Mayer
and Sarin (2005) explicitly test this hypothesis and show that income
segregation is one mechanism that links income inequality to infant mor-
tality at the state level. However, other research finds that economic seg-
regation does not mediate the relationship between income inequality and
mortality (Lobmayer and Wilkinson 2002) or between income inequality
and the distribution of educational attainment (Mayer 2001a). Clearly the
role of income segregation as a mediator between income inequality and
various social outcomes warrants further investigation, as does the direct
impact of income segregation on other forms of social inequality.
APPENDIX A

Computing Income Segregation

Practical Issues in Computing the Rank-Order Information Theory
Index, H®

To compute H* from equation (3), we need to know the function H(p)
over the domain (0, 1). In practice, however (given census data, e.g.), we
can compute H() for only a finite number of values of p, corresponding
to the income category thresholds that the census uses to report incomes.
For example, in the 2000 census, income was reported in 16 categories
(less than $10,000, $10,000-$15,000, $15,000-$20,000, and so on, up to
$150,000-$200,000 and greater than $200,000). These allow us to compute
H(p) at 15 distinct values of p (those corresponding to F(10,000),
F(15,000), ..., #(200,000) in this case). Within each census tract, the census
provides counts (estimates, really, based on a 1-in-6 sample) of the number
of families with incomes below each of these income thresholds. For each
of the thresholds, we can compute #, the proportion of the population
with incomes below the threshold, and H(), the information theory index
of segregation between those below the thresholds and those at or above
the thresholds. Following Reardon et al. (2006), we then approximate the
function H(p) over the range (0, 1) by fitting an mth-order polynomial to
the values, weighting each point by the square of E(p):

°

Hi) = 6+ 80+ BP + BD Hey Gg ~N(0 Ge). (AD
We use a fourth-order polynomial here, but our results are insensitive to
the choice of any higher-order polynomial. If 6, is the estimated kth co-
efficient from this model, then Reardon et al. (2006) show that equation
(3) will evaluate to
Correcting Small Sample Bias in Income Segregation Measures

One complication with comparing income segregation levels across met-
ropolitan areas and racial groups is that evenness measures of income
segregation are biased upward in small populations (specifically, when
the population is relatively small compared to the number of tracts). This
bias results from the fact that income segregation measures (including the
rank-order information theory index) are generally ratios of average
within-unit (e.g., tracts) income variation to total population income var-
iation. When the number of households in a unit is small (either because
of a small population or because of sampling), estimates of within-unit
variation will be biased downward, meaning that estimates of segregation
will be biased upward. The bias can be substantial. When we take a
random sample of 10,000 households from a metropolitan area and com-
pare income segregation among the sample to income segregation among
the total population, the sample estimates are considerably higher. Given
that census family income data are based on 1-in-6 samples, this has
implications for comparing income segregation across metropolitan areas,
years, and groups that vary in population size.

To ensure that our comparisons of the levels of segregation among
metropolitan areas, race groups, and decades are not biased by differences
in population size, we adjust the estimated segregation levels for popu-
lation size. For each of the 644 cases in our analysis, we draw 50 random
samples (without replacement) of 10,000 families of the specified racial
group (or from the total population) and compute H* from each sample.
The mean of these 50 estimates provides a population size—adjusted es-
timate of income segregation for each group-metro-year case. This pro-
cedure eliminates bias due to different population sizes by ensuring that
each of the estimates of H® are based on the same size sample. The
APPENDIX B

Data and Sample
Data Comparability Issues

Metropolitan boundaries and definitions ——Metropolitan boundaries
change over time. We use consistent metropolitan area definitions across
census years to ensure comparability of the results over time. We use the
OMB 2003 metropolitan area definitions, the first definitions based on
the 2000 census.

Census confidentiality procedures —The census employs certain mea-
sures to ensure confidentiality that affect the reporting of race-specific
income distributions. More specifically, the census suppresses data within
certain geographic units when it determines that the population numbers
for certain groups are small enough to threaten the privacy rights of
individuals or families. For instance, if there are only a handful of black
families in a census tract, the census would not release the income data
for black families in that tract because it may be possible to identify
individual families. In 1980 the census also employed complementary
suppression, which can lead to the suppression of other groups besides
the small subgroup to avoid inferences through subtraction. We do not
adjust our analyses for suppression, but because we include in our race-
specific analyses only metropolitan areas with more than 10,000 families
in that race group, the problem is minimized.

Income.—Total income is defined by the census as the sum of the
amounts reported separately for wage or salary income; net self-employ-
ment income; interest, dividends, or net rental or royalty income or income
from estates and trusts; social security or railroad retirement income;
Supplemental Security Income; public assistance or welfare payments;
retirement, survivor, or disability pensions; and all other income.

We use family income data from the 1970-2000 censuses. We obtain
tract-level family income data by race for 1970, 1980, and 2000 from the
GeoLytics Neighborhood Change Database CDs (GeoLytics 2004) as well
as the 1990 data from the National Historical Geographic Information
System’s online data extract system (Minnesota Population Center 2004).
This was necessary because family income by race was not available in
the STF3 files in 1990, the files available in the GeoLytics CDs. Instead,
the 1990 family income by race was in the STF4a files.

The census reports income for families and households. We use family
income because the data are available by race for all four census years.
Covariates: Data and Construction

Total population (by race).—1970-2000 obtained from National
Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS).

Unemployment (by race).—1970 obtained from NHGIS; 1980-2000 ob-
tained from GeoLytics. We collapsed unemployment by gender and then
calculated the percentage of the population that is unemployed. This
measure includes persons 16 years of age and older in the civilian em-
ployment force who are not employed.

Age.—1970 obtained from NHGIS; 1980-2000 obtained from Geo-
Lytics. We calculate the percentage of the population that is less than 18
and the percentage of the population older than 65. In 1970, the under-
18 category is actually under 19.

Education (by race).—1970-2000 obtained from NHGIS. We calculate
the percentage of the population with at least a high school diploma for
the population 25 years and older.

Per capita income (by race).—1970-2000 obtained from NHGIS. In
1970 there was no specific variable for per capita income, so we con-
structed the measure using the aggregate individual income variable.

Foreign born.—1970-2000 obtained from GeoLytics. We calculate the
percentage of the population that was born outside of the United States.

Occupational industries —1970-1990 obtained from NHGIS; 2000 ob-
tained from GeoLytics. We calculate the percentage of the population that
is employed in the following occupational industries: manufacturing; con-
struction; finance, insurance, and real estate; and professional/managerial
(information; finance, insurance, and real estate; education; health; other
professional; and public administration). This measure includes persons
16 years of age and older in the civilian employment force.

Family structure (by race).—1970 obtained from NHGIS; 1980-2000
obtained from GeoLytics. We calculate the percentage of families that are
headed by females. We also calculate the total number of families.

Residential mobility —1970-2000 obtained from GeoLytics. We cal-
culate the percentage of the population that resides in the same house
that they did five years before as well as the percentage of the population
that resides in a different house in the same county. These measures
include persons 5 years of age and older.

New housing construction.—1970 obtained from NHGIS; 1980-2000
obtained from GeoLytics. We calculate the percentage of housing (occu-
pied + vacant) built 10 years, 5 years, and 1 year before the census year.
TABLE Cl

TRENDS IN FAMILY INCOME SEGREGATION, BY RACE AND INCOME PERCENTILE, 100

LarGEST METROPOLITAN AREAS, 1970-2000

 

 

 

 

 

YEAR
GROUP AND PERCENTILE 1970 1980 1990 2000 Change
Black:
Sth oo. cee 101 132 188 192 091
10th .. 095 125 177 176 081
25th 091 121 163 156 065
50th 097 128 162 158 061
75th 102 139 177 176 .074
90th 127 71 .228 .230 103
95th .. 145 192 260 264 119
White:
Sth .... 17 145 163 173 056
10th .. 104 124 139 148 044
25th .. 093 101 AL 118 025
50th .. -100 107 118 126 026
75th .. 119 123 144 151 032
90th .. 178 175 .204 .207 029
95th 216 .210 242 241 025
All:
Sth .. 134 .180 .208 -203 069
10th 122 156 179 178 056
25th 112 124 .140 144 032
50th 114 122 136 143 029
75th .. 128 134 156 163 035
90th .. 184 187 213 215 031
95th .. 221 223 .250 247 026

 

 

NotTEe.—Segregation measures indicate segregation (H) of families with incomes above
the specified income percentile from those with incomes below the percentile. The sample
includes the 100 largest metropolitan areas (according to 2000 population). For blacks, the
sample includes 61 of 100 metropolitan areas with at least 10,000 black families in each

census, 1970-2000.
TABLE C2
ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF INCOME INEQUALITY ON INCOME SEGREGATION AT VARIOUS
PERCENTILES OF INCOME DISTRIBUTION, 100 LARGEST METROPOLITAN AREAS, VARIOUS

SPECIFICATIONS, 1970-2000

 

 

PERCENTILE OF INCOME DISTRIBUTION

 

 

MopeEL Sth 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th

Model 2 (V = 644)....... 076 = .138 292% ATAREE B39 — -T7QHEK BATHE
(124) (.091) (051) (.057) (.069) (.108) (.130)

Model 4 (V = 488)....... A86* —.626*** 782% 719% B4QeEE 1. O74*RE 1.15 6%**
(.239) (.190) (.166) (.120) (.123) (132) (.147)

Model 6 (V = 644)....... 133.235 A00** — 484 631K 785% 84H
(135) (115) (.124) (.094) (.085) (.099) (.129)

All families (V = 400)... 155.244 387 550%* — .789FEE BT TRRK 756%
(181) (.158) (142) (.169) (.084) (133) (211)
White (V = 400) ......... 110.164 273" — 462*** 661" — 61LRE 527*
(116) (.098) (.100) (118) (.110) (141) (.229)

Black (NV = 244) ......... 259.202 263 AT4RRE  SO5*E — Q62*EE 1. 250%**
(.276) (.207) (141) (.106) (107) (.166) (.194)

 

NotTEe.— Coefficients are estimated effects of income inequality on income segregation at the
specified percentile of income distribution. Bootstrapped SEs are in parentheses. Estimates from
models 2, 4, and 6 use the sample and corresponding model specifications from table 3. Estimates
for all families use the sample of the 100 largest metropolitan areas and specifications from
table 4; estimates for white and black families use the sample of the 100 largest metropolitan
areas with at least 10,000 families of the specified group (100 metropolitan areas for white
models and 61 metropolitan areas for black models) and use specifications from table 4.

*P <.05.
P< O01.
wee P< O01.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore.
2009. “Recent Trends in Top Income Shares in the USA: Reconciling Estimates from
March CPS and IRS Tax Return Data.” Working paper no. 15320. National Bureau
of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Card, David, and John E. DiNardo. 2002. “Skill-Biased Technological Change and
Rising Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics
20:733-83.

Card, David, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell. 2004. “Unions and Wage In-
equality.” Journal of Labor Research 25:519-59.

Clampet-Lundquist, Susan, and Douglas S. Massey. 2008. “Neighborhood Effects on
Economic Self-Sufficiency: A Reconsideration of the Moving to Opportunity Ex-
periment.” American Journal of Sociology 114:107-43.

Coulton, Claudia J., Julian Chow, Edward C. Wang, and Marilyn Su. 1996. “Geo-
graphic Concentration of Affluence and Poverty in 100 Metropolitan Areas, 1990.”
Urban Affairs Review 32:186-216.

Crowder, Kyle, Scott South, and Erick Chavez. 2006. “Wealth, Race, and Inter-neigh-
borhood Migration.” American Sociological Review 71:72-94.

Cutler, David M., and Edward L. Glaeser. 1997. “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112:827-71.

Davidoff, Thomas. 2005. “Income Sorting: Measurement and Decomposition.” Man-
uscript. University of California, Berkeley.

DiPrete, Thomas A. 2007. “What Has Sociology to Contribute to the Study of Inequality
Trends? A Historical and Comparative Perspective.” American Behavioral Scientist
50:603-18.

Duncan, Otis Dudley, and Beverly Duncan. 1955. “A Methodological Analysis of Seg-
regation Indexes.” American Sociological Review 20:210-17.

Durlauf, Steven. 1996. “A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Growth 1:75-93.

Echenique, Federico, and Roland G. Fryer. 2005. “On the Measurement of Segrega-
tion.” Working paper no. 11258. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Mass.

Ellen, Ingrid Gould. 2000. “Is Segregation Bad for Your Health? The Case of Low
Birth Weight.” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 203-38.

Farley, Reynolds, and William H. Frey. 1994. “Changes in the Segregation of Whites
from Blacks during the 1980s: Small Steps toward a More Integrated Society.”
American Sociological Review 59:23-45.

Firebaugh, Glenn, and Matthew B. Schroeder. 2008. “Does Your Neighbor’s Income
Affect Your Happiness?” American Journal of Sociology 115 (3): 805-31.

Fong, Eric, and Kumiko Shibuya. 2000. “The Spatial Separation of the Poor in Ca-
nadian Cities.” Demography 37:449-59.

GeoLytics. 2004. “Neighborhood Change Database.” East Brunswick, N.J.: GeoLytics.

Gottschalk, P., and Sheldon Danziger. 2005. “Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings and
Family Income in the United States, 1975-2000.” Review of Income and Wealth 51:
231-54.

Hardman, Anna, and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2004. “Neighbors’ Income Distribution:
Economic Segregation and Mixing in U.S. Urban Neighborhoods.” Journal of Hous-
ing Economics 13:368-82.

Ioannides, Yannis M. 2004. “Neighborhood Income Distributions.” Journal of Urban
Economics 56:435-57.

Ioannides, Yannis M., and Tracey N. Seslen. 2002. “Neighborhood Wealth Distribu-
tions.” Economics Letters 76:357-67.

James, David R., and Karl E. Taeuber. 1985. “Measures of Segregation.” Sociological
Methodology 14:1-32.
Jargowsky, Paul A. 1996. “Take the Money and Run: Economic Segregation in U.S.
Metropolitan Areas.” American Sociological Review 61:984-98.

. 1997. Poverty and Place: Ghettos, Barrios, and the American City. New York:

Russell Sage Foundation.

. 2003. “Stunning Progress, Hidden Problems: The Dramatic Decline of Con-
centrated Poverty in the 1990s.” Pp. 1-24 in Living Cities Census Series. Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Jencks, Christopher, and Susan Mayer. 1990. “The Social Consequences of Growing
Up in a Poor Neighborhood.” Pp. 111-86 in Inner-City Poverty in the United States,
edited by Laurence E. Lynn Jr. and Michael G. H. McGeary. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.

Jenkins, Stephen P., John Micklewright, and Sylke V. Schnepf. 2006. “Social Segregation
in Schools: An International Comparison.” Paper presented at the 29th General
Conference of the International Association for Research in Income and Wealth,
Joensuu, Finland, August 20-26. http://www.iariw.org/papers/2006/jenkins.pdf.

Katz, Lawrence F,, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2007. “Experimental
Estimates of Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75:83-119.

Lee, Barrett A., Sean F. Reardon, Glenn Firebaugh, Chad R. Farrell, Stephen A.
Matthews, and David O’Sullivan. 2008. “Beyond the Census Tract: Patterns and
Determinants of Racial Residential Segregation at Multiple Geographic Scales.”
American Sociological Review 73:766-91.

Lee, David S. 1999. “Wage Inequality in the United States during the 1980s: Rising
Dispersion or Falling Minimum Wage?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:977—
1023.

Leventhal, Tama, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2000. “The Neighborhoods They Live In:
The Effects of Neighborhood Residence on Child and Adolescent Outcomes.” Psy-
chological Bulletin 126:309-37.

Levy, Frank, and Richard J. Murnane. 1992. “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings
Inequality: A Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations.” Journal of
Economic Literature 30:1333-81.

Lobmayer, P., and R. G. Wilkinson. 2002. “Inequality, Residential Segregation by In-
come, and Mortality in US Cities.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
56:183-87.

Ludwig, Jens, Jeffrey B. Liebman, Jeffrey R. Kling, Greg J. Duncan, Lawrence F.
Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2008. “What Can We Learn about
Neighborhood Effects from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment?” American
Journal of Sociology 114:144-88.

Massey, Douglas S. 1996. “The Age of Extremes: Concentrated Affluence and Poverty
in the Twenty-first Century.” Demography 33:395-412.

Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton. 1988. “The Dimensions of Residential
Segregation.” Social Forces 67:281-315.

Massey, Douglas S., and Mitchell L. Eggers. 1993. “The Spatial Concentration of
Affluence and Poverty during the 1970s.” Urban Affairs Quarterly 29:299-315.

Massey, Douglas S., and Mary J. Fischer. 2003. “The Geography of Inequality in the
United States, 1950-2000.” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 1-40.

Mayer, Susan E. 2000. “Income Inequality, Economic Segregation and Children’s Ed-
ucational Attainment.” Manuscript. University of Chicago.

. 2001a. “How Did the Increase in Economic Inequality Affect Educational

Attainment?” American Journal of Sociology 107:1-32.

. 2001b. “How the Growth in Income Inequality Increased Economic Segre-

gation.” Working paper no. 230. Joint Center for Poverty Research, Northwestern

University, Institute for Policy Research, and University of Chicago, Harris School

of Public Policy Studies.
. 2002. “How Economic Segregation Affects Children’s Educational Attain-
ment.” Social Forces 81:153-76.

Mayer, Susan E., and Ankur Sarin. 2005. “An A: ment of Some Mechanisms Linking
Economic Inequality and Infant Mortality.” Social Science and Medicine 60:439-
55.

Minnesota Population Center. 2004. “National Historical Geographic Information Sys-
tem: Pre-release Version 0.1.” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. http://www
nhgis.org.

Moller, Stephanie, Arthur S. Alderson, and Frangois Nielsen. 2009. “Changing Patterns
of Income Inequality in U.S. Counties, 1970-2000.” American Journal of Sociology
114:1037-1101.

Mora, Ricardo, and Javier Ruiz-Castillo. 2003. “Additively Decomposable Segregation
Indexes: The Case of Gender Segregation by Occupations and Human Capital Levels
in Spain.” Journal of Economic Inequality 1:147-79.

Morenoff, Jeffrey D. 2003. “Neighborhood Mechanisms and the Spatial Dynamics of
Birth Weight.” American Journal of Sociology 108:976-1017.

Neckerman, Kathryn M., and Florencia Torche. 2007. “Inequality: Causes and Con-
sequences.” Annual Review of Sociology 33:335-57.

Nielsen, Francois, and Arthur S. Alderson. 1997. “The Kuznets Curve and the Great
U-Turn: Income Inequality in U.S. Counties, 1970 to 1990.” American Sociological
Review 62:12-33.

Osypuk, Theresa L., and Dolores Acevedo-Garcia. 2008. “Are Racial Disparities in
Preterm Birth Larger in Hypersegregated Areas?” American Journal of Epidemiology
167:1295-1304.

Pendall, Rolf, and John I. Carruthers. 2003. “Does Density Exacerbate Income Seg-
regation? Evidence from U.S. Metropolitan Areas, 1980 to 2000.” Housing Policy
Debate 14:541-89.

Pielou, Evelyn C. 1977. Mathematical Ecology. New York: Wiley.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States,
1913-1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:1-39.

. 2008. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998 (Tables and Figures
Updated to 2006).” http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/.

Quillian, Lincoln. 2007. “Does Segregation Create Winners and Losers? Education and
Spatial Segregation on the Basis of Income and Race.” Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Population Association of America, New York City, March 29-31.

Reardon, Sean F., Chad R. Farrell, Stephen Matthews, David O’Sullivan, Kendra
Bischoff, and Glenn Firebaugh. 2009. “Race and Space in the 1990s: Changes in
the Geographic Scale of Racial Residential Segregation, 1990-2000.” Social Science
Research 38:55-70.

Reardon, Sean F., and Glenn Firebaugh. 2002. “Measures of Multi-group Segregation.”
Sociological Methodology 32:33-67.

Reardon, Sean F.,, Glenn Firebaugh, David O’Sullivan, and Stephen A. Matthews.
2006. “Measures of Socioeconomic Segregation.” Paper presented at the 29th General
Conference of the International Association for Research in Income and Wealth,
Joensuu, Finland, August 20-26. http://www.iariw.org/papers/2006/reardon.pdf.

Reardon, Sean F., Stephen A. Matthews, David O’Sullivan, Barrett A. Lee, Glenn
Firebaugh, Chad R. Farrell, and Kendra Bischoff. 2008. “The Geographic Scale of
Metropolitan Racial Segregation.” Demography 45:489-514.

Reardon, Sean F.,, and David O’Sullivan. 2004. “Measures of Spatial Segregation.”
Sociological Methodology 34:121-62.

Rosenbaum, James E., and Susan J. Popkin. 1991. “Employment and Earnings of
Low-Income Blacks Who Move to Middle-Class Suburbs.” Pp. 342-56 in The Urban
Underclass, edited by Christopher Jencks and Paul E. Peterson. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.
Ross, Stephen L., and Margery Austin Turner. 2005. “Housing Discrimination in Met-
ropolitan America: Explaining Changes between 1989 and 2000.” Social Problems
52:152-80.

Ryscavage, Paul. 1999. Income Inequality in America: An Analysis of Trends. New
York: Sharpe.

Sampson, Robert J. 2008. “Moving to Inequality: Neighborhood Effects and Experi-
ments Meet Social Structure.” American Journal of Sociology 114:189-231.

Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Felton Earls. 1999. “Beyond Social
Capital: Spatial Dynamics of Collective Efficacy for Children.” American Sociolog-
ical Review 64:633-60.

Sampson, Robert J., Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls. 1997. “Neighborhoods
and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy.” Science 277:918-24.

Sampson, Robert J., Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Patrick Sharkey. 2008. “Durable
Effects of Concentrated Disadvantage on Verbal Ability among African-American
Children.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105:845-52.

Schwartz, Christine R., and Robert D. Mare. 2005. “Trends in Educational Assortative
Marriage from 1940-2003.” Demography 42:621-46.

Sharkey, Patrick. 2008. “The Intergenerational Transmission of Context.” American
Journal of Sociology 113:931-69.

Son, In Soo, Suzanne W. Model, and Gene A. Fisher. 1989. “Polarization and Progress
in the Black Community: Earnings and Status Gains for Young Black Males in the
Era of Affirmative Action.” Sociological Forum 4:309-27.

South, Scott J., and Kyle D. Crowder. 1998. “Housing Discrimination and Residential
Mobility: Impacts for Blacks and Whites.” Population Research and Policy Review
17:369-87.

Taeuber, Karl E., and Alma F. Taeuber. 1965. Negroes in Cities: Residential Segregation
and Neighborhood Change. Chicago: Aldine.

Theil, Henri. 1972. Statistical Decomposition Analysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Theil, Henri, and Anthony J. Finezza. 1971. “A Note on the Measurement of Racial
Integration of Schools by Means of Informational Concepts.” Journal of Mathe-
matical Sociology 1:187-94.

Tiebout, C. M. 1956. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures.” Journal of Political
Economy 64:416-24.

Turner, Margery Austin, and Stephen L. Ross. 2005. “How Racial Discrimination
Affects the Search for Housing.” Pp. 81-100 in The Geography of Opportunity: Race
and Housing Choice in Metropolitan America, edited by Xavier de Souza Briggs.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Turner, Margery Austin, Stephen L. Ross, George C. Galster, and John Yinger. 2002.
“Discrimination in Metropolitan Housing Markets: National Results from Phase I
HDS 2000” [electronic version]. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development.

Waitzman, Norman J., and Ken R. Smith. 1998a. “Phantom of the Area: Poverty-Area
Residence and Mortality in the United States.” American Journal of Public Health
88:973-76.

. 1998b. “Separate but Lethal: The Effects of Economic Segregation on Mortality
in Metropolitan America.” Milbank Quarterly 76:341-73.

Watson, Tara. 2006. “Metropolitan Growth, Inequality, and Neighborhood Segregation
by Income.” Manuscript. Williams College.

. 2009. “Inequality and the Measurement of Residential Segregation by Income.”
Review of Income and Wealth 55:820-44.

Western, Bruce, Deirdre Bloome, and Christine Percheski. 2008. “Inequality among
American Families with Children, 1975-2005.” American Sociological Review 73:
903-20.

Wheeler, Christopher H. 2006. “Urban Decentralization and Income Inequality: Is
Sprawl Associated with Rising Income Segregation across Neighborhoods?” Man-
uscript. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Wheeler, Christopher H., and Elizabeth A. La Jeunesse. 2006. “Neighborhood Income
Inequality.” Manuscript. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

. 2008. “Trends in Neighborhood Income Inequality in the U.S., 1980-2000.”
Journal of Regional Science 48:879-91.

Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass,
and Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wolff, Edward N. 2006. “Changes in Household Wealth in the 1980s and 1990s in the
US.” Pp. 107-50 in International Perspectives on Household Wealth, edited by
Edward N. Wolff. Northampton, Mass.: Elgar.

Wong, David W. S. 1993. “Spatial Indices of Segregation.” Urban Studies 30:559-72.

. 2002. “Spatial Measures of Segregation and GIS.” Urban Geography 23:85-

 

 
 
 

 

92.

Yang, Rebecca, and Paul A. Jargowsky. 2006. “Suburban Development and Economic
Segregation in the 1990s.” Journal of Urban Affairs 28:253-73.

Yinger, John. 1995. Closed Doors, Opportunities Lost: The Continuing Costs of Housing
Discrimination. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Zoloth, Barbara S. 1976. “Alternative Measures of School Segregation.” Land Eco-
nomics 52:278-98.
