Children of Misfortune: Early Adversity and Cumulative Inequality in Perceived Life
Trajectories

Author(s): Markus H. Schafer, Kenneth F. Ferraro and Sarah A. Mustillo

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 116, No. 4 (January 2011), pp. 1053-1091
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/655760

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:50 UTC
‘ Earlier versions of this article were presented at the 2008 meeting of the American
Sociological Association in Boston and the Indiana University Social Psychology,
Health, and the Life Course workshop. The article has benefited from the helpful
criticism of Pamela Jackson, Jane McLeod, Tim Owens, Eliza Pavalko, Joy Pixley,
Brian Powell, Donald Reitzes, Peggy Thoits, Andrea Willson, and AJS reviewers.
Support for this research was provided by a grant from the National Institute on Aging
to the second author (RO1AG033541). Data were made available by the Inter-University
Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Neither the col-
lector of the original data nor the consortium bears any responsibility for the analyses
or interpretations presented here. Direct all correspondence to Markus Schafer, De-
partment of Sociology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-2059. E-mail:
mhschafe@purdue.edu
picious label (Sampson and Laub 1997), or socioeconomic strain (Hayward
and Gorman 2004), can have enduring consequences on life chances. Early
life course events and experiences are the seedbed for lifelong human
development, and life course scholars are bringing fresh insights into how
negative conditions during childhood and adolescence compromise adult
well-being (Turner and Lloyd 1995; Conley and Bennett 2000; Dube et
al. 2001; Singh-Manoux and Marmot 2005).

Missing from most of this research, however, is explicit attention to
how people interpret the course of their lives in light of the adversity they
have experienced. Most previous studies on the topic identify the negative
early-life exposures and seek to link these to outcomes during adulthood
and later life. This genre of research is exemplary to aid our understanding
of the life course, and the priority on structural disadvantage is well
placed. At the same time, human agency plays an important role in how
people interpret and respond to early adversity. Some people face major
disadvantages but fare rather well by mobilizing resources, choosing
wisely, and/or expending extraordinary effort (Thoits 2006). This is not
to diminish the influence of structural disadvantage but to recognize the
important role that human agency plays in facing adversity. As several
recent papers demonstrate, how people interpret their experience of ad-
verse events is critical for either the maintenance of well-being or opti-
mization of life chances (Surtees and Wainwright 2007; Reynolds and
Turner 2008).

From an interactionist point of view, people actively interpret and de-
fine lines of action (Goffman 1959; Blumer 1969), and reflective processes
provide intrinsic motivations for behavior (Gecas and Burke 1995). Few
studies, however, have examined how people fit together lines of actions
over the life course to understand the ebb and flow of life sequences. To
that end, this article systematically examines how adversity during child-
hood affects the way in which adults understand their past, present, and
future—whether things are getting better, growing worse, or staying the
same. We examine a straightforward measure, general life evaluations,
investigating how temporal appraisals are related to actualized futures
and whether early adversity has long-term consequences on life evalua-
tions.

As beings that often construe events in narrative form, humans in-
terpret life in a way in which circumstances in the past, present, and
future constitute an understandable and unified story (Mead 1932; Call-
ero 2003). These cognitive schemas are of interest to social psychologists
interested in mental health (Keyes and Ryff 2000) but also to sociologists
who argue that perceived life trajectories are closely linked to the process
of cumulative inequality (Ferraro, Shippee, and Schafer 2009). Individ-
uals’ interpretations of their lives are rooted in structural systems of
advantage and disadvantage, but the interpretations also shape the fu-
ture through goals, expectations, and/or self-fulfilling prophecies (Mer-
ton 1995). Though beliefs about the modifiability of life trajectories are
an essential element of human agency, the tenability of these optimistic
beliefs has received little systematic attention. Do people’s forecasts
generally envisage a brighter tomorrow? And do their evaluations of
the past and expectations for the future actually influence how things
turn out?

These questions also fall within the purview of broader sociological
discussion about the dialectic of agency and structure. Recent attention
to agency emphasizes how situational and reflexive aspects of the self
proceed through time and shape life trajectories, underscoring the im-
portance of optimism for the attainment of agentic goals (Hitlin and Elder
2007a, 2007b). The wealth of theorizing, while thoughtful and stimulating,
has yet to eventuate in much empirical research on how agency and
structure are related to processes of cumulative inequality. Much of this
owes to the abstract nature of agency and the difficulty in empirically
assessing its influence on individuals’ lives. As Hitlin and Elder note,
agency remains a “slippery” concept because “theory and research have
largely occurred in isolation” (2007), p. 185).

Though social scientists often veer away from the deterministic posi-
tions that characterize some biological theories of human development,
perspectives on the long-term effects of early disadvantage vary in their
emphasis on the irreversibility of early adversity—scarring effects versus
opportunities for resilience.” We argue for some of each. Early disadvan-
tage (relative deprivation, family dissolution, exposure to abuse, poor
health) is not likely irreparable, and the optimism embodied in human
agency can stave off resignation and fatalism in the face of early adversity;
yet early disadvantage likely limits the ability to actually rebound, despite
an optimistic stance toward the future. In developing our argument and
through empirical evidence from the Midlife Development in the United
States (MIDUS) study, we advance the theory of cumulative inequality,
drawing fresh attention to the dialectic of structure and agency over the
life course.

To develop the research questions for contributions to the sociology of
the life course, we discuss four topics in this introductory section. First,
we briefly describe the origins of cumulative inequality theory and its
utility for research on a variety of issues related to well-being. Second,
we summarize the burgeoning literature on the early origins of adult well-
CUMULATIVE INEQUALITY THEORY: AN INTEGRATIVE
PERSPECTIVE ON THE LIFE COURSE

One of the most important themes in life course research has been socio-
genesis of inequality, including the dynamics of intracohort differentiation
(Dannefer 2003; Elman and O’Rand 2004; Willson, Shuey, and Elder
2007). The framework commonly known as cumulative advantage/dis-
advantage (CAD) holds that statuses and events from early points in the
life course pave the road to an individual’s future, creating a divergence
between individuals that expands over the course of time (Dannefer 1987,
2003; O’Rand 1996). As others have noted, many types of disadvantage
proliferate across domains, setting into motion a cascading effect by which
“one condition [is] overtaken by the next in a serial unfolding of hardships”
(Hatch 2005, p. 131). The broad body of literature encompassing these
processes is known alternately as cumulative advantage (DiPrete and
Eirich 2006; Willson et al. 2007), cumulative disadvantage (Dupre 2007),
or a combination of the two (Dannefer 2003). Building on these illumi-
nating works, we integrate and expand on elements from other theories
with cumulative inequality theory (CIT).

CIT builds upon CAD and other theories to explicate the mechanisms
by which inequality develops between persons over the life course (Ferraro
et al. 2009). The theory maintains that “social systems generate inequality,
which is manifested over the life course via demographic and develop-
mental processes, and that personal trajectories are shaped by the ac-
cumulation of risk, available resources, perceived trajectories, and human
agency” (Ferraro and Shippee 2009, p. 333). Emphasis is thus placed on
integrating both systemic and agentic processes, not only the “social system
processes acting on populations or other collectivities” (Douthit and Dan-
nefer 2007, p. 224). CIT is formulated axiomatically as a middle-range
theory that integrates other theories in a synthetic way; it is, in Merton’s
(19688, p. 68) words, “consonant with a variety of sociological systems of
thought” and “consolidated into wider networks of theory.”
The Importance of Early Origins on Cumulative Inequality

One of the chief contributions from studies using CAD and life course
theories has been to demonstrate long-term consequences of early status
inequality, especially those associated with educational differences. Just
as financiers understand that compound interest increases principal in-
vestment at differential rates of return, so do life course scholars articulate
that one’s initial allowance of capital—social, economic, physical reserve,
or other—should set the stage for divergent life trajectories (Elman and
O’Rand 2004). Indeed, Merton (1968a) referred to this as the Matthew
effect because he observed the long-term benefits of early scientific
achievement, not only for the acclaim attendant with an important dis-
covery but also because the initial favor boosted the value of subsequent
scientific contributions.

Though it may seem rather intuitive that those with resources can
parlay their advantage into further advantage, there may be other mech-
anisms (outside of the individuals themselves) that can help explain why
early periods of the life course are important for cumulative inequality.

framework on “age-graded informal social control” that draws from several theories—
life course, cumulative disadvantage, labeling, developmental criminology, and social
control—and uses the concept of situated choice to explicate how the structure/agency
dialectic influences criminal activity. For a systematic development of CIT’s five axioms
and 19 propositions, see Ferraro et al. (2009).

* As an exemplar of empi 1 tests, O’Rand and Hamil-Luker (2005) demonstrate that
some aspects of early disadvantage can have long-term effects on the risk of heart
attack during adulthood. Ferraro and Kelley-Moore (2003) also found health conse-
quences due to long-term risks (obesity) but identified how compensatory mechanisms
may offset some of the deleterious effects of earlier risks.
Childhood, for example, is the life course period of crucial socialization
processes, including the development of self-esteem, role-modeling of vo-
cational and marital behavior, and the internalization of values and norms
(McLeod and Almazan 2003). Especially early on, each of these influences
is centered around the family institution (Cooksey, Menaghan, and Me-
kielek 1997), and so it is for good reason that there has been considerable
attention given to studying the consequences of childhood home factors.*

With so much at stake during childhood—from development of the self
to the introduction to key social institutions—it is perhaps with little
surprise that social scientists of disparate disciplinary backgrounds con-
verge at the conclusion that early life course conditions matter deeply for
life chances. Considering educational attainment and adult earnings as
one consequence, growing up poor does not predestine one for a life of
penury, but household income during the initial five years of life is strik-
ingly related to years of schooling completed, particularly among those
growing up in poorer households (Duncan et al. 1998). Poverty during
childhood is similarly associated with reduced likelihood of employment
and economic productivity (e.g., annual earnings, wage rates) as an adult
(Haveman and Wolfe 1995; Wagmiller et al. 2006). Conflict in the family
and parental absence (e.g., through divorce) likewise have a dampening
effect on status attainment (Caspi et al. 1998) in addition to the well-
documented negative consequences for long-term emotional well-being
(Amato, Loomis, and Booth 1995; Cherlin, Chase-Landsdale, and McRae
1998). Low socioeconomic status and parental absence likewise alter the
life course by downwardly extending adulthood; these factors increase the
likelihood of adopting adult identities in adolescence (Johnson and Moll-
born 2009) and provide a rationale for early parenthood—a role in which
accomplishment is seen as attainable by those who stand little chance of
flourishing in labor market hierarchies (Edin and Kefalas 2005). These
premature transitions, in turn, are associated with less stable adult family
relations and compromise human capital attainment (Amato et al. 2008).

The fields of social epidemiology, criminology, and demography, too,
have painted a compelling portrait of the importance of the early life
course. Economic hardship as measured by father’s low-level occupation
has been linked to increased risk of mortality from stroke and stomach
cancer (Smith et al. 1998). Other dimensions of social class, such as father’s
education level and childhood housing conditions, are also related to mor-
tality risk (Elo and Preston 1992; Kuh et al. 2002). Family disruption,
such as divorce of parents, is likewise associated with increased risk of
adult mortality (Schwartz et al. 1995). Health outcomes—both physical
and mental—are similarly affected by abuse and mistreatment during
childhood (Horwitz et al. 2001; Irving and Ferraro 2006).° Beyond health,
however, childhood maltreatment has consequences for early adult tran-
sitions (Foster, Hagan, and Brooks-Gunn 2008) and likelihood of criminal
record and arrests as an adult (Widom 1989).

Though many studies have focused on how a particular adversity may
affect adult life chances, a number of studies have considered the “joint
or cumulative effects of multiple traumas” (Turner and Lloyd 1995, p. 268;
Turner, Wheaton, and Lloyd 1995). A series of studies by Felitti and
colleagues (1998) examined the long-term effects of multiple traumas.
Using data from managed care enrollees, the researchers found that child-
hood adversities (ranging from parental divorce to sexual abuse) are con-
sequential in their effects on adult well-being decades later. They also
showed that a count of adverse childhood experiences—what they termed
an ACE score—predicted a host of adult problems, such as attempted
suicide (Dube et al. 2001), alcohol abuse (Dube et al. 2002), depressed
affect (Dube et al. 2003), and decreased health status (Felitti et al. 1998).
Other studies taking the cumulative burden approach report a relationship
between multiple childhood adversities and physical and mental health
(Turner and Lloyd 1995; Surtees and Wainwright 2007). Adversities, when
considered in additive form, signify how their accumulation limits life
chances.’

Of course, the simple accumulation of adversity is not the only way to
conceptualize early disadvantage. Challenges during childhood related to
family structure, abuse and trauma, and relative deprivation, for instance,
may have distinct long-term effects because they impede the development
of different forms of life course capital, such as human, social, and health
capital (O’Rand 2006; Hamil-Luker and O’Rand 2007). Indeed, distin-
guishing between these forms of life course capital proved quite useful in
several studies of heart attack risk between the ages of 51 and 71 (O’Rand
and Hamil-Luker 2005; Hamil-Luker and O’Rand 2007). As others have
noted, however, childhood adversities tend to cluster within homes, and
“attempts to disaggregate the effects of clustered adversities may offer
relatively little insight into processes of risk and resilience” (McLeod and
Almazan 2003, p. 401).

With these competing considerations in mind, it seems reasonable to
examine potential domains of adversity and compare the predictive va-
lidity of domain-specific and overall-accumulation models on outcomes.
In addition, although most studies use an overall count of adversities (e.g.,
Surtees and Wainwright 2007), another consideration is whether a simple
count adequately captures what is meant by accumulation. Simple counts
presume that each unit difference is equivalent, but there may be thresh-
olds of when people feel especially challenged. Most people will have at
least one childhood adversity, but facing a second or third adversity may
lead to a greater sense of affliction. And for persons with a high number
of adversities, perhaps eight or nine, does a unit difference have equivalent
consequences on well-being? The term accumulation is now widely used
in the social sciences, but we contend that greater attention should be
given to identifying thresholds and functional forms of adversities that
may influence the life course. In identifying such thresholds, moreover,
one needs to consider how the actor evaluates the accumulation of ad-
versity.
Social psychological research sheds interesting light on this phenomenon,
finding that individuals use multiple temporal referents to envision “pos-
sible selves” (Markus and Nurius 1986) and to engage in comparisons
with others (Wilson and Ross 2000). Mead’s (1932) theory of time places
reality itself in the present but acknowledges that the past is reconstituted
in various ways as to maintain continuity in the passage of time (Maines,
Sugrue, and Katovich 1983). Similarly, according to Maines et al., the
future exists not as an ontological reality, but as an anticipated, hypo-
thetical springboard from the “specious present.” Thus, diachronic think-
ing, rooted in the present, yields two main anchor point evaluations:
reflective and prospective. Reflective life evaluation pertains to interpre-
tations of one’s past and current reality, whereas prospective life evalu-
ation envisions a future state of affairs. In other words, the key distinction
is between lived experience (reflective) and that period of life that the
mind foresees (prospective).°

What accounts for a diachronic self? The principal view among many
scholars is that people universally construe, tell, and revise life stories,
making sense of their world through narratives that have a beginning
point and progress to some form of resolution (McAdams 2001). The
elements of a story—plot, settings, characters, scenes, themes—are widely
familiar and are useful schemas for interpreting and making sense of the
social world. Indeed, this may be one of the most important tasks that
individuals undertake. As Giddens (1991, p. 54) notes, “a person’s identity
is not to be found in behavior, nor—importantly though this is—in the
reactions of others, but in the capacity to keep a particular narrative going”
(emphasis added). The narration that individuals construct is hardly an
“objective” tale in any sense of that description.’

Narrative form likely differs across the life course—contingent on cur-
rent social roles within status hierarchies—but the primacy of early in-
equality for directing the tone and form of the story is a more fundamental
question. Because narrative efforts typically stress self-improvement and
growth, it is reasonable to expect that people with an inauspicious life
start (e.g., through material deprivation, abuse, family strain) will evaluate
The Relation of Agency to Life Trajectories and Cumulative Inequality

Human agency has many expressions, but a perceived trajectory is one
way for actors to characterize their lot in life. Taken together, reflective
and prospective life evaluations are elements of agency because they in-
volve both a summary judgment of how the actor has fared to date and
a projection of how the actor envisions his or her future. Our research
addresses an empirical question that is encased in the theoretical issue of
how people interpret and form lines of action (Goffman 1959; Blumer
1969).

Agency is defined by Hitlin and Elder (2007a) as “an individual capacity
for meaningful and sustained action, both within situations and across
the life course” (p. 39). Agency is inherently a time-bound process, with
people acting in terms of current and situational goals, but also in order
to arrive at planned courses of action in the future. Cumulative inequality
theory privileges the structure/agency dialectic by recognizing how the
actor perceives his or her life trajectory, whether overcoming adversity
or maintaining a favored status. The difficulty often comes, however,
when one tries to pin down the concept of agency. In this analysis, agency
is assumed to be a human trait that cannot be proven per se but that is
demonstrated most clearly by identifying its limits—consistent with Hitlin
and Elder’s (20076) concept of existential agency. Structures impinge on
agency, suggesting that our chief task is to explain the forces that may
restrict agency. Specifically, agency is circumscribed to the extent that
people’s wishes, goals, or expectations are thwarted.

This article focuses on general expectations that people have about
their lives, which, although invoking future-time horizons, differs appre-
ciably from studies that tap concrete goals in the life course, such as
educational attainment (e.g., Shanahan, Elder, and Miech 1997; Dino-
vitzer, Hagan, and Parker 2003). In one such study, competent youths
were found to demonstrate high levels of career and marital success nearly
half a century past their adolescence because they made wise choices and
followed through on premeditated goals (Clausen 1991). These types of
“planful competence” clearly reflect an important aspect of agency, but
what of more general processes, such as overall evaluations of life and
expected evaluations in the future? People do not consciously plan for a
sense of life evaluation, and the very reason that there are not clear ways
to “achieve” such evaluations makes subjective correlates of biographical
flow an important issue to study. Whereas people can take steps to fulfill
educational requirements or gain experience for a better job, general life
evaluations provide a context to examine how countervailing forces can
restrict expectations in more subtle ways.

A unifying theme between the above accounts of agency and the current
article is the focus on agency’s temporal nature. In this way, optimism is
one of agency’s most important components because it implies that action
can be taken that will influence the future. Hitlin and Elder (2007a), for
instance, argue that when social psychological constructs such as self-
efficacy are put in their proper temporal context—reflecting agentic life
course processes that people undertake (Hitlin and Elder 2007b)—the
resultant construct is optimism. Indeed, optimism offers an “empirically
measurable, but [mostly] unexamined aspect of agency” (Hitlin and Elder
2007a, p. 44). Temporally, optimism relates to a future orientation; yet the
past cannot be dismissed as a trivial constituent of future events. Mead
(1932) emphasized that the past “is exhibited in memory, and in the his-
torical apparatus that extends memory” (p. 17). In this way, the past
“becomes a stabilizing influence that shapes the flow of effort and allows
us to sustain identities, meanings, and interactions over time” (Emirbayer
and Mische 1998, p. 975). Interestingly, however, Hitlin and Elder (20076)
discuss how agency is observable in present behavior and the anticipation
of future events, but there is very little sense of how influential the past
is for life course agency.

For people with an inauspicious life start (e.g., relative deprivation,
abuse), the past offers a theoretically important springboard. We expect
that adversity mars the past but offers room for redemption and life
growth, though early hardship could conceivably lower the entire slope
of perceived life trajectories. The question is essentially whether subjective
trajectories exhibit patterns similar to or different from the more objective
“trajectories of failure” (e.g., educational disruption) so often seen in stud-
ies of early disadvantage (e.g., McLeod and Fettes 2007).

The dialectic of agency and structure has occupied a central place in
the sociological imagination. Empirically elucidating the interplay be-
tween agency and structure, then, is an important and ongoing task.
Following theorists such as Bourdieu, Giddens, and Sewell, life course
sociologists too have made important contributions to how we understand
structure (e.g., Shanahan 2000; Mayer 2009). We argue that to the extent
RESEARCH QUESTIONS

We formulate two main research questions to advance our understanding
of the structure/agency dialectic and the long-term consequences of early
adversity. First, we ask whether childhood adversity affects diachronic
life evaluations. That is, do high levels of early adversity dampen one’s
overall life evaluation, spanning the past, present, and future? One po-
tential is that an inauspicious start suppresses optimism for the future,
creating the perception of a negative life trajectory from the past to the
future. Alternatively, early adversity could mean that life seems to be
improving after a turbulent start. Either way, diachronic life evaluations
provide a window into how actors interpret their lives and anticipated
futures.

Our second main research question concerns the nature of life course
agency and pits expectations for the future against the future itself. Using
a follow-up wave to the same survey, we investigate how diachronic life
evaluations—reflective and prospective alike—affect one’s evaluations. If
perceptions about past and future matter, we should observe that positive
reflective and prospective evaluations confer some benefit in how people
evaluate their lives. In pursuing this question, however, we also examine
whether adverse experiences offset the beneficial effects of these positive
life evaluations. In other words, do adversities from childhood diminish
DATA AND METHODS
National Survey of Midlife Development in the United States

Data are drawn from the National Survey of Midlife Development in the
United States (MIDUS; Brim et al. 2000). Data collection was undertaken
from 1995 to 1996 by the MacArthur Foundation’s Network on Successful
Midlife Development. The survey first used random-digit dialing to obtain
a sampling frame of all English-speaking noninstitutionalized adults ages
25-74 in the contiguous 48 states.’° Next, the investigators used dispro-
portionate stratified sampling to oversample males between 65 and 74.
The response rate from these initial telephone interviews was 70%. The
final stage included a two-part follow-up questionnaire mailed to those
who participated in the telephone interview, yielding an 86.6% response
rate. Thus, the overall response rate was 61% (.70 x .87 = .61), producing
a total sample of 3,032 participants who completed both the telephone
and mail interviews. After we removed subjects with missing data points,
the total study sample comes to 2,956 for wave 1 analyses.

Respondents from wave 1 were then contacted 10 years later, in 2005,
to secure their participation for wave 2. Of the complete wave 1 sample,
1,748 individuals completed both the telephone and self-administered fol-
low-up interviews (58%). Sixty-eight cases were removed for missing data
(N = 1,680). Data from both waves come primarily from the questionnaire
portion of the survey since this was the section in which respondents were
queried on past, present, and future life evaluations.
Finally, they were asked to look ahead 10 years into the future and provide
an expected life evaluation (“Looking ahead ten years into the future,
what do you expect your life overall will be like at that time?”).

Our analyses of wave 1 utilize all three diachronic points of life eval-
uation, and our analysis of wave 2 uses life evaluation from that point
in time. We also used the data points from wave 1 as indicators for two
additional measures. First, we calculated an average evaluation of lived
experiences at wave 1, adding past and present life evaluations and di-
viding by two. We refer to this measure as reflective life evaluation. The
other key wave 1 measure is prospective life evaluation, which is simply
life evaluation projected 10 years into the future. Life evaluation variables
were centered around their means when used as independent variables
in regression analyses to reduce multicollinearity, as they were multiplied
to estimate interaction effects.

In order to measure the extent of adversity experienced early in the life
course, we created a summary score of 16 different events. Indicators of
childhood adversity were (1) selected on the basis of prior literature (e.g.,
Turner et al. 1995; Felitti et al. 1998) and (2) drawn from the available
pool of MIDUS questions on childhood. These items include receipt of
welfare; less than a high school education for father (or mother, in house-
holds in which father was not present); report of being “worse off” than
other families; lack of a male in the household; parental divorce; death
of a parent; physical abuse at the hands of a mother, father, siblings, or
other person; emotional abuse by any of the same parties; and reported
“fair” or “poor” physical health and mental health at age 16. Of the 16
variables, 12 were not initially in dichotomous form, so they were recoded
as binary markers for experiencing the given adversity."' In order to retain
as many respondents as possible, we generated an average score for all
subjects with at least half of the questions answered. Childhood adversity
is the count of conditions experienced in childhood.’ The variable was
centered around its mean for analyses in which interactive effects were
estimated (table 3 below). We also test for polynomial forms of childhood
adversity.

To investigate the possibility that various types of adversity may have
distinct effects, we also undertook a latent class analysis to better un-
derstand whether specific domains of disadvantage shape perceived life
course trajectories in different ways. The best-fitting latent class model
included six distinct classes (as determined by Vuong-Lo-Mendell-Rubin
likelihood ratio tests): (1) abuse (physical or emotional) perpetrated by
mother; (2) abuse perpetrated by father; (3) abuse perpetrated by other
person; (4) abuse perpetrated by mother, father, sibling, and other person;
(5) family/structural strain; and (6) a nonexposure group.’ Substantively,
the six classes were associated with the dependent variables in the same
direction and with similar effect sizes." For this reason and owing to the
large number of classes, the final models are presented with the summed
adversity score (and polynomials of it) to capture the “joint or cumulative
effects of multiple traumas” (Turner and Lloyd 1995, p. 268; Turner et al.
1995). We provide the results using the six clusters of adversity in appendix
table Al, however, because it may be instructive for the study of other
outcomes.

In supplementary analyses, we also tested specifications treating each
childhood adversity separately and for the sum of two types: parental
financial distress (i.e., poverty during childhood and received welfare) and
all 14 other adversities. Neither of these specifications altered the major
conclusions presented below, giving further support to the robustness of
our findings. Nevertheless, retrospective reports of early adverse events
are prone to underreporting bias, so there is some likelihood that the
relationships between childhood adversity and life evaluations reported
in this article are underestimated (Hardt and Rutter 2004).

Analyses include controls for a number of correlates of life evaluations,
each of which were measured at wave 1. Age was coded as a continuous
variable, and sex and race were coded as binary variables (1 for female,
1 for black), respectively. An age-squared term was explored, but since it
did not improve model fit for the models presented herein, it was removed
from final analyses. Three dummy variables adjust for marital status,
including currently married, currently divorced/separated, and widowed
(never married is the omitted reference group). Two markers of social
class were included. Education is an approximated count of years in
formal education (e.g., high school diploma = 12 years, master’s degree
= 18 years). Household income was measured as the dollar midpoint
corresponding with categories from 0 (no income) to 31 ($1 million or
more), divided by the number of people living in the household and log-
transformed because of its skewed distribution.

Finally, adverse childhood experiences are related to health and health
behaviors (Turner and Lloyd 1995; Felitti et al. 1998; Dube et al. 2003),
and health issues, in turn, have a marked influence on life evaluation.
Health-related binary variables are thus included for smoking, sedentary
lifestyle (engaging in vigorous or moderate activity less than once a
month), and obesity (body mass index greater than 30). The MIDUS
survey included an exhaustive battery of questions about medical con-
ditions experienced within the past 12 months, as well as the experience
of heart disease and cancer at any time during the respondents’ lifetime.’°
We first divided morbidity into serious (life-threatening) and chronic ill-
nesses (Ferraro and Farmer 1999), creating binary variables for the pres-
ence of each type at wave 1.'° For the portion of the analysis that predicts
life evaluations at the follow-up wave and examines the discrepancy be-
tween expected and attained life evaluations, we also included a measure
for 12-month (recent) morbidity not observed at wave 1 (incident mor-
bidity). This latter measure, therefore, captures new and recently diag-
nosed wave 2 conditions.
Analysis

The first portion of the analysis involves fitting a model of perceived life
trajectories that estimates the intercept and slope of the three diachronic
life evaluation data points at wave 1—past, present, and future. The
model was estimated using MPlus, specifying the baseline probability
weights representing the inverse probability for being selected into the
sample on the basis of values from the 1995 Current Population Survey
(geographical region, metropolitan statistical area, sex, race, age, educa-
tion, and marital status).

In a statistical sense, the model was specified similarly to a latent growth
curve model; it included a latent intercept and latent slope for perceived
life evaluation, which allowed individuals to vary on both their initial
life evaluations and the shape of their trajectories over diachronic time.
The model differs, however, from true latent growth models in that it
does not span an actual period of chronological time. If assumed to be a
traditional growth model, the approach could be questioned on the basis
of period bias since observations were not independent in time. Diachronic
indicators, however, are by their very nature entities that do not corre-
spond to actual moments in historical time. Rather, they reflect the actor’s
evaluation of the specified time. Our use of a trajectory model in this
context, then, is somewhat unique, but it offers an efficient way to capture
temporal judgments.

In such trajectory models, time-specific individual-level measures are
assumed to contain input from two sources: the latent process under
consideration and random error. If we assume that the process of interest
follows a linear pattern over diachronic time, the individual measures can
be modeled with an individual-specific intercept and slope across time
plus error. The level 1 equation is

¥, = a; + BA, + &,

i

where Y,, is the response variable for individual 7 at time ¢; a; is a subject-
specific intercept term; 6;\, is the subject-specific slope multiplied by
diachronic time; and ¢,, is the disturbance for individual i at diachronic
time ¢.

This portion of the model captures the within-individual trajectory over
diachronic time and is essentially equivalent to the level 1 submodel in
the hierarchical linear model framework. In a structural equation mod-
eling framework, the variance of the errors can be fixed or forced to be
equal across time. We allow them to vary.

The second level of the model allows the random intercepts and slopes
to be a function of covariates. In this model, the random intercept and
slope are allowed to correlate. The level 2 equations are

K
a; Ma + > Yew Xin + Eis
=1

K
Bi = be + > Yon + E53,
=1
FINDINGS

Descriptive statistics for the sample are presented in table 1. Consistent
with the notion that one’s lot in life will improve over time, mean values
of past, present, and future life evaluation likewise rise, from 7.201 to
7.661 to 8.258 (each contrast is significant at P < .001). As for actual life
evaluation as reported at wave 2, however, the overall mean fell short of
expectations by 0.409 units.

Observing that there was indeed variation over three diachronic life
evaluations at wave 1, we proceeded to investigate whether adverse child-
hood experiences help explain the average of the three evaluations as well
as the shape of their trajectory. As shown in table 2, an examination of
the relationship between childhood adversity and life evaluation indicates
that the number of adverse experiences is indeed related to diachronic
perceptions of change in life evaluation. Experiencing more adverse early
events is associated with a lower intercept, indicating that challenging
childhood years lead to a lower starting point for life evaluation. Specif-
ically, each additional childhood adversity was associated with an 0.18-
point decrease in mean initial life evaluation. For example, with a mean
intercept of about six when predictor variables are equal to their mean,
reporting five adversities would be associated with about a one-point
lower level of initial life evaluation (mean initial life evaluation of five
compared to six for those with five adversities compared to those with
no adversities). At the same time, higher levels of early adversity are
TABLE 1
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FROM THE MIDLIFE DEVELOPMENT IN THE UNITED STATES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 

STUDY
Variable Range Mean sD

Life evaluation:*

Past life evaluation (wave 1) ........... 0-10 7.201 1.954

Current life evaluation (wave 1) 0-10 7.661 1.656

Future life evaluation (wave 1) . 0-10 8.258 1.699

Current life evaluation (wave 2) 0-10 7.849 1.555
Childhood adversity ................. oO-11 2.630 2.094
Demographic:

Age ..... 20-74 46.981 13.110

Female . 0-1 513

Black ... 0-1 067

Married 0-1 -643

Widowed 0-1 057

Divorced . 0-1 154
Social status:

Education ..................cceceeeeeee ee 4-20 13.809 2.606

Income (logged) ................0000e0e ee —2.30-12.61 9.639 1.587
Health:

Smoker . 0-1 227

Obese .. 0-1 -280

Sedentary lifestyle . 0-1 015

Serious medical condition (wave 1) 0-1 302

Chronic medical condition (wave 1) ... 0-1 .738

Incident serious medical condition

(wave 2) .. 0-1 333
Incident chronic medical condition
(Wave 2) .......cc cece cece cece scene eee 0-1 335

 

Note.—Number of observations is 2,956 for wave 1 variables and 1,680 for wave 2
variables. SDs of binary variables are omitted.
“For wave 2 analyses, the average of past life evaluation (wave 1) and current life
evaluation (wave 1) is the measure of reflective life evaluation. Future life evaluation (wave
1) is the measure of prospective life evaluation.
TABLE 2
ANALYSIS OF SLOPE AND INTERCEPT OF PERCEIVED LIFE TRAJECTORIES IN THE

MIDLIFE DEVELOPMENT IN THE UNITED STATES STUDY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

  

INTERCEPT SLOPE
INDEPENDENT VARIABLE b SE Beta b SE Beta
Childhood adversity ........... —.179*** = 020 —.289 061*** — 013 134
Demographic:
Age ..... .050*** — 004 516 —.037*** — 002 —.529
Female . —.110 077 —.042 .128** 049 066
Black ... 249 170 064 003 .098 001
Married 216 124 077 126 091 062
Widowed .450* 203 073 —.133 158 —.030
Divorced . —.689F** 155 —.191 A00*** 107 152
Social status:
Education ..................5 —.031 016 —.061 .026** .010 069
Income (logged) ............. .009 .030 012 .018 .019 033
Health:
Smoker . —.147 103 —.048 —.048 034 025
Obese .. —.268** 087 —.092 .122* 056 057
Sedentary lifestyle . — 475 334 —.051 —.046 302 —.007
Serious medical condition
(wave 1) ............ : —.196* 097 —.070 —.032 .065 —.016
Chronic medical condition
(wave 1) ............. eee —.242** 087 —.082 -003 055 001
Random components:
Intercepts:
Intercept . 4.581*** 376
Slope .. 1.426*** — 250
Residual variances:
Past life evaluation ..... 2.712*** 227
Present life evaluation . 1.480*** 111
Future life evaluation . 201 196
Intercept .............. . JS25*** 057
Slope ..........ceeeeeeeeeee 644** 043

 

Note.—N = 2,956, CFI = .971, RMSEA = .026, b = unstandardized coefficient.

* P < .05 (two-tailed).
P< O1.
we P< O01.
pattern of significant relationships for the covariates was identical to what
was observed in the more parsimonious analysis using the sum of child-
hood adversity.

Divorce, an adult experience often associated with adverse conse-
quences, is similarly related to a lower intercept but an upward slope
from 10 years in the past to a decade in the future. Manifesting the opposite
pattern, greater age is related to higher starting values of diachronic life
evaluation but with a downward trajectory in looking forward. More
highly educated subjects tended to have upward slopes. Obese respon-
dents, like those who are divorced, tend to have a lower starting point
for life evaluations but see things as getting better. Respondents with
serious or chronic illnesses, although reporting lower initial life evalua-
tions, do not demonstrate a similar level of optimism. This is demonstrated
by the nonsignificant slope coefficient. Females, however, tend to be some-
what more optimistic about their future prospects.

Figure 2 shows graphically how varying levels of the childhood ad-
versity count variable influence both reflective and prospective life eval-
uations. This analysis separates the three elements of the diachronic tra-
jectory into the two pairs of life evaluation anchored in the present,
identifying whether early adversity affects reflective and prospective eval-
uations up until a certain threshold or whether its effect is consistent
across its range. The effect of early adversity is fairly linear for both
evaluations: higher levels of childhood adversity dampen life evaluations.
Though both evaluations are lower overall at higher levels of childhood
adversity, the growth curve analyses (table 2) demonstrate that high levels
of early adversity actually increase the slope of life evaluations relative
to their intercepts.

Having established that adverse childhood experiences leave adults
lower in their overall life evaluations yet predispose them toward height-
ened optimism for a better future, we move to a regression analysis to
examine whether things actually improve with time. In table 3, the de-
pendent variable is life evaluation as reported at wave 2. The first four
columns are reduced models showing the effects of childhood adversity,
reflective life evaluations, and prospective life evaluations. Model 5 es-
timates the key variables mentioned above as well as the full range of
controls. In order to test whether early adversity offsets the reflective and
EE

 

(s¢o") (s¢0) (s¢0) (s¢0) (r£0) (r£0)
ce TO?) ——sekk60Z ae ST) sea TOT) aca PT eae SPT" “* (T aaa) uorpenyeaa ayy] aarjvadsorg
(4£0) (9¢0") (z¢0°) (8£0) (z¢0°) (z£0°)
ice E08 sek L8Z oT aka Z6Z7 oka E each bE" “(7 aaa) worenerd apy eanoayay
(900°) (900°) (900°) (900°) (900°) (900)
«b10" ea LTO" #£10" x6T0 see ZO" pe ZO ttn neeenseeseseeeesecess -Ays12ape pooypltyD
(s¢0’) (460) (6r0) (sb0’) (6r0) (6v0) (120°)
wSOT— STE 660 eT ke ELT ae Z82°— sae BOOK reese Aqs12ape pooypyyD
SPPON LPP 9 PPON Ss PPON F PPO ¢ PPO 7 PPOWL T PPO ATAVRIVA LNTANTAATGNT

 

(Z PARM\) NOLLVA TVA FATT

 

 

AGOALS SALVLS GALINQ) FHL NI

LINANdOTAIATG AATICIP, AHL NI SATAVIAVA LNAGNAdACGN]T NO Z GAVA, LY NOILVNTIVAY GAIT JO NOISSAMOAY

© ATaVL
“T00" > di xs

TO > d xx

“(poyte}-0m}) SO" > d x
“SiS ore sasayjuared

UI SIaqUINN| ‘SUBIUT JTaYy} puNoIe pasejud are UONEN[eAd ay] aATIadsoid pure ‘UoENTeAad aj] AATXayor ‘AIsIaApe PooypTYD ‘089 l = N—ALON

 

cee Tea Sev oe sor
(68T'T) (€6T'T) (€6T'T) (2171) (080°)
ax POEL cee DEEL aaa PIT Lexx T $69 xxxOSSL

(1L9) (bL9) (€19) (089°)
COV T— x LOPT— cLo7T— 6I7T—
(p80") (p80") (p80") (r80")
aekOTE — tek OTE’— se OTL— ake BEL —
(060°) (960°) (960°) (460°)
aeeCl7— ——aexOL7— ee TOT — ee EST —
(060°) (060°) (060°) (060°)
srl — ost’ — 7st — 4st —
(sor) (901) (sor) (Zor)
£90° $90" cr0" 80"
(26s") (409°) (179) (902')
zs 889° cco £69°
(260°) (260°) (€60°) (€60°)
£70" 970" 970" £70"
(221) (221) (Z2r) (ezr')

er Tvl — sst— 69l —

 
 

 
 

  

ydas19quy

 

 

 

“+++ gsuodsa1u0 N
crests (Z PABM) UOIIPUOD [edIpeut ITUOAYD JUspIUT

vetteeees (Z 9ABM) UOTIIPUOD [eoTpaU snotias yUaproUy

 

(T aABM) UONIpPUOD [edIpsut dTUOIYD

 

“** ([ dABM) UOTPIPUOD [edTpauT sNorLIaS

 

 

 

* g[Aysajt] Areyuapas

 
 
 

asaqoO

 

 

 

creesess axyOULS
prospective life evaluations, which would otherwise increase the possi-
bility of enhanced future life evaluation, we also multiply childhood ad-
versity scores by reflective life evaluations (model 6). Model 7 includes
the interaction of childhood adversity with prospective life evaluations.
Finally, model 8 includes both interaction terms.

From models 1 and 2, it is apparent that childhood adversity continues
to negatively affect life evaluations at wave 2, but the relationship is
underestimated unless one takes into account a squared term of childhood
adversity. The effect of childhood adversity on wave 2 evaluations is fairly
steep through the lower levels of the variable but tapers off at the high
levels of childhood adversity. The inflection point of the quadratic curve
was at 6.02 adversities, which corresponds with the highest 5% of ad-
versity scores.

In model 3, high levels of both elements of life evaluation at wave 1
predict higher life evaluations in the actual future. The effect is stronger
for reflective evaluations than for prospective evaluations, however (a 6
of .27 vs. a B of .15, respectively). Essentially, people’s attained life eval-
uation at wave 2 is a result of both lived experience pushing forward and
expected experience pulling along, though it seems that lived experience
has more influence. When childhood adversity and its squared term are
added to the life evaluation predictors, each variable retains a significant
effect on wave 2 life evaluations, again revealing diminishing conse-
quences for very high levels of early adversity. Note also that the R’ values
increased appreciably from models 1 and 2 to models 3 and 4, signifying
that the direct effect of childhood adversity on wave 2 life evaluation is
modest.

Model 5 introduces the full set of control variables to ascertain whether
the effects of wave 1 life evaluations and childhood adversity remain.
Each remains significant, though the effect of childhood adversity is at-
tenuated somewhat. With the full set of control variables and with re-
flective and prospective life evaluation variables included, childhood ad-
versity contributes relatively little to the variance explained (about .007
difference in R’ when adversity is removed from the equation). Though
these direct effects are modest, we consider the moderating effects of
childhood adversity (mentioned below) to be of chief substantive and
theoretical importance.

In model 5, higher levels of logged household income are associated
with higher levels of life evaluation when we adjust for other variables,
whereas the inception of an illness, whether chronic or serious, is asso-
ciated with lower life evaluations. The final three models estimate a par-
allel equation with the addition of the two interaction terms (childhood
adversity by each type of life evaluation), entered separately (models 6
and 7) and simultaneously (model 8). The variable for adverse childhood
DISCUSSION

Some of our most eminent social psychologists from the 20th century
argued for sociologists to bring people back into social science research
(Mead 1934; Goffman 1959; Wrong 1961; Homans 1964; Blumer 1969).
Far from puppets that mindlessly fall into a structurally determined pat-
tern of behavior, humans make sense of their social worlds and how they
fit within them. This process involves interpreting one’s past and looking
toward a malleable future. Sociological studies have had little difficulty
showing that structurally generated disadvantage serves to limit life
chances, and the analyses from these national data concur. Nevertheless,
our goal was also to integrate components of self-reflexivity, projection,
and personal agency in the study of how early adversity influences the
life course. In doing so, we build on the legacy of Mead, Homans, and
others to bring the person back into the study of social life and cumulative
inequality, in particular.

To that end, this study set out to investigate the long-term consequences
of childhood adversity for people’s life evaluations during adulthood. We
investigated whether a range of early misfortunes dampened an overall
sense of past, present, and future life evaluation, as well the trajectory of
those three evaluative time points. In addition, we explored whether the
perception that things would get better was “wishful thinking.”

Long-term effects of childhood disadvantage have been well established
across a range of life experiences, such as adult health (Hayward and
Gorman 2004) and social mobility (Biblarz and Raftery 1993); indeed,
this large body of literature suggests that the early portion of the life
course is pivotal for lifelong development and structures (i.e., constrains
and enables) developmental trajectories (McLeod and Almazan 2003).””
We have attempted to locate the self and its diachronic sense of life
progression within the framework of the life course and cumulative in-
equality theory. Boiled down to a simple question, is the self able to
overcome early adversity? Although many believe that the race is to the
swift, we sought to better understand how people interpret a rough start,
perhaps pushed off course by structural disadvantage or the hurtful be-
havior of others.

Our results reveal that agency, conceived as “an internally complex
temporal dynamic” (Emirbayer and Mische 1998, p. 963), results in diverse
interpretations of early adversity. On the one hand, respondents facing
high levels of early adversity tend to see the trajectory of their life im-
provement as on the rise; despite an inauspicious start and an overall
dampened sense of life evaluation, people experiencing higher levels of
childhood adversity are more likely to believe that things are getting better.
Past studies of Americans’ life trajectories demonstrate a pattern in which
people anticipate brighter days (Lachman et al. 2008). When a series of
challenges or setbacks is involved in this process, many people seem to
go further in search of redemption, self-improvement, and growth
(McAdams 2006), and this does not seem to be an insurmountable task.
Rather, resilience enabled by individual effort is a powerful script in life
narratives (Rudd and Evans 1998); though starting from a lower position
(i.e., lower intercept in subjective life trajectory), there is a greater sense
of improvement (i.e., higher slopes in subjective). There is evidence to
suggest that infusing life narratives with redemptive turning points is a
psychologically adaptive strategy (McAdams et al. 2001).

On the other hand, the finding of statistical interactions between both
reflective and prospective life evaluations at wave 1 and adverse childhood
experiences for predicting wave 2 evaluations suggests that although
higher life evaluations predict a better actualized future, accumulated
childhood adversity compromises the buoyant outlooks. These results are
obtained, furthermore, after adjusting for adult educational attainment,
household income, and health status, among other factors. This is what
we would expect if biography is capable of constraining life course agency
and the optimism that things are getting better. Given that these childhood
events occurred 20-80 years prior—yet still exerted an effect net of adult
conditions—our results point toward an effect of biographical structur-
ation.

Biographical structuration, as we think of it, refers to the constraining
influence of a person’s past for his or her present and future life chances.
Structure is often portrayed as a set of present social conditions—external
to the individual—that enables or limits choice. Social experiences, how-
ever, often have a more enduring existence than their momentary ex-
pression would suggest. It is through the human capacities of memory
and narration that biographical details from across life are woven together
and remain consequential for the present and future. This interpretive
phenomenon adds another dimension to the concept of structure in the
life course (Shanahan 2000; Mayer 2009). Situated choice, in other words,
is biographically structured, reflecting both one’s social location and lived
experiences.

Putting biographical structuration in the context of our findings, child-
hood adversity is not wiped clean with the progression of time, but its
influence continues through life evaluations, including via its grip on early
life evaluations. Early adversity is fundamentally rooted in concrete social
conditions and meaningfully incorporated into human narrative; in this
way, biographical experiences—as subjective and interpretive orientations
to the past, present, and future—can constrain life course agency and
work in tandem with the more objective structural forces that generate
and increase interindividual inequality.

Our results also highlight the mechanism of path dependency in how
early adversity translates into revised life trajectories. Linking together
lines of action arises “out of a background of previous actions” and “is
connected with a context of previous action” (Blumer 1969, p. 20). Many
presume that calls for studying such lines of action require a qualitative
approach, but we have shown that these phenomena can be studied quan-
titatively. With diachronic evaluations and longitudinal data, we uncov-
ered a process whereby most people formed interpretations of early ad-
versity that enabled them to engage in wishful thinking. Status and
evaluation are relative, and these judgments are made in light of signif-
icant others or personal biography. Early adversity led to lower intercepts
but steeper positive slopes.

These results were derived from a sample that was 25-74 years of age
during the initial interview, thereby suggesting that people do not abruptly
move on from adversity faced during childhood. In this regard, the results
from table 3 also revealed the importance of accumulated adversity for
shaping life course pathways. Coping with a single childhood adversity
is hard, but when the adversities pile up during the early years, path
dependence is more substantial over the adult life course.

These findings also yield fresh insights for cumulative inequality theory.
While past research drawing from the cumulative disadvantage/advan-
tage paradigm has called attention to the importance of early events for
shaping life course trajectories, it has not prioritized key underlying social
psychological processes that may influence trajectories. Cumulative in-
equality theory was articulated to recognize the importance of human
agency within social systems; people are dealt advantages and disadvan-
tages, but instead of passively floating along, they observe, interpret, and
seek to change their social reality (Goffman 1959; Blumer 1969). This
article, by developing the concept of biographical structuration, found
that such realities are not altogether malleable.

There is evidence to support the idea that people perceive things to be
getting better, but the findings also highlight the life-pervading damage
of early adversity, or the “long arm” of childhood adversity (Felitti et al.
1998; Hayward and Gorman 2004; Haas 2008). After we accounted for
wave 1 life evaluations, childhood adversity maintained a negative effect
on life evaluations at wave 2. Moreover, childhood adversity counteracted
the positive effects of such wave 1 life evaluations. The belief that hope
springs eternal implies that existential agency—or agency as a subjective
sense of capacity (Hitlin and Elder 2007b)—is not tightly circumscribed.”
However, inauspicious beginnings may suppress life course agency in the
sense of actually being able to attain a more fulfilling life. Future work
using cumulative inequality theory should further specify how life per-
ceptions redirect trajectories and consider the consequences of unfulfilled
expectations. Does having more optimistic life evaluations protect mental
or physical health or help career trajectories regardless of whether ex-
pectations are fulfilled?

Our aim has been to explicate a general framework for coupling ad-
versity and inequality with the self, thereby lending a new eye to the role
of agency in life course inequalities. Though our approach was pursued
mostly on the basis of its innovativeness, we urge future researchers to
more carefully refine particular types or configurations of adversity or
disadvantage and their effects on reflexive and projective evaluations of
life course trajectories.”’ The particular dependent variable we used, a
general evaluation of a person’s life, can also be expanded in future re-
search to include more specific domains. For example, trajectories of
school success and failure among youths are elucidated by incorporating
measures of the expectations of teachers (McLeod and Fettes 2007)—an
exemplary approach. At the same time, including subjective appraisals
by the actors themselves can also illuminate processes of how inequality
accumulates (or fails to accumulate despite early adversity). Unfortunately,
our data were limited to adults, and so we are unable to speak to the
possibility that biographical evaluations in childhood or adolescence shape
important life course outcomes such as status attainment in early adult-
hood. Adult health, however, is an important context to observe the im-
plications of pessimistic versus optimistic perceived life trajectories; we
see this direction for future research as a natural extension of the findings
presented in this piece.

It is also worth noting that a limitation of the current research was the
reliance on recollections of early adversity. Although retrospective reports
allow for a unique life course analysis without the difficulties of actually
following respondents over their lifetimes, we agree with O’Rand and
Hamil-Luker (2005) that such designs are inherently limited because sub-
jects may have recall problems. Nevertheless, we also concur with them
that having measures of numerous forms of adversity is preferable to
having only one or two indicators. By examining a composite score of
the cumulative burden of these early adversities, we acknowledge that
recall of early events will be imperfect but still capture a range of negative
experiences. The reason is that the score captures an approximation of
total adversity rather than a crude binary distinction between adversity
and nonadversity.” Respondents may also recollect the occurrence or in-
tensity of events from their past differently depending on their current
condition (i.e., endogeneity of the independent and dependent variables).
Past research using recall measures of childhood events indicates that
underestimation is more common than overestimation (i.e., people report
fewer adversities than occurred) and that the probability of potential bias
produces overly conservative estimates (Dube et al. 2003). It is therefore
likely that the findings presented are weaker than they would be if perfect
measurement was available. These are important considerations for stud-
ies using retrospective data, and the current findings must be considered
in light of such limitations.

The findings from this investigation also highlight the importance of
the accumulation of adverse experiences. Although we examined whether
the specific types or clusters of childhood adversity differentially shaped
life trajectories, the analyses confirm those by Turner and Lloyd (1995)
that the joint or cumulative effects of adverse childhood experiences mat-
tered most. Life trajectories were less buoyant for persons experiencing
multiple adversities, regardless of which adversities were reported. The
relationship between childhood adversity and life trajectories was fairly
linear through six reported adversities, but there was some tapering of
this effect for persons with seven or more of the 14 possible adversities.
Our finding on nonlinear relationships suggests that more attention needs
to be given to studying accumulation processes. The term accumulation
is used in many ways in life course studies, epidemiology, and criminology.
Is accumulation simply adding items, or are there properties of how these
accumulate that are important? Does the timing, or at least sequencing,
of the accumulation matter? Are continual bouts of accumulation equal
in their effects to those that occur intermittently? These and related ques-
tions merit consideration as scholars seek to advance our understanding
of accumulation processes that shape the life course.

In conclusion, humans piece together strands of their past and present
experiences to create a coherent life narrative (Mead 1934; Goffman 1959;
Blumer 1969; Maines et al. 1983; McAdams 2001), and their dispositions
toward the future tend to emphasize potential for growth and positive
change (Markus and Nurius 1986). Even yet, evidence suggests that the
constraining forces of early disadvantage prevail, suggesting a bounded
nature of life course agency within the structuring context of biography.
Persons dealt an inauspicious start in life often foresee improvement in
their life evaluations, but their actual increase in life evaluation falls
increasingly short of expectations when they accumulate high levels of
adversity early in the life course.
LT 8 6s Lo be br sp “* ppoyasnoy 100g.
80° £0" IT or 40° 90 iv OT ase Uyyeay [eyUaUL 100g
+0" zo" £0° 40° +0" rl +0" “gy a8e yyeay peotsxyd 100g
or or ee br ce sr sr * ploy
-asnoy Jo peay—uonronpa MoT
9c" 10° nd es te seeees “a0
or co es 89° 7s Bugs
tl so" £0" 00° er er * ped
Iv £0" 1@ Ir 90° ea “WO
vasnqe jeuorjowgy
90° 10° £0° Iv 90° La LO’ seers BUTTQIS
or £0" or Iv or 98° ol “14310
8 70" £0" oe 0° 8S" OL “" ped
or 00° er 8s 00° bh er “WOT
rasnqe yesisxyd
er so 6s eV 40° co sv “* paoloalp sjuateg
40° 90° sc +O" +0" 80° so’ cress pap yuared
90° 00° 19° 00° 00° Ir so" ployasnoy ut ajeut oN,
90° TO" La so” £0" ca or are FLOM
aTdNVS NI (ainsodxq (urens (wioyy Aq (72T]10 (rw Aq (eye WAL]
AOVINAONId MOT) yeanjonays) pasnqy) Aq pasnqy) pasnqy) Aq pasnqy)
TWOLoy 9 sseIQ, g sseID p sseIQ. € sseIQ Z sse[Q. T sse[g.

 

SSVID LNGLV’T

 

 

SALLISUAAGY 91 ‘SISATVNY SSWID LNALWT JO SLTASAY

IV ATAVL
TABLE A2
ANALYSIS OF SLOPE AND INTERCEPT OF PERCEIVED LIFE TRAJECTORIES USING LATENT

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 
 

CLASSES
INTERCEPT SLOPE
INDEPENDENT VARIABLE b SE b SE
Childhood adversity:
Class 1. —.663*** 158 .204* 092
Class 2 . —1.316*** 190 340** 119
Class 3. —.219 127 130 072
Class 4 . — 546% 145 .260** 097
Class 5. — 673% 162 2347 -103
Demographic
Age... 048 004 —.037*** 002
Female . —.127 076 .122* 048
Black ... 317 172 —.020 098
Married .. 238 127 127 091
Widowed . -505* 206 —.130 158
Divorced .........0..6.se cece ee eee eee —.687%** 156 405 *** -106
Social status:
Education —.022 016 .022* 010
Income (logged) .. 010 030 017 019
Health:
Smoker —.188 102 .061 065
Obese .. — 286% 087 -128* 056
Sedentary lifestyle . . —.449 339 —.053 301
Serious medical condition (wave 1) —.226* .096 —.034 .064
Chronic medical condition (wave 1) —.246** .088 004 055
Random components:
Intercepts:
Intercept ............. cece eee 5.623 354
Slope .. 1.449% .236
Residual variances:
Past life evaluation .... 2.712*** 257
Present life evaluation . 1.480*** AL
Future life evaluation . 203 197
Intercept . 923 182
Slope . SIGE 101

 

NotTe.—N = 2,956, CFI = .972, RMSEA = .023. Latent classes are (1) abuse (physical
or emotional) perpetrated by mother; (2) abuse perpetrated by father; (3) abuse perpetrated
by other person; (4) abuse perpetrated by mother, father, sibling, and other person; (5) family/
structural strain; and (6) a nonexposure group (reference group).

* P < .05 (two-tailed).

P< O1.

we P< O01.
Women’s Family Formation Pathways.” Journal of Marriage and Family 70:1271-—
86.

Amato, Paul R., Laura S. Loomis, and Alan Booth. 1995. “Parental Divorce, Marital
Conflict, and Offspring Well-Being during Early Adulthood.” Social Forces 73:895—
915.

Barker, David J. 2003. The Best Start in Life. London: Century.

Biblarz, Timothy J., and Adrian E. Raftery. 1993. “The Effects of Family Disruption
on Social Mobility.” American Sociological Review 58:97-109.

Blumer, Herbert. 1969. Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Brim, Orville G., Paul B. Baltes, Larry L. Bumpass, Paul D. Cleary, David L. Feath-
erman, William R. Hazard, Ronald C. Kessler, Margie E. Lachman, Hazel R.
Markus, Michael G. Marmot, Alice S. Rossi, Carol D. Ryff, and Richard A. Shweder.
2000. National Survey of Midlife Development in the United States MIDUS, 1995-
1996 [computer file]. ICPSR version. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Inter-University Consortium
for Political and Social Research [distributor].

Bushway, Shawn, Brian D. Johnson, and Lee Ann Slocum. 2007. “Is the Magic Still
There? The Use of the Heckman Two-Step Correction for Selection Bias in Crim-
inology.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 23:151-78.

Callero, Peter L. 2003. “The Sociology of the Self.” Annual Review of Sociology 29:
115-33.

Case, Anne, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson. 2005. “The Lasting Impact of Child-
hood Health and Circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics 24:365-89.

Caspi, Avshalom, Bradley R. E. Wright, Terrie E. Moffitt, and Phil A. Silva. 1998.
“Early Failure in the Labor Market: Childhood and Adolescent Predictors of Un-
employment in the Transition to Adulthood.” American Sociological Review 63:424—
51.

Cherlin, Andrew J., P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale, and Christine McCrae. 1998. “Effects
of Parental Divorce on Mental Health throughout the Life Course.” American So-
ciological Review 63:239-49.

Clausen, John S. 1991. “Adolescent Competence and the Shaping of the Life Course.
American Journal of Sociology 96:805-42.

Conley, Dalton, and Neil G. Bennett. 2000. “Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and
Life Chances.” American Sociological Review 65:458-67.

Cooksey, Elizabeth C., Elizabeth G. Menaghan, and Susan M. Mekielek. 1997. “Life
Course Effects of Work and Family Circumstances on Children.” Social Forces 76:
637-67.

Dannefer, Dale. 1987. “Aging as Intracohort Differentiation: Accentuation, the Mat-
thew Effect, and the Life Course.” Sociological Forum 2:211-36.

. 2003. “Cumulative Advantage/Disadvantage and the Life Course: Cross-
Fertilizing Age and the Social Science Theory.” Journal of Gerontology: Social Sci-
ences 58B:S327-S337.

Dinovitzer, Ronit, John Hagan, and Patricia Parker. 2003. “Choice and Circumstance:
Social Capital and Planful Competence in the Attainments in Immigrant Youth.”
Canadian Journal of Sociology 28:463-88.

DiPrete, Thomas A., and Gregory M. Eirich. 2006. “Cumulative Advantage as a Mech-
anism for Inequality: A Review of Theoretical and Empirical Developments.” Annual
Review of Sociology 32:271-97.

Douthit, Kathryn Z., and Dale Dannefer. 2007. “Social Forces, Life Course Conse-
quences: Cumulative Disadvantage and ‘Getting Alzheimer’s.’” Pp. 223-43 in Ger-
ontology: Perspectives and Issues, edited by J. M. Wilmoth and K. F. Ferraro. New
York: Springer.

Dube, Shanta R., Robert F. Anda, Vincent J. Felitti, Daniel P. Chapman, David F.
Williamson, and Wayne H. Giles. 2001. “Childhood Abuse, Household Dysfunction

»
and the Risk of Attempted Suicide throughout the Life Span: Findings from the
Adverse Childhood Experiences Study.” Journal of the American Medical Associ-
ation 286:3089-96.

Dube, Shanta R., Robert F. Anda, Vincent J. Felitti, Valerie J. Edwards, and Janet B.
Croft. 2002. “Adverse Childhood Experiences and Personal Alcohol Abuse as an
Adult.” Addictive Behaviors 27:713-25.

Dube, Shanta R., Vincent J. Felitti, Maxia Dong, Wayne H. Giles, and Robert F. Anda.
2003. “The Impact of Adverse Childhood Experiences on Health Problems: Evidence
from Four Birth Cohorts Dating Back to 1900.” Preventive Medicine 37:268-77.

Duncan, Greg J., W. Jean Yeung, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Judith R. Smith. 1998.
“How Much Does Childhood Poverty Affect the Life Chances of Children?” Amer-
ican Sociological Review 63:406-23.

Dupre, Matthew E. 2007. “Educational Differences in Age-Related Patterns of Disease:
Reconsidering the Cumulative Disadvantage and Age-as-Leveler Hypotheses.” Jour-
nal of Health and Social Behavior 48:1-15.

Edin, Kathryn, and Maria Kefalas. 2005. Promises I Can Keep: Why Poor Women
Put Motherhood before Marriage. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.

Elder, Glen H., Jr. 1998. “The Life Course as Developmental Theory.” Child Devel-
opment 69:1-12.

Elman, Cheryl, and Angela M. O’Rand. 2004. “The Race Is to the Swift: Socioeconomic
Origins, Adult Education, and Wage Attainment.” American Journal of Sociology
110:123-60.

Elo, Irma T., and Samuel H. Preston. 1992. “Effects of Early-Life Conditions on Adult
Mortality: A Review.” Population Index 58:186-212.

Emirbayer, Mustafa, and Ann Mische. 1998. “What Is Agency?” American Journal of
Sociology 103:962-1023.

Felitti, Vincent J., Robert F. Anda, Dale Nordenberg, David F. Williamson, Alison M.
Spitz, Valerie Edwards, Mary P. Koss, and James S. Marks. 1998. “Relationship of
Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of the Leading Causes of
Death in Adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study.” American Jour-
nal of Preventive Medicine 14:245-58.

Ferraro, Kenneth F.,, and Melissa M. Farmer. 1999. “Utility of Health Data from Social
Surveys: Is There a Gold Standard for Measuring Morbidity?” American Sociological
Review 64:303-15.

Ferraro, Kenneth F., and Jessica A. Kelley-Moore. 2003. “Cumulative Disadvantage
and Health: Long-Term Consequences of Obesity?” American Sociological Review
68:707-29.

Ferraro, Kenneth F., and Tetyana Pylypiv Shippee. 2009. “Aging and Cumulative
Inequality: How Does Inequality Get under the Skin?” Gerontologist 49:333-43.
Ferraro, Kenneth F., Tetyana Pylypiv Shippee, and Markus H. Schafer. 2009. “A
Theory of Age and the Accumulation of Inequality.” Pp. 413-33 in Handbook of
Theories of Aging, 2d ed., edited by Vern L. Bengtson, Merril Silverstein, Norella

M. Putney, and Daphna Gans. New York: Springer.

Foster, Holly, John Hagan, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2008. “Growing Up Fast: Stress
Exposure and Subjective ‘Weathering’ in Emerging Adulthood.” Journal of Health
and Social Behavior 49:162-77.

Gecas, Viktor, and Peter J. Burke. 1995. “Self and Identity.” Pp. 41-67 in Sociological
Perspectives on Social Psychology, edited by K. Cook, G. A. Fine, and J. House.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Giddens, Anthony. 1991. Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late
Modern Age. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Dou-
bleday.
Haas, Steven. 2008. “Trajectories of Functional Health: The ‘Long Arm’ of Childhood
Health and Socioeconomic Factors.” Social Science and Medicine 66:849-61.

Hamil-Luker, Jennifer, and Angela M. O’Rand. 2007. “Gender Differences in the Link
between Childhood Socioeconomic Conditions and Heart Attack Risk in Adulthood.”
Demography 44:137-58.

Hardt, Jochen, and Michael Rutter. 2004. “Validity of Adult Retrospective Reports of
Adverse Childhood Experiences: Review of the Evidence.” Journal of Childhood
Psychology and Psychiatry 45:260-73.

Hatch, Stephani L. 2005. “Conceptualizing and Identifying Cumulative Adversity and
Protective Resources: Implications for Understanding Health Inequalities.” Journal
of Gerontology: Social Sciences 60:5130-S134.

Haveman, Robert, and Barbara Wolfe. 1995. “The Determinants of Children’s At-
tainments: A Review of Methods and Findings.” Journal of Economic Literature
33:1829-78.

Hayward, Mark D., and Bridget K. Gorman. 2004. “The Long Arm of Childhood:
The Influence of Early-Life Social Conditions on Men’s Mortality.” Demography 41:
87-107.

Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econo-
metrica 47:153-61.

Heidegger, Martin. 1962. Being and Time, translated by John Macquarrie and Edward
Robinson. Oxford: Blackwell.

Hitlin, Steven, and Glen H. Elder Jr. 2007a. “Agency: An Empirical Model of an
Abstract Concept.” Pp. 33-67 in Advances in Life Course Research, vol. 11, edited
by Ross MacMillan. Amsterdam: Elsevier/JAI.

. 2007b. “Time, Self, and the Curiously Abstract Concept of Agency.” Socio-
logical Theory 25:170-91.

Holland, P., L. Berney, D. Blane, G. D. Smith, D. J. Gunnell, and S. M. Montgomery.
2000. “Life Course Accumulation of Disadvantage: Childhood Health and Hazard
Exposure during Childhood.” Social Science and Medicine 50:1285-95.

Homans, George C. 1964. “Bringing Men Back In.” American Sociological Review 29:
809-18.

Horwitz, Allan V., Cathy S. Widom, Julie McLaughlin, and Helen R. White. 2001.
“The Impact of Childhood Abuse and Neglect on Adult Mental Health.” Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 42:184-201.

Irving, Shalon M., and Kenneth F. Ferraro. 2006. “Reports of Abusive Experiences
during Childhood and Adult Health Ratings: Personal Control as a Pathway?” Jour-
nal of Aging and Health 18:458-85.

Johnson, Monica Kirkpatrick, and Stefanie Mollborn. 2009. “Growing Up Faster, Feel-
ing Older: Hardship in Childhood and Adolescence.” Social Psychology Quarterly
72:39-60.

Keyes, Corey Lee M., and Carol D. Ryff. 2000. “Subjective Change and Mental Health:
A Self-Concept Theory.” Social Psychology Quarterly 63:264-79.

Kuh, Diana, Rebecca Hardy, Claudia Langenberg, Marcus Richards, and Michael E.
J. Wadsworth. 2002. “Mortality in Adults Aged 25-64 Related to Socioeconomic
Conditions in Childhood and Adulthood: Post War Cohort Study.” British Medical
Journal 325:1076-80.

Lachman, Margie E., Christina Rocke, Christopher Rosnick, and Carol D. Ryff. 2008.
“Realism and Illusion in Americans’ Temporal Views of Their Life Satisfaction.”
Psychological Science 19:889-97.

Maines, David R., Noreen M. Sugrue, and Michael A. Katovich. 1983. “The Socio-
logical Import of G. H. Mead’s Theory of the Past.” American Sociological Review
48:161-73.

Markus, Hazel, and Paula Nurius. 1986. “Possible Selves.” American Psychologist 41:
954-69.
Mayer, Karl Ulrich. 2009. “New Directions in Life Course Research.” Annual Review
of Sociology 35:413-33.

McAdams, Dan P. 2001. “The Psychology of Life Stories.” Review of General Psy-
chology 5:100-122.

. 2006. The Redemptive Self: Stories Americans Live By. New York: Oxford
University Press.

McAdams, Dan P., Jeffrey Reynolds, Martha Lewis, Allison H. Patten, and Phillip J.
Bowman. 2001. “When Bad Things Turn Good and Good Things Turn Bad: Se-
quences of Redemption and Contamination in Life Narrative and Their Relation
to Psychosocial Adaptation in Midlife Adults and Students.” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 27:474-85.

McLeod, Jane D., and Elbert P. Almazan. 2003. “Connections between Childhood and
Adulthood.” Pp. 391-411 in Handbook of the Life Course, edited by J. T. Mortimer
and M. J. Shanahan. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.

McLeod, Jane D., and Danielle L. Fettes. 2007. “Trajectories of Failure: The Edu-
cational Careers of Children with Mental Health Problems.” American Journal of
Sociology 113:653-701.

Mead, George Herbert. 1932. The Philosophy of the Present. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

. 1934. Mind, Self, and Society, edited by Charles W. Morris. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Merton, Robert K. 1968a. “The Matthew Effect in Science.” Science 159:56-63.

. 1968b. Social Theory and Social Structure. New York: Free Press.

. 1995. “The Thomas Theorem and the Matthew Effect.” Social Forces 74:379-

 

 

 

 

424,

O’Rand, Angela M. 1996. “The Precious and the Precocious: Understanding Cumu-
lative Disadvantage and Cumulative Advantage over the Life Course.” Gerontologist
36:230-38.

. 2006. “Stratification and the Life Course: Life Course Capital, Life Course
Risks, and Social Inequality.” Pp. 145-62 in Handbook of Aging and the Social
Sciences, 6th ed., edited by Robert H. Binstock and Linda K. George. San Diego,
Calif.: Elsevier.

O’Rand, Angela M., and Jennifer Hamil-Luker. 2005. “Processes of Cumulative Ad-
versity: Childhood Disadvantage and Increased Risk of Heart Attack across the Life
Course.” Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 60B:117-24.

Palloni, Alberto. 2006. “Reproducing Inequalities: Luck, Wallets, and the Enduring
Effects of Childhood Health.” Demography 43:587-615.

Pearlin, Leonard I. 1989. “The Sociological Study of Stress.” Journal of Health and
Social Behavior 30:241-56.

Pearlin, Leonard I, Kim Nguyen, Scott Schieman, and Melissa Milkie. 2007. “The
Life Course Origins of Mastery among Older People.” Journal of Health and Social
Behavior 48:164-79.

Pearlin, Leonard I., Scott Schieman, Elena M. Fazio, and Stephen C. Meersman. 2005.
“Stress, Health, and the Life Course: Some Conceptual Perspectives.” Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 46:205-19.

Preston, Samuel H., Mark E. Hill, and Greg L. Drevenstedt. 1998. “Childhood Con-
ditions That Predict Survival to Advanced Ages among African-Americans.” Social
Science and Medicine 47:1231-46.

Reynolds, John R., and R. Jay Turner. 2008. “Major Life Events: Their Personal
Meaning, Resolution, and Mental Health Significance.” Journal of Health and Be-
havior 49:223-37.

Riley, Matilda W. 1987. “On the Significance of Age in Sociology.” American Socio-
logical Review 52:1-14.

Rudd, Peter, and Karen Evans. 1998. “Structure and Agency in Youth Transitions:
Student Experiences of Vocational Further Education.” Journal of Youth Studies 1:
39-62.

Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. 1997. “A Life-Course Theory of Cumulative
Disadvantage and the Stability of Delinquency.” Pp. 133-61 in Developmental The-
ories of Crime and Delinquency, Advances in Criminological Theory, vol. 7, edited
by Terence P. Thornberry. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction.

. 2005. “A Life-Course View of the Development of Crime.” Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 602:12—45.

Schwartz, Joseph E., Howard S. Friedman, Joan S. Tucker, Carol Tomlinson-Keasey,
Deborah L. Wingard, and Michael H. Criqui. 1995. “Sociodemographic and Psy-
chosocial Factors in Childhood as Predictors of Adult Mortality.” American Journal
of Public Health 85:1237-45.

Shanahan, Michael J. 2000. “Pathways to Adulthood in Changing Societies: Variability
and Mechanisms in Life Course Perspective.” Annual Review of Sociology 26:667—
92.

Shanahan, Michael J., Glen H. Elder Jr., and Richard A. Miech. 1997. “History and
Agency in Men’s Lives: Pathways to Achievement in Cohort Perspective.” Sociology
of Education 70:54-67.

Sharot, Tali, Alison M. Riccardi, Candace M. Raio, and Elizabeth A. Phelps. 2007.
“Neural Mechanisms Mediating Optimism Bias.” Nature 450:102-7.

Singh-Manoux, Archana, and Michael Marmot. 2005. “Role of Socialization in Ex-
plaining Social Inequalities in Health.” Social Science and Medicine 60:2129-33.

Smith, George D., Carole Hart, David Blane, and David Hole. 1998. “Adverse Socio-
economic Conditions in Childhood and Cause Specific Adult Mortality: Prospective
Observational Study.” British Medical Journal 316:1631-35.

Surtees, Paul G., and Nicholas W. J. Wainwright. 2007. “The Shackles of Misfortune:
Social Adversity Assessment and Representation in a Chronic Disease Epidemio-
logical Setting.” Social Science and Medicine 64:95-111.

Thoits, Peggy A. 2006. “Personal Agency in the Stress Proce:
Social Behavior 47:309-23.

Turner, R. Jay, and Donald A. Lloyd. 1995. “Lifetime Traumas and Mental Health:
The Significance of Cumulative Adversity.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior
36:360-76.

Turner, R. Jay, Blair Wheaton, and Donald A. Lloyd. 1995. “The Epidemiology of
Social Stress.” American Sociological Review 60:104—25.

Wagmiller, Robert L., Mary Clare Lennon, Li Kuang, Philip M. Alberti, and J.
Lawrence Aber. 2006. “The Dynamics of Economic Disadvantage and Children’s
Life Chances.” American Sociological Review 71:847-66.

Widom, Cathy S. 1989. “Child Abuse, Neglect, and Violent Criminal Behavior.” Crim-
inology 27:251-71.

Willson, Andrea E., Kim M. Shuey, and Glen H. Elder Jr. 2007. “Cumulative Advan-
tage Processes as Mechanisms of Inequality in Life Course Health.” American Jour-
nal of Sociology 112:1886-1924.

Wilson, Anne E., and Michael Ross. 2000. “The Frequency of Temporal-Self and Social
Comparisons in People’s Personal Appraisals.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 78:928-42.

Wrong, Dennis H. 1961. “The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology.”
American Sociological Review 26:183-93.

 

 

.” Journal of Health and
