Intergroup Attitudes and Social Ascent Among Negro Boys

Author(s): Glen H. Elder, Jr.

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Tan., 1971), pp. 673-697
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776434

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:10 UTC
A valued belief in the American experience defines the good life as a
reward achieved by moral discipline, hard work, and ambition. The
efficacy of this formula in status mobility is contingent on access to
favorable life opportunities and on the evaluation of performance by
universalistic-achievement standards. Racial subordination violates both
of these conditions, and places individual ascent in a contingent relation-
ship to group advancement. Through heightened race pride, sensitivity
to white oppression, and awareness of the individual-group relationship,
the black liberation movement has tended to increase the psychological
validity of social ascent through ingroup commitment.

The individualist and collective modes of social ascent are incor-
porated within two contrasting approaches to social change: an emphasis
on individual achievement as expressed in Weber’s Protestant Ethic
and McClelland’s achievement motive and the revolutionary-collec-
1A version of this paper was presented at the sixty-fourth meeting of the American
Sociological Association, September 1969. The data on which the analysis is based
were obtained from a larger community study directed by Alan Wilson and funded
by a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health (MN-0097). Support for
the present analysis was provided by the Institute for Research in Social Science,

University of North Carolina. I am indebted to a number of my colleagues for helpful
comments on initial drafts of this manuscript.
tivist approach outlined by Sorel and others.2 Achievement theory
stresses the development of motivation to excel through family socializa-
tion, freedom from binding group obligations or ties, and a willingness to
take advantage of opportunities in areas away from home. Applied to
majority-minority relations, this approach would view racial change as a
consequence of the aggregated achievements of individual Negroes.

Revolutionary-collectivist theory, on the other hand, sets forth the
rationale for commitment to a collectivity, a belief that the deprived,
apathetic masses can only achieve a better life through involvement in a
collective, revolutionary struggle. Participation in the movement is the
primary agent of personal change. Thus psychological change among
participants in the black liberation movement—toward a greater sense
of a racial pride and efficacy—would constitute a major accomplishment
in its own right and an important prerequisite for Negroes to achieve
their goals. While both theories view the disciplined effort of individuals
as an essential determinant of change, revolutionary theory joins this
quality with subordination of self to a collective cause and authority.
“It emphasizes selflessness, the strength in unity, the necessity to ‘stand
together or fall separately,’ the enormous power that a single-minded
body exhibits” (Coleman 1969, p. 296).

Two historically dominant strategies for racial change are posed by
the achievement and revolutionary approaches: the attainment of racial
equality through integration, as advocated by civil rights organizations,
and the black nationalist strategy—mobilization of black people for the
development of their economic resources, collective identity, and
political power.’ Cruse observes that “American Negro history is basical-
ly a history of the conflict between integrationist and nationalist forces
in politics, economics, and culture—between freedom and racial equality,
on the one hand, and self-help, group solidarity, economic nationalism,
and separatism, on the other’ (1967, p. 564).

The integrationists have struggled to achieve a social situation wherein

2 These two approaches are compared by James Coleman in a provocative essay on
race relations and social change (1969). This paragraph and the next are heavily in-
debted to this source.

3 Despite much confusion regarding the aims and strategies of black power, the ideal
of equality in pluralism and the following points have received moderate agreement.
The movement aims to eliminate through collective means all forms of racial sub-
ordination or discrimination, in contrast to more restricted, reform objectives. Its
basic strategy rests on the premise that black men must act in their own behalf in all
institutional domains—stress is placed on economic, political, and cultural national-
ism. Black solidarity and identity are promoted by developing a collective conscious-
ness of racial oppression and by fostering self-discipline and self-respect through an
understanding of the black man’s historical, contemporary, and international experi-
ence. For a more detailed discussion of these points, see Carmichael and Hamilton
(1967), Killian (1968), and Franklin (1969).
the life chances of the individual Negro are relatively independent from
those of other members of the black community. The route to racial
equality is charted through the accumulated achievements of individual
Negroes. Throughout recent history this appeal has been made by Negro
leaders from the upper strata, and the benefits of this approach have been
greatest for this population. If integration weakens racial ties, some
evidence suggests that desegregated schooling does increase the life
chances of black children for educational and occupational attainment by
fostering school success, interracial trust, and access to good jobs
(Crain 1970). Accordingly, we assumed that commitment to racial
integration and individualistic achievement would arise among black
adolescents who view the social system as supportive of individual
mobility through individual performance, who have acquired a sense of
interracial trust through white friends, and who are relatively high on
status origin, intellectual ability, and desire to achieve.

Whether committed to racial separation or not, nationalist organiza-
tions have devoted their main efforts to the cultural and communal
development of black people, especially in the lower classes where there
is little chance of, or interest in, meeting the prerequisites of racial
integration. From the movement’s beginnings to the present, various
expressions of black nationalism have claimed that meaningful integra-
tion of the black man cannot be achieved by disavowing his racial group
or from a position of inequality. The belief that black solidarity and
racial equality can and should be achieved before energies are directed
toward the attainment of racial integration is expressed in the rhetoric
and programs of black power advocates. This position is well expressed
by Ron Karenga, a militant leader of cultural nationalism from the
Watts area of Los Angeles: “‘We’re not for isolation but interdependence
—but we can’t become interdependent unless we have something to
offer.” Likewise, Nathan Wright concludes that “there can be no
meaningful integration between unequals.’”

Traditionally, black nationalism has acquired its support from young
Negroes in the lower classes, a setting where individual life chances are
most closely related to the relative group position of black people. Ac-
cordingly, commitment to this cause and to ascent through the status
change of all Negroes should be most characteristic of adolescents who
are keenly aware of the disjuncture between hopes and expected ac-
complishments. Anticipated failure in status achievement is attributed
to an external barrier, white oppression, rather than to the self, as
seems probable among individualistic youth, and their relations to white
authority figures are likely to be conflicted. This view of the system—

4 The statements by Karenga and Wright are on pp. 164 and 116 in Barbour’s The
Black Power Revolt (1968).
unfavorable status prospects and white oppression—may stem from
distrust or hostility associated with racial isolation and from “socially
imposed” handicaps, such as low-status origin and reward deprivation
in school.

In comparisons of the integrationist and nationalist approaches to
racial change, it is commonly assumed that support for one implies
opposition to the other. Negro movements have tended to embrace one
or the other strategy, but other alternatives are available on the social-
psychological level. The position of Negro youth relative to racial
integration and the black community involves more than simply ap-
proach, avoidance, or aggressive responses to a particular group. Com-
mitment to a cause does not clearly define one’s relation to others. Out-
group hostility, for instance, is not an inevitable correlate of ingroup
identification. At minimum, decisions regarding one’s relation to racial
integration and the black community could result in one of four inter-
group orientations: uncommitted—indifference toward the collective
interests of black people and racial integration; nationalist—affirmation
of only the collective interests of the black community ; integrationist—
support for only racial integration; and pluralist—support for both
racial interests and integration.’ Our aim in this study is to identify
these four intergroup orientations from attitudes toward racial integra-
tion and black solidarity in a sample of Negro boys of high school age,
and to compare boys in each orientation group on selected social and
psychological variables. These variables are grouped under interracial
experience, life opportunity, and competence.

An ideological bridge between black solidarity and integration is
provided by the pluralists, who favor both strategies. The differing
views of the nationalists and pluralists on racial integration imply that
racial isolation and separatist feeling would be concentrated among the
former. A desire to become part of an interracial community requires
5 These perspectives are similar to three of the four minority-group orientations out-
lined by Louis Wirth in a sequential model based mainly on the experiences of Euro-
pean religious and ethnic groups: an initial pluralistic attitude is followed by assimila-
tionist, secessionist, and militant strategy (1945; cf. Johnson 1966). Tolerance from
the dominant group, as well as social and economic equality, is sought by a pluralistic
minority in the belief that differing cultures can flourish harmoniously in the same
society. Adequate subgroup differentiation in society to ensure perpetuation of the
ethnic tradition and autonomy is the central goal of this minority. Desegregation
which allows intergroup contact in secondary settings establishes social bonds and
forces that eventually weaken communality and strengthen assimilationist sentiment.
Slavery excluded equality in cultural pluralism as an initial alternative for black
Americans, while assimilation was not an option for the masses. Revitalization of
cultural individuality and pride in secessionist or separatist movements can be viewed
as a response to the above conditions and their psychic costs. The militant orientation
in Wirth’s typology, which aspires to dominance over groups, is expressed by some
nationalist groups, for example, as in the belief that black people will soon rule the
world.
Intergroup Attitudes and Social Ascent

faith in the opportunity to do so, and thus we expected perceived racial
barriers to individual achievement to be less prevalent among the plural-
ists than the nationalists. Such faith is nurtured by adequate family
resources, individual competence, and rewarding experience with adult
(predominantly white) authorities.

Support for racial integration implies confidence in one’s ability and
belief in a black person’s chances in a predominantly white society,
while effort toward the development of the black community is con-
tingent on a willingness to cooperate with other Negroes. In the absence
of these conditions, one might expect to find a noncommittal, survival
ethic of individualism, such as that expressed by a nineteen-year-old
boy in Harlem. When asked by a youth worker why he “didn’t know”
about conditions in his area, he replied: ‘As long as I can survive, I
don’t care about nobody else, man” (Clark 1965, p. 15). Compared with
youth having other intergroup attitudes, we expected the uncommitted
to be lowest on intelligence and sense of mastery, and most dependent
on their family of orientation.

In summary, conditions which promote individualistic-achievement
striving are also viewed as predictive of integrationist sentiment. Since
individualism is nurtured by trust and the belief that rewards can be
achieved by the self, we assumed that the integrationists would have
greater interracial experience and be less handicapped by environmental
and personal limitations to achievement than boys in the other groups.
Racially linked barriers to this form of social ascent increase the im-
portance of race for achievement, and the more the individual’s future is
linked to his racial group, the greater the likelihood of nationalistic
sentiment among relatively competent boys (cf. Cloward and Ohlin
1960, p. 125). The nationalists are likely to differ from other youth on
isolation from whites—social and emotional—and on degree of conflict
with white authorities in school and community. Though race conscious,
we assumed that the pluralists would have more rewarding interracial
experiences and perceive greater opportunities than the nationalists.
Last, an incompetent self—defined by low intelligence, fatalism, and
family dependency—is viewed as the primary distinguishing attribute
of the uncommitted.
composition is primarily a consequence of a large influx of Southern
Negroes during World War II. The proportion of Negro residents in-
creased from 1 percent in 1940 to 16 percent in 1950; approximately 30
percent of the city’s residents were Negro in 1960. Most of the Negro
population is concentrated in the western and southern flatlands of the
city. Negro students comprise less than 11 percent of the students in two
of the five high schools; no high school was more than half Negro. Numer-
ous racial disturbances have occurred in the city since 1965, the most
serious of which was two consecutive nights of rioting during the summer
of 1968.

Most of the Negro parents are Southern born and low in socio-
economic status. Three-fourths were born in the South, and most spent
part of their childhood in rural areas of this region. Twenty percent of
the Negro adolescents were also born in the South. Compared with the
white students, Negro youth were more likely to come from father-
absent families (22 vs. 9.5 percent), and their fathers were generally
employed in unskilled jobs, in contrast to a fourth of the white fathers.

Our first step in the analysis involves construction of the intergroup
typology and a test of its construct validity on racial and interracial
attitudes. This is followed by a comparison of the groups on measures
indicating life opportunity (objective and perceived) and competence—
family and personal resources, relations with white authorities, and views
of the future in terms of anticipated barriers and status prospects.
THE INTERGROUP TYPOLOGY AND ITS CONSTRUCT VALIDITY

The proposed typology is based on the assumption that sentiment favor-
ing the collective interests of the black community is relatively inde-
pendent of attitudes toward racial integration. To test this assumption
we constructed indices of both attitudes from items in the survey.

On black solidarity, the boys were presented with a list of strategies
that have been proposed by some Negro groups to reach their goals and
were asked how strongly they felt about each of them. Three of the
strategies represent core principles of black power—black unity, power,
and self-defense—and boys who approved of one were also likely to
approve of the others.? Approximately three out of five boys approved
of each strategy.

Another tactic, exclusion of whites from the movement, has been
stressed by some black-power advocates as necessary to ensure the de-
velopment of black leadership. In support of this policy, Carmichael and
Hamilton cite the experience of a white civil rights worker who observed
that “too often we have found our relationships with the local community
leaders disturbingly like the traditional white-black relationship of the
Deep South” (1967, pp. 28-29). In our sample of Negro boys, the exclu-
sion of whites from black organizations received very little support (only
12 percent), and this support was unrelated to approval of black solidar-
ity as measured by the three-item index. In this respect at least, separat-
ism is not reflected by sentiment favoring black solidarity.

A more direct test of the intergroup alternatives associated with vari-
ations in attitude toward black solidarity is provided by an index of
integration sentiment constructed from two interrelated items on the
preferred racial composition of schools and neighborhoods.® Seventy
percent of the boys strongly agreed that students of all races should
attend school together and a third preferred to live in an integrated
neighborhood. In line with our assumption regarding intergroup atti-
tudes, these youth did not differ from boys who were against or indiffer-

7 These strategies were presented as follows: “Get all Negroes to take the same stand
on racial issues”; “Black leadership of Negro organizations, but allow whites to be
members’; and ‘‘Negroes should strike back if attacked.”’ The items were moderately
intercorrelated (average T, = .21) and were combined as follows in a summated
index: strongly agree, 2; agree 1; and all other responses, 0. Scores ranged from 0 to 6.
Although no data were available on militancy, a recent study by Dizard (1970) found
a moderate relationship between attachment to black identity (natural hair style,
ete.) and militancy.

5 The two items are: “All pupils should attend school together” (strongly agree, 2;
agree, 1; other responses, 0); and “If you could choose, in what kind of neighbor-
hood would you prefer to live?” (integrated, 2; most residents of another race, don’t
know, and don’t care, 1; and all residents of the same race, 0). Scores range from
0 to 4. The two items were moderately intercorrelated (T, = .33).
ent toward racial integration on degree of identification with the black
community; the two attitudes were completely unrelated (T. = .01).

It should be noted that neither residence in an integrated neighborhood
nor attendance at a racially mixed school is a valued goal in black-power
ideology, since each implies that fulfillment of the black person can only
be achieved if he associates with whites. However, the right of residential
choice, within the limits of personal resources, is a fundamental aspect
of racial equality, and this right is demanded by Negro groups that vary
widely on ideology. While boys who endorsed black solidarity were not
less likely to favor racial integration than other youth, they were more
inclined to oppose racial inequality manifested by exclusive white neigh-
borhoods.®

Identification with black solidarity was defined by scores of 3 or more
on, the index; this represents approval of at least two of the three strate-
gies—black leadership, unity, and self-defense. On the integration index,
positive sentiment was defined by scores of 3 or more. According to a
cross-tabulation of these indexes, 29 percent of the boys were classified
as pluralists, 40 percent as integrationists, 15 percent as nationalists, and
16 percent as uncommitted.

If boys in the four groups hold views consistent with their attitudes
toward black solidarity and integration, we should be able to predict
their relative position on strategies for achieving racial change, racial-
group preference, and interracial experience. Two strategies that are
generally compatible with the ideology of black solidarity were included
in the survey: the application of pressure to achieve residential desegre-
gation in which the issue is open housing as a right of black people and
not personal interest in neighborhood integration; and the improvement
of living conditions in the black community. The pluralists’ identification
with the black community and integration suggests that they would be
most likely to support both strategies. Since ingroup identification is
commonly associated with intergroup distance and ethnocentrism, we
expected the nationalists to rank above other boys in the sample on pref-
erence for Negroes over other racial groups, interracial distance, and
support for the Black Muslims. Integrationist groups, such as the
NAACP, are consistent with the ideology of boys who favor integration,
regardless of attitude toward black solidarity. By their indifference
toward black solidarity and integration, the uncommitted show relatively
little interest in racial change and would therefore be least likely to favor
any change strategy.

Two procedures were employed for determining the degree of inter-
® Boys who agreed that whites should be required to “accept Negroes into the white

community” were more likely to identify with black solidarity than to approve of
racial integration as a personal goal (T, = .21 vs. .08).
Intergroup Attitudes and Social Ascent

group distance on the above variables and in all subsequent tabular
analyses. To test the hypothesis that all groups are similar on percentage
values for each indicator, we used a simple, one-way analysis of variance.
On measures which vary significantly across the four groups, the rela-
tive distance between groups was determined by comparing differences
between group percentages and ordering them according to size.

TABLE 1

COMPARISON OF FouR INTERGROUP ORIENTATIONS BY ATTITUDES
TOWARD CHANGE STRATEGIES, RACIAL PREFERENCE,
AND INTERRACIAL EXPERIENCE

 

 

PrRceNntAGE oF Necro Boys By
InrerGrovup ORIENTATION

Uncom- Nation- Integra- Plural- SIGNIFICANT

mitted alists tionists ists DIFFERENCE
ATTITUDE N =468 N=45 N=114 N=81 (F-Ratio)

 

Change strategies:
Favors desegregation and
improvement of black
community>.... - 6 41 20 47 bd
Racial preferences an
racial experience:

 

  
  

Prefers own race® 30 48 17 26 a
Interracial contac’ 46 43 63 57 N.S.
Likes white people. . . 27 22 53 48 *

 

* Minimal number of cases.

b Percentage of boys in each group who strongly approve both of the following policy statements:
“Require whites to accept Negroes into white community” and ‘‘Improving conditions in the black
community.”

¢ Each percentage represents the proportion of boys who pref
of the following items: “I would prefer my teachers to be
and ‘‘Run pretty much everything in this school.”

4 An index of interracial contact was constructed from the following three items: ‘‘How many of
your friends are white?” (half or more was scored 2; only a few, 1; and none, 0); ‘‘Have you ever eaten
at a table with a white?” (sometimes or more often, 1; never, 0); ‘Have you ever gone to a party where
most of the people were white?’ (sometimes or more often, 1; never, 0). The percentage of boys in
each group who scored 3 or 4 on the index is shown above.

*p <.01.

ed their own race on at least one
‘Most likely to succeed in life”;
Both interracial contact and especially acceptance of whites are cor-
related with support for racial integration and do not vary appreciably
by identification with black solidarity. It should be noted that racial
antipathy (dislike whites) was not prevalent in any of the groups, al-
though this attitude was more commonly expressed by the nationalists
(approximately 20 percent). The nationalists also stand out above other
boys in the sample on ethnocentrism. They were most apt to cite their
racial group as most likely to succeed in life, to claim that most student
leaders in their school are Negroes, and to prefer a teacher of their own
race (cf. Marx 1967, p. 114).

The nationalists did not differ significantly from the prointegration
boys on support for the NAACP (at least two-thirds voiced strong ap-
proval) or on support of CORE, but they were more likely to support the
Muslims (66 vs. 32 percent). Consistent with their relative indifference
toward racial change, the uncommitted were least likely to favor all
three groups; less than a third, for instance, strongly approved of CORE
and the NAACP.

With few exceptions, differences between the four attitude groups are
generally consistent with our expectations. The greatest distance on sup-
port for the two change strategies occurs between the uncommitted, on
the one hand, and the pluralists and nationalists, on the other. Interracial
experience and sentiment toward whites distinguish boys who favored
integration from those who were indifferent or negative in attitude, but
the difference on contact is not as large as one might expect. And on racial
preference, intergroup distance is most pronounced between the national-
ists and integrationists. Across all between-group comparisons, the differ-
ences are clearly a matter of degree. For instance, the nationalists do not
prefer racial integration, but very few are racially exclusive and antiwhite
in their attitudes. Preference for exclusively black organizations is the
most direct measure of support for black separation, yet only a fourth of
the nationalists expressed this attitude. At this point in the analysis,
the nationalists are more accurately described as race conscious and
indifferent to their participation in an integrated society than as explicit
advocates of racial separation.
Family and Personal Resources

The relation between race and restricted life chances is expressed in
institutional structures and their deprivational consequences for per-
sonal competence and family resources. A wage system which fails to
provide an adequate family income, underemployment, and joblessness
minimizes the cultural and economic resources of many black families,
and these deprivational conditions adversely affect intellectual develop-
ment among the young. We assumed that belief in racial integration and
individualistic achievement would be associated with the mastery ex-
perience provided by a high level of family and individual resources;
that an incompetent self would produce indifference toward black soli-
darity and integration; and that an intermediate level of resources—
neither high nor low—would enhance sensitivity to social barriers and
the collective interests of black people, but not to the point of under-
mining faith in the desirability of integration. In view of the traditional
popularity of black nationalism in the lower classes, we expected the
nationalists to have a more deprived background than the pluralists.

Family deprivation and support.—Degree of family support or depriva-
tion includes both objective and subjective aspects, such as father’s oc-
cupational status and perceptions of parental emotional support. Boys
who held each of the intergroup orientations were compared first on two
relatively objective dimensions of family deprivation: cultural—child’s
birthplace in the South (most of the parents were born in this region) and
low parental education (less than high school); and economic—father
absent or in an unskilled or semiskilled job and a large family (at least
four siblings living at home). Parents of boys who were born in the South
were relatively low on educational attainment, and a large number of
children was most common among low-status families.

The four groups are relatively similar on occupational status and
father absence (table 2). Though contrary to our expectations, this result
may reflect the spread of black consciousness to the middle class, as sug-
gested by recent surveys (Campbell and Schuman 1968). Moreover,
differences on cultural deprivation do not correspond to our expecta-
tions, for it is the pluralists who stand out in this respect. Thirty percent
of these boys were born in the South (versus an average of 18 percent
for the other groups), and their fathers were less likely to have a high
school education (61 percent did not vs. 41 percent of the other boys).
The disparity between father’s education and occupational status among
TABLE 2
INTERGROUP ORIENTATIONS AND FAMILY DEPRIVATION

 

 

Prercentace or Necro Boys sy
InTERGROUP ORIENTATIONS

Uncom- Nation- Integra- Plural-  Stenrricanr

mitted alists tionists ists DiFFeRENCE
Famrty DmprIvation N =438 N=42 N=108 N=77  (F-Ratio)

Cultural:
Child born in the South—
father has less than a

high school education... 57 49 46 72 N.S.
Economic:
Father’s occupational
status:
Skilled or higher....... 33 37 38 40 NS.
Skilled or unskilled.... . 44 45 46 45, NS.
Father absent (low
status)............5. 23 18 16 15 8.

Four or more sibs in house-

 

44 34 33 bd

 

® Minimal number of cases.

*p <.01.
could produce indifference or apathy by minimizing the kind of parent-
child interaction that stimulates intellectual growth and educational
skills.

The family background of the nationalists is surprisingly similar to
that of boys who only favored integration, but the former were less confi-
dent that their parents would stick by them if they got into trouble, a dif-
ference which is greatest in relation to father (table 3). There is no evi-
dence, however, that this expectation is expressed in alienation from the
family. Loyalty to parents is not significantly related to confidence in pa-
rental support and is most prevalent among the nationalists and uncom-
mitted. Upon further examination of the data, familistic sentiment was
found to be more highly related both to a perception of the larger environ-
ment as threatening and to low ability than to the perceived quality of
TABLE 3

COMPARISON OF INTERGROUP ORIENTATIONS ON PARENTAL
SUPPORTIVENESS AND FAMILY TIES

 

 

PERCENTAGE or Necro Boys py
InTERGRoUP ORIENTATIONS

 

 

Uncom- Nation- Integra- Plural- StanwrFIcaNT
PERCEIVED PARENTAL SupPorTIve- mitted alists tionists ists DIFFERENCE
NESS AND Famity Tres N=475 N=46 N=115 N=83 (F-Ratro)
Parental emotion support: 2b
Mother. . - 53 41 57 65 N.S.
Father. . 38 28 48 49 N.S.
Familism:
Main loyalty will be to par-
ents even after I marry:
Agree... 2... eee 58 49 26 29 *

 

* Minimal number of cases.
» Percentage in each group who gave ‘‘certainly”’ as a response to, “Would your mother /father stick
by you if you got into really bad trouble?”

ep <.01.
stantially higher on IQ than the uncommitted. The integrationists
ranked highest in average percentile (eighth grade Henman-Nelson Test),
followed by the pluralists, nationalists, and the uncommitted (X’s = 33,
30, 28, and 21). The only comparison worth noting centers on the differ-
ence between the uncommitted and other youth in the sample; 56 percent
of the former scored lower than the twentieth percentile, in contrast to
31 percent for the other groups. The less able boys were also found to be
less confident of their ability to control their lives and were more strongly
attached to parents than brighter youth.

One might expect teacher evaluations of school performance to cor-

10 This is reported in Elder (1970). Distrust toward others does not specifically refer
to relationships among blacks, which means that we cannot compare intragroup trust
across the four orientation groups. This is unfortunate since much has been made of
this sentiment as a barrier to cooperation in the black community.
respond to variations in measured intelligence across the four orientation
groups, although grades are only a partial reflection of scholastic skills.
Conduct in the class affects the quality of teacher-student relations and
the rewards assigned to students; other things being equal, a desirable
student is not likely to be one who is restless and aggressive, attributes
which are most likely to characterize black-conscious boys with national-
ist attitudes. As a measure of teacher evaluation, we selected the average
English grade received during 1964.

Two results from the intergroup comparisons are noteworthy: the
relatively low English grades of the nationalists (X’s = 46), when com-
pared with their IQ and the grades of other boys in the sample, and the
relatively similar grades of the pluralists and integrationists—the
difference here was less than one point (X = 57). Although the national-
ists scored higher on IQ than the uncommitted, their grades in English
were lower (X’s = 46 vs. 51). A hostile or aggressive demeanor in the
classroom, reinforced by the cultural bias of English grammar and
literature, may well be an important element in the nationalists’ diffi-
culties with this subject. A common outlet for academic frustration is
disruptive activity.

With the exception of cultural deprivation, intergroup distance (as
measured by percentage differences) is greatest between the uncommit-
ted and youth who favored racial integration (regardless of attitude
toward black solidarity). This difference occurs primarily on family
size, ties to parents, and IQ, as evident in tables 2 and 3. Overall, the
nationalists are located between these groups on resources, and they most
closely resemble the uncommitted on relations to family and test per-
formance. The most striking finding in comparisons of the integrationists
and pluralists is their similarity on most types of resources, especially
economic status, family relations, and English grades. It is only on
cultural status and, to a lesser extent, on IQ that the integrationists have
an advantage in achievement prospects. Such prospects are least favor-
able for the uncommitted.
may stem from a belief that traditional course work is not consistent
with the educational desires of black youth and their responsibility to
the black community. One type of incongruence, which has particular
relevance for the school problems of the nationalists, is produced by a
disproportionate emphasis on preparing students for prestigious univer-
sities. Over two-fifths of all boys in the sample felt that teachers cared
most about such students, which in effect meant an imbalance favoring
white students, and this perception was shared by over half of the
nationalists. A more direct indication of student preferences regarding
formal education is provided by a question which asked what the most
important benefit of school should be. Of the three alternatives—basic
skills, ability to think clearly, and job training—only the latter is clearly
at variance with the university preparatory emphasis, and it was chosen.
more often by the nationalists and pluralists (51 and 41 percent) than
by youth in the other two groups (31 percent). Boys who preferred job
training tended to dislike school (T, = .21), regardless of intergroup
attitude, but the greater vocational interests of the nationalists did not
completely explain their dislike for school. Alienation from school re-
mained most prevalent among the nationalists, even among boys who
favored the other benefits of schooling.

Another plausible source of alienation from school is a strained, con-
flicted relationship with teachers. Racially biased treatment of students,
especially in disciplinary action, is one of the more common complaints
of black parents in the local community. When white and Negro students
commit the same violation, it is expected that the latter will be treated
more punitively by school authorities. Aside from its validity, this defini -
tion of the situation is supportive of race consciousness and solidarity.
In fact, the nationalists and pluralists were most likely to regard teachers
as biased toward whites, a belief also shared by at least a third of the
integrationists and uncommitted (table 4). The data suggest that per-
ceived acceptance and concern by teachers were slightly more common
among the pluralists and integrationists than among boys in the other
two groups, with authority conflict most evident among the nationalists.
For these boys, removal from class and enforced silence in the classroom
seem to reflect a general discontent with the content of schooling, since
both conditions were most common among those who preferred job
training as a benefit of school (T, = .23). This preference was associated
with school dissatisfaction among other boys in the sample, but such
feelings were not as directly expressed in hostile or disruptive behavior.
Removal from class was unrelated to a vocational preference among the
uncommitted, integrationists, and pluralists.

The greater involvement of the nationalists in disciplinary action
(they were also more likely than other boys to have been suspended from
offense, and nationalistic sentiment was more prevalent in this group
than among the nondelinquents (38 vs. 10 percent). Juvenile offenses did
not vary among the uncommitted, integrationists, and pluralists.

In behavior patterns, the nationalists resemble gang boys from the
working class who value toughness, the display of courage, independence,
and the successful defense of honor. In the classroom, gang boys may
intentionally violate a rule of conduct in order to test the teacher’s
trust in them and demonstrate that their presence in school is indeed
voluntary and should be respected as such (Werthman 1967). When the
teacher uses imperatives or derogatory statements to restore order and
affirm authority rights, he challenges the boys’ own claims to autonomy
and initiates a character contest over the preservation of honor. This
classroom drama is consistent with our knowledge of the nationalists,
but very little is known about their life in the peer group or gang. Those
who were offenders did tend to have friends who were or had been in
trouble with the police, and, from the boys’ perspective, teachers were
not inclined to think well of their companions. But the nationalists were
not more likely than other boys to respect or identify with best friends.

Reward deprivation in school and conflicts with white authority could
result from as well as strengthen nationalistic sentiment. The acquisition
of this attitude in childhood—from older siblings, peers, or parents—
might enhance awareness and lessen tolerance of racial injustice, de-
veloping sensitivities and defensive tendencies which increase the likeli-
hood of confrontations with white authority. If the demeanor of boys
who are apprehended by authority figures influences their treatment or
disposition, as some research suggests," the nationalists’ aggressiveness
may be a significant factor in the severity and frequency of punishment
they have received. In any case, there is a strong connection between
school discipline and police arrests. Most of the boys who were expelled
from school are also juvenile offenders.

In review, we find intergroup distance on estrangement from school
most pronounced between the nationalists, on the one hand, and youth
who favored integration, on the other. Overall there is a high degree of
correspondence on positive feeling toward school among the integration-
ists and pluralists, although the latter were more conscious of teacher
favoritism toward white students. The uncommitted closely resembled
the nationalists on degree of dissatisfaction with school, but they, as
well as boys who favored integration, were less inclined to act out their
frustrations in the classroom. The nationalists ranked highest on occa-
sions of interpersonal conflict and punishment by school officials and
police. In these respects, the nationalists closely resemble the black nation-
alist sympathizers in Marx’s survey of Negro adults in the mid-sixties
(1967, p. 115). Approval of riots and violence as a means to an end and
antipolice sentiment were most prevalent among these adults. Although
substantial change has occurred in black ideology and strategy since the
mid-sixties, the relative prevalence of a conflict approach to white
authority among the nationalists (as we have defined them) is not likely
to have changed appreciably. The nationalist perspective is of course
only one form of black consciousness.

4 Through observations of police encounters with youth, Piliavin and Briar (1964)
found that juvenile demeanor has considerable effect on the severity of disposition:
“Boys who in their interactions with officers did not manifest what were considered
to be appropriate signs of respect tended to receive the more severe dispositions”
(p. 210). Uncooperative demeanor was observed among a third of the black adolescents
and one-sixth of the white youth. In this regard, it is worth noting that the nationalists

were least likely to claim respect for police, in contrast to two-thirds of the integra-
tionists.
Achievement Prospects and Anticipated Barriers

Though race is an objective element in the life chances of all boys in the
study, those who favored black solidarity were most conscious of the
interdependence between individual and group prospects. The implica-
tions of this awareness for goal setting and realistic expectations depend
on family support, intelligence, and school success. Such conditions are
supportive of individualistic achievement among the pluralists, but their
sensitivity to racial barriers may produce expectations which are lower
than goals. By comparison, the nationalists’ prospects for achievement
through legitimate channels are more limited. This factor, coupled with
the nationalists’ vocational conception of schooling, points to relatively
low expectations and desires concerning traditional forms of higher edu-
cation. A similar prediction seems applicable to the uncommitted, owing
to their limited intellectual ability.

Three types of achievement prospects were identified by comparing
aspirations and expectations on the completion of four years of college:
desire and expectation to achieve this goal; college aspirations coupled
with lower expectations; and low aspirations-expectations (below col-
lege). Only a few boys held higher expectations than aspirations. Confi-
dence in one’s opportunity and ability to succeed is particularly evident
in the integrationists’ outlook, and these boys were most likely to expect
a college education. This expectation level and the integrationists’ racial
attitudes evoke in some respects the ‘make-believe world” of Frazier’s
black bourgeoisie (1957). Their optimism regarding higher education
clearly produces a sizable risk of subsequent disappointments in adult
life. While the pluralists do not differ from the integrationists on aspira-
tion level, this ambition is more likely to exceed their expectations con-
cerning future accomplishments. Higher goals than expectations reflect
anticipated frustration, as well as hope, and are correlated in the present
sample with anxious preoccupation with adult roles, depressed feelings,
and the belief that one has to be much better than others in order to
achieve comparable success. In view of the pluralists’ goals and percep-
tion of the future (see table 5), it is not surprising that they were most
likely to express these sentiments.”

Compared with boys who favored integration, the uncommitted and
nationalists are less likely to think about the future and to want or expect
a college education. The nationalists rank lower than the other three
groups on college expectations, a perspective which is more a consequence

12 For instance, 53 percent of the pluralists reported that they often felt discouraged,
in comparison with a third of the other boys. On a six-item index of concern about the
future (work, college, aptitude, etc.), the pluralists were nearly twice as likely to score
in the high category as boys in the other three groups. The relation between these
indexes and educational goal expectations is reported in Elder (1970).
Intergroup Attitudes and Social Ascent

of school difficulties than vocational interests. Such expectations were
associated with school punishment, but not with a preference for job
training in the schools.

Reward deprivation occurs at a different point in time for the national-
ists and pluralists—the present versus the future—and this difference has
at least one implication for their reactions or adaptations to deprivation.
When failure is anticipated one can still maintain hope for the best, as
seen in the future concerns of the pluralists, and such hope sustains com-

TABLE 5

COMPARISON OF INTERGROUP ORIENTATIONS ON EDUCATIONAL
GOALS AND PERCEPTION OF FUTURE

 

 

Percentace or Necro Boys sy
InrerGRoup ORIENTATIONS

 

Uncom- Nation- Integra- Plural-  SigNIFICANT
Epucatronat Goats AND PER- mitted alists tionists ists DFFERENCE
CEPTION OF FUTURE N=378 N=41 N=101 N=76 (F-Ratio)
1. Educational goals:
College aspiration and
expectation......... 22 12 42 24 *
College aspiration only. 11 15 12 28 N.S.
Noncollege aspiration
and expectation..... 68 73 47 49 a

2. Sometimes feel that I have
to be twice as good as
others. ............-.

3. Often think about
Tl do and be after high
school................-. 24 22 50 45 *

4. Racial discrimination may
prevent me from getting
desired job............. 62 83 66 69 NS.

50 46 61 65 NS.

 

 

 

* Minimal number of cases.
*p <.01
quired liabilities in secondary school. Junior colleges in the state of
California accept students who have not completed high school, and this
opportunity is widely recognized in the community. In fact, nearly half
of the nationalists and a slightly smaller proportion of the pluralists
expected to achieve the equivalent of a junior-college education, in
contrast to a third of the other boys in the sample. Awareness of this
option in higher education is vividly illustrated by the following com-
ments of a boy with conduct and achievement problems.

Q. How certain are you that you'll go to college?

A. I’m pretty certain—’cause like junior college, you don’t have to
finish high school. You can be 18 years old to go there.

Q. You don’t have to finish high school?

A. No.

Q. So, you don’t think you’ll finish it?

A. I mean, if something comes up and I can’t finish school, I’m gonna
go to college, I don’t care what comes up. [Wilson 1967, p. 199]

Though boys who favored black solidarity are more aware of racial
discrimination than other youth, this difference is not large in the area
of occupational achievement and does not explain their relatively low
educational expectations. Both personal experience with and recognition
of racial discrimination are relatively common among boys in all four
groups. For instance, three-fourths of the adolescents reported direct
encounters with racial discrimination, and this experience did not vary
by intergroup orientation (not shown in table 5). One of the missing
links in the analysis is the particular interpretation that mediates the
relationship between perceived racial discrimination and intergroup at-
titudes. It seems likely that meanings attributed to racial discrimination
would vary markedly in relation to attitudes toward black solidarity.
For instance, boys who favor integration but not black solidarity may
expect some difficulty in getting a desired job because they are black,
and yet believe that they can surmount whatever barriers the future
holds in store for them. Needless to say, this definition of the situation
is not likely to reinforce awareness of the interdependence between indi-
vidual and group prospects. On the other hand, perception of racial
discrimination is likely to increase awareness of this interdependence and
foster identification with the black community when deprivations asso-
ciated with such acts are attributed to a white-dominated social order
rather than to the self.'4

“ For an important contribution to the literature on blame attribution, see Gurin’s
(1970) study of the motivational correlates of occupational aspirations among Negro
males in ten predominantly black colleges in the South. The analysis distinguished be-
tween a youth’s belief in his ability to ‘control reinforcements’? by his own efforts
and a general Protestant Ethic belief regarding the role of internal and external forces
in controlling the life prospects of other Negroes. As one would expect, personal con-
In terms of group attitude and status expectation, there is reason to
expect greater stability of identity among the nationalists than among
the pluralists. A singular interest in black solidarity would tend to
strengthen racial identification through a reinforcing network of
reference groups, while the dual orientation of the pluralists involves
divided and perhaps conflicting loyalties and bases of self-evaluation.
Moreover, a racial contrast in self-definition is more pronounced in the
nationalists’ world view. Status ambiguity associated with discrepant
educational desires and expectations may be an additional source of
instability in the pluralists’ self-perception and evaluation. Self-report
data in the survey do not provide an adequate test of this difference in
self-concept, although the pluralists were most likely to claim that they
had pretended and would prefer to be another person (49 percent).!®
Boys who identified with only one objective, either black solidarity or
racial integration, were least likely to prefer to be like another person,
and they did not differ in this respect (31 percent). The uncommitted
were located between these extreme groups (41 percent).

Since these data do not refer to the boys’ self-identification on the
basis of race, or to the racial identity of the “other” person, a desire to
be like someone else may not have racial significance. Thus the corre-
sponding response of the nationalists and integrationists toward being
another person may not imply similarity in racial identity. However,
our results on preference for another identity do suggest that affirmation
of conflicting or competing ideals is a source of inner tension and conflict
(cf. Hartley 1951), an emotional state which resembles the identity
dilemma poignantly described by DuBois more than sixty years ago:
“One feels his two-ness...an American, a Negro, two souls, two
thoughts, two unreconciled strivings, two warring ideals, in one dark
body. . . . He simply wishes to make it possible for a man to be both a
Negro and an American without being cursed and spit upon, without
having the doors of opportunity closed roughly in his face” (1903, pp.
3-4).
American Journal of Sociology

tunity that personal efficacy is acquired. Deprivations in this experience
and skill are commonplace in the lives of minority children. Cumulative
disadvantages in life prospects are coupled with powerlessness since
power creates and provides access to opportunity. Smith describes
opportunity, respect, and power as strategic determinants of the com-
petent self, characterized by productive engagement with the environ-
ment: “[PJower is the kingpin of the system. Power receives respect and
guarantees access to opportunity” (1968, p. 313).

In a deprivational context, adolescent support for black power or
solidarity expresses ingroup dependence and a desire to gain respect as
well as improved life chances through the collective power of Negro
Americans. This adaptation contrasts with the response of able youth
who perceive favorable opportunities in life and feel respected, are pre-
pared to leave their minority group in a psychological sense, and are
attracted to the appeal of a racially integrated society. Some evidence of
these differences between identification with black solidarity and racial
integration was obtained in our sample of Negro boys of high school age.

Allegiance to black solidarity and a personal commitment to racial
integration are not mutually exclusive among the identifications of black
youth, although support for both ideals or neither may be stressful.
A major historical theme in the black movement is conflict between the
integrationist and nationalist forces, but there have always been indi-
viduals and groups that have worked to bring selected aspects of each
world together in a united front. In the present study, identification with
one cause—black solidarity (political power, leadership, and self-defense)
or racial integration—was not predictive of attitudes toward the other.
The largest group of boys favored integration more than black solidarity
(integrationist), but support for both ideals ranked next in popularity
(pluralists). The least popular intergroup attitudes included support for
only black solidarity (nationalists) and indifference or negative senti-
ment toward both causes (uncommitted). By delineating intergroup
attitudes and the pluralist option, we find that a substantial number of
boys who favor racial integration are not indifferent to the collective
interests of the black community, and that a majority of those who be-
lieve in black solidarity also believe in racial integration. Beyond the
field of race relations, the typology makes explicit intergroup alternatives
which are sometimes overlooked in research on two reference groups or
individuals. This oversight has occurred, for instance, in studies of ado-
lescent attitudes toward parents and peers. Until recently there has been
a tendency to assume that peer and parent identification are opposite
ends of the same continuum, thus excluding congruent attitudes toward
both sets of reference figures.

On the empirical level, the four intergroup attitudes vary in relation
to interracial contact, ingroup-outgroup feeling, and commitment to
change strategies. As might be expected, frequency of interracial contact
and positive sentiment toward whites were correlated with personal
interest in an interracial community; the relationship was not modified
by positive or negative sentiment toward black solidarity. The national-
ists ranked highest on ethnocentrism or ingroup preference, considerably
higher than the pluralists and especially the integrationists, and they
were most strongly attracted to the Black Muslims. Levels of ingroup
preference and outgroup hostility were not comparable; only a fifth of
the nationalists expressed antipathy toward whites, while approximately
half of these boys reported some preference for their own racial group.
Two change strategies—residential desegregation and improvement of
the black community—received their greatest support from the pluralists
and nationalists, followed at a distance by the integrationists and a small
proportion of the uncommitted. As an intermediate group that shares
some views held by the nationalists and integrationists, the pluralists
couple positive interracial ties with an ingroup commitment and some
uncertainty of self.

On life opportunity and competence, perceived as well as objective,
the integrationists ranked above the other groups, followed by the
pluralists, nationalists, and uncommitted. Factors bearing upon or
indicating life chances included family status (cultural and economic),
grades, and relations with authority figures in school and community, and
achievement prospects, especially in education. Personal competence
was measured by performance on an IQ test, subjective independence
from the family, and mastery beliefs. Individualistic achievement is
compatible with a favorable opportunity structure and intellectual com-
petence, and both factors were most characteristic of the integrationists.
Their family status was not substantially higher than that of other boys,
but they were generally higher on IQ, school commitment and satis-
faction, and achievement expectations. By comparison, the pluralists
differed primarily on their lower expectations regarding future achieve-
ment; they were more aware of racial discrimination and were more
likely to anticipate failure to achieve their aspirations. On a wide range
of indicators, the nationalists were more limited in achievement oppor-
tunity or prospects than boys who favored integration. They tended to
have less confidence in parental support, received lower grades in school,
and were less satisfied with school; a larger percentage of these boys
received discipline from school and legal authorities, and very few ex-
pected to achieve a college education. The uncommitted also perceived
limited opportunity, but they differed most from other boys in the sample
on their relative incompetence, expressed in a low average IQ, family
dependence, and fatalism. In these respects, there is some resemblance
American Journal of Sociology

between the uncommitted and adults who are acquiescent and politically
apathetic.

Since the study is cross-sectional, most of the between-group differ-
ences are not amenable to causal interpretation. Causal direction is less
of a problem for family background and IQ, which are clearly antecedent
to the intergroup attitudes, than for attitude and experiential variables.
For instance, racial expectations held by the nationalists may well have
contributed to and resulted from their low grades and authority conflicts
in school. Likewise, racial isolation may be both cause and consequence of
negative sentiment toward racial integration. In addition, we were un-
able to trace the particular paths and turning points leading to each
intergroup attitude, such as childhood experiences—attitude trans-
mission through parents and peers, encounters with discrimination, and
degree of racial isolation.

The continued growth of black consciousness and ingroup commitment
has important implications for the content of child socialization in fami-
lies established by this age group, for the correlates of nationalistic feel-
ing, and for the current popularity of pluralism. In what area, if any, is
ideological change related to generational change in child rearing and
family relationships? Research on this question would benefit from an
understanding of the intergroup attitudes of girls in view of the centrality
of Negro mothers in child rearing and culture transmission. An important
question here is the relative stability of each intergroup attitude from
adolescence to the adult years, since a number of studies have found
black consciousness to be most prevalent among the young. For reasons
stated earlier, one would expect the nationalist perspective to be more
resistant to change than the dual orientation of the pluralists. Second,
racial change since the mid-sixties suggests that the nationalist attitude
(as we have defined it) has become more popular at the expense of the
uncommitted and integrationist groups, and that contemporary youth
who support only black solidarity are characterized by a greater sense
of mastery, pride, and commitment to the future. Within the nationalist
group in the present sample, this outlook was most characteristic of boys
who did not approve of the Black Muslims.

If nationalist sentiment has become more popular among the young in
recent years, it remains a minority position which is restricted by the
persistent strength of support for racial integration in this age group. The
converging levels of support for racial integration and black solidarity
suggest that advocates of both causes have increased markedly since the
mid-sixties. This perspective expresses an illusive ideal, a pluralistic
community in which blacks can affirm their racial identity, contribute to
the social, economic, and cultural life of their people, and freely partici-
pate in relationships with whites that are characterized by friendship and
REFERENCES

Barbour, Floyd B., ed. 1968. The Black Power Revolt. Boston: Sargeant.

Campbell, A., and Howard Schuman. 1968. ‘Racial Attitudes in Fifteen American
Cities.” In National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders. Supplemental
Studies. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Carmichael, Stokeley, and Charles Hamilton. 1967. Black Power. New York: Vintage.

Clark, Kenneth B. 1965. Dark Ghetto. New York: Harper & Row.

Cloward, James A., and Lloyd E. Ohlin. 1960. Delinquency and Opportunity: A Theory
of Delinquent Gangs. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Coleman, James S. 1969. ‘Race Relations and Social Change.” In Race and the Social
Sciences, edited by Irwin Katz and Patricia Gurin. New York: Basic.

Crain, Robert L. 1970. “School Integration and Occupational Achievement of Ne-
groes.” American Journal of Sociology 75 (January) : 593-606.

Cruse, Harold. 1967. The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. New York: Morrow.

DuBois, W. E. B. 1903. The Souls of Black Folk. Chicago: McClurg.

Dizard, Jan E. 1970. “Black Identity, Social Class, and Black Power.” Psychiatry 33
(May) : 195~207.

Elder, Glen H., Jr. 1970. “Socialization and Ascent in a Racial Minority.”’ Youth and
Society 2 (September): 74-110.

Franklin, Raymond 8. 1969. ‘The Political Economy of Black Power.” Social Prob-
lems 16 (Winter) : 286-301.

Frazier, E. Franklin. 1957. Black Bourgeoisie. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Gordon, Milton M. 1964. Assimilation in American Life. New York: Oxford.

Gurin, Patricia. 1970. ‘Motivation and Aspirations of Southern Negro College
Youth.” American Journal of Sociology 75 (January) : 607-31.

Hartley, E. L. 1951. ‘Psychological Problems of Multiple Group Membership.” In
Social Psychology at the Crossroads, edited by J. Rohrer and M. Sherif. New York:
Harper & Row.

Johnson, R. B. 1966. ‘“Negro Reactions to Minority Status.” In Racial and Ethnic
Relations, edited by Bernard E. Segal. New York: Crowell,

Killian, Lewis. 1968. The Impossible Revolution? Black Power and the American Dream.
New York: Random House.

Marx, Gary T. 1967. Protest and Prejudice. New York: Harper & Row.

Piliavin, Irving, and Scott Briar. 1964. ‘Police Encounters with Juveniles.” American
Journal of Sociology 70 (September) : 206-14.

Smith, M. B. 1968. “Competence and Socialization.” In Socialization and Society,
edited by John A. Clausen. Boston: Little, Brown.

Werthman, Carl. 1967. ‘The Function of Social Definitions in the Development of
Delinquent Careers.” In President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Ad-
ministration of Justice. Task Force Report: Juvenile Delinquence and Youth Crime.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Wilson, A. B. 1967. ‘Educational Consequences of Segregation in a California Com-
munity.” In Racial [solation in the Public Schools. Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office.

Wirth, L. 1945. “The Problem of Minority Groups.” In The Science of Man in a World
Crisis, edited by Ralph Linton. New York: Columbia University Press.

This sentence is adapted from Gordon’s concluding sentence in Assimilation in
American Life.
