Adolescent Competence and the Shaping of the Life Course

Author(s): John S. Clausen

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 96, No. 4 (Tan., 1991), pp. 805-842
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780732

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:54 UTC
The life course is shaped by the interaction of cultural and social
structural features with physical and psychological attributes of the
individual and by the commitments and purposive efforts of the
individual. In modern society, rationality and functionality have
replaced tradition as determinants of individual choices in the tran-
sition to adulthood. Adolescent competence should lead to thinking
through career and marital choices and inhibiting tendencies to
make unwise choices. Therefore, competent adolescents should
have more stable careers and marriages, and, because they will
more often be rewarded for their attributes than will less competent
ones, they should experience less personality change over the adult
years. These hypotheses are largely confirmed with data from a
longitudinal cohort studied for more than 50 years.
CHOICE AND THE ORGANIZATION OF THE LIFE COURSE

In modern society, the individual has a greater number of potentially
available roles to choose among than ever before, but the choices are
constrained by the institutional structures within which the person must
fit. Several writers on the life course (e.g., Kohli 1986; Mayer 1986;
and Meyer 1986) have noted that the educational system, the world of
occupations, and the period of retirement provide a very substantial de-
gree of structure and scheduling for the individual life course. Much
formal preparation is now needed for entering most occupational roles,
preparation that entails education and the conferring of credentials. For
career attainment, one can no longer plan to start at the bottom and
work to the top in an industry or business; people entering at the bottom
have no place to go, for jobs much above the bottom require specialized
knowledge and skills that are not provided to workers in lower-level
jobs. This is especially true in the “information society” of today, but
it was largely true in the late 1930s and the 1940s, when the research
subjects discussed here were making the transition to adulthood.
Rational assessment of opportunities has to a large degree replaced
tradition as the primary basis for choices to be made. Moreover, selection
for professional or bureaucratic careers strongly favors those who show
high potential and plan for the development of that potential early in
their lives. Persons with special talents may achieve success through
different routes than persons going into most professional and bureau-
cratic organizations and careers. Such special talents, especially artistic
and athletic talents, may lead to high monetary and social rewards, but
even here a high degree of training is likely to be required, and success
is far less predictable than in professional and bureaucratic careers.

Adolescence is certainly not the period in which most persons are espe-
cially rational in their choices. It tends to be a time of highly labile
emotions and of experimenting with varied experiences and identities.
Erikson (1950) extolled using adolescence as a period of moratorium and
saw a danger in “premature identity foreclosure.” Adolescence is still a
time of exploration and even moratorium for many youths, but a long
moratorium may now entail serious costs to those without ample re-
sources. Only youths from affluent families can continue their education
and other less focused explorations without great struggle. Higher educa-
tion, and possessing a reasonably clear idea of who and what one is and
wants to be, now gives not only a head start but an acceleration that
makes it difficult for late bloomers without special talents to catch up.
Some degree of early identity closure—knowing what kind of person one
wishes to be and the intellectual and moral enclave in which one wishes
to participate—need not be foreclosure; it is almost essential for effective
preparation for adulthood effectiveness. Thus I am not arguing that ratio-
nality prevails at adolescence but rather that there are considerable varia-
tions among adolescents in this respect and that later success is increas-
ingly dependent on education and on making wise choices.

Given the constraints imposed by institutional structures and historical
circumstances, the setting of realistic goals for oneself and preparation
for reaching those goals should have payoff value. I hypothesize that
personal orientations that entail such goal setting and preparation in
adolescence will strongly influence the direction that the life course will
take from early adolescence on. Adolescent choices will influence the
major social roles occupied later in life, the stability of role performance,
and the individual’s attainment over the life course. School, work, and
retirement may be phases in almost every life course, but they tell us
only a small part of the life story. Depending on abilities, interests, and
opportunities, individuals opt for different levels and types of education
and allocate differing priorities to preparation for various adult roles.
There exist general expectations as to when it is most appropriate to
marry (Neugarten, Moore, and Lowe 1965), but these are less clear now
than they were a generation ago, and it is individuals who decide when
and whom to marry. It is individuals who decide if and when to have
children and how many, although this decision may not be entirely under
individual control. These choices may be left to chance; many adolescents
WHAT COMPETENCE ENTAILS

As a first approximation, competence entails knowledge, abilities, and
controls. It entails knowing something about one’s intellectual abilities,
social skills, and emotional responses to others. It entails knowing one’s
interests and developing them. It entails knowing about available options
and thinking about how to maximize or expand those options. Compe-
tence obviously also entails ability to make accurate assessments of the
aims and actions of others in order to interact responsibly with them in
pursuit of one’s objectives. Further, the person must have sufficient self-
confidence to pursue his or her goals and desires.

The life course begins to be organized by patterns and habits of intellec-
tual analysis, interpersonal relations, and values and attitudes that are
developed in the childhood and early adolescent years. I hypothesize
that, by age 18, many young people will have developed the capacity to
make realistic choices or at least to inhibit tendencies to make unwise
choices. Parents or other adults who can provide an orientation to poten-
tial options and who can raise thoughtful questions to help the adolescent
identify important issues can assist enormously. High intelligence and
reasonable self-confidence will also enhance chances of success.

In his Seasons of a Man’s Life, Daniel Levinson (1978) has suggested
that no one life organization can have stability for more than a portion
of a decade, because a life plan that fits one period will leave some of
the individual’s needs unfulfilled, so that there must be periodic reassess-
ments and transitions. I propose that, if individuals choose wisely, they
are more likely to remain satisfied with the choices that they have made.
If they have anticipated future developments and contingencies and have
the necessary abilities to do what they want to do, careful choices should
produce more success than casual choices or mere drifting.

Studies of educational attainment among both men and women attest
to the great importance of the family’s socioeconomic status (SES), the
adolescent’s measured intelligence, and parental and peer encouragement
EFFECTIVE COPING VERSUS MALADAPTATION

Recently, Glen Elder and his associates have presented a series of papers
dealing with the transmission over several generations of maladaptive
tendencies (especially those derived from early temper tantrums and lack
of self-control) and, most recently, with the consequences for the individ-
ual life course of explosive behaviors in childhood (see, e.g., Caspi, Elder,
and Bem 1988). Their “explosive children” are drawn from the popula-
tion studied in this article. These subjects tend to be a subtype of those
persons who show low competence in adolescence. Caspi et al. make a
good case for the effects of personality on the life course, a topic that one
can approach by focusing either on what makes for effective coping that
leads to positive rewards or on what makes for maladaptive, self-defeat-
ing patterns that lead to “vicious cycles of development” as Brewster
Smith (1968) observed.

I can hardly overstress the critical importance of timing in the acquisi-
tion of competence. Maturity tends to bring increasing skills in assessing
what one must do to achieve success and smooth relationships with oth-
ers. As we get older, we are more inclined to think of consequences
before acting. Therefore, the attributes that distinguish highly competent
adolescents from their peers are less likely to differentiate them in the
later years. However, those who had the attributes in adolescence will
have better prepared themselves for adult roles and will have selected,
and been selected for, opportunities that gave them a head start. Thus,
we are dealing not only with the importance of personality but also with
INDIVIDUAL AGENCY AND COMPETENCE

In recent years many behavioral and social scientists have stressed the
importance of “individuals as producers of their own development”
(Lerner and Busch-Rossnagel 1981; Brandtstadter 1984; Wells and
Stryker 1988) and the critical phase of interaction in the early adolescent
years of biological, cognitive, and sociocultural influences on cognitive
development and on life chances. Brandtstadter (1984), in an article on
personal and social control over development, stresses that effective
“self-planned behavior” in the pursuit of personal goals, or in the service
of particular values, rests on a knowledge of formal and informal cultural
prescriptions and restrictions, on the constitutive rules for particular
types of relationships, and on personal regulation. Such regulation entails
(1) expectations about age-related changes and developmental outcomes,
(2) subjective evaluations of expected developmental and age-related
events, and (3) beliefs and assumptions about the possibilities of action
in the face of such events in particular contexts. Realistic expectations
and accurate assessments and assumptions should enhance the possibility
of favorable outcomes.

There has also been renewed interest in competence or self-efficacy
(Bandura 1977) as an important element in the individual’s coping with
life stress. Competence was earlier viewed primarily as an outcome vari-
able, especially as a more promising successor to “adjustment,” though
with the recognition that competent persons produced other favorable
outcomes for themselves (Foote and Cottrell 1955).

I shall not try to review the voluminous literature on this concept, but
I will note that there is much support for the notion that some individuals
are more effective than others in making positive events happen in the
course of their development. Here I wish to show that longitudinal data
can be brought to bear to demonstrate the extent to which an attribute
COMPETENCE AS HERE DEFINED AND MEASURED

It is, however, necessary to spell out more fully what I mean by “planful
competence” and to show its relationship to other conceptualizations and
measures of adolescent competence. My formulation is quite similar to
Brewster Smith’s (1968) conceptualization of competence in studying
Peace Corps volunteers. Smith (1968, pp. 282-83) demonstrated the im-
portance of self-respect, feelings of efficacy, realistic goal setting, intelli-
gence, and dependability for successful Peace Corps performance. More
recently, Grotevant and Cooper (1988), in analyzing the role of family
experience in the adolescent’s career exploration, have proposed the fol-
lowing “key aspects of individual competence that mediate the capacity
of adolescents to engage in such exploration” (p. 244): self-esteem, ego
control and ego resiliency, and intellectual ability. In this article, adoles-
cent “planful competence” is crudely measured by three (complex) com-
ponents of personality, labeled self-confidence versus victimization, intel-
lectual investment, and dependability. The reliable assessment of these
components requires a substantial amount of information about a per-
son’s behavior in various situations, but I believe that the components
as assessed are consonant with the conceptualizations just mentioned. A
fuller description of the measures will be given shortly.
their networks of significant others should have greater continuity and
persistence.

The stability of a marriage depends on the attitudes, temperaments,
and ever-changing role relationships of two persons. It may seem unrea-
sonable to expect that the adolescent personality orientations of either
spouse will markedly affect the stability of the marriage except in the
instance of psychopathology or deviance. We know, however, that very
early marriages and marriages made with minimal acquaintance tend to
be much more short-lived than those based on longer acquaintance be-
tween persons reasonably mature at the time of marriage. Moreover,
from earlier analysis by Skolnick (1981), we know that self-confidence
and a low level of hostile tendencies are associated with high marital
satisfaction. One might anticipate that most planful, competent young
men and women will not marry until they feel that they know what they
are getting into and are ready to work out their relationships. Obviously,
one partner may be much more planful than the other, and either one
may change or turn out to have attributes that make a stable marriage
unlikely. Nevertheless, adolescent competence should pay off for both
men and women. Whether competence pays off more for one sex than
for the other is a matter to be assessed. Dependability and self-confidence
will not only influence the choice but should make the chooser a better
candidate for a successful marriage. Mutual choice under such circum-
stances should predict a lasting marriage (or at least longer-lasting mar-
riage in a period when there is much instability in marital ties).

If competent adolescents do indeed show greater stability in relation-
ships and other commitments, I hypothesize that they should also show
less change in personality from one period to another throughout the life
course. They should experience more positive feedback by virtue of their
educational and occupational attainment, tending to enhance the attri-
butes they already possess. They should experience fewer sharp disap-
pointments in their early adult years and fewer negative life events.
Those low in adolescent competence will less often find satisfying job
opportunities; I would expect them more often to shift jobs as well as
spouses, and they should experience more pressures to change themselves
over the early adult years.

To summarize, I hypothesize that, among adolescents who came to
adulthood at around the time of World War II or since, those high in
“planful competence” as contrasted with those low in competence should

1. obtain more education;
have lower rates of divorce and multiple marriages;
have more orderly careers (men only);
achieve higher occupational status (men only);
less often experience life crises such as unemployment, alien-

aAPwnd
ation of children, and other types of crises in which the individ-
ual’s own behavior and dissatisfaction may play a role;

6. show less personality change over the life course (here, a period
of 36—43 years beyond high school graduation).

Figure 1 presents a summary of hypothesized antecedents of adolescent
planful competence and life patterns or experiences hypothesized as being
affected by competence and as affecting personality stability over the life
course. It collapses 50 years of data collection into three major periods:
childhood and early adolescence, the senior high school years, and ages
53—62—the age of our study members at the time of most recent intensive
follow-up. Apart from showing the effects of family SES, early IQ, and
one measure of parenting on competence, this article will not deal with
the antecedents of planful competence but rather with its consequences
for the life course. Men’s occupational attainment tends to be related to
remaining in the same line of work and advancing within that line,
but insofar as occupational experience affects personality stability, the
orderliness of a man’s career should be more important than his status
level. Therefore, measures of both status and stability are of interest. In
the case of women, almost none of whom had planned careers, I hypothe-
sized that occupational involvement and attainment would be less related
to competence and, if anything, would tend to produce personality
change over the adult years because very few women had expected to
become labor-force participants.
THE BERKELEY LONGITUDINAL STUDIES?

Between 1928 and 1931, three longitudinal studies were begun at the
Institute of Child Welfare (now the Institute of Human Development) at
the University of California, Berkeley. All three have endured long be-
yond the childhood years. The Guidance Study was initiated by Jean
Macfarlane in 1928 with 248 boys and girls selected from every third
birth in Berkeley from January 1, 1928, to June 30, 1929. Half the cases
were designated to be the experimental subjects, their parents to receive
guidance in child care, and the other half were to serve as controls.
Because only the guidance group was studied intensively during child-
hood and adolescence, analyses of adolescent personality orientations are
limited to members of that group. Guidance Study members were con-
tacted again at ages 30, 40, and 53 for intensive assessments.

The Berkeley Growth Study was a much more circumscribed study of
mental, motor, and physical development in infancy and early childhood,
entailing frequent observation and testing in the early months of life with
a subsample of 60 hospital-born children of white native-born parents,
children who were born in the same time period as that covered by the
Guidance Study. Studied through adolescence, they were reassessed at
ages 37 and 53. Finally, the study originally designated as the Adolescent
Growth Study (now the Oakland Growth Study) was initiated in 1931 to
examine the social, intellectual, and physiological development of a cross
section of boys and girls from preadolescence through the high school
years. The sample comprises slightly over 200 boys and girls ranging in
age from 10 to 12 at the time of their graduation from one of five Oakland
elementary schools. These children constituted the large majority of grad-
uates who subsequently attended a particular academically demanding
junior high school that served as a center of research operations. They
approximate a random sample of the white students except for elimina-
tion of students regarded as academically deficient (primarily males from
lower-working-class homes) and those whose parents did not speak En-
glish. Oakland Growth Study subjects were interviewed intensively at
ages 37, 48, and 62.

The original study groups comprised slightly over 500 boys and girls,
of whom approximately 390 remained in the studies through the high
school years. Data were secured from 281 study members and from the
majority of their spouses in a recent follow-up that was implemented
when the study members ranged in age from 53 to 62 years. A substantial
segment of those lost to the study moved away during the school years,
and at least 50 study members had died prior to the last follow-up; I
estimate that the last follow-up obtained current data on roughly four-
fifths of the sample under study at high school graduation and still surviv-
ing to the present time. It may be noted that there are two age cohorts
differing in age by seven or eight years. For the analyses to be reported
here, the three samples have been merged. While data collection in the
early years often entailed different techniques and instruments (though
with some overlap), all three have been subject to exactly the same fol-
low-up procedures and measures in their later middle years.

The Guidance Study relied very heavily on interviews, while the Oak-
land Growth Study and the Berkeley Growth Study relied much more
heavily on observations, inventories, and tests. Merging the studies there-
fore posed a serious challenge to somehow securing comparable classifi-
cation. Thirty years ago, my colleagues and I sought comparability in
classifications of personality and social functioning by the use of Block’s
(1961) California Q-sort.’ The California Q-sort consists of 100 descrip-
tive terms written on small cards, relating to personality and behavior
(e.g., “has a wide range of interests,” “is calm and relaxed in manner,”
“has hostility toward others”). These cards are sorted into nine piles
according to whether they are highly descriptive (9) or not at all descrip-
tive (1) of the person. Judges (experienced clinical psychologists and social
workers) read through materials relating to a given period in the study
member’s life and then sorted the items of the Q-sort according to their
salience in describing the person at this period. The resulting, roughly
normal, distribution provides an ideographic characterization of the indi-
vidual, that is, a description of what are the most salient and least salient
attributes of a given person, regardless of how that person’s characteris-
tics compare with those of other persons. Because of the large number
of items entailed, however, this unique characterization correlates very
substantially with a nomographic or normative classification (comparing
relative levels on the same attributes) based on unforced ratings.* No
judge ever sorted more than a single life period for any subject, nor did
any judge involved in the sorting have a knowledge of the study members
in periods prior to or subsequent to that for which they were sorting.
Thus there is complete independence in the scores for each period. To
enhance reliability, at least two sorts were done for each person at each
period.

Personality Q-sorts were performed for the junior and senior high
school years for all study members seen in the first adult follow-up, except
control subjects in the Guidance Study, and for the adult years for all
those interviewed at each period, most recently at age 53-54 for the
younger cohort and age 61-62 for the older. Where an individual’s data
for any period were seriously incomplete, the data set lacks Q-sorts. The
lack is, unfortunately, most serious in the adolescent years; we lack Q-
sorts from the high school years not only for the control subjects but also
for those not seen at the first adult follow-up. Funding for adolescent
sorting had been provided only at that initial follow-up, and the cost of
additional adolescent sorts was beyond the budgetary limits of subse-
quent grants. In general, unavailability of early Q-sorts does not have a
biasing effect but rather constricts the number of subjects. For most
analyses that relate adolescent personality measures to later outcomes,
60-70 cases are available.

The Q-sort enables us not only to assess personality at each time period
but also to examine the amount of personality change for any individual
from one period to another, subject to the constraint that the mean reli-
ability of the Q-sort profile for an individual, representing the composited
ratings of two or three judges for each period, ranges from .69 to .76.
When allowance is made for attenuation due to unreliability, correlations
between time periods that exceed .50 for any person suggest relatively
little change, while those below .30 suggest substantial change.

A new technique of component analysis, developed by Millsap and
Meredith (1988), was applied to scores on the Q-sort items from all peri-
ods to yield a set of six components of personality that can then be scored
for each period.° These components, more stable than individual items,
provide my primary measure of personality or personal orientations. The
index of planful competence in the analyses to be reported is the sum
of the three components: dependable, intellectually invested, and self-
confident versus victimized.

When I compared the correlations of junior high competence and those
of senior high competence with later life outcomes, the senior high assess-
ments were almost always more highly predictive. Nevertheless, a com-
positing of the two assessments yields a gain in reliability that appears
to offset the relatively modest changes from junior to senior high (interpe-
riod correlations of .75 for males and .65 for females). Therefore I have
consistently used as a measure of adolescent competence the mean of the
scores for the junior and senior high school years. In a few instances,
other measures from only the senior high years will be employed when
age changes bring marked changes in behavior (e.g., interest in the oppo-
site sex becomes much more salient in senior high).

Further description of the components of competence is called for.
“Dependable,” the most crucial element, loads most heavily on the posi-
tive end on the following items: “is a genuinely dependable and responsi-
ble person,” “is productive, gets things done,” and “tends toward over-
control of needs and impulses.” Dependable persons received low scores,
on the other hand, on “tends to be rebellious,” “is self-defeating in
regard to his/her own goals,” and “characteristically pushes and tries to
stretch limits; sees what he/she can get away with.” Thus we have the
connotation of responsible, dependable behavior but also of self-control,
regard for the rules of everyday life, and freedom from self-defeating
tendencies (suggesting a degree of ego resilience).

“Intellectually invested” incorporates both intellectual ability and the
effective use of one’s intelligence. On the positive end it incorporates
“genuinely values intellectual and cognitive matters,” “has a high de-
gree of intellectual capacity,” and “is introspective; self-observing; con-
cerned with self as an object.” Attributes loading negatively are “is
uncomfortable with uncertainty and complexities,” “values self and oth-
ers in terms set by the group, like ‘popularity,’ presumed adolescent
norms, social pressures” (i.e., conventional, conforming), and “disorga-
nized and maladaptive when under stress or trauma; has a small reserve
of integration,” another attribute that connotes low ego resilience.

Finally, “self-confident versus victimized” connotes both a measure
of self-esteem and the ability to interact in a positive way with others.
The strongest positive contributions come from “feels satisfied with
self,” “is calm, relaxed in manner,” and “is cheerful.” On the negative
end, we have “self-pitying; feels cheated and victimized by life,” “be-
haves as if generally fearful in manner and approach,” and (again) “is
self-defeating.” A number of other attributes connoting positive or nega-
tive tendencies in behavior have lower-level loadings.

Thus the concept of planful competence not only entails the notions of
dependability, productivity, and effective use of one’s intelligence but
also self-esteem and the ability to interact positively with others. Because
of the small number of cases involved, the scores of the three components
(which have approximately equal SDs) are simply added together to ob-
tain the index of planful competence for use in multiple regression analy-
ses. In any instance where a single component correlates more strongly
than the index does, the single component will be reported.

Data are available on the number of jobs held by men and women
and the orderliness of careers (based on complete occupational histories
derived from each follow-up), and the most recent interviews contained
several indicators of career satisfaction and career stability. The inter-
viewer asked, for example: “Thinking back over your whole work life,
when would you say you felt quite certain that you were doing the kind
of work that you wanted to do, or have you never felt that way?” Early
career stabilization in a satisfying occupation gives us one index of stabil-
ity. Never finding a congenial kind of work gives us the other extreme.
Orderliness of career and the variable we named “when sure” are the
measures of stability used for the men in the study.

The problem of assessing stability in the life course is much more
difficult for women than for men. The great majority of those women
who came to adolescence just before or just after World War II were,
from an early age, oriented to getting married after they had finished
their education. As several women commented in reviewing their lives
with us, they were “programmed for marriage.” This was as true for
those who went to college as for those whose education did not extend
beyond high school. Most of them worked for a year or two, rarely as
much as five years, and then left the labor force for 10 or 20 years, if not
for life. Most did ultimately return to the labor force, and they did so for
a number of reasons, among them the termination of marriage. Therefore
there is little reason to expect that early planfulness had much to do with
orderly careers or later occupational attainment except for the handful
of women who consistently pursued careers of their own. Most women’s
early adult lives were contingent on the careers of their husbands.

Personality change from adolescence to the early adult years, as well
as over the adult years, is assessed by comparison of individual Q-sort
profiles, based on 72 items with consistently high reliabilities, available
for adolescence and each follow-up. That is, for each individual, the
adolescent score on each item is correlated with the score for the item as
of later maturity. The correlation coefficient then becomes a resemblance
score, or, if subtracted from one, a change score. When we assess the
effects of early competence, we can at the same time ask, To what degree
have various intervening experiences—specifically education, occupa-
RESULTS

Family social status and intellectual ability are among the postulated
determinants of adolescent competence and have been demonstrated to
influence many life outcomes. Both variables are significantly related to
the overall index of competence and to the components “intellectually
invested” and “dependable” but not to “self-confident.” (For examina-
tion of the intercorrelations of the components and of their relationships
to parental SES and IQ, see App. tables Al and A2.) In a multiple
regression, IQ at age 18 and parental SES at birth account for roughly
one-fifth of the variance in adolescent competence for females and three-
tenths for males.°

The components of competence are moderately intercorrelated, the
strongest relationship being that between intellectual investment and de-
pendability—.60 for males, .41 for females—with self-confidence and
intellectual investment also significantly related for both sexes. The com-
ponents are sufficiently strongly related for males to suggest that, in
combination, they may provide a useful index for the multifaceted con-
cept of competence, but the much lower intercorrelations for females
suggest that a composite index of competence based on these components
is likely to be less satisfactory for the women. As we shall see, single
TABLE 1

Major VARIABLES UTILIZED, WITH MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    
 
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

Variable Mean sD
Parental SES (combined Hollingshead [weighted] scores for
mother’s education and father’s education and occupation at
subject’s birth):*
Male.. 53.7 24.6
Female 55.7 22.9
Adolescent IQ (Wechsler-Bellevue form 1 for Guidance Study and
Berkeley Growth Study and 1937 Stanford-Binet for Oakland
Growth Study):
Male... 122.5 12.9
Female 118.2 10.9
Depression deprivation (percentage unemployed or with 30% in-
come loss [Elder 1974)]):
Malle ...........ccccccccccceceeeesessscceeeeeeeececeeseesesessseeeseeeeeeeeeneaes 49.2 50.0
etiiale meceesemrerseenntrenserreemrenecmnattnteamtnneeettetrememesenteeeart 54.8 50.0
Adolescent planful competence (see text for description and for de-
tails on component relationships; range, —60 to +141):
Male... 39.5 54.0
Female «36.7 41.4
Educational attainment (Hollingshead scale: 1 graduate profes-
sional training; 7 = less than seven years):*
Male... 2.26 11
Female a 3.04 95
Occupational status (Hollingshead [unweighted] categories as of cur-
rent or last job if retired within five years):*
Male... 2.48 1.50
Female 50 3.31 1.10
Orderly career (1-6 scoring: all jobs in same field, with increas-
ing responsibility; 6 = frequent shifting, with little conti-
nuity):*
Male. 2.11 1.3
Female a 2.99 2.0
“When sure” in right job (career stage or age at which men say
they felt in right line of work: 1 = while in college or by age 20;
2 = from time began work or in twenties; 3 = in thirties; 4 =
after age 40; 5 = never have; men only, asked at ages 53-62)... 30.08 1.21
Percentage of years in labor force (percentage of years in labor force
between completion of education and age at 1982 follow-up;
WOMEN ONLY) .......seececeeeecceeeecceeeeeeaeeceeeeceneereenseeeceeetesenaee 44.4 29.0
Personality profile resemblance, adolescence to later maturity (Pear-
son 7 between scores on 72 items common to adolescent and
age 53-62 personality Q-sorts)
Male... 294 286
Female B -283 252
Marital satisfaction (mean of self-rating and judges’ rating, both
made at ages 53-62, weighted equally for 1-10 scale
Male... 7.2 1.7
Female ea 6.8 19
Competence in later maturity (same components as adolescent plan-
ful competence, assessed at 53-62):
Male.... 70.5 48.8
Female. 59.9 45.8

 

 

* Sign reversed for correlations.
TABLE 2

ORDINARY LEAST SQUARES REGRESSION OF ULTIMATE EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT
ON VARIABLES ASSESSED BEFORE HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION

 

 

EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT

 

 

  
  
 

 

Males Females
Zero — Zero
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES Order Model A Model B Order 8B
Parental SES .0.........ccccessesssssseesceeeeeens 44% 15 ll -62** -36**
IQ at age 17-18... -56** .25* .23* .52** .29%*
Planful competence . -68** 54 wae 40%*
Self-confident.... .33* a 09 ar
Intellectually invested .63** .31* .42** 02
Dependable........ Ol, .34** 47%* —30#
Adjusted R? . 55 56 45
tN emer 70 70 74

 

 

Norte.—Regression uses Hollingshead educational scale with signs reversed. An ellipsis indicates the
variable was not entered.

*P<.05.

** P< OL.
parental SES or IQ. Since the composite index yields the highest correla-
tion, it alone was used together with IQ and parental SES (model A) to
predict educational attainment. Because the contribution of self-confi-
dence is modest, a second model including the separate components
—“intellectually invested” and “dependable”’—together with IQ and
SES (model B) was tried, and it explains a shade more variance than
does the use of the competence index alone.

For females, at the level of zero-order correlations, parental SES and
IQ are more strongly related to educational attainment than either the
index of competence or any of its components. Dependability and intellec-
tual investment nevertheless show substantial correlations, and both are
superior to the composite index, so the two components were entered
into the multiple regression model in place of the index of competence.
Intellectual investment no longer shows an effect when IQ is entered
into the predictive model, but dependability remains a highly significant
contributor to explained variance. For both sexes, adolescent dependabil-
ity appears to be an extremely important ingredient in high educational
attainment. Self-confidence is less important than the other two compo-
nents of competence, but for males especially, high adolescent compe-
tence adds substantially to the amount of variance explained by parental
SES and IQ.
inconsequential as a predictor of ultimate occupational attainment. Of
the components, only intellectual investment shows a significant zero-
order correlation with occupational status, and that only modestly. Intel-
ligence and family status predict educational attainment, as we have seen
above, and, both at the zero-order level and in multiple regression mod-
els, educational attainment is by far the strongest predictor of occupa-
tional attainment for this cohort of women. Indeed, the four variables
used to predict men’s occupational attainment (substituting intellectual
investment for the competence index) explain no more variance in
women’s occupational attainment than that explained by education
alone. The small amount of variance explained for women is largely a
consequence of the cohort we are dealing with—women born in the
1920s. Only about half have had more than 10 years of steady labor-
force participation. Women who were in the labor market for short peri-
ods would be unlikely to benefit greatly in occupational status from high
intelligence or high educational attainment. Moreover, in this cohort,
high adolescent competence tended to be associated with marriage to a
man of relatively high educational and occupational status and to rearing
a family rather than pursuing a career (except for that small group of
women who obtained graduate education). Women’s competence scores
correlated with the number of children they bore at .41, and the more
Men’s Career Stability and Satisfaction

I consider now the relationship between the index of planful competence
and (1) the orderliness of men’s careers and (2) recent self-reports as to
when study participants felt sure they were doing what they really
wanted in their occupational careers. The orderliness of a man’s career
is strongly related to his occupational attainment, since orderliness is
defined partly in terms of increasing job status within a sequence of
functionally related jobs (Wilensky 1961). A man’s feeling sure that he
is in the right job is not so strongly related to occupational attainment
as is orderliness of career but is perhaps more clearly an indication of
having made the right choice for himself. Both orderliness and the feeling
of being in the right job relatively early in one’s career are significantly
related to adolescent competence (correlations of .39 and .45, respec-
tively). Both educational and occupational attainment also correlate sub-
stantially with the orderliness of a man’s career, and one might anticipate
that all of the contribution of adolescent competence comes through these
two variables. This is not the case. Inclusion of adolescent competence
in a multiple regression with educational and occupational attainment to
predict orderliness raises the amount of variance explained (adjusted R’)
from .23 to .28.

Neither educational nor occupational attainment is significantly related
to a man’s reporting that he felt sure, relatively early in his career, that
he was in the right job. The strongest correlates are having been assessed
as dependable and intellectually invested in adolescence. Of men who
had scored in the top third on the index of planful competence, two-fifths
said that they had felt certain they were in the right line of work either
while they were still in school or right from the beginning of their careers,
and only one man (of 22) said he had never found the right line of work.
Of those in the bottom third, on the other hand, only 16% felt that they
had been in the right line of work early on, and nearly two-fifths reported
that they had never found the right line of work for themselves. Men
Marital Careers

Each of the components of adolescent competence was associated with
earlier, rather than later, age at marriage for men, though the relation-
ship was significant only in the case of self-confidence. For women, as
expected, those who had been highly dependable in adolescence married
significantly later than their peers, while the other two components were
essentially unrelated to age at marriage. Women’s educational attainment
influenced their age at marriage far more than did men’s.

Competent adolescents were only slightly less likely to divorce than
were their less competent peers. However, higher scores on the single
component adolescent dependability predicted less likelihood of divorce
(r = .34, P < .01) for women. Also significantly related to divorce for
both sexes were interest in the opposite sex while in senior high school
and, for women only, age at marriage. When these two variables are
entered along with “dependable” into a logistic regression, “depend-
able” is the only variable to retain a significant relationship to divorce
(P < .02, for women only).

For both sexes, significant relationships were found between compe-
tence and number of marriages. When the men and women of the sample
were ranked on adolescent planful competence, more than 90% of those
in the top third were married only once, as against only a little over half
of those in the bottom third. No one in the top third was married as
many as three times, but among both men and women in the lower third,
roughly one in seven had been married three or more times.

For men, both adolescent intellectual involvement and dependability
were significant predictors of number of marriages, the former having a
stronger correlation (.33, P < .01) than the total competence index. Nei-
ther adolescent IQ nor educational attainment was significantly corre-
lated with number of marriages, but occupational status in later maturity
was (ry = .37, P < .002). In a multiple regression, combined with intellec-
Planful Competence, Role Stability, and Lifetime Personality Change

The issue of personality constancy or change has long been debated, and
the number of published discussions has multiplied greatly during the
past decade or two (Mischel 1968; Block 1977; Costa and McCrae 1980;
Nesselroade 1988). Certain facets of personality, especially cognitive
skills, have high stability, while others seem much more variable over
situations and over time. Most discussions of constancy or change deal
with population or average continuity, but clearly some people change
more than others. To my knowledge, few studies have addressed this
question. Perhaps the most sophisticated one that did address it was
Block’s (1972) report based on data from a 1958-59 follow-up of the
Guidance Study and the Oakland Growth Study members included in
this article, demonstrating that subtypes of adolescent personality varied
greatly in degree of personality change from adolescence to the early
thirties.

The hypothesis to be tested here is that men and women who scored
high on adolescent planful competence show substantially less change in
personality from their adolescent years to later periods in the life course
than do those low in competence. Stability of roles and relationships
should provide a social framework for the maintenance of personal orien-
tations. This does not imply that under conditions of high stability in
one’s social matrix no personality change takes place. Rather personality
change should be less for persons whose commitments remain reasonably
constant than for those who go through a succession of changes in their
most salient roles and relationships. In addition, attributes that lead to
positive rewards should be reinforced, so that there should be greater
continuity on this score as well.

Overall, personality profiles in later maturity show little resemblance
to those of adolescence. The median correlation between individuals’
adolescent personality profiles on the 72 most reliable Q-sort items and
their profiles at the latest follow-up is .30 for men and .28 for women.

Do those men and women who had been highly competent in adoles-
cence show less change than their less competent peers? Yes, and to a
remarkable degree. The zero-order correlations between the index of
planful competence in adolescence and the resemblance of personality
profiles over the ensuing 40-45 years are .72 for men and .46 for women
(both significant at P < .001). Men who ranked in the top third on
adolescent competence had a median personality resemblance score (cor-
relation between senior high personality scores and scores at ages 53—62)
of .56 while those in the bottom third had a median score of only .16.
For women the comparable medians were .40 and .18, respectively.

Table 4 shows the contribution of the total index of competence and
each of the components to personality resemblance at the early adult
follow-up (ages 30 and 37) and the most recent follow-up (ages 53-62). It
will be noted that for males there is greater resemblance with adolescent
personality in later maturity than there was when the men were in their
thirties, while the reverse is true for females. The relatively modest de-
crease for women and the increase in resemblance with adolescent per-
sonality for men may seem surprising, since considerable personality
change took place during the 23-25 years that intervened between these
follow-ups. Intermediate change is itself predictable to a surprising ex-
tent, but further discussion takes us beyond the scope of this paper.
Suffice it to note that personalities continue to change through the adult
years, and different phenotypic manifestations appear to reflect life cir-
cumstances (see Peskin and Livson 1981). It is for this reason that the
term resemblance (at a given period) seems preferable to stability or
continuity.

Entered into a multiple regression equation, each of the three compo-
nents is to some degree related to personality resemblance for both sexes.
Early self-confidence becomes a more potent predictor of personality re-
semblance to later maturity than to early maturity, though it is not quite
significant for women. Dependability is the most significant predictor to
early adulthood for both sexes, but for men it drops off somewhat in its
contribution to resemblance in later maturity. Having been intellectually
invested in adolescence shows a similar drop-off for women.

I hypothesized that planful competence should affect personality stabil-
ity because adolescent competence insures a more stable network of roles
and relationships over the life course. This receives only modest support,
however. Table 5 shows the zero-order correlations and the standardized
®’s relating personality resemblance to planful competence and three
mediating variables from figure 1: educational attainment, divorce, and
occupational attachment (women) or orderliness of career (men).*

The zero-order correlation between adolescent competence and person-
ality resemblance over the life course is so high in the case of men that
no other variable comes close to having a significant effect when compe-
tence is part of the regression equation. For women, whose adolescent
competence is slightly less strongly related to personality resemblance,
work attachment contributes significantly to resemblance while divorce
appears to diminish resemblance, although the latter relationship is not
quite significant statistically.° For men, divorce has no apparent effect.
Thus, apart from adolescent competence, no pathway to personality re-
semblance for men, and only one for women, is statistically significant.

Although work attachment and educational attainment appear to en-
hance personality continuity (persistent high resemblance) of women
while divorce diminishes it, substituting different intervening variables
modifies the regression coefficients enough to give one pause. For exam-
ple, the number of children a woman raised makes no contribution to
explained variance in personality continuity but reduces somewhat the
contribution of both divorce and work attachment. It would appear that
the normative shifts in women’s roles and consciousness over the inter-
vening years have been so great that early competence has served them
less in preserving continuity of personality. The small size of the sample
available for the assessment of competence and of personality change (69
women) does not permit more definitive delineation of the pathways to
personality continuity or change beyond the dominant effects of adoles-
cent competence.

There does not appear to be a significant relationship between intergen-
erational occupational mobility and personality change. Adolescents from
the working class were less likely than middle-class adolescents to score
high on planful competence, but if they did score high, they were more
likely to be upwardly mobile. Those upwardly mobile men show roughly
the same degree of personality stability over the life course as do compe-
tent adolescents from the middle class. The small size of the sample
precludes analysis of class differences in the nature of such changes as
Life Satisfaction

Only a crude index of life satisfaction was available at the time of the
most recent follow-up, one derived from a “life chart,” on which study
members graphed the level of their life satisfaction from early childhood
to the present. This was mailed to study members before they were
interviewed, and roughly two-thirds mailed back completed charts. It
was anticipated that interview respondents would complete the chart
when the interviews took place, but time pressures precluded this. This
inability to complete the chart limits the feasibility of multiple regressions
using other variables that were available for only limited segments of the
respondents most recently seen, such as women’s occupational attain-
ment or marital satisfaction, for example. Nevertheless, the relationships
found are of considerable interest.

Women who had scored high on adolescent competence plotted their
life satisfaction higher over the entire life course, on the average. Stronger
than the relationship with the index of competence at ages 54-62, how-
ever, was that with the component “self-confident versus victimized” in
adolescence (yr = .39, P < .01). Strongest of all was the relationship
between marital satisfaction (reported on a different occasion at ages
54-62) and general life satisfaction (r = .53, P < .001). Neither IQ nor
educational attainment was significantly related to reported life satisfac-
tion, again paralleling women’s marital satisfaction. Women’s marital
satisfaction and life satisfaction were thus both strongly influenced by
self-confidence and a positive orientation to meeting life’s challenges in
the adolescent years.

For men, on the other hand, neither the index of adolescent compe-
tence nor the component “adolescent self-confidence” predicted current
life satisfaction as plotted on the life chart. Marital satisfaction was sig-
nificantly associated with general satisfaction but to a lesser degree than
Competence and Psychological Health

At each period, the index of competence is highly correlated with a mea-
sure of psychological health developed by Livson and Peskin (1967),
which consists of a composite of four clinical psychologists’ ideal Q-sort
profile for a “psychologically healthy person.” The correlations between
the index of competence and the measure of psychological health range
from .74 and .79 for adolescent males and females, respectively, to .83
and .93 for males and females as of later maturity. Given the reliability
of the Q-sort items, these correlations suggest that, in later years, compe-
tence and psychological health are almost synonymous. It is therefore
important to note that adolescent psychological health is not nearly so
powerful a predictor of educational or occupational attainment for men,
number of marriages for both sexes, or marital satisfaction for women
as is adolescent competence. However, adolescent psychological health
vies closely with adolescent competence as a predictor of personality
continuity over time. It seems obvious that the two concepts should be
closely related, for poor psychological health connotes lack of self-confi-
dence and an inability to utilize one’s abilities effectively. In a multiple
regression analysis with all three components, self-confidence accounts
for all of the association in adolescence between competence and psycho-
logical health for males and almost all for females. But it is the combina-
tion of dependability and intellectual investment that accounts for the
better prediction of men’s occupational attainment and career stability
and of women’s marital stability.
number of a woman’s children, the more negative was the effect of child
rearing on her competence in later maturity. On the other hand, strong
occupational involvement enhanced both self-confidence and intellectual
investment of women (Clausen and Gilens 1990).

One would not expect as high a correlation between adolescent compe-
tence and competence at maturity as was found with personality stability,
for as competence generally rose with maturity, the SD of each of the
components was approximately halved. Nevertheless, there was substan-
tial continuity, especially for males. For constant samples (those seen at
each follow-up), the male autocorrelations were .62 from adolescence to
ages 30 or 37, .60 to ages 41 or 48, and .53 to ages 54 or 61. For women,
however, the comparable correlations were consistently lower: .32 to ages
30 or 37, .29 to 41 or 48, and .32 to 54 or 61. Women’s life experiences
were far less under their control than were men’s, and early competence
led to life patterns less likely to enhance later competence.

Table 6 reveals that all but one of the components as assessed in
adolescence are positively and significantly related to the total index in
later maturity. The adolescent index of competence significantly predicts
all later components except dependability for females (not shown in table
6). In a multiple regression, however, most of the contribution from
adolescent components to competence of males in later maturity comes
from “dependable.” This one component is, in fact, more strongly re-
lated to later life competence than is the adolescent index; it strongly
predicts self-confidence and intellectual investment as well as dependabil-
ity in later maturity. It also predicts the measure of psychological health
Retrospective Assessments of Early Orientations

Randomly selected subsamples of 32 men and 28 women were inter-
viewed to review their lives in 1985. Their retrospective life accounts
were compared by level of planful competence assessed as of the high
school years, dividing men and women into three groups of roughly 10
each, high, medium, and low in planful competence. There were few
significant differences between the very small groups of men who had
been high or low in planful competence in their high school years, but
those that emerged are highly interesting. Those men high in early com-
petence were more likely to report, 40-45 years later, that they had
known their strengths and weaknesses while adolescent (P < .05), and
they were much more likely to report that they had been aware of the
options available to them (P < .01). They did not claim earlier maturity,
but they less often reported severe crises in their early and middle adult
years. Those who had been planfully competent were somewhat more
likely to attribute the shaping of their lives to the good parenting they
received, while those low in competence more often felt that their parents
had failed them, though neither finding quite attains significance in these
very small comparison groups. Early competence is totally unrelated to
men’s views of whether they have remained pretty much the same or
have changed over the life course; overwhelmingly, both highly compe-
DISCUSSION

Before attempting to sum up the ways in which early competence tends
to shape the life course, I must issue a caveat. Competence not only tends
to lead to favorable outcomes and to a smoother life course, but it
tends to promote continued participation in a research program that has
endured for more than 50 years. No other variable predicts attrition of
the sample as strongly as does adolescent competence. Among men in
the top third of the ranking on adolescent competence, 93% participated
in the most recent follow-up, while only 68% of those in the bottom third
participated. For women, the spread was slightly less, ranging from 71%
to 89%. This means that the current sample was self-selected for superior
performance and the findings overstate the degree of stability in personal-
ity and careers that would be found if there had been no differentials in
attrition. That said, it is equally true that the strong relationships found
between early competence and later life performance might be even
stronger if those lowest in adolescent competence had been retained in
the sample. Fortunately, there remain in the sample a substantial number
of persons who were seen in adolescence as lacking in the elements of
what I have called planful competence, so we can trace the consequences
of both high and low competence. The consequences of early attainment
of competence are obviously related to the norms of the society and to
the circumstances that each cohort faces, but I believe that the benefits
of early competence will continue to accrue for adolescents making the
transition to adulthood today.

Planful competence in adolescence may be considered both a measure
of maturity that provides a “head start” and a measure of attributes
associated with effective functioning throughout the adolescent and adult
years. It is evident that planful, competent adolescents had fewer disrup-
tions of marriage and career over the middle years than did less planful,
less competent ones. They less often reported difficulties along the way
in the decade-by-decade review of their lives. The data do not support
Levinson’s assertion that the preadult era is “only a prelude to adult
living” and that “its result is an immature and still vulnerable individual
making his entry into the adult world” (Levinson 1978, p. 21). Many
adolescents may have been immature and vulnerable, but many others
were planful, competent, and reasonably self-assured as they looked
ahead to their adult years. Those who were most mature and competent
tended to assess the options available to them; they made more considered
choices and they were better prepared to work through the problems of
adaptation that marriage and careers require. Their competence led to
superior opportunities and superior achievements. Men who were in ado-
lescence less planful, mature, and competent had much less orderly lives.
Many of these men attained mature competence in the early adult years,
but others never found a job that brought lasting satisfaction or a wife
with whom they could live in harmony. It was in this group that recurrent
life crises most often occurred, crises due to career disruption, to marital
conflict and marital dissolution, and to feelings of alienation and de-
pression.

For the women in our sample, the concept and index of social compe-
tence was much less powerful than that for the men. Although each of
the components of competence tended to be positively related to favorable
outcomes, sometimes one or sometimes a pair proved to be more highly
predictive than the index itself. Adolescent dependability clearly had
the strongest effect on educational attainment and marital stability, but
intellectual investment was the only element of the competence index
that even marginally enhanced occupational achievement (with parental
SES and IQ held constant) for women who entered the labor force. Ado-
lescent self-confidence, which was strongly linked with physical attrac-
tiveness, predicted both marital satisfaction and life satisfaction more
strongly than any other component. Yet when it came to the prediction
of number of children borne and the prediction of personality resem-
blance over the adult years, the index of adolescent competence surpassed
each of the separate components in the amount of variance explained.
Moreover, in the later years, there is stronger coherence to the concept
of competence, in that both intellectual investment and dependability are
much more strongly related to self-confidence than in adolescence, despite
their lesser relationship to each other.

Given the cultural norms of the 1930s and early 1940s, when our study
members moved into adolescence, the differences between competence
for men and for women were perhaps inevitable. When a woman’s pri-
mary adult roles were marital and parental, highly competent women
tended to devote themselves to those roles. Recall that one of the strongest
correlates of women’s adolescent competence was the number of children
they bore. Yet the rearing of children does not in itself appear to have
enhanced competence as assessed here; to the contrary, in their late fifties
and early sixties the number of their children proves to have no associa-
tion with the index of competence. Historical shifts in values and in
expected roles would lead one to expect that, for the daughters of our
study members, adolescent competence would be more strongly associ-
ated with occupational attainment than with number of children. Initial
analyses of data from a sample of offspring studied at ages 14-18 and
again at 28-32 find this to be the case, despite a much less adequate
assessment of adolescent competence. To the extent that women now
have many more options and can prepare to take advantage of them,
planful competence should have more payoff value than it did for their
mothers.

The success of early competence in predicting long-term outcomes,
including personality continuity, derives both from the greater effective-
ness of competent persons and from the greater ability of competent
adolescents to make choices that would serve them well in their later
years. Competent men and women were better able to marshal, draw
on, and maintain social support and to achieve their objectives. They
received positive feedback, confirming the persons that they were. Be-
yond adolescence neither scheduled transitions nor adventitious life
events seem to have major effects on the most salient features of their
personalities, especially in the case of males. As Haan, Hartke, and Mill-
sap (1985) have reported, “males generally made their own luck.”

A fairly common reaction to my concept and to the evidence of stability
in the lives of competent persons is to suggest that they must be dull,
relatively rigid persons. The opposite is true. They are not seen as histri-
onic, but among the positively scored items that make up the components
of competence are “arouses liking,” “interesting,” “values indepen-
dence,” “thinks unconventionally.” And, at the other extreme, consider
what they are not: fearful, distrustful, uncomfortable with uncertainty,
self-defeating. Within the group that scores high on adolescent compe-
tence there is, of course, variation. Not all sail smoothly through life.
And, conversely, some men and women who achieved social and emo-
tional maturity later than their peers have been highly successful and
have had enormously satisfying lives. Much remains to be done in deline-
ating subtypes. A few of the highly competent do indeed seem rigid, as
do many more of the least competent. But the competent are far more
often people one would like to know.

Several sociologists have reacted to my initial presentation of these
ideas by suggesting that this is primarily a psychological theory. I do not
so view it. It should not be necessary to explain that humans are organ-
isms, thinking persons, sharers of a cultural heritage that defines desired
goals, and participants in a series of negotiated roles that are part of a
larger structure. That structure operates according to rules. Persons who
know how to use the rules to achieve their objectives are favored,
whether we are talking about academic performance, the selection of job
candidates, the promotion of managers, or the utilization of health ser-
vices. One’s personal attributes may be valued or devalued by others.
Talent and intelligence obviously come into play in negotiating life roles,
and in most realms they are recognized and frequently tip the balance in
selection processes.

The effects of occupational disruptions as a result of social change and
economic depression, of illness and of a variety of other misfortunes, as
well as the effects of movements for women’s liberation and greater civil
rights, can obviously diminish the predictability and stability of future
lives. Chance encounters also shape our lives, but as Bandura (1982)
has noted, values and personal standards mediate the effects of such
encounters, as do the social milieus in which people operate. But some
events and circumstances may be overwhelming. Some of the highly
competent will fall by the wayside. Moreover, some persons with great
abilities and talents may not manifest those talents from the start. They
may make their opportunities at a later date. I do not mean to suggest
that competence insures success or happiness. Indeed, there is no evi-
dence that at the threshold of retirement those who were highly compe-
tent adolescents are happier than those who were not. They are not
superior in personal warmth, but neither are they less warm. They are
better off, and they appear to have somewhat more positive relationships
with their children. On the whole, they seem better satisfied with their
lives, even if the men do not score themselves higher on the life chart.
They express less dissatisfaction and see themselves more positively.

Much more work is needed on sharpening the concept of planful com-
petence and developing more adequate means of measuring it. The power
of the index here utilized rests on my having had many kinds of data,
secured by different methods in different situations and over many occa-
sions. One cannot hope to have such rich data except for relatively small
samples, but a combination of interviews of adolescents and their par-
ents, inventories, and testing should make possible reliable and valid
measures at far less cost than was entailed in the Berkeley studies. In
addition, more thought needs to be given to the nature of competence at
various age levels. The measure presented here turns out to be almost
synonymous with psychological health in the later years. Featherman,
Smith, and Petersen (1990) have proposed a concept of “adaptive compe-
tence” in old age that entails both rational problem solving and “reflec-
tive planning” to deal with the ill-structured dilemmas of later life. We
need to delineate more precisely the facets of competence and, in particu-
lar, their sources, not merely in childhood and adolescence but in middle
and old age. We need to assess the extent to which the effects of role loss
in the later years may be offset by what Gove, Ortega, and Style (1989)
have called the maturational perspective on aging, entailing an enhanced
sense of social ease and a more thoroughly integrated self-concept in the
healthy elderly.

Competence in the senior high school years is the product of the inter-
action of many influences. Genetic givens and the circumstances of bio-
logical development set potentials and limitations. The personalities of
parents and other early caretakers, along with patterns of child rearing,
strongly influence the development of the child’s own personality—the
ability to control impulses, to mobilize resources, and to relate to others.
Preliminary analysis of the antecedents of adolescent competence finds
substantial correlations with high parental demand for independence and
achievement in the preadolescent years. Firm and consistent discipline
and strong parental attention and support at all antecedent periods also
contribute to the prediction of adolescent planful competence, even when
family SES and the child’s IQ are controlled for. Thus early socialization
contributes greatly toward producing adolescent orientations that will
permit the individual to make wise choices and to pursue them success-
fully not only in the transition to adulthood but for much of the life
course.
‘10° > d xx

“SO >d«

“pasqaAal SI UBIS 4

“pasiaaal suis yyIM sayeos uorednd90 pue uoNeonpa peayssul]oY Wor are sane _

 

 

    

 

  

 

 

 
 

 

      

 

ot ts 89 89 1 29 oe 1% st a9 19 99 89 «OL 4266 7% 4% «$8 = 06 N
6% 6T  6z i ue Lt oT 99 OF OTe 71 oft fT TT 80S SOF Tse OFS GT OFZ as
CS ve ee" ZL 66% ET «(62 OH COE «IZ TET 97% HOOT HHE- OF SOE SZzt LES x
sae (gor)
Aqunyeur raye ‘aouajaduroy “ZT
60 * (2861) uoREysHES aT “OT
wee a “(7861) AM
-Bur 197] 0} Jooyss YBIY Woy
aouejquiesar Aypeuosieg “ST
40h ST x68 (2861) AuMgeu Jaye] 01 saat
woyy aouE|quiasal APEUOSIeg “PT
wef 60 x0 ee ““(8S6T) SORE 0} [ooUDs YsIY
wouy aoue[quiasas Aypeuosiag “£1
ve or zo 10 u- a “ uOWEsHeS TENE “ZT
+82 or v1 v1 10-87 : “uaspyiyp Jo zaquUIAN “TT
eeff— nnSE oI-  8I- —90- ST a “sadepueu Jo QUINN “OT
exSf— 67 10 60- 00s £0 wal “parsoatd “6
fI— 0-7 TT LOE ge9E- LTR ~-aBerreu ys1y Je aBY °g
St@— p@—  e2E— TZ wefE- OT- —OZ— Ss TOs =—s £0 “wonednose jo ains way *L
wa2e 22 eel neShak8E TT 60 $1- 90-  2T— eB ™ 9218 KUOPIO “9
els 20 ee9SwefS ee UT 7 wel$— LT — Twa ab “* e(Z86T) snqeys feuonedns99 *s
+087, ee a  ) £2 a nD a squamurene feuCHeoNPY “+
wal 80 e8S eel eb 90 OT ebZ—  60- —60— wel ee B8E eT we 9 seeeeeeeeseees gigqepuadag, °9
#068 TT #809 ee9f wl 20 SZ 9Z— HT TE Zee we 209 “oo paysaaut Ayer oayfeuy
08 12 #e6SxeSE9Z 80 zz BO- 80 aTf— e6Z— 9S HD we neh ee Zh crores quapyUOI TIS “e
we 8S 90 weZL ee eeZS 90 gkZ ST BO— C—O ew fL 469 a8 aSB OL aouayadutos quaosajopy “¢
+62 LI— eOh —webfn6Z BT BZ ZI— Zt BT— LO LOY 09 eB SD OTS . vo gy ae we OL “7
80 wz- £0 $0 60 (90 er 10 ST BT weT® 682 elZ 90 TZ we 8Z “SAS [ewuered “1
a or st + st a 1 or 6 8 L 9 S$ 4 % Ge we ¢ z 1 saiqeue An,

 

 

VLIVQ ALITVNOSYag LNFOSaTOGY HLIM
SLOSLANS FIV AOA SAUASVAW ASYNOD AAV] TWdIONIY ANV ‘SLNINOdWOD SL] ‘FONILAWOD ‘XRILVIA| NOLLVTIYIOD

IV ATaVL
‘10’ > d xx

 

 

      

 

 

 

       

 

       

 

 

“$0. >d«
“pasdaAal SUBIS YIM safeds UoTedNd90 pu UONeoNpe peayssunjoH] Woy are sanyeA »
08 8 94 6 16 19 $8 $8 88 96 08) as 18 Or 20t = zor. OT «#6, N
vly 12 se gt St oT ST So gh 97 62 -OHT «TT «($6 OOT «FO? TLE OH Ih LOT ‘as
a 89 She SET SIZ bh 667 IEE HOE TR OLI- FO LOE ZBIT LSS “x
*(@R61)
Aqunyeur aye} ‘aouajadaioy “11
abt . (2861) vonoesHes ary “OT
£2 st (2961) Gun
“Bul 197R] 0} foods YBIY woIy
aouelquiases AyeUOsIag “ST
#98 oz- at * (861)
AyNyeut Jaye] 0} Sanat WoIy
aouelquissas Aypeuosiag “pT
8I 20 x6 x87 * (8861)
SORAYA 07 Jooyss YsIY Woy
aouejquiasar Aypeuosiag “£1
ely web v1 W zo uOnseysHes TEE “ZT
vO- Oz or 90- axZe 1 ‘waapfiy> Jo eqUINN “TT
wx8f— TT ebZ— 8Z-S0- OZ * saBepireut Jo JoquInN “OT
SI- SO ee0S— —ehZ— E— — G0-—TO— wa 28 “* panuoald, “6
or 8I 1 zo- st 40 OZ— xf€— eal + aSeprew ysiy qe aBy “8
£0 97- tT zo TO-  80- 4498- TT 10 10 ** 9Dd0y
soqe] Ut steak Jo JuadIEg “L
ay 4o- oT so or 8I TO— 60— xx0f- 6T et se0re9 APIO “9
10 th £0 or 40 Te 90 10 10 zw- of 92 “"e(Z861) smaeys TeuoHEdN200 “s
81 et st tT walt 80 SO wa2©— x08 eelb— —-TO- ST nT vo gquaumurene [euonEonPY “y
«2 10 walt TL a6 OT ebZewT€— wb 497 £0- 80 0 wxlh “ayqepuadaq °>
+82 OZ e0fwhZ nl ST aah sI- 90-00 00 90 ab SaeZh nal * parsaaur Afrenyoaqjawuy “q
OZ we6fwlkZ 40 ZL ex0b SZ £0- $0 so-  zI- £0 £0 60- ET wal yuapyuor-zeg “e
eeZf asf ue eo vO- 80 OZ 40h — axhl 4408 ned * souajaduio yua2saopy “¢
or £0 sI- et 6r 90 ot 60~ 10- 00 OZ— 90-40% 4x0S SZ 44 8S 20 exlh ST oBe OI “Z
Bt aE 10 40 wfZ wef OF SI—  OT— B80 w0P— OT wal eeZS nT eh SO #49f 4498 “SAS reward “T
a or st +1 eI a iat or 6 8 ‘ 9 Ss eC z saiqenea,

 

 

VLVQ ALITVNOSYAg LNANSATOGY HLIM
SLOaLANS ATVWAY YOA SAANSVAI ASUNOD AAI] IVdIONIYd GNV ‘SLININOdWOD SL] ‘AONALAAWOD ‘XIGLVI NOLLVTAAAOD

eV ATaVL
REFERENCES

Bandura, Albert. 1977. “Self-Efficacy: Toward a Unifying Theory of Behavior
Change.” Psychological Review 84:191-215.

. 1982. “The Psychology of Chance Encounters and Life Paths.” American
Psychologist 37:747-55.

Block, Jack. 1961. The Q-Sort Method in Personality Assessment and Psychiatric
Research. Springfield, fl.: Thomas.

. 1977, “Advancing the Psychology of Personality: Paradigmatic Shift or Im-
proving the Quality of Research.” Pp. 37-63 in Personality at the Crossroads,
edited by D. Magnusson and N. S. Endler. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Block, Jack, in collaboration with N. Haan. 1971. Lives through Time. Berkeley,
Calif.: Bancroft.

Brandstadter, Jochen. 1984. “Personal and Social Control over Development: Some
Implications of an Action Perspective in Life-Span Developmental Psychology.”
Pp. 1-32 in Life-Span Development and Behavior, vol. 6. Edited by Paul B. Baltes
and O. G. Brim, Jr. New York: Academic Press.

Caspi, Avshalom, Glen H. Elder, and Daryl Bem. 1988. “Moving against the World:
Life Course Patterns of Explosive Children.” Developmental Psychology 24:824-
31.

Clausen, J. A., and Martin Gilens. 1990. “Personality and Labor Force Participation
across the Life Span: A Longitudinal Study of Women’s Careers.” Sociological
Forum 5 (December).

Costa, P. T., Jr., and R. R. McCrae. 1980. “Still Stable after All These Years:
Personality as the Key to Some Issues in Adulthood and Old Age.” Pp. 66-102 in
Life Span Development and Behavior, vol. 3. Edited by Paul Baltes and O. G.
Brim, Jr. New York: Academic Press.

Eichorn, Dorothy H. 1981. “Samples and Procedures.” Pp. 33-51 in Present and
Past in Middle Life, edited by Dorothy Eichorn, J. A. Clausen, N. Haan, M. P.
Honzik, and P. H. Mussen. New York: Academic Press.

Elder, Glen H. 1974. Children of the Great Depression. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.

—. 1986. “Military Times and Turning Points in Men’s Lives.” Developmental
Psychology 22:233-45.

Erikson, Erik. 1950. Childhood and Society. New York: Knopf.

Featherman, David L. 1980. “Schooling and Occupational Careers: Constancy and
Change in Worldly Success.” Pp. 675-738 in Constancy and Change in Human
Development, edited by Orville G. Brim, Jr., and Jerome Kagan. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Featherman, David L., Jacqui Smith, and James G. Peterson. 1990. “Successful
Aging in a Post-retired Society.” Pp. 50-83 in Successful Aging: Theory and Re-
search, edited by Paul Baltes and Margaret M. Baltes. London: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Foote, Nelson, and L. S. Cottrell, Jr. 1955. Identity and Interpersonal Competence.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gould, Roger. 1978. Transformations: Growth and Change in Adult Life. New York:
Simon & Schuster.

Gove, Walter R., S. T. Ortega, and C. B. Style. 1989. “The Maturational and Role
Perspectives on Aging and Self through the Adult Years: An Empirical Evalua-
tion.” American Journal of Sociology 94:1117-45.

Grotevant, Harold D., and C. R. Cooper. 1988. “The Role of Family Experience in
Career Exploration: A Life Span Perspective.” Pp. 231-58 in Life-Span Develop-
ment and Behavior, vol. 8. Edited by Paul Baltes, David Featherman, and Richard
Lerner. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Haan, Norma, Elizabeth Hartka, and Roger Millsap. 1985. “Development and

841
Stress-related Change in Adult Personality.” Paper presented at the annual meet-
ings of the American Psychological Association, Los Angeles.

Haan, Norma, Roger Millsap, and Elizabeth Hartka. 1986. “As Time Goes By:
Change and Stability in Personality over Fifty Years.” Psychology and Aging
1:220-32.

Hogan, Dennis. 1981. Transitions and Social Change: The Early Lives of American
Men. New York: Academic Press.

Kohli, Martin. 1986. “Social Organization and Subjective Construction of the Life
Course.” Pp. 271-92 in Human Development and the Life Course, edited by Aage
B. Sgrenson, Franz E. Weinert, and Lonnie R. Sherrod. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Lerner, Richard, and N. A. Busch-Rossnagel, eds. 1981. Individuals as Producers of
Their Own Development. New York: Academic Press.

Levinson, Daniel J. 1978. The Seasons of a Man’s Life. New York: Knopf.

Livson, Norman, and Harvey Peskin. 1967. “Prediction of Adult Psychological
Health in a Longitudinal Study.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 72:509-18.

Marini, Margaret. 1984. “Age and Sequencing Norms in the Transition to Adult-
hood.” Social Forces 63:229-44.

Mayer, Karl Ulrich. 1986. “Structural Constraints on the Life Course.” Human
Development 29:163—70.

Meyer, John W. 1986. “The Self and the Life Course: Institutionalization and Its
Effects.” Pp. 199-216 in Human Development and the Life Course, edited by Aage
B. Sgrenson, Franz E. Weinert, and Lonnie R. Sherrod. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Millsap, Roger, and William Meredith. 1988. “Component Analysis in Cross-sectional
and Longitudinal Data.” Psychometrika 53:123-34.

Mischel, Walter. 1968. Personality and Assessment. New York: Wiley.

Nesselroade, John. 1988. “Some Implications of the Trait-State Distinction for the
Study of Development over the Life-Span: The Case of Personality.” Pp. 163-89
in Life-Span Development and Behavior, vol. 8. Edited by Paul Baltes, David
Featherman, and Richard Lerner. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Neugarten, Bernice L., J. W. Moore, and J. C. Lowe. 1965. “Age Norms, Age
Constraints, and Adult Socialization.” American Journal of Sociology 70:710-17.
Peskin, Harvey, and Norman Livson. 1981. “Uses of the Past in Adult Psychological
Health.” Pp. 153-221 in Past and Present in Middle Life, edited by D. Eichorn,
J. A. Clausen, N. Haan, M. Honzik, and P. H. Mussen. New York: Academic

Press.

Quinn, Robert, and G. L. Staines. 1979. The 1977 Quality of Employment Survey.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Survey Research Center.

Riley, Matilda White, Marilyn Johnson, and Anne Foner. 1972. Aging and Society,
vol. 3. A Sociology of Age Stratification. New York: Russell Sage.

Sewell, William H., Robert M. Hauser, and Wendy C. Wolf. 1980. “Sex, Schooling,
and Occupational Status.” American Journal of Sociology 86:55 1-83.

Skolnick, Arlene. 1981. “Married Lives: Longitudinal Perspectives on Marriage.”
Pp. 270-300 in Present and Past in Middle Life, edited by D. Eichorn, J. A.
Clausen, N. Haan, M. P. Honzik, and P. H. Mussen. New York: Academic Press.

Smith, M. Brewster. 1968. “Competence and Socialization.” Pp. 270-320 in Social-
ization and Society, edited by John A. Clausen. Boston: Little, Brown.

Staw, Barry, Nancy Bell, and J. A. Clausen. 1986. “The Dispositional Approach to
Job Attitudes: A Lifetime Longitudinal Study.” Administrative Science Quarterly
31:56-77.

Wells, L. E., and S. Stryker. 1988. “Stability and Change in Self over the Life
Course.” Pp. 192-224 in Life-Span Development and Behavior, vol. 8. Edited by
Paul Baltes, David Featherman, and Richard Lerner. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Wilensky, Harold. 1961. “Orderly Careers and Social Participation.” American So-
ciological Review 26:521-39.
