The Market Transition Debate: Toward a Synthesis?

Author(s): Ivan Szelenyi and Erie Kostello

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Tan., 1996), pp. 1082-1096
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782241

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:20 UTC
THE THEORY OF MARKET TRANSITION

In his seminal 1989 article, “A Theory of Market Transition,” Victor
Nee offered a new theory of social inequality and applied it to the study
of the problem of transition from state socialist redistributive economy
to market capitalism. Nee claimed that the emergence of markets in state
socialist redistributive economies had unexpected consequences. The
most privileged stratum or class of state socialism, the redistributors, lost
some of their privilege, while those at the bottom of the state socialist
hierarchy, the “direct producers,” benefited (for earlier formulations see
Szelényi and Konrad [1969], Szelényi [1978], and Whyte [1984]). As a
result, inequality, as measured by income or access to scarce goods, was
reduced. Nee’s theory identified the mechanisms by which markets gen-
erated equality under redistributive systems: if wages are not administra-
tively set, but established by transactive relations, then producers are
likely to have more power (market power); if markets operate, then hu-
man capital is likely to be rewarded more while political loyalty is likely
to matter less (market incentive); if there are markets in a redistributive
economy, then entrepreneurship becomes an alternative avenue of socio-
economic mobility (market opportunity; Nee 1989).

Data collected in 1985 in rural China offered support to the theory of
market transition. Between 1977 and 1985 overall income inequalities in
China declined: the income gap between urban residents and farmers
shrank; the income gap in the countryside between peasants and cadres
also narrowed. The decline of inequality arguably was the result of dereg-
ulation of state policies in agriculture. After 1977, Chinese peasants re-
ceived land, their production targets were less strictly regulated by plan-
ners, and they were allowed to bring their produce to urban markets. As
a result they expanded production, increased their productivity, and their
incomes and living standards increased rapidly.

In 1991 Nee published another influential paper, “Social Inequality in
Reforming State Socialism.” In this article Nee further analyzed the 1985
data and found that some cadres retained their privileges despite the
emergence of markets. Nee did not believe, however, that these facts
contradicted his initial theory. The 1989 article did not offer a periodiza-
tion of market reforms and so left unexplored the question of whether
the equalizing effects of markets characterize only certain epochs of mar-
ket reform or whether they are universal characteristics of marketization.
But here, Nee did distinguish different stages of market penetration and
introduced the idea of partial reform. In Nee’s view sustained cadre
privileges was attributable to the partial character of the reform in China
during the early 1990s. As reform progresses—according to Nee’s 1991
statement—cadre privileges will be undermined. The implication is that
the inequalities of state socialism will be overcome.

Nee’s 1989 article generated a lively exchange of views among scholars
of China (Bian and Logan 1995; Huang 1990; Lin 1995; Oi 1992; Walder
1992) and Eastern Europe (Stark 1986, 1992; Réna-Tas 1994); we refer
to this as the market transition debate. While we pay special attention
to articles published in this issue, we also try to summarize the market
transition debate as it has unfolded since 1989. It is a debate that has
been, at times, acrimonious. We suggest that at least one of the sources
of acrimony is a lack of specificity about the domain—the concrete socio-
economic conjunctures—that the hypotheses are applicable to: In this
paper—in order to identify such conjunctures—we distinguish between
three types of market penetration; we hypothesize that little disagree-
ment remains among the participants once they specify which type of
market penetration their findings or hypotheses are derived from or ap-
plicable to.
However, there is also evidence that it began to increase not long after.
Data from Eastern Europe and China show a similar pattern: well before
a full-fledged market economy is in place, inequality will be higher than
it was during the classical model of state socialist redistributive economy.
In Hungary inequality fell after 1968 and reached its lowest level some-
time around the early 1980s; it then began to climb soon after. In China,
the first five years or so of post-1977 reforms produced a slight decrease
of inequalities, but since the mid-1980s Chinese society has becoming
increasingly inegalitarian.

The existence of an early decline and later increase of inequality is
accepted by all sides in the debate. Does the early decline of inequalities
support market transition theory? Does the later increasing inequality
falsify it? There is little consensus in answering these questions. The
controversy then, is over, (1) the cause of the early dip in inequality and
(2) the point at which inequality begins to increase again.

The initial decline of inequalities.—The cause of the initial, more
egalitarian distribution of income is far from obvious. There are two
competing hypotheses. One attributes the change to new market opportu-
nities; the other to fairer state redistributive policies. Szelényi (1978) and
Nee (1989) believed that the initial decline of inequality was a result of
market penetration. In contrast, Bian and Logan (1995) suggest that
post-1977 egalitarianism in China was the result of state redistribution
that sought to buy political peace for market reform by increasing the
lowest incomes. Later increases in inequality—so they argue—should be
attributed to market penetration.

Why does inequality increase later?—The next disputed question is,
What is the turning point in the trend of income inequalities? Is market
transition theory challenged by the observed increase in inequality after
the initial decline?

The change in inequality is not simply a function of an increase of the
markets which first appeared; rather, it is a function of the appearance
of markets—such as markets for labor—where they did not exist before
and the appearance of new participants. Thus it is important to have
clearly defined criteria about the kind of market penetration likely to
produce specific social outcomes. The evidence at our disposal suggests
that markets have equalizing effects just briefly, when the socialist econ-
omy is still dominant. As market penetration continues it becomes more
likely that markets exacerbate inequality.

We contend that to understand this U-shaped pattern, it is necessary
to specify precisely the institutional conditions under which markets in-
crease or decrease inequality. The questions are markets for what? What
are the property relations that set the parameters of functioning of those
markets? And, what are the class relations—who are the social actors
Cadres and Markets

One of the most sensational issues in the market transition debate is
whether current or former cadres benefit or lose from reforms. It is clearly
related, but not identical, to the more general question of changes in
overall inequality. Sometimes it is a question of absolute returns to cadre
status, especially when there is negative growth, but typically it is a
controversy about relative gains.

According to Nee’s critics, market transition theory claims that, as
market penetration continues (and they understand this process as a lin-
ear, evolutionary process) “direct producers” benefit, cadres and former
cadres lose out, and return on human capital becomes more and more
important to explain who will obtain higher income. Researchers over
the past few years have presented evidence that former cadres are the
main winners of market transition (Hankiss 1990; Staniszkis 1991; Szalai
1990; Szelényi and Szelényi 1990; Réna-Tas 1994); that there is positive
association between cadre position, cadre connections, and high incomes
(Bian and Logan 1995); and, finally, that return to human capital is
negatively related to the degree of market penetration as measured by
differential dynamics of economic growth in different regions, but that
economic growth does not change the differences in incomes for party
members and nonmembers (Xie and Hannum, in this issue). However,
in his analysis included here, Nee finds that former cadres do not benefit
from cadre status with the establishment of markets when other factors
are controlled for. We argue below that these differences stem from dis-
agreement about the type of market penetration as well as how to account
for the affects of growth.
capitalism. A transition theory measures the degree of “success” of transi-
tion by contrasting concrete East European or Chinese economies with
pure models of market capitalism. Those who subscribe to such ideas be-
lieve it is possible to “build capitalism by design.” Instead, Stark suggests
that socioeconomic change under postsocialism should be understood as a
path-dependent transformation, a process of readjusting existing institu-
tions to the changing socioeconomic environment.

The question of whether to assume evolutionary or involutionary
(Huang 1990) characteristics of postcommunist or late socialist socioeco-
nomic change is a metatheoretical issue, not testable by the means of
empirical social science. Even without Stark’s work on recombinant
forms in Hungary included here, we would prefer not to use an evolution-
ary framework because it precludes making discoveries about possibly
new social phenomena and reduces all such variation onto a single scale
with socialism at one end and capitalism at the other. If it is indeed the
case that the socialist societies will become or already have become capi-
talist it should be an achievement of the theory and empirical research,
not an assumption.

Because of the limitations of space, in the concluding section we pre-
sent our hypotheses about the social implications of market penetration
of redistributive economies, and we focus our attention on the question
of the degree of inequalities and explore who benefits from more markets
and under what conditions. The scheme we present below is informed,
however, by the debate about evolution/involution, or teleology. Since
we are still doubtful about the empirical accuracy of teleological assump-
tions (see Szelényi 1988, 1990), we do not write here about stages but
about types of market penetration.
redistributively integrated economies, (b) socialist mixed economies that
feature the coexistence of market and redistributive system under the
hegemony of redistribution, and (c) capitalist-oriented economies with
the stated aim of the establishment of market capitalism and the elimina-
tion of state socialism. Below we elaborate what these types are, how
markets in each type effect inequalities, and who the social actors are
who gain or lose in each type. Again, we are not suggesting that the types
we present can be arranged in some necessary evolutionary sequence, and
we do not assume that progress from one stage to the next is inevitable,
necessary, or desirable.

We distinguish the three types of market penetration by describing the
institutional characteristics of each type. We pay particular attention to
the kind and combination of market institutions in place in each type.
In table 1 we offer hypotheses about the characteristics of three different
market institutions in different socialist and postcommunist countries.
Market reforms usually begin with petty commodity markets: producers
are allowed to sell products or services in places where prices are regu-
lated by supply and demand. Such commodification of consumer goods
and services can go a long way, while allocation of factors of produc-
tion—labor and capital—remain redistributive. The greater the propor-
tion of deregulated prices (prices set by the mechanisms of supply and
demand), the more highly developed commodity markets are. In Marx’s
terms, labor markets exist when actors are legally free to sell their labor
power and are also compelled to do so by virtue of their separation from
the means of subsistence. The more the price of labor is set by supply
and demand, the more developed the labor market is. Capital market
refers to the allocation of capital goods. In a socialist redistributive econ-
omy, surplus is typically first appropriated then allocated by central plan-
ners through budgetary means. Reduction in the proportion of state-
regulated investment is an indicator of the making of capital markets.
In capital markets competitive investors allocate capital goods in expecta-
tions of higher returns on their capital investments. Following Polanyi
(1957) we call an economy market integrated, or capitalist, when labor
and capital markets are the dominant allocative mechanisms. If labor
and capital are primarily redistributively allocated, commodity markets
only constitute what Polanyi called local markets.
uORNqUySTpay
++

pyre

asvaioUl 9B1e']

ee ee
yeyreur suo

+
yoyrew/UORNNGLysIpay
asevadoul asreT

eee
yoxreU aUI0S

+
yoyTeUL/LORINGNSTPAY,
aseorUl aul0g

 

  

syoyreyy sjoyreyl suistueyoow Surzienby
- ce yevides ueuny 0} sumay
uOTNGLsIpay uONNGLysIpay, ++ Ayyenbaut Jo a01n0g

auTpIap aUI0S aUIPIP BUIOS Ayyenbaut jo sorareusq:

 

 

 

 

:S9UI0I}NO [eII0S
Daal 7 os _ a eetettteteeneees yoyreur pene
++44+ + ++ - ett tetreesesnces yoyreut Joqe'y
++ +++ + ++ syoyreul AWpourut0)
rsolsliayoereys PeuoNyNsuy
(6861 aours 9861 68-0861 $8-ZL61 08-8961
adoing wisyseq) aours BUIYyD adoing wioyseq “euryy adoinq wi9yseq
SAIINONODD
daINnaliQ SAINONOO"Y AAXIP LSITVIOOS SAINONOOW
-LSITVLIdVD

AALLAGRILSIGAY NI SLIRAVIA TVIOT

 

 

NOILVULINGG LAAUVIA 4O AMAT, AM SLOAMAY TVIOOS ANV TVNOILOLILSNT

T ATavVL
and services and were peripheral to the economic system. They were
highly insecure; activity in such markets often bordered on the illegal, so
that participation was risky. Production required little skill and very
rarely any credentials. The typical actors in such markets were peasants
and peasant-workers. Thus, the producers in these markets were those
unskilled or semiskilled industrial workers who in Eastern Europe had
been forced out of full-time peasant existence and had to take urban
industrial jobs but who remained in their rural residences close to the
sites of agricultural production. Under these circumstances local markets
were likely to have equalizing effects (Szelényi and Konrad 1969; Szelényi
1978). Actors who produced for local markets, while rarely at the very
bottom of the society, were usually fairly low in the social hierarchy.

These facts are consistent with most of the expectations of Nee’s 1989
market transition theory: direct producers under the conditions of local
markets in redistributive economy do indeed have some “market pow-
ers” and certain “market opportunities.” Under the conditions of local
markets the expectation of market transition theory that “redistributors”
were likely to experience a change in relative fortunes also seems to be
true. Indeed, cadres soon became very resentful as they saw actors in the
second economy, especially those with low levels of education, sometimes
earning higher incomes than local cadres themselves.

In brief, under the conditions of local markets, most of the predictions
of market transition theory seem to be accurate. Only the hypothesis
concerning higher return to human capital seems to be incorrect—though
as Xie and Hannum point out above, this hypothesis is internally incon-
sistent anyway. It is implausible to argue that returns to human capital
increase at the same time that the degree of inequality declines. Indeed
the initial decline of inequality was followed with a decline on return of
human capital. As table 2 shows, Nee (1989) and Szelényi (1978, 1983)
offered hypotheses that were derived from economies in which local mar-
kets were expanding, but the allocation of labor and capital remained
primarily redistributively regulated.
ansst sty) Ur ‘uMuUUey pue ary

 

ansst stqy uy “yreIS (661) ue3o7] pur uerg
(v661) SeL-eu0y (S661) UT
(0661) tugjazg pure tugjazg (2661) 10
(1661) styzstuRIg (ansst sty3 Ur ‘266T) JOPTEM (8861) Mugpezs = (P86T) BAY (€861 ‘8L6T) tugjezs
(0661) sstqueyy (S661 ‘661 ‘T661) 9N —(86T) LAugjazg pure utyouRpY (6861) 2®N —(696T) KMugjazg pue peruoy
(edoing usajseq) euryo adoiny wiayseq Bury adoimy wiayseq

 

QAININQ LSVIVLidvD
AWONOOY GIXIPL SLAWAVI TVOO'T

 

 

SLXHLNOD ‘TVIDOS OL ONIGHOIOW SASTHLOdAH TWOILAUOTHL, ,.ONIddVIAL,,

@ ATaVL
least educated and socially most marginal, were pushed aside or wiped
out altogether.

Some cadres also oriented to markets. In particular, some members of
the technocratic fraction of the cadre elite began to build bridges to the
emergent new private economy (Manchin and Szelényi 1987). They “com-
modified” their bureaucratic privileges. For example, some early capital
accumulation was possible in the emergent new real estate markets.

Thus, in a socialist mixed economy, the market is far from a simple,
compensatory mechanism. Even though some relatively uneducated,
low-income groups can still benefit from the secondary markets of a
still-dominantly redistributive economy, a socialist mixed economy can
more accurately be described as a dual system of inequality (Szelényi
1988; Walder 1995).

There is additional controversy evident in the papers of Nee and Xie
and Hannum over economic growth in this type of economy. It is unclear
how to separate the effects of growth when measuring differential gains
after reforms are implemented. In this discussion, Xie and Hannum use
economic growth as a proxy for reform, which means that their findings
about reforms are findings about the effects of reforms that are successful
at producing growth. Thus, as they point out, they are not able to draw
conclusions about the relationship of income inequality to the intention
to reform, although an advantage is that their results are not limited to
“market” reforms. Still, they are not able to resolve whether acts or
effects of reform are more important to differential income gains.

While Nee’s paper is critical of this approach, we believe he may be
in a similar position. Nee uses the logged number of “market dependent”
firms as an indicator of the level of marketization, and thus of reform. (He
combines private with cooperative firms—a convenient, but teleological
action. In addition, he does not explain why he does not normalize this
variable, and that lack of normalization calls into question the validity
of the results that depend on it.)? This measure (production market),
however, is surely related to economic growth since reforms precisely are
able to bring about forms of enterprises that were not possible when only
local markets were allowed. When starting from a very low level, the
difference between growth and the absolute level is likely to be minimal.
Nee attempts to control for growth itself by using the level of industrial
output, but it is unclear why growth in industrial output was not used.
In China, growth has been positive and the controversy has been about
who has a higher rate of return from different activities. In Eastern
Europe growth has been low or negative and the question of who has
suffered a worse drop arises. We are unsure how to solve the problem
of the relationship between growth and inequality in either of these two
cases. The effect of growth needs to be controlled for, but reforms are
indeed implemented very much with the goal of spurring growth in previ-
ously stagnant economies. The high growth rates that occur in all three
sectors of China’s economy indicate clearly that growth is not simply a
function of how much of the economy is officially market oriented.

Both for theoretical and empirical reasons it is vital not to conflate the
measures of economic growth with the type of market penetration. This
is particularly important in analyzing economic change in China today.
China’s economic growth is still in the extensive stage of development,
and its large population resources may enable an extensive growth strat-
egy to be carried on for a long period of time. It is not that surprising,
therefore, that Xie and Hannum find underdeveloped labor markets
(and, consequently, low return on human capital) in rapidly growing
areas of China. This finding is consistent with the historically observable
capacity of socialist mixed economies to grow under the condition of
extensive development.

We believe that most of the recent literature on market transition in
China accurately describes the characteristics of socialist mixed economies
(see table 2). Walder (1992, 1995), Oi (1992), Bian and Logan (1995), and
Lin (1995) capture the coexistence of market and redistributive mecha-
nisms and the resulting duality of the system of social inequalities. If we
interpret Nee’s concept of partial reform this way, Nee’s contributions
(1991, in this issue; see also Nee and Peng 1994) can also be read as demon-
strating the duality of inequalities under hybrid property forms and in an
economic system where both markets and redistribution operate.

If Nee’s theory of partial reform implies that further reform—and thus
the ascendance of markets to the dominant mechanism in allocating labor
and capital—leads to gains by direct producers and losses (even if only
relative) by cadres or former cadres, then it is likely to be wrong. Empirical
evidence from postcommunist Eastern Europe seems to suggest that extrap-
olating trends from local markets or from socialist mixed economies into
capitalist-oriented economies is likely to be inaccurate and even misleading.
or encourage the growth of new private sector. In all East European
countries, the privatization of the public became state policy after 1989.
In China the public sector is maintained. Stark’s work in Hungary con-
tinues to undermine any assumptions that these changes will automati-
cally bring about a market-coordinated society. Stark also demonstrates
that Walder’s (1994) distinction between property reform and privatiza-
tion holds as much for Hungary as it does for China. However, without
assuming that the new capitalist orientation will bring about capitalism,
we contend that it qualitatively changes the dynamics of market penetra-
tion in postcommunist societies.

How privatization plays out depends to a significant degree on the
class capacities of actors involved in postcommunist social and political
struggles. In Hungary and Poland the technocratic fraction of the nomen-
klatura has been quite powerful and has succeeded in establishing close
ties with the emergent new postcommunist political elite. Hankiss (1990)
noted as early as 1988 that spontaneous privatization is a strategy of the
cadre elite to establish itself as the new grand bourgeoisie (see also Stan-
iszkis 1991). He proved to be mostly correct (Réna-Tas 1994). We would
only add that, in order to understand this process precisely, we need to
make a distinction between the old and new elite of communism—
between the bureaucracy and the technocracy. While it is quite true that
the command positions of the new corporate sector in Poland and Hun-
gary are held almost exclusively by the members of the old technocratic
elite (about 90% of the managers of the 3,000 or so largest firms in these
countries come from former management) it is also true that the old
bureaucratic elite lost big. About half of those who managed the largest
firms in 1988 in Hungary and Poland were by 1993 out of elite positions
(Szelényi and Szelényi 1995).

Can we conclude that, in capitalist-oriented economies, markets are a
major source of new inequalities and the former cadres are the winners?
For the first part of the proposition the answer is yes. Inequality is grow-
ing rapidly and generated primarily by markets. Those still reliant on
the redistributive mechanism rapidly lose ground.

The answer to the second part of the proposition is more complex.
First of all, it is simply untrue that the cadre elite converted their old
privileges into new ones. As we pointed out before, a substantial fraction
of the old elite are losers by any measure. Furthermore, when we consider
who the winners are we need a more complex theory.

Hanley (1995) pointed out that in capitalist-oriented economies there
is evidence of the formation of not one, but two new classes in the top
or middle of the social hierarchy: a new corporate bourgeoisie and a new
petty bourgeoisie. Hanley also presents robust data to show that the
recruitment process into these two classes is quite different. The new
CONCLUSIONS

After distinguishing the different types of market penetration, little dis-
agreement remains among the participants of the market transition de-
bate. First, all participants are likely to agree that markets have an
equalizing effect only as long as markets are those we defined above as
local. As markets penetrate the economy more deeply, they became a
major source of social inequality. Second, all participants seem to agree
that “direct producers,” in particular ordinary people, benefit from mar-
ket penetration under the conditions of local markets. When capital accu-
mulation becomes possible in socialist mixed economies, cadres, former
cadres, and members of precommunist elites begin to enter into and gain
from market transactions. Thus a dual system of inequality emerges.
Third, there is little disagreement concerning the social consequences of
postcommunist transformation in Eastern Europe after 1989: researchers
tend to agree that the technocratic fraction of the cadre elite is the main
beneficiary of this transformation. It uses the policy of privatization as a
mechanism of “primitive accumulation” of capital. It converts public
property into its own private wealth, even though there can be ambiguity
in the newly emergent forms of private property. Other players of the
economic system—in particular those who invested in market transac-
tions in earlier times—are pushed out of (or marginalized in) the newly
emergent markets.

To what extent contemporary Eastern Europe is the future of China
remains unclear. This is a question, however, beyond the scope of empiri-
cal social research. At this point we suggest the following: if the commu-
nist state begins to disintegrate before a new bourgeoisie has a firm grip
on the command positions of the new economy, it is likely that the Chi-
REFERENCES

Bian, Yanjie, and John Logan. 1996. “Income Inequality in Tianjin: 1978 to 1993.”
American Sociological Review, in press.

Burawoy, Michael, and Pavel Krotov. 1992. “The Soviet Transition from Socialism
to Capitalism—Worker Control and Economic Bargaining in the Wood Industry.”
American Sociological Review 57:16—-38.

Hankiss, Elemer. 1990. East European Alternatives. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Hanley, Eric. 1995. “Markets and the Maintenance of Inequalities in Eastern Eu-
rope.” Paper presented at the conference, The Market Transition Debate. UCLA
Center for Social Theory and Comparative History, May 22.

Huang, Philip. 1990. The Peasant Family and Rural Development in the Yangzi Delta:
1350 to 1988. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Kornai, Janos. 1984. “Bureaucratic and Market Coordination.” Osteuropa Wirtschaft
29:306-31.

Lin, Nan. 1995. “Local Market Socialism: Local Corporatism in Action in Rural
China.” Theory and Society 24 (3): 301-54.

Lin, Nan, and Yanjie Bian. 1991. “Getting Ahead in Urban China.” American
Journal of Sociology 97:657-88

Manchin, Robert, and Ivan Szelényi. 1987. “Social Policy under State Socialism.”
Pp. 102-39 in Stagnation and Renewal in Social Policy, edited by G. Esping-
Andersen, L. Rainwater, and M. Rein. White Plains, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe.

Nee, Victor. 1989. “The Theory of Market Transition: From Redistribution to Mar-
kets in State Socialism.” American Sociological Review 54:663—81.

. 1991. “Social Inequality in Reforming State Socialism: Between Redistribu-
tion and Markets in China”, American Sociological Review 56:267—82.

Nee, Victor, and Peng Lian. 1994. “Sleeping with the Enemy: A Dynamic Model of
Declining Political Commitment in State Socialism.” Theory and Society 23 (3):
253-96.

Oi, Jean. 1992. “Fiscal Reform and the Economic Foundation of Local State Corpo-
ratism in China.” World Politics 45:99-126.

Peng, Yusheng. 1992. “Wage Determination in Rural and Urban China—a Compari-
son of Public and Private Industrial Sectors.” American Sociological Review 57:
198-213.

Polanyi, Karl. 1957. “The Economy as an Instituted Process.” Pp. 271-306 in Trade
and Market in the Early Empires, edited by Karl Polanyi et al. New York: Free
Press.

Rona-Tas, Akos. 1994. “The First Shall Be Last? Entrepreneurship and Communist
Cadres in the Transition from Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 100:
40-69.

Staniszkis, Jadwiga. 1991. The Dynamics of the Breakthrough in Eastern Europe:
The Polish Experience. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Stark, David. 1986. “Rethinking Internal Labor Markets—New Insights from a
Comparative Perspective.” American Sociological Review 51:492-504.

. 1992. “Path Dependence and Privatization Strategies in East Central Eu-
rope.” East European Politics and Societies 6:17-51.

Stark, David, and Victor Nee. 1989. “Toward an Institutional Analysis of State
Socialism.” Pp. 1-31 in Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism: China
and Eastern Europe, edited by Victor Nee and David Stark. Palo Alto, Calif.:
Stanford University Press.

Szalai, Erzsebet. 1990. Gazdasag es hatalom. Budapest: Aula.

Szelényi, Ivan. 1978. “Social Inequalities in State Socialist Redistributive Econo-
mies.” International Journal of Comparative Sociology 19:63—87.

. 1983. Urban Inequalities under State Socialism. London: Oxford University

Press.

. 1988. Socialist Entrepreneurs: Embourgeoisement in Rural Hungary. Madi-

son: University of Wisconsin Press.

. 1990. “Alternative Futures for Eastern Europe: the Case of Hungary.” East
European Politics and Societies 4 (2): 231-54.

Szelényi, Ivan, and George Konrad. 1969. Az uj lakotelepek szociologiai problemai
(Sociological problems of the new housing development). Budapest: Akademiai
Kiado.

Szelényi, Ivan, and Szonja Szelényi. 1990. “Az elit cirkulacioja?” (Circulation of
elites?). Kritika, no. 9, pp. 8-10.

. 1995. “Circulation or Reproduction of Elites during Post-Communist Trans-
formation in Eastern Europe: Introduction.” Theory and Society, in press.

Walder, Andrew. 1992. “Property Rights and Stratification in Socialist Redistributive
Economies.” American Sociological Review 57 (August): 524-39.

. 1995. “Career Mobility and Communist Political Order.” American Sociolog-
ical Review 60 (3): 309-28.

Whyte, Martin King. 1986. “Social Trends in China: The Triumph of Inequality.”
Pp. 103-23 in Modernizing China: Post-Mao Reform and Development, edited by
A. Doak Barnett and Ralph N. Clough. Boulder, Colo.: Westview.
