The Emergence of a Market Society: Changing Mechanisms of Stratification in China
Author(s): Victor Nee

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Tan., 1996), pp. 908-949
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782234

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:10 UTC
' The research for this paper was funded by a grant from the National Science Foun-
dation (SES-930965 1). I also wish to express appreciation of the Russell Sage Founda-
tion, which supported work on this article during my year in residence as a visiting
scholar, 1994-95. I am grateful to Chen Junshi and T. Colin Campbell for the data
set used in this study. Special thanks to Raymond L. Liedka and Rebecca Matthews
for research assistance and comments. Deborah Davis, Rachel Davis, Nan Lin, Robert
K. Merton, William L. Parish, Jimy M. Sanders, Andrew G. Walder, Yu Xie, and
AJS reviewers provided helpful criticism and comments. An earlier draft was pre-
sented at the Eighty-eighth Annual Meeting of the American Sociological Association
in Miami, Florida, August 13-16, 1993, and at the Tianjin Academy of Social Sci-
ences, August 24-26, 1993. Direct correspondence to Victor Nee, Department of
Sociology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853. E-mail: vgn1@cornell.edu

© 1996 by The University of Chicago. Ali rights reserved.
0002-9602/96/10104-0004$01.50
Hauser 1984; Hauser and Grusky 1988). Institutional theorists, however,
are skeptical about theories of convergence. If convergence pointed the
way to state socialism’s future, the sweeping measures to institute a
market economy in industrially developed Eastern Europe and the for-
mer Soviet Union would not have been necessary. Rather than focusing
on the effects of industrial growth, institutionalists insist that research
on state socialism needs also to take into account underlying differences
in institutional forms. Such a focus on alternative institutional forms that
provide a deep structure for economic action underlies my argument that
the shift from redistribution to markets gives rise to different mechanisms
of stratification.

New institutionalist theory in sociology maintains that institutions
shape the structure of incentives and thereby establish the constraints
within which rational actors identify and pursue their interests (Nee and
Ingram, in press; Cook and Levi 1990). It builds on Polanyi’s (1944;
North 1977, 1981) insight that economies are embedded in definite insti-
tutional arrangements. In Polanyi’s view, the problem with neoclassical
economics is that its formal models assume the existence of a market
economy. Yet comparative studies of human societies, past and present,
have demonstrated a variety of institutional forms giving rise to econo-
mies organized around fundamentally different operating principles (Po-
lanyi 1957). Hence, the movement of goods and services in an economy
is not simply a product of the aggregation of individual maximizing be-
havior as assumed in neoclassical economics. In societies integrated by
redistribution, goods and services are collected and distributed from a
center in accordance with the customs, regulation, ideology, and ad hoc
decisions of those social groups that hold redistributive power. Producers
pass on a larger share of the economic surplus to the state precisely
because they have less bargaining power over the terms of exchange than
in a market economy. Instead, the state requisitions their products and
compels them to work for prices and wages fixed by central bureaus
(Szelényi 1978). As a consequence, the institutional logic of redistributive
economies differs substantively from market economies where goods and
services are exchanged directly between buyer and seller (Polanyi 1957;
Kornai 1980), and from economies based on reciprocity where trust and
cooperation in local social orders allow for balanced exchange (Homans
1950; Sahlins 1972). Redistribution, market, and reciprocity, as alterna-
tive institutional forms, incorporate different structures of incentives and
constraints and therefore distinct parameters of choice. Elements of each
coexist in every society, at various levels, but Polanyi claimed that only
one can constitute the dominant integrative mechanism of an economy.
It is not narrowly economic but is embedded in customs, social norms,
laws, regulations, and the state. Fundamentally, differences in institu-
tional framework are reflected in contrasting structures of property rights
(Pryor 1973; Eggertsson 1990).

The transition from one institutional form to another entails remaking
the fundamental rules that shape economies, from formal regulations and
laws to informal conventions and norms. The shift to markets—well
underway but far from complete in China—involves changing structures
of opportunity (Merton 1949). Whereas opportunities for advancement
were previously centered solely on decisions made by the redistributive
bureaucracy and within the economy controlled by it, markets open up
alternative avenues for mobility through emergent entrepreneurship and
labor markets. Under conditions of expanding markets, economic actors
strive to institute new rules of competition and cooperation that serve
their interests, both through informal arrangements and through formal
institutional channels. This entails efforts to change the structure of prop-
erty rights in a manner that enables entrepreneurs and producers to cap-
ture a greater proportion of the economic surplus, previously transferred
to the state by administrative fiat. Political actors contribute to instituting
change in the formal rules of the game insofar as gains in productivity
increase revenues to the state (North 1981). Such action at the margins
is cumulative and gradually results in transformation of the institutional
environment.

Market transition theory (Nee 1989, 1991, 1992; Nee and Lian 1994)
maintains that as power—control over resources—shifts progressively
from political disposition to market institutions, there will be a change
in the distribution of rewards favoring those who hold market rather
than redistributive power. Compared to nonmarket allocation, market
exchange enhances the bargaining power of producers. Incentives are
improved as producers retain a greater share of the economic surplus.
Opportunities for gain depend less on the personal discretion of cadres
in positional power. Consequently, the growth of market institutions
(i.e., labor markets, subcontracting arrangements, capital markets, and
business groups) causes a decline in the significance of socialist redistribu-
tive power even in the absence of fundamental change in the political
order. In sectors of the socialist economy where a decisive shift to markets
has occurred, officials are less likely to gain a dominant advantage from
positional power in the state socialist redistributive bureaucracy. Contin-
gent on continuing allocative control over key factor resources, their
relative advantage declines as a function of the extent to which markets
replace redistribution as the coordinating mechanism of the economy.

In the state socialist redistributive economy, officials act as monopolists
who specify and enforce the rules of exchange by administrative fiat and
exclude private entrepreneurs from taking part in legitimate economic
activities. Because economic actors depend on resources allocated from
above, they strive to secure favorable access to these decision makers in
order to maximize their access to scarce resources (Walder 1986). By
contrast, the shift to the market mechanism reduces dependence on su-
perordinate bureaucratic agencies, as producers and consumers increas-
ingly get needed goods and services through market exchanges. Market-
based exchanges stimulate the development of horizontal ties between
buyers and sellers, in labor and production markets, resulting in an incre-
mental decline in the relative value of vertical connections—political
capital—and an increasing importance of network ties between economic
actors in society.’

In sum, changes in the mechanisms of stratification stem from the
expansion of opportunities for gain and profit centering on market institu-
tions. Opportunities are more broadly based and diverse when markets
replace and augment the opportunity structure controlled by the state.
The more developed the market economy, the greater the breadth and
diversity of opportunities that develop outside the boundaries of the redis-
tributive economy. Groups and individuals who were formerly barred
from advancement in the state socialist bureaucracy and economy gain
chances for social mobility through emergent labor markets and private
entrepreneurship. Such growth of opportunities undermines the political
power of indigenous elites in small communities (Yan 1995). To the extent
that new bases of opportunity expand, resources become embedded in
alternative networks and institutions, dependence on the established elite
declines, and excluded groups gain in power relative to the established
elite. Importantly, such shifts in power do not entail a direct transfer of
power as in a regime change but do occur as an unintended by-product
of institutional change. Reflecting the changing institutional basis of
power and privilege in society, elements of the administrative elite adapt
to the emerging market society by becoming entrepreneurs. The move-
ment of cadres into private entrepreneurship accelerates the decline of
state socialist redistributive power because it contributes to opportunism
and malfeasance among party members, exacerbating a crisis of legiti-
macy (Nee and Lian 1994). As in the rise of capitalism in the West,
change in the stratification order is incremental and over time.
tion from state socialism in China. Hybrid corporatist forms proliferate
in mixed economies to capture the gains from trade under conditions of
widespread institutional uncertainty (Nee 1992). Local corporatism is a
societal arrangement loosely coupling the formal rules of the game speci-
fied by the state and the informal procedures devised by local political
and economic actors to promote market-oriented growth. Such corporat-
ist arrangements are characterized by informality and flexibility, with
long-standing personal relationships providing a foundation for complex
economic transactions (Nee and Su, in press). The cement that holds
corporatist arrangements together appears to be generalized reciprocity
in network-based social exchanges (Wilson 1994). Reciprocity involves
generalized exchanges based on trust and cooperation; it is fostered in
symmetrical social structures, as in a kinship group or village community
(Sahlins 1972). Reciprocity differs from market exchanges insofar as it
does not involve haggling over price, and it differs from redistributive
exchange where the pattern of resource movement conforms to the princi-
ple of centricity with goods and services flowing to and from a central
point.

Corporatist arrangements involve both market and nonmarket alloca-
tion of labor, capital, and land and entail a partitioning of property rights
over collective assets between local government and economic actors
through leasing agreements and responsibility contracts. As a governance
structure, local corporatism conforms to the needs of industrial firms
under conditions of partial reform. It reduces transaction costs by secur-
ing credible commitment in an institutional environment characterized
by weak property rights and irregular monitoring and enforcement of
formal rules by the central state. Socialist local governments themselves
engage in political entrepreneurship, constructing institutional rules and
myths to build and legitimize corporatist strategies of economic develop-
ment (e.g., Lin 1995). Rather than producing for the redistributive state,
corporatist strategies are oriented to the marketplace, but they also pro-
vide welfare services to the community (Oi 1990). In corporatist local
economies, redistribution limits the profit-making activities of entrepre-
neurs and maintains a safety net for the poor and weak, resulting in
lower levels of income inequality; by contrast in other regions, income
inequality increased following an initial decline in the early 1980s (Nee
and Liedka 1995). Though it is a loosely coupled societal arrangement,
solidarity is manifest in market competition with external groups and in
response to predatory encroachment by the central state.

The rapid and sustained economic growth of local corporatist commu-
nities has strengthened the capacity of local government. Nonetheless,
the development of rural industry is not likely to provide a viable eco-
nomic base enabling redistributors to reconsolidate state socialist redis-
tributive power. Analysis of the organizational dynamics of market tran-
sition indicates that change in the institutional environment brought
about by the spread of markets and expansion of private property rights
induces corresponding changes in the behavior of industrial firms (Nee
1992; Qian and Xu 1993). Collective ownership forms coexist and even
flourish in a market environment, but the discipline and incentives im-
posed by market competition lead to behavior more similar to private
firms. As nonstate firms marketize, they are less likely to serve redistribu-
tive purposes (Byrd and Lin 1990). Workers are rewarded on the basis
of performance. Firms compete for better qualified workers in quasi labor
markets. Managers strive to improve profitability and efficiency (Su
1994). Peng’s (1992) analysis comparing workers’ wages in rural industry
and state enterprises supports this view. He argues that even while rural
industry remains under collective ownership, rural firms already display
behavior similar to that of private firms, which is why he classifies rural
industry as “semiprivate.” And indeed there is extensive informal priva-
tization of collective-owned assets and firms (Nee and Su, in press).
Higher productivity in marketized firms and increased demand for labor
in quasi labor markets tend to push up wages, resulting in improved
wages for producers (workers and managers) relative to redistributors.
Hence, market transition theory predicts that the transformation of pub-
lic firms into marketized firms induces a decline in the income advantage
of positional power based on redistribution even in the industrial sector
of the economy. Local corporatism to be sure entails strong government,
but the role of government is transformed into one similar to corporatist
political institutions in market economies (Williamson 1989).
and on the mechanisms, formal and informal, through which the state
controlled the economy and society.

The response of state-centered analysts to economic reform and regime
change has been to emphasize structural continuity with unreformed state
socialism. Walder (19955), for example, argues that it is an intensification
of state control through more effective monitoring and enforcement by
local government, stemming from downward transfer of property rights
in the state hierarchy—and not the action of economic actors in society
seeking higher returns for their investment and work—that accounts for
the dramatic improvement of economic performance in industry. Simi-
larly, state-centered analysts describe a local stratification order in which
the cadre elite continue to control the economy even under conditions of
rapid market penetration and corresponding decentralization of economic
decision making to firms and households (Oi 1992). These scholars argue
that the marketization of the industrial economy need not diminish the
redistributive power of the cadre elite.

Like modernization theory, state-centered analysis minimizes the effect
of institutional change on the stratification order. Emphasizing the persis-
tence of the old stratification order, state-centered analysts claim that
“the primary beneficiary of marketization is the old elite” (Réna-Tas
1994, p. 44). The main proponents of the “political capitalism” or
“power conversion” hypothesis of augmented cadre advantage elaborate
their arguments in extended discursive commentaries on the Polish (Stan-
iszkis 1991) and Hungarian (Hankiss 1990) revolutions. According to
them, the cadre elite adeptly transforms its political capital into economic
capital as it faces the impending collapse of state socialism. They engage
in various forms of rent seeking in which they utilize their control over
public assets and their political connections to reap private advantages
in the emergent market economy. As their final redistributive act, cadres
transfer to themselves ownership rights in privatized firms, and, by build-
ing on their initial control of firms and financial institutions, they are
able to establish themselves in businesses and thereby secure increasing
income advantage as the economy shifts to markets. Although similar
points with respect to the commodification of bureaucratic power were
developed in market transition theory (Szelényi and Manchin 1987; Nee
1991; Nee and Lian 1994), state-centered analysts emphasize continuity
in the stratification order insofar as the cadre elite benefits more than
other groups from the transition to a market economy. The evidence
supporting this claim, however, is weak.*

3 The only systematic empirical study is Réna-Tas’s (1994) analysis of Hungarian

survey data collected in the springs of 1989 and 1991. This study has several limita-
tions. First, as R6na-Tas points out, state-directed market transition in Hungary
commenced in 1989 and was completed sometime in 1991; however, his models dem-
onstrating “cadre” advantage regressed on 1990 income. Because R6éna-Tas empha-
sized transition from above, the 1990 income data pose a problem for causal inference
in the sequencing of events. Second, the “cadres” in his sample were former cadres,
not government officials currently in power. This is a limitation because market transi-
tion theory is an argument about the declining significance of positional power of
current government officials. Former cadres indeed have political capital—vertical
networks—which they can mobilize to secure advantages in the new market economy.
This is what Réna-Tas actually examines. However, he does not mention that his
findings are very similar to those reported in the original test of market transition
theory, despite the differing contexts of rural China and industrialized Hungary. In
both settings, entrepreneurs from cadre backgrounds are advantaged, but cadres who
are not entrepreneurs do not profit from accumulated political capital. The higher
proportion of cadres entering into entrepreneurship and an income advantage for
cadres operating private businesses were first reported by Nee (1989, pp. 671-73, see
tables 3 and 4) and explained as a function of politically bounded markets and financial
institutions (Nee 1991, pp. 268-69). Market transition theory interprets the absence
of an income advantage for cadres (current and former) who are mot entrepreneurs as
evidence of declining relative value of political capital. These members of the cadre
status group are far more numerous, and their experience is modal for the administra-
tive elite. Few of the studies Réna-Tas (1994, p. 44) cites as supporting the claim that
the administrative elite are the primary beneficiary of marketization actually state this
claim as a central point; most of them say so only in passing, and none provide
other than impressionistic evidence. This, e.g., from Shirk (1989, p. 340): “Already
grumblings can be heard about the unfair advantages of cadres and their families in
rural commerce; they can use their connections to gain access to lucrative business
opportunities and avoid the extortionary license fees slapped on other rural business-
men by local officials.”
ADJUDICATING THE COMPETITIVE HYPOTHESES

The “power conversion” hypothesis of state-centered analysis, asserting
that the administrative elite are the primary beneficiary of marketization,
predicts increasing income growth for cadres (relative to producers). Be-
cause markets purportedly enable cadres to convert political capital to
economic capital, the predicted income advantage of the administrative
elite should be evident for cadres holding positional power as well as
former cadres, especially those who establish private businesses. Not
only should current cadres qua cadre derive income advantages for their
positional power, but cadre entrepreneurs should be advantaged and
obtain greater income gains from operating private businesses than do
noncadre entrepreneurs.

Market transition theory predicts that the administrative elite’s con-
trolling position in the stratification order will decline and the value of
their political capital depreciate incrementally following a shift to mar-
kets and corresponding changes in property rights.» The declining-
significance-of-redistributive-power hypothesis would be verified by a
higher-income growth for producers (including entrepreneurs, managers,
and technicians) relative to current cadres. This key reversal in relative
income advantage would reveal that social inequalities structured by
redistribution are declining, even while inequalities generated by market
forces increase.® Such predicted trends will not be linear because no
economy is purely coordinated by markets, and mixed economies combin-
ing markets and redistribution are the likely outcome of market transi-
tion. In other words, redistributive power will persist as a source of
advantage, even while its significance declines as a function of the shift
to markets. Another obvious caveat is that income gains for producers
are adversely affected by economic downturns.

Both arguments recognize that during the course of market transition,
cadres often strive to broker redistributive power to establish themselves
in private businesses. Another way in which the hypotheses differ is with
respect to the predicted trends of the cadre advantage in entering private
entrepreneurship. The declining-significance-of-redistributive-power hy-
pothesis predicts a diminishing cadre advantage in entering into and
profiting from private entrepreneurship as markets thicken and a market
economy is instituted. The “power conversion” hypothesis makes the
opposite prediction, arguing that cadres are more likely to shift into and
prosper from ownership of private businesses when the institutional
framework for a market economy has been instituted by the state.
INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE AND INDUSTRIAL GROWTH

There may be important factors exogenous to market transition theory
that explain the declining significance of redistributive power under con-
ditions of market reform. According to modernization theory, the more
industrialized a community, the more similar the mechanisms of stratifi-
cation will be to those found in other industrial societies. In other words,
the accumulation of capital, rising income, and new jobs, not institu-
tional change, explain the decline in the significance of positional power.
The industrialism hypothesis maintains that without change in the
structure of property rights or economic institutions, a rise in the num-
ber of high-paying factory jobs will improve the relative income of pro-
ducers (workers and managers) and diminish that of the administrative
elite.

However, prior to market reforms, industrialized regions and urban
centers provided a strong economic base for state socialist redistribution
(Whyte and Parish 1984; Walder 1986). Hence, there is no inherent in-
compatibility between an industrial economy and socialist redistribution.
By contrast to petty commodity production, the factory regime enables
the socialist state to monitor and enforce communist rule more effectively
(Burawoy and Lukacs 1992). Indeed, state socialist redistributive power
is well suited for organizing extensive industrial growth as long as surplus
labor power can be shifted out of agriculture into industry (Szelényi
1989).

In any case, whether industrialization and redistributive power are
positively or negatively correlated, an attempt to verify a causal link
between institutional change and the declining significance of redistribu-
tive power must control for the level of industralization.

These unresolved issues point to the need to test propositions from
market transition theory using a national data set collected at a different
point in time than the original 1985 survey that was used in the prelimi-
nary confirmation of the theory. The 1985 sample involved households
DATA AND MODEL

The data for this study come from a multistage, multilevel nationwide
social survey of 138 administrative townships (xiang), 138 villages (cum)
and 7,950 households in rural China carried out in the fall and winter
of 1989-90. Twenty-five of China’s 29 provinces were included in the
survey. The data were collected by the Chinese Academy of Preventive
Medicine (CAPM), using trained teams of public health field interview-
ers, and provide a multidimensional view of a society in transition. The
first survey, involving principally nutritional and biological samples to
study the relationship between nutrition and cancer, had been conducted
in 1983. Sixty-five counties were selected nonrandomly; within each of
these counties, two townships and then two villages were selected ran-
domly, as were the households interviewed for the survey in each village
(see Chen et al. 1989; Parpia 1994). The 1989 resurvey added four addi-
tional counties and incorporated multilevel socioeconomic question-
naires.

The household as opposed to the individual is the unit of analysis,
for in Chinese rural society the household serves as the production and
accounting unit. Regression analyses of household income employ maxi-
mum-likelihood estimates of multilevel models. Structural models utilize
both a static and dynamic approach employing a lagged dependent vari-
able. Static mixed models are used to examine the effect of selected vari-
ables on household income in 1989. When lagged income variables are
used, the regression analysis points to net returns of the exogenous vari-
ables on change in the dependent variable.

With multilevel models, to the extent households share common attri-
butes by virtue of residence in the same locality, the assumption of uncor-
related error terms of household-level observations is violated, primarily
affecting the standard errors of contextual variables (Mason, Wong, and
where x indicates the explanatory microlevel variables and a, are the
township/ village contextual effects, assumed to be a random sample from
N(0,o2), and independent of the household-level errors €,; [E(@,) = 0;
var(a,) = 02; var(e;) = oF]. To examine the cross-effect of the macro
context on the micro variable, interaction between the macrolevel and
microlevel variables are employed (Bryk and Raudenbush 1992; e.g.,
interacting the marketization variable with cadre status tests for the effect
of a thicker market environment on advantage stemming from positional
power in the administrative elite). Mixed model computations employ
the SAS/STAT MIXED software, and in the case of the poisson and
logistic regressions the GLIMMIX SAS macro was used. In a large sam-
ple, the difference between restricted maximum-likelihood (REML) and
maximum-likelihood (ML) estimation procedures are minimal; both are
maximum-likelihood based. Searle, Casella, and McCulloch (1992) write
that “with balanced data REML solutions are identical to ANOVA esti-
mators which have optimal minimum variance properties—and to many
users this is a sufficiently comforting feature of REML they prefer it over
ML” (p. 255).

Hierarchical poisson and logistic regression analyses are employed to
test hypotheses on the effect of cadre power in securing nonfarm jobs and
establishing nonfarm private businesses, the principal means by which
households can achieve income gains in the era of market reform. Poisson
regression models are used where the dependent variable is a count (e.g.,
the number of nonfarm workers). The nonlinear model employed in the
hierarchical discrete regression is
R is a diagonal matrix that contains evaluations at » of a known variance
function for the model and R is unknown. The estimation involves a
generalized linear mixed model with a log link and poisson error em-
ploying the Lindstrom and Bates (1990) algorithm derived from Laplace’s
approximation. Restricted pseudolikelihood (REPL) procedures are used
in estimating a, 8, D, and R (Wolfinger and O’Connell 1993). In Wol-
finger’s approach, a and 8 are estimated from the mixed-model equa-
tions, and D and R are estimated using REML. When evidence of over-
dispersion is found, an overdispersion parameter is estimated and
standard errors adjusted accordingly (McCullagh and Nelder 1983).
Following Lenski (1966), who maintained that the distribution of re-
wards—income—is a function of the distribution of power in society, I
measure change in relative power by reference to 1989 income and the
change in household income from 1983 to 1989. The income variables
are the natural log of total deflated household income for 1983 and 1989.
All income data were collected at the time of the 1989-90 resurvey.
Although retrospective income data are known to be prone to error,
informants are better able to make accurate comparisons by reference to
years well etched in their memory: 1978, the start of post-Mao reform,
and 1983, the year of the last survey when provincial public health work-
ers visited the villages and collected data from the same households sur-
veyed in 1989. Separate analysis was conducted using the 1978 household
income variable. The results were largely identical to those when 1983
household income was used as the lagged dependent variable. Household
income is the sum of the net income from the sale of agricultural products,
the cost of food produced by the household, and the contribution of
nonagricultural income—private business, cadre salary, factory jobs, ser-
vice, sidelines, and an unspecified “other” category.’ Cadre households
reported the highest mean income in the sample, reflecting their continu-
ing elite status. In 1989, 29.5% of cadre and 50% of cadre entrepreneur
households reported household income that placed them in the top in-
come quintile.

The human capital of the household head is measured by the levels of
formal schooling and by work experience. Primary, junior, and advanced
are dummy variables for household heads who either attended or gradu-
ated from primary school, junior middle school, or senior middle school,
technical school, college, or university. Because there were so few house-
hold heads with education above the senior middle school level, those
attending technical school, college, or university were pooled together
with those who received senior middle school education. The omitted
reference category is household heads who never attended school. Age
squared is added to the model in order to adjust for the assumed nonlinear
relationship at the effect of age of the household head on household
income.

Chayanov (1966) demonstrated the importance of change in household
labor power and composition in the determination of the rural stratifica-
tion order. Respondents were asked the gender of the current household
head and the composition of the household labor force, male and female,
for 1978, 1983, and 1989. Household characteristics are controlled for by
reference to dummy variables female head (female = 1) of the household
and male household labor: 83-89 and female household labor: 83-89—
the change in the number of male and female adults contributing income
to the household from 1983 to 1989. Because I use household income as
a measure of power, the control for the number of income earners is
more satisfactory than the number of adult laborers and children. Farm
labor measures the number of adults who derive income from agricultural
work. Nonfarm labor is the number of male and female peasant workers
who contribute nonagricultural income to the household, excluding cad-
res and entrepreneurs.*® Most of the nonfarm workers in the sample find
jobs in the local economy in township industry, service, and construction,
but others migrate to find jobs in county towns and cities, and some
leave the province altogether. Another major source of nonfarm income
is private entrepreneurship. Entrepreneur is a dummy variable indicating
whether a household has established a private nonfarm business (entre-
preneur = 1). The foregoing variables include all adults in the household
(except current cadres) and thus serve as a control for the number of
producers contributing income to the household.

In a socialist redistributive economy, cadres maintain direct control
over the allocation of resources. They embody the elite group at each level
of the state-constructed hierarchy. Cadre is a dummy variable pointing to
the presence in the household of a current cadre holding positional power
in local government. All the various ranks of cadres comprising the local
administrative elite are represented in the cadre variable, from county-
level officials down to cadres in the natural village. The specifications of
the cadre variables are the same as those used in the preliminary verifica-
tion of market transition theory. This facilitates comparisons between
the results reported in this article and the earlier study. Separate analyses
using the rank of current cadres were conducted, and similar results were
obtained. Since the start of reform some cadres have sought profit in the
marketplace as private entrepreneurs.

The model has three variables that purport to measure the political
capital of households other than those of current cadres. Former cadre
is a dummy variable identifying households with members who in the
past held positions as redistributors and who still have political capital
insofar as they still belong to the cadre status group. Their political
capital provides them with greater ease of access to redistributors who
currently hold power in local government. Cadre relation is a dummy
variable identifying households having close relatives as redistributors.
These households have a strong informal tie with officeholders in local
government. All of the political capital variables identify households that
are likely to enjoy advantages from ease of access to officials who hold
formal power in the local bureaucracy.

In addition to the above set of household-level variables are contextual
variables that control for the institutional environment. These data were
gained through key informant interviews with township and village offi-
cials. Production market is the number of private and collective firms in
the township. This variable serves as a measure for marketization at the
local level, conforming to White’s (1981) specification of a production
market. As a measure of marketization, it focuses analytic attention on
the effect of firms in creating a market environment. This is particularly
important with respect to the emergence of labor markets. Given the
skewed distribution, I use the natural log of the number of private and
collective firms. Collective firms are pooled with private firms because
they also depend on markets for their survival and growth. The higher
the number of private and collective firms, the thicker the local market
environment. Production market is used in hierarchical models for the
nation as a whole (table 2) but not when the extent of marketization is
operationalized by regional grouping (table 5). Labor market measures
the extent of the market for nonfarm labor by reference to the proportion
of the village population engaged in nonfarm work outside the village.
It is based on the sum of peasant workers in construction, factories, and
workshops and the self-employed engaged in private business, traveling
craftsmen, and peddlers outside the village. The higher the proportion
of off-village nonfarm workers, the greater the extent of the local labor
market.

The number of nonstate firms, however, is not a reliable indicator of
the level of industrialization because the nature and size of the firm—
commercial or industrial—is not revealed. Also 4% of township firms in
the sample are state owned. The correlation between the number of
private and collective firms with industrial output per capita is .04 and
-03 respectively. Industrial output—the per capita industrial output—
measures the extent of rural industrialization in the township. This vari-
able is a useful indicator of the level of local economic development,
permitting a control for the effect of industrial growth on stratification.
As a control on local economic development, it is employed in analyses
both of the nation as a whole (table 2) and of specific regions (table 4).

Although China has made more rapid progress toward instituting a
market economy than Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, it
remains a mixed redistributive and market economy. Government finds
nonfarm job is a village-level variable that specifies how most people
find nonfarm jobs outside the village. If “most people find jobs through
government” (findjob + 1), this indicates that the village government
retains substantial redistributive power. If most people find jobs through
friends and relatives or through advertisement or private job agencies,
then findjob = 0, which I interpret as indicating weak local redistribu-
tive power insofar as the local government controls neither the agricultural
economy nor the allocation of nonfarm jobs, the highest-paying jobs.

Community income provides a control for the mean household income
in a village. This allows us to distinguish household income gains net of
the community mean. By controlling for the mean village income, we
are able to assess cadre income relative to other households in the commu-
nity, as opposed to households in the region.

The emergence of a market economy is better operationalized as a
regional, rather than a local, phenomenon. Controlling only for local
conditions fails to take into account the full scope of institutional environ-
ments that shape incentives and opportunities for rural households. The
substantial internal labor migration reported by households in the sam-
ple, for example, highlights the importance of extralocal demand for
nonfarm labor. Also, marketization should be operationalized at the re-
gional level insofar as local firms compete with firms in other areas. The
coastal region includes provinces that experienced significant and often
decisive shifts to reliance on market coordination and rapid integration
with global markets (Yang 1990). Substantial foreign investments have
accompanied market reform here, especially in the southeast coastal
provinces, the Yangzi Delta region near Shanghai, and the Bohai Bay
region, resulting in rapid incorporation into the world market economy.
I examine the effects of regional variation in the coastal provinces by
distinguishing between relatively laissez-faire (Fujian and Guangdong),
corporatist (Jiangsu and Zhejiang), and redistributive (Hebei, Shandong,
Shanghai) provinces. I contrast these with the much less marketized
inland provinces. These regional groupings represent a preliminary clas-
sification scheme for the extent of institutional change in the structure of
property rights in the industrial economy after the first decade of market
transition. They were identified by cluster analysis of provincial data on
the relative industrial output of private, collective, and state-owned firms
from 1987 to 1989.°

In the inland regions, state-owned firms produced 65.9% of the indus-
trial output in 1989, with collective and private firms producing only
27.2% and 6.9% respectively. The dominance of state-owned firms in the
industrial economy is also found in the coastal redistributive provinces.
State-owned firms in the coastal redistributive provinces produced 53.8%
of industrial output, while 37.6% and 8.6% were accounted for by collec-
tive and private firms. This contrasts with the dominance of collective
firms—owned by local governments—in the corporatist provinces, where
60.8% of industrial output was produced by collective firms and 33.9%
and 7% by state and private firms. Only in the laissez-faire provinces do
we find a mixed industrial economy in which no property form is domi-
nant, but the output of firms that rely on markets is over 50%. There
19.4% and 35.8% of industrial output were produced by private and
collective firms, with 44.8% produced by state-owned firms. Market-
driven economic growth has stimulated growing internal migration and
urbanization in small towns and cities (Liang and White, in press; Parish
1994). The shift of surplus labor from agriculture to industry is fueled to
a large extent by the increasing share of industrial output and demand
for labor of the nonstate property forms, growing rapidly in the coastal
provinces. By contrast, state-owned firms, which acquire labor through
bureaucratic allocation, are less likely to generate labor demand that
reaches beyond the urban population.

Table 1 shows that townships located in the relatively laissez-faire
TABLE 1

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF SELECTED HOUSEHOLD AND INSTITUTIONAL

 

 

 

 

 

CHARACTERISTICS
CoasTAL
INLAND Redistributive Corporatist Laissez-Faire
#17 Gnoonnoc0nee00000N0000ods 4,840 823 1,086 1,146
1978 household income 576.17 668.64 695.31 1,127.13
(638.00) (794.00) (704.37) (1,131.34)
1983 household income ........... 1,065.90 1,075.87 1,153.14 1,761.37
(931.92) (1,003.86) (981.12) (1,338.93)
1989 household income ........... 1,103.02 1,386.08 1,387.85 2,159.53
(1,332.87) (1,323.43) (1,012.16) (2,451.46)
1989 agricultural income ......... 747.62 572.44 571.90 882.55
(721.09) (604.15) (501.59) (943.64)
provinces have the highest median number of market-oriented nonstate
firms (83.5), followed by the coastal corporatist (47), and coastal redistrib-
utive (22.5) provinces, with townships in the inland provinces (8) showing
the lowest number of such firms. Disaggregating this category (separating
private and collective firms) reveals that townships in the inland and
coastal redistributive provinces report virtually no private firms, whereas
townships in the corporatist and laissez-faire provinces already have well-
established private economies, with the ratio between collective and pri-
vate approaching parity in the laissez-faire subregion. Similarly, the high-
est percentage of village-level private entrepreneurs reside in the
laissez-faire provinces, followed by the corporatist and then the redistrib-
utive coastal provinces, with the lowest percentage of private entrepre-
FINDINGS

Changes in the mechanism of stratification in the transitions from state
socialism are caused, I claim, by changing institutions—the shift to mar-
kets and corresponding changes in the structure of property rights. Sixty
percent of rich households experienced relative decline in economic stand-
ing from 1978 to 1989. Even more poor households moved up in their
relative economic standing than the rich experienced decline. Only 34.8%
of the poorest households remained in the bottom income quintile, while
41.7% moved up at least two income quintiles during the decade of
reform. The extent of income mobility is even greater in the middle three
income quintiles, where 75%-—80% of households experienced change in
their relative economic standing. The transition to a mixed market econ-
omy was accompanied by a quickening pace of change in relative eco-
nomic standing among rural households.

To what extent did the administrative elite hold on to their power and
privileges in the midst of all this change? Table 2 shows that in 1989 in
the nation as a whole, cadre households still enjoyed a statistically sig-
nificant net advantage. Likewise, households gain higher income when
village governments assign nonfarm jobs, indicating persistent local re-
distributive power. These findings may be viewed by state-centered ana-
lysts as evidence of persistent redistributive power and privilege of the
administrative elite in rural China, which market transition theory does
not dispute. No claim is made that the administrative elite no longer
TABLE 2

MaxiMuM-LIKELIHOOD (REML) EsTIMATES OF THE EFFECTS OF HOUSEHOLD
CHARACTERISTICS AND INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT ON HOUSEHOLD EARNINGS, BY
SOURCE AND TOTAL, 1989

 

 

 

Independent Variable Model 1 Model 2
Intercept ...........cecccceeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees — 2.489%** —2.701****
(.482) (.489)

a rT.

 

yo Lo Lola Ld
have power and privilege. Even in a market economy, bureaucrats have
power and privilege, though much less relative to such an elite in a
socialist redistributive economy. What the theory claims is that cadre
power declines incrementally relative to producers and entrepreneurs as
a function of the shift to a market economy. This prediction is verified
in the interaction between cadre status and the extent of the production
market in equation (1). The cross-effect interaction confirms a negative
effect of local marketization on income returns to cadre status. Examin-
ing the cadre advantage a standard deviation above and below the mean
for production markets reveals a contrast of .16 [.495 + —.069 (3 +
1.837)] and .42, respectively. Where the production market is most devel-
oped, cadre status has a net negative effect on household income (— .09)
and, in areas with the fewest nonstate firms, the net cadre advantage is
greatest (.50). These findings confirm that the thicker the market environ-
ment, the lower the income return for local cadres. A similar effect of
market-oriented economic growth can be seen in the interaction between
cadre status and mean community income reported in equation (2). (The
analysis was done separately due to collinearity between the two cross-
effect interactions.) The finding indicates that the more affluent the com-
munity, the smaller the income advantage of cadres holding positional
power in the county bureaucracy. The cadre advantage is substantially
less (.20) in affluent communities than it is in poorer communities (.43)
based on the mean community income plus or minus the standard devia-
tion. Table 1 indicates that the richest communities are located in the
marketized laissez-faire provinces. Other possible interactions between
the contextual and household variables were not significant.

Overall, after taking into account the interaction effects, the betas for
entrepreneur and nonfarm labor are substantially larger than that for
cadres, which suggests a household may now be better off pursuing eco-
nomic goals, rather than securing positional power in the local bureau-
cracy as in the past. An extra nonfarm laborer in the household has a
much larger effect on nonfarm income than cadre position. None of the
political capital variables is significant, nor is the cadre entrepreneur
advantaged. This was not the case in the earlier tests of market transition
theory, and the change reflects the greater extent of the market by 1989.
In the pursuit of plenty, the labor force participation of nonfarm entrepre-
neurs and workers, and the human capital of the household head predict
higher household income. Moreover, female-headed households are not
disadvantaged. In sum, comparison of the income returns of both politi-
cal and economic actors supports the claim of a declining significance of
the positional power of the administrative elite as a function of the extent
of market transition.

That nonfarm jobs are secured through local government in many
communities suggests a direct mechanism through which the adminis-
trative elite can benefit their immediate family, friends, and relatives,
especially since local government retains formal property rights over
collective-owned enterprises. To what extent have cadres used their re-
distributive power to secure lucrative nonfarm jobs for their own kind?
Table 3 reports findings from a hierarchical poisson regression analysis
of the determinants of nonfarm employment. These findings do not show
a statistically significant effect of cadre power or former cadre status on
the number of nonfarm workers in the household in any region of China.
The first column shows a weak negative effect of cadre status on ob-
taining nonfarm work for the nation as a whole. Households in villages
where most nonfarm jobs are found by local government have a lower
chance of obtaining nonfarm jobs. By contrast, the labor market variable
is strongly positive for the nation as a whole and in all regions except
the laissez-faire provinces. In other words, labor markets more reliably
promote the movement of surplus agricultural labor into off-village non-
farm jobs than local governments, just the opposite from the prereform
period. The level of industrialization in rural townships has a strong
effect on the chances of households gaining nonfarm employment but not
in the more marketized corporatist and laissez-faire provinces. The main
effects of the contextual variables are consistent with the new institution-
alist model, but cross-effect interactions with political capital variables
OS HOP EAG MY PIVYPSHOH OV

 

 

 

(12°) (9¢1'T) BLL" (82°) (e¢8")
sete 8 TP — se 196 DY — aaa bbe © — aeex VDE — gemee PLOTS Ur rrrtirtrrsseresssssereeeereeceesscee qdasi93uy
@IOHM V aare q-zasstery ystyer0di0_, eAQNQUySIpay GNVINI G1aViIdvA LNIGNGdgaN]
SV NOLLVN
‘IVLSVOZD

 

 

SYMAAOM WAVINON JO SLNVNIWYALIG AO SNOISSaAOTy TAO GIXIPL NOSSIOg JO NOILVWILSY GOOHITANI'T-OGNasg GALOTALSAY

€ W1avL
“100° > d xxx
"10" > d we
"$0" > d wx
Ol > dx

“sasayjuered Ul USAIS are (UOISIAdSIP 10} pa}201109) SYS— "ALON

 

L1°289'S
e27'L
(810°)
aex#S90'T
(192°2)
wex8ZL°6
(818°)
sere SV
(9bT")
#92" —

$7°290'T
6II'T
(os0")
see SOUT
(p21'Z)
£9S°9
(g€2'T)
v0z"—
(ots’)
ose"

1 260'T
060'T
(¢¢0")
exe 96"
(ebz"s)
le"¢
(19¢°2)
seine 9" L
(06¢")
x 108° —

ZU bt
$89
(60°)
sei S06"
(068°T)
8L0°¢
(192°T)
aS
(be)
«985°

O1'26L'2
zse'b
(20°)
se L80°T
(16$°8)
axex900 87
(Is"T)
wel OSE
(821°)
181° -

 

 

 

“+ aoueIAep payeog

 

ayeos uorsredsip eyxq

stereesssess eye gad jndyno [esnpuy

 

Heneeeies gaye soqey

pons soot gol waeyuou spuy yuauTUIEA0D
were not significant. However, Parish, Zhe, and Li (1995) found dimin-
ished redistributive power of the administrative elite in the wake of ex-
panding local labor markets.

At the household level, work experience and household size and com-
position predict the chances of obtaining nonfarm jobs. Except for the
laissez-faire provinces, education has a strong effect on the chances of
obtaining nonfarm work. As for households reporting a cadre relative,
this variable is significant for the nation as a whole. In the regional
analyses, only (surprisingly) in the laissez-faire subregion is the variable a
statistically significant predictor of participation in nonfarm work. Other
measures of political capital fail to show a significant effect. It may be
that kinship constitutes a bridge tie (Granovetter 1973)—and not the
“strong tie” that opens the door to opportunity for the job-seeker—
especially in large lineage villages common to the southeastern coastal
provinces where 15% of the sample report a cadre relative. According to
this interpretation, kinship ties to cadres serve as a conduit of information
about the availability of jobs outside the village.

Turning now to the question of laissez-faire exceptionalism, in these
provinces it appears that none of the contextual and few of the household
variables predict the chances of obtaining nonfarm jobs. Why? In the
laissez-faire provinces market-induced economic growth was so rapid
that rural households with surplus labor could readily find nonfarm jobs.
So plentiful are nonfarm jobs that these provinces serve as a virtual
magnet drawing millions of migrants from poorer inland provinces in
search of nonfarm jobs unwanted by local farm households. In any case,
households in the marketized coastal provinces have on average 2.73
times as many male nonfarm workers as households in the inland areas,
and this increases to 5.58 times as many in the case of female nonfarm
workers. Although kinship ties to cadres in the laissez-faire provinces
confer some advantages in securing nonfarm jobs, the greater advantage
stems from residence in a marketized region.

Thus far we have focused on the relative standing of cadre and other
households in 1989. But the declining-significance-of-redistributive-
power hypothesis emphasizes the trajectory of income change, rather
than privileges currently held.'° Accordingly, let us now ask to what
extent local officials did or did not make exceptional economic gains
during the transition period.'’ In other words, were households that
possessed a greater stock of political capital able to achieve an advan-
tage in growth of income relative to other households? By comparing the
betas affecting change in household income, it is possible to identify
which social group—entrepreneurs, producers, or local officials—is
likely to gain the most relative to others from the shift to a market
economy.

According to market transition theory, the less marketized inland prov-
inces experience less change compared to the more marketized southeast-
ern coastal provinces, which shifted to a stratification order shaped more
by market than by redistributive institutions. The parameter estimates
in table 4 for the less marketized inland provinces conform to an expecta-
tion of slower incremental change. In the inland provinces, the adminis-
trative elite continue to enjoy positive returns on positional power in
local government (reflected in increase in household income). However,
the betas for entrepreneur and nonfarm labor are larger than that for
cadres, indicating that a noncadre household with an entrepreneur or
nonfarm worker experiences greater gains in household income than a
household with a current cadre.” Neither cadre entrepreneurs nor house-
holds with former cadres and cadre relations experience advantages in
income growth.

The analyses of household income for the coastal redistributive prov-
inces (table 4, col. 2) show that cadres lack a statistically significant
advantage; however, the interaction between cadre status and entrepre-
neur shows a net positive return, while entrepreneurs without redistribu-
tive power are at a relative disadvantage. The “power conversion” hy-
pothesis finds support in the finding that the income growth of cadre
entrepreneurs is highest of any group in the coastal redistributive prov-
inces. However, these cadre entrepreneurs (V = 8) constitute .9% of the
sample in this region, whereas households of current cadres make up
17%. In coastal redistributive provinces, the more broadly based source
of relative gains in household earning are nonfarm jobs.

The interaction between current cadre and entrepreneur suggests that
local officials may be using their political power to establish private busi-
nesses. Table 5 reports results of a mixed model logistic regression analy-
sis. It shows that neither current nor former cadre status has a statistically
significant effect on the odds of entering into entrepreneurship in the
pees Peet re ete eee OV

 

 

 

 

(8s0°) (s¥0") (sso’) (sz0')
sexes 60° ses TLE" HK IIT eae LBC” auIODUT Pfoyasnoy Eg6I Passo]
(9eb'T) (£80°2) (vez"T) (6£9°)
en675'E— pata 4892°2— ea es qdaoraquy
aate J-zasste’] ysnerodi0s SANNGIYSIPAy CNV'INT UIaVIaVA LINIONIATONT
‘IVLSVOD

 

 

68-€861 ‘SONINUVY GIOHISAOH NI FONVHD NO LNAWNOYIANG
IVNOILALILSN] GNV SOILSIUALOVAVHD AIOHASNOY JO SLOAIAY AHL AO STACO| GAXIP[ AO SALVINILSY (TIWAY) COOHITEHI'T-WAWIXV

v aTaVvL
9rsis‘e
$60'T
(620°)
aeeel 78 °T
(p10°)
+00"

tv 7L6'7
900‘T
(240°)
axe 9€0'T
(£40")
#%260"

6S°8S0'Z
219
(90°)
see STT
(810°)
210°

“sasoyjuared ut UaAIZ are (UOISIAdsIp 103 pa}9eII09) s|S— "ALO

96°0TE‘eT
eLt'y
(o¢0')
sea POET
(STO’)
4790"

"100" > d xxix
“10° > di wx
"$0" > dl we
‘Ol > dx

 

  

* poourpayyy 80] TWA Z—

 

 

 

Ployasnoyy

  

 Tengxayu0g,
"TOO" > di sexe

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘TO > d xxx
“SO > d xx
Ol >dx
“sasayjzuered Ul UdAIS are (UOISsIadsIp 10} pa}901109) S|S— "ALON.
Sr P68'e elle LS'6eh 08°66¢ €L°202'2 “re QQUBIAIP PaTeoS
0e9'. 6IT‘T 990‘T 408 8E9'r corns: ee AT
(pT0’) (6£0°) (8b0") (6¢0°) (410')
seen? 98" etek STO" se4#680'T see SLL" sei 078" - “ gyeos uolsiedstpeayxg
(TeT’) (62°) (s8°) (v6S") (vor)
200° €02°— 91s" — 789° — sgt “ uoHelad axped
(STT’) (192’) (Ib) (oe) (8¢T°)
vst 190° — 6le° — sis’ #962" “' gapes JoULI0]
(ser) (782°) (ZL) (Leb) (621)
92 — Or" — 8@z"— 68s" — bl — ue * aapeg
(090°) (111") (ut) (891°) (€60°)
#801 — 10" sx 198° — 1b" — ex S22" veers Joey ULTRJUON,
(e¢0") (020') (set’) (IT) (40°)
sete 7D — 060° — we BE — «x097° — #980" — vee vo soqey wey
(evT°) (voe’) (¢¢") (90s") (v6r’)
see 18S" — ose — seg — xxb9ODT seek LB" — “" pjoyasnoy Jo peay ereuia.y
(8¢z") (8¢s") (802°) (6¢9°) (z¢¢")
6L1- $90" — 250° ~ eho" — sgz'— “* Buyfooyos pasueapy
(9¢T’) (Ise’) (2L') (9zb") (T6T’)
wee ES” see LO" 91s" LIg*— seve 229" so Jooups aTpprur soyunf
(zt) ($62°) (26¢") (us¢") (991)
267° #07S" ors” sig — 4787" “ yooyos Areurtig
(s00’) (10°) (sT0") (ST0") (400°)
see BT0" — 400° 8490" — O10" - sexxebZ0 — ” vs a8
(€82’) (899°) (428°) (pL8°) (s8e")
see 9Z8'T — see LZ — 6£0° — x089°T— sexeeZ06°T — “+ ydaoraquy
aIOHM V aayej-zasste’y ysneiodi0_ BANNQUISIPIY dNVINI @TaVIdVA LNIGNadaaNT
SV NOILVN
TvLsvoD

 

 

dIHSaNaNaddadINY ALVA JO SLNVNIWYALAG GALOATIS JO SNOISSTAOAY TACO GAXIJ[ IILSIOO'T

$ OTaVvL
maritime provinces. Only in the inland provinces does political capital—
former cadres—increase the odds of entering into entrepreneurship; but,
there, cadres entrepreneurs failed to obtain a net income advantage over
other households. When viewed from the vantage of the nation as a
whole, the effect of cadre status on the odds of becoming an entrepreneur
is negative and significant. This is in line with market transition theory’s
prediction that over time, the initial cadre advantage in becoming entre-
preneurs declines. Overall, these findings fail to support the “power
conversion” hypothesis of state-centered analysis that cadres readily con-
vert their political capital into economic capital by becoming entrepre-
neurs and thereby becoming the primary beneficiaries of marketization.

The coastal corporatist provinces exhibit processes of stratification that
represent a significant departure from the pattern of social inequality
produced by state socialist redistribution (Szelényi 1978). Initially it
would appear that the corporatist region is similar to the inland region:
cadre position has a significant effect on change in household income
(table 4). But distinctive to the corporatist provinces, the income returns
of nonfarm workers, entrepreneurs, and cadres fall within a narrow
band, with somewhat higher income returns to nonfarm laborers and
entrepreneurs. Corporatist communities appear to be able to specify and
enforce rules of income distribution consistent with egalitarian principles,
resulting in declining income inequality between households from 1978
to 1989. As a result, income inequality declined steadily as seen in the
coefficient of variation over the three years (1978, 1983, 1989) income
data was collected (Zhejiang, .767 — .649 — .674; Jiangsu, 1.103 >
-881— .711). In every other region of China, income inequality increased
during the mid- to late 1980s.

Whether the coastal corporatist region can continue to buck the na-
tional trend of increasing income inequality is not clear. The institutional
environment giving rise to local corporatism is in dynamic transition.
The collective ownership form remains dominant in corporatist commu-
nities so long as local governments exclude private firms from subcon-
tracting arrangements with state-owned enterprises and control quasi
markets for key factor resources and financial capital. Should barriers
to entry be lowered in the industrial economy, markets thicken, and
competition from private firms intensify, the profits of entrepreneurs in
the corporatist region are likely to increase as they have in the laissez-faire
provinces. Whether local corporatist communities can persist in uphold-
ing egalitarian rules in the distribution of rewards depends on the persis-
tence of social institutions and collective action giving rise to a moral
order that constrains rent seeking by cadres and limits the profits of
entrepreneurs. These include social sanctions, threat of ostracism, pro-
test, sabotage, violence, and other forms of collective action (Lyons 1994).
The last column in table 4 reports estimates of change in household
income for the laissez-faire provinces. Cadres do not retain an advantage
in the most marketized of the coastal provinces. This finding replicates
the results reported in the early test of market transition theory.'* It also
corresponds with the analysis reported in table 2. In the laissez-faire
provinces, most nonfarm jobs are secured in labor markets through social
networks and job referral agencies and are not allocated by local govern-
ment.'* Combined, these findings confirm a diminished significance of
socialist redistributive power as a function of the extent of the market.'5
Not surprisingly entrepreneurs here enjoy the greatest gains in household
income of all the regions. An increase in the number of laborers, male
and female, has a statistically significant effect on gains in household
income. Hence, the pattern is quite clear: in the coastal laissez-faire prov-
inces, producers and entrepreneurs experience greater gains in income
than the local administrative elite. Moreover, current officials in the
southeastern coastal region are not advantaged as cadre entrepreneurs,
nor does political capital contribute to growth of household income.

In the laissez-faire provinces, household heads unexpectedly receive
no advantage to education. The income effects of junior middle and
advanced education do not turn statistically significant and negative until
after controlling for nonfarm workers. This is because the household
head is more apt to be involved in agriculture.'° Analysis of discrete
income streams for the nation as a whole by agriculture, private business,
and nonfarm sources not reported here indicates that education has a
negative effect on agricultural income, though it is statistically significant
only for advanced schooling. It has a significant positive effect in the
sectors of the rural economy that experienced a shift to greater reliance
on markets (private business and nonfarm income). Separate mixed mod-
els of the determination of these income streams computed for the laissez-
faire provinces reveal the same negative effect of education in the deter-
mination of agricultural income, but the effects of schooling on private
business and nonfarm income are not statistically significant.

Market transition theory claims that the shift to a market economy
improves incentives at the individual level. That the incentive to work
has improved a great deal in the laissez-faire provinces is confirmed at
the aggregate level in their unprecedented rates of economic growth. It
is also seen in the higher income returns of entrepreneurs. The logistic
regression results reported in table 5 show that education increases the
odds of becoming an entrepreneur in the laissez-faire provinces. The
predicted effect of education is mediated through entrepreneurship. For
whatever reason, what normally should have served as a reliable measure
of the incentive to work—income returns to education—did not perform
as expected for heads of households who are more likely to remain in
agriculture. Is the education of the household head not a sensitive mea-
sure of the incentive to work in a household economy in which agriculture
comprises a declining source of cash income contributed by income earn-
ers? This is suggested by the positive returns to education in the inland
region where nonfarm jobs are relatively scarce and agriculture remains
the only source of income for all but a few.!” Or could it be that the
rough and tumble of early capitalism is such that education does not
matter in the pursuit of power and plenty? It may be that under condi-
tions of exceptionally rapid economic growth, opportunities for advance-
ment abound to the extent that formal schooling no longer serves as a
screening mechanism.

Across all of the regions, the impact of producers on the household’s
earnings is positive and robust. Moreover, the contribution of a nonfarm
worker to the household’s income stream is greater than that made by a
cadre. In all but the coastal redistributive provinces, the income gains
of private entrepreneurs are greater than those of cadres. The widest gap
in income growth favoring producers—farm and nonfarm workers and
entrepreneurs—relative to cadres occurs in the laissez-faire provinces.
CONCLUSION

The analysis here confirms that the stratification order of rural China
began a transformative change during the 1980s. Especially in the mar-
ketized coastal region, households moved up and down in relative eco-
nomic standing, driven by new rules and mechanisms for getting ahead.
The old rules of the game no longer worked as they did in the Maoist
era, and households that followed those rules discovered that they fell in
relative economic standing. However, households that were quick to
adjust to an emergent market economy discovered new rules for getting
ahead. These households experienced rapid increases in household earn-
ing power. By 1989, only 30% of cadre households in the sample were
in the top income quintile. That cadre households make up a relatively
small percentage of the households in the top income quintile supports
the main claim of market transition theory. Most households in the top
income group were newly affluent producers and entrepreneurs not from
cadre background.

Even in the absence of regime change, a rapid shift to markets incre-
mentally causes a relative decline in the significance of positional power
based on redistribution and relative gain in the power of producers and
entrepreneurs. The interactions testing the effect of local marketization
and resulting affluence on the income returns to the administrative elite
confirm a causal relationship between institutional change and decline in
the significance of positional power in the government bureaucracy. In
the relatively laissez-faire coastal provinces, where no direct advantage
was found for cadre position, the decline in the significance of redistribu-
tive power on household earning is more manifest. The contextual vari-
able indicating whether nonfarm jobs are gained through political alloca-
tion or through markets is perhaps the best indicator of the redistributive
power of local government. It showed a net negative effect in the laissez-
faire coastal provinces. However, the more important evidence is seen in
the higher income gains of producers and entrepreneurs relative to cadres
in the country as a whole and especially in the laissez-faire subregion.

Some results were inconsistent with the predictions of market transi-
tion theory. These include the absence of a positive income effect of
education in the coastal provinces. No doubt others will be uncovered
in the course of future research. Theory cannot yet readily anticipate
how redistributive institutions combine with market forces (Stark, in this
issue). Hybrid state-controlled markets in which cadres set the price by
administrative fiat, often according to political favor, are a feature of
China’s mixed economy; these are likely to persist as long as land and
major fixed capital assets remain under redistributive control. An exam-
ple is the housing market in urban China where quasi markets have
introduced elements of a commodity exchange but within the existing—
though changing—institutional framework of state ownership of real
property (Zhou and Logan 1994). For these reasons, many of the unantic-
ipated features of the emergent stratification order are likely to stem
from the impact of socialist hybrids and their governance structure, local
corporatism, in altering the mechanisms of stratification.

In the stratification order based on socialist redistribution, the political
power of cadres entitles them to a greater share of the rewards than
others with the same human capital and household characteristics. This
condition persists in urban centers where the structure of property rights
remains largely unchanged and redistribution continues to be institution-
ally dominant, as Walder’s (1992) analysis of nonwage benefits using
1986 data from Tianjin, a northern industrial city, indicates. In cities,
nonmarket allocation of labor continues, and emergent labor markets are
confined mainly to the second economy. For these reasons, cadre status
continues to be associated with controlling the distribution of rewards.
In socialist redistributive economies, cadres stand at the pinnacle of the
stratification order. The main mechanism of stratification is bound up
with access to and control over redistributive institutions: mainly the
party and state bureaucracies. Households compete to secure redistribu-
tive power, either directly by holding office or through the acquisition of
network ties that guarantee ease of access to officials in power. In con-
trast, gains in earning power in the emerging stratification order shaped
by market forces are derived through jobs in marketized firms (e.g., joint
ventures) or through entrepreneurship. Like other households, cadres too
strive to adjust to the new opportunity structure created by markets.
Many in fact turn to entrepreneurship seeking to secure a privileged place
in the new stratification order. In the initial stages of market transition,
cadre entrepreneurs enjoy an advantage in the pursuit of market power.
Their control over the disposition of scarce resources not available in
the marketplace confers class advantages based on redistributive power.
However, the cadre advantage is diminished as the leverage gained from
redistributive power erodes in the wake of expanding markets and corre-
sponding changes in the structure of property rights.

Tests of market transition arguments in the urban context are at an
early stage. Analyses of income returns in Tianjin (Bian and Logan 1996)
and Shanghai (Nee and Cao 1995) report a persistence of cadre power in
the redistributive sector and evidence of decline in income returns to
party membership in the marketized sectors. The extent of decline is
greatest in Shanghai where the data were collected in 1994. There party
membership shows a significant negative effect in the marketized sector
of the urban economy. Also as predicted by the theory, in both Tianjin
and Shanghai, human capital obtains its largest return in the marketized
and private economic sectors. These findings are consistent with results
which verify the declining-significance-of-redistributive-power hypothe-
sis in the rural setting. More recently, Walder’s (1995a) analysis of career
mobility in Tianjin concludes that the power and advantages of the redis-
tributive elite are shallow when perceived from the vantage point of the
potential for gain and profit in a market economy. His prediction that
marketization will erode the advantages of the redistributive elite, espe-
cially after inflation takes its toll on the salary of government employees,
leads him toward convergence with explanations and predictions devel-
oped by market transition theory.

Xie and Hannum (in this issue) conflate the still dominant government-
controlled urban redistributive economy with the emergent marketized
sectors, resulting in erroneous interpretations of continuing income re-
turns to party membership. Their findings are inconclusive because they
use the wrong exogenous variable to test market transition theory. Their
multilevel analysis examines the effect of extensive industrial growth on
returns to human capital and party membership in Chinese cities. I use
industrial output as a control for the industrialism hypothesis, not as in
Xie and Hannum, a measure of the extent of the shift to markets. They
assert their hypotheses are derived from my earlier work (Nee 1989), but
market transition theory makes no claim about industrial growth.

The application of the Stalinist growth model produced extensive in-
REFERENCES

Aitkin, M., and N. Longford. 1986. “Statistical Modeling Issues in School Effective-
ness Studies.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Academy 149:1—43.

Arendt, Hannah. 1951. Totalitarianism, part 3. The Origins of Totalitarianism. New
York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

Bian, Yanjie, and John Logan. 1996. “Income Inequality in Tianjin: 1978 to 1993.”
American Sociological Review, in press.

Brown, George P. 1992. “Rural Reforms and the Sunan Model.” Paper presented at
the Annual Meeting of the Association for Asian Studies, Washington, D.C., April.

Burawoy, Michael, and Janos Lukacs. 1992. The Radiant Past: Ideology and Reality
in Hungary’s Road to Capitalism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Byrd, William A., and Lin Qingsong, eds. 1990. China’s Rural Industry: Structure,
Development, and Reform. New York: Oxford University Press.

Bryk, Anthony S., and Stephen W. Raudenbush. 1992. Hierarchical Linear Models:
Applications and Data Analysis Methods. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

Chayanov, A. V. 1966. The Theory of Peasant Economy. Homewood, IIl.: Richard
D. Irwin for the American Economic Association.

Chen Junshi, T. Colin Campbell, Li Junyao, and Richard Peto. 1989. Diet, Life-Style,
and Mortality in China: A Study of the Characteristics of 65 Chinese Counties.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cook, Karen Schweers, and Margaret Levi, eds. 1990. The Limits of Rationality.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Eggertsson, Thrainn. 1990. Economic Behavior and Institutions. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Emerson, Richard A. 1962. “Power-Dependence Relations.” American Sociological
Review 27:31-41.

Erlich, A. 1977. “Stalinism and Marxian Growth Models.” Pp. 137-54 in Stalinism:
Essays in Historical Interpretation, edited by R. Tucker. New York: W. W.
Norton.

Friedrich, Carl J., ed. 1954. Totalitarianism. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

Granovetter, Mark. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 78:1360-80.

Grusky, David B., and Robert M. Hauser. 1984. “Comparative Social Mobility Re-
visited: Models of Convergence and Divergence in 16 Countries.” American Socio-
logical Review 49:19-38.

Hamilton, Gary G., ed. 1991. Business Networks and Economic Development in East
and Southeast Asia. Hong Kong: University of Hong Kong, Centre of Asian Study.

Hankiss, Elemer. 1990. East European Alternatives. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Hauser, Robert M., and David B. Grusky. 1988. “Cross-National Variation in Occu-
pational Distribution, Relative Mobility Chances, and Intergenerational Shifts in
Occupational Distributions.” American Sociological Review 41:498-511.

Hechter, Michael. 1987. Principles of Group Solidarity. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press.

Homans, George C. 1950. The Human Group. New York: Harcourt Brace Jova-
novich,

Huang, Philip. 1990. The Peasant Family and Rural Development in the Yangzi Delta:
1350 to 1988. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Huang Shu-min. 1989. The Spiral Road: Change in a Chinese Village through the
Eyes of a Communist Party Leader. Boulder, Colo.: Westview.

Johnson, Graham E. 1994. “Open for Business, Open to the World: Consequences
of Global Incorporation in Guangdong and the Pearl River Delta.” Pp. 55-88 in
The Economic Transformation of South China, edited by T. Lyons and V. Nee.
Cornell East Asia Series, no. 70. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University, East Asia
Program.

Kornai, Janos. 1980. The Economics of Shortage. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Lenski, Gerhard. 1966. Power and Privilege. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Liang, Echo Hang. 1994. “Contractual Arrangements and Labor Incentives in Rural
China: A Case Study of Northern Jiangsu.” Pp. 169-98 in The Economic Transfor-
mation of South China, edited by T. Lyons and V. Nee. Cornell East Asia Series,
no. 70. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University, East Asia Program.

Liang, Zai, and Michael White. In press. “Market Transition, Government Policies,
and Interprovincial Migration in China: 1983-1988.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change.

Lin, Nan. 1982. “Social Resources and Instrumental Action.” Pp. 131-46 in Social
Structure and Network Analysis, edited by P. Marsden and N. Lin. Beverly Hills,
Calif.: Sage.

. 1995. “Local Market Socialism: Local Corporatism in Action in Rural
China.” Theory and Society 24:301-54.

Lindstrom, M. J., and D. M. Bates. 1990. “Nonlinear Mixed Effects Models for
Repeated Measures Data.” Biometrics 46:673-87.

Liu, Via-ling. 1992. “Reform from Below: The Private Economy and Local Politics
in the Rural Industralization of Wenzhou.” China Quarterly 130:293-316.

Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Hans L. Zetterberg. 1959. “Social Mobility in Industrial
Societies.” Pp. 11-75 in Social Mobility in Industrial Society, edited by S. M.
Lipset and R. Bendix. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Lyons, Thomas P. 1994. “Economic Reform in Fujian: Another View from the Vil-
lages.” Pp. 141-68 in The Economic Transformation of South China, edited by T.
Lyons and V. Nee. Cornell East Asia Series, no. 70. Ithaca, N. Y.: Cornell Univer-
sity, East Asia Program.

Mason, William M., George Y. Wong, and Barbara Entwisle. 1983. “Contextual
Analysis through the Multilevel Linear Model.” Pp. 72—103 in Sociological Meth-
odology, edited by S. Leinhardt. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

McCullagh, P., and J. A. Nelder. 1983. Generalized Linear Models. London: Chaps-
man & Hill.

Merton, Robert K. 1949. Social Theory and Social Structure. New York: Free Press.

Nee, Victor. 1989. “A Theory of Market Transition: From Redistribution to Markets
in State Socialism.” American Sociological Review 54:663-81.

. 1991. “Social Inequalities in Reforming State Socialism: Between Redistribu-

tion and Markets in China.” American Sociological Review 56:267-82.

. 1992. “Organizational Dynamics of Market Transition: Hybrid Forms, Prop-
erty Rights, and Mixed Economy in China.” Administrative Science Quarterly
37:1-27,

Nee, Victor, and Yang Cao. 1995. “Testing Market Transition Theory in the Urban
Context.” Paper to be presented at the Market Transition Debate workshop at the
University of California, Los Angeles, May.

Nee, Victor, and Paul Ingram. In press. “Embeddedness and Beyond: Institutions,
Exchange and Social Structure.” In The New Institutionalism in Economic Sociol-
ogy, edited by M. Brinton and V. Nee. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Nee, Victor, and Peng Lian. 1994. “Sleeping with the Enemy: A Dynamic Model of
Declining Political Commitment in State Socialism.” Theory and Society 23:
253-96.

Nee, Victor, and Raymond V. Liedka. 1995. “Institutions, Income Mobility, and the
Production of Inequality in Reforming State Socialism.” Working Papers on the
Transitions from State Socialism, no. 95-9. Cornell University, Einaudi Center for
International Studies.

Nee, Victor, and Rebecca Matthews. 1996. “Market Transition and Societal Trans-
formation in Reforming State Socialism.” Annual Review of Sociology 22, in press.

Nee, Victor, and Su Sijin. 1990. “Institutional Change and Economic Growth: The
View from the Villages.” Journal of Asian Studies 39:293-325.

. 1996. “Institutions, Social Ties, and Commitment in China’s Corporatist
Transformation” In Remaking Asian Economies: The Growth of Market Institu-
tions, edited by J. McMillan and B. Naughton. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.

North, Douglass C. 1977. “Markets and Other Allocation Systems in History: The
Challenge of Karl Polanyi.” Journal of European Economic History 6:703-16.

. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton.

Oi, Jean C. 1990, “The Fate of the Collective after the Commune.” Pp. 15-30 in
Chinese Society on the Eve of Tiananmen: The Impact of Reform, edited by D.
Davis and E. Vogel. Cambridge, Mass.: Council of East Asian Studies.

. 1992, “Fiscal Reform and the Economic Foundations of Local State Corpo-
ratism in China.” World Politics 45:99-126.

Parish, William L. 1994. “Rural Industralization in Fujian and Taiwan.” Pp. 119-40
in The Economic Transformation of South China, edited by T. Lyons and V. Nee.
Cornell East Asia Series, no. 70. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University, East Asia
Program.

Parish, William L., Xiaoye Zhe, and Fang Li. 1995. “Nonfarm Work and Marketiza-
tion of the Chinese Countryside.” China Quarterly 143:697—730.

Parpia, Banoo. 1994. “Socioeconomic Determinants of Food and Nutrient Intakes in
Rural China.” Doctoral dissertation. Cornell University, Department of Sociology.

Peng, Yusheng. 1992. “Wage Determination in Rural and Urban China: A Compari-
son of Public and Private Industrial Sectors.” American Sociological Review 57:
198-213.

Polanyi, Karl. 1944. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins
of Our Time. New York: Rinehart.
. 1957. “The Economy as Instituted Process.” Pp. 243-69 in Trade and Market
in Early Empires, edited by K. Polanyi, C. Arensberg, and H. Pearson. Glencoe,
Ill.: Free Press.

Pryor, Frederick L. 1973. Property and Industrial Organization in Communist and
Capitalist Nations. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Qian, Yingyi, and Chenggang Xu. 1993. “Why China’s Economic Reforms Differ:
The M-Form Hierarchy and Entry/Expansion of the Non-State Sector.” Economics
of Transition 1:135—70.

Roéna-Tas, Akos. 1994. “The First Shall Be Last? Entrepreneurship and Communist
Cadres in the Transition from Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 100:
40-69.

Sahlins, Marshall. 1972. Stone Age Economics. New York: Aldine.

Schurmann, Franz. 1966. Ideology and Organization in Communist China. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Searle, Shayle R., George Casella, and Charles E. McCulloch. 1992. Variance Compo-
nents. New York: John Wiley.

Shirk, Susan. 1989. “The Political Economy of Chinese Industrial Reform.” Pp.
328-64 in Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism: China and East-
ern Europe, edited by V. Nee and D. Stark. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University
Press.

Skilling, H. Gordon, and Franklyn Griffith, eds. 1971. Interest Groups in Soviet
Politics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Staniszkis, Jadwiga. 1991. The Dynamics of the Breakthrough in Eastern Europe:
The Polish Experience. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Stark, David. 1996. “Recombinant Property in East European Capitalism.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology, in this issue.

Stark, David, and Victor Nee. 1989. “Towards an Institutional Analysis of State
Socialism.” Pp. 1-31 in Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism, edited
by V. Nee and D. Stark. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Su, Sijin. 1993. “Institutional Change and Dynamics of Market Growth in Chinese
Firms.” Doctoral dissertation. Cornell University, Department of Sociology.

. 1994, “Hybrid Organizational Forms in South China: ‘One Firm, Two Sys-
tems.’” Pp. 199-214 in The Economic Transformation of South China, edited by
T. Lyons and V. Nee. Cornell East Asia Series, no. 70. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University, East Asia Program.

Szelényi, Ivan. 1978. “Social Inequalities in State Socialist Redistributive Economies.
International Journal of Comparative Sociology 19:63—87.

. 1989. “Eastern Europe in Transition.” Pp. 208-32 in Remaking the Eco-
nomic Institutions of Socialism: China and Eastern Europe, edited by V. Nee and
D. Stark. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Szelényi, Ivan, and Robert Manchin. 1987. “Social Policy under State Socialism.”
Pp. 102-39 in Stagnation and Renewal in Social Policy, edited by G. Esping-
Anderson, L. Rainwater, and M. Rein. White Plains, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe.

Treiman, Donald J. 1970. “Industralization and Social Stratification.” Pp. 207-34 in
Social Stratification: Research and Theory for the 1970s, edited by E. O. Laumann.
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

Vogel, Ezra F. 1989. One Step Ahead in China: Guangdong under Reform. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Walder, Andrew G. 1986. Communist Neo-Traditionalism: Work and Authority in
Chinese Industry. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

. 1992. “Property Rights and Stratification in Socialist Redistributive Econo-

mies.” American Sociological Review 57:524-39.

. 1995a. “Career Mobility and the Communist Political Order.” American

Sociological Review 60:309-28.
. 19956. “Local Governments as Industrial Firms: An Organizational Analysis
of China’s Transitional Economy.” American Journal of Sociology 101:263-301.
White, Harrison C. 1981. “Where Do Markets Come From?” American Journal of

Sociology 87:517-47.

Whyte, Martin K., and William L. Parish. 1984. Urban Life in Contemporary China.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Williamson, Peter J. 1989. Corporatism in Perspective: An Introductory Guide to
Corporatist Theory. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

Wilson, Scott. 1994. “Peasants into Villagers: Social Networks and Power Relations
in Contemporary Shanghai Villages.” Doctoral dissertation. Cornell University,
Department of Government.

Wolfinger, Russ. 1993. “Laplace’s Approximation for Nonlinear Mixed Models.”
Biometrika 80:791—95.

Wolfinger, Russ, and Michael O’Connell. 1993. “Generalized Linear Mixed Models:
A Pseudo-Likelihood Approach.” Journal of Computing Simulation 48:233—-43.
Wong, George Y., and William M. Mason. 1984. “The Hierarchical Logistic Regres-
sion Model for Multilevel Analysis.” Research Report no. 84-56. University of

Michigan, Population Studies Center.

Xie, Yu, and Emily Hannum. 1996. “Regional Variation of Earnings Inequality in
Reform-Era Urban China.” American Journal of Sociology, in this issue.

Yan Yun-Xiang. 1995. “Changes in Everyday Power Relations: A View from a North
China Village.” In The Waning of the Communist State: Economic Origins of
Political Decline in China and Hungary, edited by A. Walder. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.

Yang, Dali. 1990. “Patterns of China’s Regional Development Strategy.” China
Quarterly 122:230-57.

Zhou, Min, and John Logan. 1994. “Market Transition and the Commodification of
Housing in Urban China.” Working Paper no. 58. Russell Sage Foundation, New
York.
