Liminal Legality: Salvadoran and Guatemalan Immigrants’ Lives in the United States
Author(s): Cecilia Menjivar

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 111, No. 4 (January 2006), pp. 999-1037
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/499509

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:41 UTC
This article examines the effects of an uncertain legal status on the
lives of immigrants, situating their experiences within frameworks
of citizenship/belonging and segmented assimilation, and using Vic-
tor Turner’s concept of liminality and Susan Coutin’s "legal non-
existence.” It questions black —and-—white conceptualizations of doc-
umented and undocumented immigration by exposing the gray area
of "liminal legality” and examines how this in—between status affects
the individual’s social networks and family, the place of the church
in immigrants’ lives, and the broader domain of artistic expression.
Empirically, it draws on ethnographic fieldwork conducted among
Salvadoran and Guatemalan immigrants in San Francisco, Los An-
geles, Washington, D.C., and Phoenix from 1989 to 2001. The article
lends support to arguments about the continued centrality of the
nation—state in the lives of immigrants.
existence. Empirically I rely on the experiences of Salvadoran and Gua-
temalan immigrants in four U.S. cities. Immigrants’ legal status shapes
who they are, how they relate to others, their participation in local com-
munities, and their continued relationship with their homelands. An un-
documented status can affect anything from the immigrants’ health risks
(Guttmacher 1984), their vulnerability in the streets (Hirsch 2003), and
their ability to combat domestic violence (Salcido and Adelman 2004), to
their health-seeking behavior (Menjivar 20020), their chances in the labor
market (Simon and DeLey 1984; Uriarte et al. 2003), their wages (Massey,
Durand, and Malone 2002), and their identities (Rodriguez and Hagan
2004). Indeed, legal statuses create a class of immigrants with rights and
privileges distinct from those holding temporary work visas (Freeman
2004), and it can be said that documented and undocumented immigrants
have such different experiences that they can be regarded as two different
social classes (Durand cited in Hirsch 2003).

Examinations of the effects of legal status on different spheres of life
have concentrated on the differences between documented and undocu-
mented status. I focus on the gray area between these legal categories,
how this “in-between” status or liminal legality shapes different spheres
of life—the immigrant’s immediate sphere of social networks and family,
the community-level place of religious institutions in the immigrants’ lives,
and the broader domain of artistic expression. Furthermore, with few
exceptions (see Rodriguez and Hagan 2004), the effect of legal status on
these areas has not received much attention in research. My examination
illustrates how the impact of legal status extends far beyond labor force
participation and access to services—areas that have been researched—
to encompass sociocultural spheres as well.

The case of Salvadorans and Guatemalans presents an opportunity to
capture these effects. For reasons having to do with the context they exited,
in which the United States played a key role in political conflicts in the
sending countries, these Central Americans in the United States have been
categorized neither as strictly economic migrants nor as political refugees.
Occasionally they are granted temporary relief from deportation with
multiple and confusing deadlines for applications and renewals of permits
and convoluted application procedures (e.g., fees, forms, photos, finger-
prints, proofs of residence, and innumerable caveats and conditions). In-
deed, so much work is involved in preparing these applications and in-
formation is so difficult to obtain that a veritable industry has developed
among document preparers, notaries, and other entrepreneurs (some of
whom are not particularly well qualified) to fulfill the needs of Central
Americans applying for the different dispensations (see Coutin 2000; Mah-
ler 1995). This situation creates enormous anxiety, as each deadline ac-
centuates these immigrants’ precarious situation, which for many has gone
on for over two decades. This aspect of life among these immigrants has
been noted in other studies and has been referred to as “permanent tem-
porariness” (Bailey et al. 2002).

It also has been life threatening or simply unfeasible economically for
these immigrants to return to countries either at war or suffering the
devastation of years of war. Central Americans have been squeezed be-
tween an extremely harsh and even dangerous context of exit and an
exceptionally inhospitable context of reception. This highly ambiguous
character of Central American migration stems in no small part from
these immigrants’ complex position vis-a-vis U.S. immigration law, which
in turn has been a product of Cold War politics and the U.S. role in the
civil wars in Guatemala and El Salvador.

It is not simply an undocumented status that matters theoretically and
analytically, but the long-term uncertainty inherent in these immigrants’
legal status. This uncertain status—not fully documented or undocu-
mented but often straddling both—has gone on for years and permeates
many aspects of the immigrants’ lives and delimits their range of action
in different spheres, from job market opportunities and housing, to family
and kinship, from the place of the church in their lives and their various
transnational activities, to artistic expressions. Arguably exceptional, the
legal ambiguity of Guatemalans and Salvadorans may be deemed irrel-
evant to broader conceptualizations of immigrant life. However, it is pre-
cisely the uncertainty of these immigrants’ legality that presents an op-
portunity to better capture how political decisions embodied in
immigration law constrain and enable human action. Examining this
ambiguity as directly linked to state power in a time when the nation-
state is believed by some to be in decline highlights the central role the
state still plays in shaping and regulating immigrants’ lives.

This examination also permits reflection on the organization of mem-
bership in an increasingly mobile and transnationally structured world
and the challenges that immigration may pose to the theory and practice
of citizenship. The case of Salvadorans and Guatemalans is not an ex-
ception in today’s world, as their experiences parallel those of other im-
migrant groups in the United States and in other major receiving coun-
tries.’ In her research on immigration to Spain, Calavita (1998, p. 530)
observes that immigration law “actively ‘irregularizes’ people by making
it all but impossible to retain legal status over time. Indeed, it makes little
sense to draw distinctions between legal and illegal immigrants . . . be-
cause the law ensures that legal status is temporary and subject to con-
CAPTURING LIMINAL LEGALITY ANALYTICALLY

The importance of the broader context of reception for immigrants’ lives
is well known (Portes and Zhou 1993; Portes and Rumbaut, 1996; Reitz
1998; Menjivar 2000). Portes and Rumbaut (1996) note that the context
of reception channels immigrants in different directions, often altering the
link between individual skills and expected rewards. Similarly, segmented
assimilation (Portes and Zhou 1993) calls attention to the multiple out-
comes of immigrant incorporation, as not all immigrants have the same
resources or face the same conditions in destination areas, a situation that
leads to disparate outcomes. In these conceptualizations, the context of
reception includes extrapersonal factors such as immigration laws and
the labor market that together shape opportunity structures. Immigration
policy determines who stands inside or outside the law (or in between)
and whether immigrants qualify as full participants in society, as it dictates
whether they will have access to resources and, if they do, to what kind
(Menjivar 2000) and for how long. Thus, the political-economic context
in which immigrants arrive translates into either a favorable reception—
with relaxed or even friendly immigration laws and a viable economy
with abundant jobs—or an adverse one, with stiff immigration laws and
fewer jobs, as in the case of the Salvadoran and Guatemalan immigrants.
My focus on only the political (legal) aspect of the context of reception
does not imply monocausality, for a single factor alone cannot possibly
lead to any of the multiple outcomes I examine here. I have singled it out
because in all the sites I conducted fieldwork, regardless of the specific
aim of the study, legal status emerged as paramount in the immigrants’
lives. It highlights the enduring power of the nation-state in creating
immigration laws that shape immigrant integration, playing a significant
role in opportunities for work, rights, and social benefits (Aleinikoff 2001,
p. 267). As Freeman (2004, p. 950) notes, “Immigration laws, observed
or violated, necessarily precede and often constrain the migrants’ inter-
action with markets, welfare, and cultural regulations.” Thus, an exam-
ination of the lives of individuals who are ambiguously situated legally
can lead to fruitful theorizing about incorporation, assimilation, citizen-
ship, belonging, and exclusion.

The legal instability at the heart of this discussion is closely linked to
broader questions of citizenship and the state, as the concept of citizenship
is used to describe a number of discrete but related phenomena surround-
ing the relationship between the individual and the polity (Rubenstein
and Adler 2000). Citizenship as legal status—whom the state recognizes
as a citizen and the formal basis for the rights and responsibilities of the
individual in the state—shapes the immigrants’ membership in society
and their understandings of their place in it. Lengthy uncertain legal
statuses determine if, how, and when immigrants will become fully legal
and then citizens (through naturalization). Thus, spaces between conven-
tional legal categories affect the immigrants’ immediate lives as well as
long-term membership, thus raising the possibility of new forms of citi-
zenship through migration.’ Legal citizenship in the United States is no
longer easy to attain, and even permanent residence has proven an elusive
dream for many. Furthermore, as De Genova (2002) notes, the different
legal statuses—documented, undocumented—would be inconceivable
were it not for the value they produce to society, and, as such, they are
fundamentally inseparable from citizenship. The multiple legal categories
in immigration law, including in-between statuses, thus shape immigrant
long-term incorporation, and thus, broader forms of citizenship and com-
munity belonging (and exclusion).

In debates about the link between citizenship and immigration some
scholars stress the legal dimension of citizenship, while others examine
the set of rights an individual has by virtue of belonging to a national
community, and still others study the participatory dimensions of the
concept (Martiniello 1997). Bosniak (2000) differentiates four “strands” or
dimensions of citizenship: rights, legal status, political activity, and col-
lective activity and sentiment. Coutin (2000a) notes that individuals can
move between the different forms of citizenship and can use one dimension
to gain another. And movements between membership and exclusion, one
dimension of citizenship and another, the national and the nonnational,
legitimacy and illegitimacy may be as important as redefinitions of the
concept of citizenship itself (Coutin 2000a, p. 586).

Bosniak (2000) notes that legal citizenship has enormous legitimizing
functions; to characterize social practices in the language of citizenship
recognizes them as politically and socially consequential. Even when im-
migrants perform tasks through which they participate in and contribute
to society (e.g., raising children, working, and paying taxes), they are
excluded from full membership if they lack full (permanent) legal rec-
ognition. And the assumption in discussions of citizenship that temporary
workers and undocumented immigrants eventually gain access to per-
manent residence (as over time there seemed to be a convergence toward
full incorporation [Zolberg 2000, pp. 514—-15])* is more uncertain and
complex today. References to undocumented immigration are occasionally
made in debates about citizenship, but these tend to be marginal and
without a deep exploration of the conceptual link binding the exclusion
of illegal immigrants (Rubio-Marin 2000, p. 6). The exclusion of undo-
cumented immigrants from these discussions shows “how deeply en-
trenched are the assumptions about national and territorial sovereignty”
(Rubio-Marin 2000, p. 238). In this regard liminal legal spaces, the gray
areas between documented and undocumented, remain even less theorized
or explored, although their examination can lead to a rethinking of legal
citizenship as well as broader forms of citizenship and of the place of the
nation-state in an increasingly mobile and transnational world.

Indeed, an examination of in-between legal statuses brings to the fore
the continued power of the nation-state. In spite of arguments about its
decline, citizenship as legal status remains a largely national enterprise
(Bosniak 2000, 1998) because the very designations “legal,” “undocu-
mented,” “regular,” and “irregular” (and, I would add, in-between cate-
gories) are intelligible only by reference to both the rule of state territorial
sovereignty and its limitations (Bosniak 1991, p. 742). Some scholars em-
phasize the decline or obsolescence of the nation-state and the devaluation
of nation-based citizenship resulting from the extension of certain rights
to noncitizens, which signals the emergence of postnational citizenship
(see Soysal 1994; Jacobson 1996). From this viewpoint the nation-state
model has given way to a new regime in which citizenship and human
rights have become increasingly legitimated at the transnational level
(Soysal 2000).° Others argue that the state is only being transformed
through the growth of interconnections among states and individuals
around the world, by deregulation and privatization and, thus, particular
aspects of the institution of citizenship will be transformed but not erased
(Sassen 2000, 2002). As Bloemraad (2004, p. 421) observes, while sover-
eignty might be differentiating, new forms of citizenship act to build the
nation-state rather than destroy it.’

The case I examine here lends support to the scholarship that empha-
sizes the enduring power of the nation-state, particularly with regard to
citizenship—and in doing so, it also upholds central tenets of the seg-
mented assimilation framework (see Portes and Zhou 1993). Although
transformations in the nation-state as a result of movements of capital
and globalization may translate into changes in citizenship, these might
not necessarily lead to openness. There may be more flexibility, but also
more tightening and restrictions, as well as the creation of new barriers,
legal categories, and obstacles, particularly when migratory movements
are linked to terrorism in the global arena. Thus, increased interconnec-
tions among states and individuals can lead to reduced access to per-
manent legality and the tightening of immigration laws when national
security is paramount. The proliferation of such interconnections has in-
volved “the emergence of a sociohistorically particular configuration of
migrant illegality” (De Genova 2002, p. 424). Indeed, there has been an
effort to reinvigorate, or revalorize, the legal status of citizenship—either
by making it count for more or by making it more difficult to obtain
(Bosniak 1998, p. 30). Coutin (2000a, p. 589) finds that increasingly re-
strictive immigration policies have sharpened distinctions between U.S.
citizens and permanent legal residents and have thereby made citizenship
(through naturalization) more important. And as Aleinikoff (2001, p. 267)
observes, the state’s physical boundaries (the border) and its political and
legal boundaries (membership) are closely related: “Whom states chose to
admit as immigrants in part determines who shall be citizens.” In this
context, lengthy periods of legal instability deeply affect the immediate
lives of immigrants in multiple ways, as well as their long-term prospects
for seeking and attaining full citizenship, which in turn shapes other forms
of belonging and membership. For instance, Jones-Correa (1998) observes
that the length of time it takes for Latinos to become citizens has great
implications for their community.

In an era when publics in immigrant-receiving countries feel besieged
and threatened by images linking immigrants with terrorists and drug
smugglers (Kil and Menjivar, in press), states will be less inclined to extend
rights and protection to foreigners. The continued militarization of the
southern U.S. border attests to increasing efforts to fortify, not dilute,
physical (and legal) borders and, thus, to the power and centrality of the
nation-state. As Guiraudon and Joppke (2001, p. 15) note, those who
proclaim the death of the state overlook the fact that governments give
up some of their authority only to increase their capacity to control move-
ment. Thus, global economic and political trends might have transfor-
matory effects on national states, but not necessarily in the same direction,
creating a kind of “social schizophrenia,” to use Castells’s (1989, p. 347)
term. In this situation the economies become more integrated and open,
but the political spheres do the opposite, with direct implications for
citizenship, belonging, and exclusion.

Furthermore, as segmented assimilation theory would suggest (Portes
and Zhou 1993), legal categories create a stratified system of belonging,
as not all groups are treated equally before immigration law. Legal cat-
egories mark immigrants not only as nonnationals but also as deportable,
and these categories become marks of exclusion. Not all groups have equal
access to permanent statuses, an aspect of immigration law that under-
mines the assumption of equality of status and belonging in citizenship.
Thus, in line with segmented assimilation theorizing (Portes and Zhou
1993), assimilation in receiving societies does not occur monolithically,
and the multiple categories created by the law generate layered or frag-
mented forms of belonging. Moreover, my examination may contribute
to debates about the relevance of classic assimilation theory frameworks
for contemporary immigrants (see Alba and Nee 2003), as legal status has
clearly become an important axis of stratification that can shape immi-
grants’ assimilation in critical ways, but has not received enough theo-
retical or analytical attention in these discussions.

As a conceptual guide to capture the Central American immigrants’
uncertain legality, I borrow from the work of two anthropologists. First,
Victor Turner’s classic concept of liminality, used to capture the ambig-
uous periods of rites de passage and conceptualized as a transitional in-
tervening period between “two relatively fixed or stable conditions”
(Turner 1967, p. 93) including legal status, is appropriate here.* In Turner’s
view, “the transitional-being or ‘liminal persona’ is defined by a name
and by a set of symbols. The structural invisibility of the liminal personae
has a twofold character. They are at once no longer classified and not yet
classified” (Turner 1967, pp. 95-96).

In a direction that Turner’s analysis already suggests, the immigrants’
uncertain legality transforms them into “transitional beings,” who are
“neither one thing or another; or maybe both; or neither here nor there;
or maybe nowhere . . . and are at the very least ‘betwixt and between’
all the recognized fixed points in space-time of structural classification” (
Turner 1967, p. 96). It is the “betwixt-and-between” period and the process
of the midtransition exposed by Turner’s analysis that, in my view, cap-
tures the uncertain legality I examine here. Although in Turner’s view
these transitory stages are empowering and are positive moments in social
transformation, when they are extended indefinitely (as in the case of the
immigrants in this discussion) they can breed uncertainty and lose their
empowering potential. Thus, an examination of an extended marginal
legality can lay bare crucial aspects of immigrant life essential for theo-
rizing about immigrant incorporation, exclusion, citizenship, and belong-
ing that lie at the core of varied forms of assimilation.

I also borrow from the work of Susan Coutin (20000). In her study of
the complex ways in which undocumented Central Americans are situated
both inside and outside the United States and their countries of origin,
Coutin has researched the process through which Salvadorans have at-
tempted to redefine the legal constraints that have limited their options
in the United States. She identifies a situation of “legal nonexistence” that
Salvadorans (and I would argue Guatemalans, too) have experienced,
which is characterized by being physically present and socially active, but
lacking legal recognition. As Coutin (20006) observes, although legal non-
existence in the United States has not precluded these immigrants’ social
participation and political activism, legal nonexistence is a state of sub-
jugation that results in vulnerability to deportation, confinement to low-
wage jobs, and the denial of basic human needs, such as access to decent
housing, education, food, and health care. To be sure, nonexistence has
been characterized as subversive in some contexts because those who
transgress certain borders have been celebrated for the challenges they
pose to established hierarchies, as reflected in the work of Liisa Malkki
among refugees in Tanzania (Malkki 1995). However, in the case of Cen-
tral Americans legal nonexistence can mean erasure of rights and per-
sonhood, thus making violence against people in this condition not only
legitimate but sometimes even required (Coutin 20000) and a situation in
which their rights become ambiguous.

Building on Turner’s concept of liminality and on Coutin’s legal non-
existence, and bridging citizenship theorizing and immigrant incorpora-
tion and belonging, I examine how a condition of uncertain legality shapes
social and cultural aspects of immigrants’ lives and the meaning that a
suspended legality or a “legal limbo” (not only nonexistence) has for them.
These immediate experiences shape if and when these immigrants acquire
permanent legal status and, eventually, citizenship, and as such will also
be felt on their own future and the future of their children.

Thus, I would like to use the term “liminal legality” to express the
temporariness of this condition, which for many Central Americans has
extended indefinitely and has come to define their legal position. This
“liminal legality” is characterized by its ambiguity, as it is neither an
undocumented status nor a documented one, but may have the charac-
teristics of both. Importantly, a situation of “liminal legality” is neither
unidirectional nor a linear process, or even a phase from undocumented
to documented status, for those who find themselves in it can return to
an undocumented status when their temporary statuses end. When Cen-
tral Americans are granted temporary legality, they are conferred the right
to work and reside in the United States without access to social services.
In some cases they are later given the opportunity to renew their permits.
However, when the renewed permits expire, these immigrants slip back
into the realm of nonlegality. Indeed, as Uriarte et al. (2003) observe in
their Boston study, nonrenewal or denial of an application means an
immediate return to undocumented status or deportation; thus, some im-
migrants do not apply for a temporary permit even if they are eligible.
Of course, these individuals do not wait passively for their statuses to
change. They look for other avenues to become permanent legal residents,
such as applying for asylum (see Coutin 2000b), resorting to marriage, or
seeking legalization through work, but these efforts do not always work
out.

My examination questions the black-and-white conceptualizations of
documented and undocumented immigration by exposing the gray area
of “liminal legality,” which may affect assimilation and belonging in im-
portant ways. Furthermore, in an era of enhanced immigration controls
and increasingly rigid laws, more immigrants may find themselves in a
similar gray area of legality. Consistent with immigration reforms in sev-
eral immigrant-receiving countries that focus on barring immigrants from
resources and benefits in society, stiffer immigration laws seek not only
to reduce the number of immigrants entering the country, but also to keep
more of them in undetermined legal statuses. This situation denies im-
migrants many rights and marginalizes them from the national commu-
nity, and it is by no means unique to the cases I discuss here. As for
Salvadorans and Guatemalans, even new waves of immigrants experience
this situation, because there continues to be a series of temporary permits
for them as well. Thus, insights from an analysis of liminal legality will
have relevance not only for Central Americans but also beyond this group,
as political instability increases around the world, capital and labor flow
more intensely and rapidly, immigration laws in receiving countries set
more difficult eligibility requirements, and temporary statuses and gues-
tworker programs proliferate as new strategies pursued by immigrant
receiving countries around the globe (see Mountz et al. 2002) to regulate
and control immigrants.

Research on undocumented immigration demonstrates that an undo-
cumented status affects directly the immigrants’ job prospects and work-
ing conditions (Simon and DeLey 1984; Grasmuck 1984) as well as earn-
ings (Chiswick 1984).’ One of the consequences of the Immigration Reform
and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA) is that it led to greater discrimination
against undocumented migrants in general (Heyman 1998) and resulted
in a steady deterioration in their wages (Phillips and Massey 1999; Massey
et al. 2002). Similar to undocumented immigration, a condition of “liminal
legality” not only overshadows the potential gains of individuals’ higher
levels of human capital but also exacerbates the effects of other systems
of stratification, such as those based on social class, gender, and ethnicity.
Furthermore, a liminal legal status among immigrants who would oth-
erwise be classified as refugees (as in the case of many Guatemalans and
Salvadorans) creates added obstacles, as these individuals face additional
consequences resulting from the sudden uprooting of their migration and
the impossibility of returning while the political conflict and violence that
prompted their departure still flare in their origin countries. Thus, liminal
legality shapes immigrants’ incorporation and membership in the host
society, but not all immigrant groups or even immigrants within the same
group are affected in the same way.
CONTEXTUALIZING CENTRAL AMERICANS’ RECEPTION

This section contextualizes the Central Americans’ legal experience in the
United States, so that I may set the stage for discussing the three spheres
of their lives I examine here. My focus is on aspects of sociocultural
incorporation (e.g., bearing and raising children, establishing ties, partic-
ipating in the community, creating art), but these immigrants’ liminal
legality greatly influences their economic opportunities as well. Even
though some Salvadorans and Guatemalans with relatively higher levels
of education and English language skills are employed in technical and
administrative jobs, and those with lower educational levels and English
language proficiency are likely working in service occupations and as
operators and laborers, these are not clear-cut distinctions. Generally, those
who lack a permanent legal status tend to labor in low-paying jobs that
require few skills (Menjivar 2000). Among these immigrants there are
many stories of former teachers working as dishwashers, former account-
ants taking care of other people’s children, former nurses cleaning houses,
former business owners cleaning office buildings at night, and college
graduates looking for work as day laborers. The Central Americans’ con-
centration in these jobs does not depend only on their legality, individual
characteristics, or human capital levels but also on the jobs available at
the time and place of their U.S. destination. However, given their con-
tinued uncertain legality, niches created during harsh economic times have
endured and become some of these immigrants’ most important, and often
only, avenues for employment.
mine their eventual arrival in the United States. Many Central Americans
crossed several international borders to reach their destinations because
they had family and friends already in the United States. These ties had
been forged through an enduring history of U.S. political, military, eco-
nomic, and cultural influence in Central America. Therefore, when the
conditions in that region deteriorated to the point where many sought
refuge elsewhere, the United States emerged as a preferred destination
(Menjivar 2000).

Although many Salvadorans and Guatemalans who immigrated in the
1980s were fleeing violence in their countries, most were not accorded
refugee status by the U.S. government but were treated as economic
(mostly undocumented) immigrants, a reception more in line with US.
policies in Central America than with the conditions of exit and the plight
of these immigrants. The U.S. government could not legally recognize
refugees generated by a conflict it was financially and militarily sup-
porting, as it would have contradicted its foreign policy in that region.
Central American immigrants indeed embody the contradictions of U.S.
policies and politics in the Central American region. Although victims of
Central America’s geopolitics, these individuals have been received by
the United States as depoliticized labor migrants who do not need political
protection (Rodriguez 2001). As with other refugee populations in the
United States, these immigrants’ legal status has been shaped by the
intersection of immigration and refugee policy with foreign policy. But
unlike de jure refugees, these de facto refugees have been trapped in a
situation that reflects the dynamics of U.S. policy in Central America.
Their case makes evident that defining a particular group of immigrants
as refugees is not based solely on unsafe conditions in the origin country,
but even more important, on the fact that a receiving state recognizes
them as deserving asylum and assistance (Zolberg, Suhrke, and Aguayo
1989), a decision based on international political considerations.

Also, U.S. immigration law has been applied unevenly across Central
American groups and within the same group at different points in time,
contributing to discrepancies in the experiences of Central Americans.
Thus, for over two decades the web of legal obstacles and undecipherable
and intractable immigration laws and deadlines has made legality par-
amount in the Central Americans’ lives, particularly when a return to
their origin countries has been either life threatening or economically
unfeasible. Moreover, increasingly rigid immigration laws make it almost
impossible to obtain a U.S. tourist visa in their origin countries.

Without a visa, many Central Americans have had to cross two or three
international borders clandestinely. These journeys by land have left many
of them even more traumatized than the conditions they fled. Traveling
by land often involves complicated arrangements with coyotes (smug-
glers), as well as robberies, assaults, and extortion by local authorities
along the way. The journey north turns out to be so lengthy and costly
that upon arrival in the United States many of these immigrants are
emotionally and physically scarred and must also face huge debts that
they must repay to cash-strapped relatives (Mahler 1995; Menjivar 2000).
Because many Salvadorans and Guatemalans are in the process of ap-
plying for the different forms of legal protection, they also cannot leave
the country easily without risking the ability to return. Rodriguez (2002a)
refers to these immigrants’ hardships during the trip specifically as ex-
periencias fronterizas centroamericanas, or Central American border ex-
periences, and argues that Central American immigrants personify the
(un)sung heroes of legendary border crossing (Rodriguez 2001, p. 387). A
Salvadoran man I interviewed in Washington, D.C., compared his situ-
ation to that of Mexican immigrants: “If Mexicans are deported, they go
to their own country, and manage to come back more easily. If we are
deported, we end up in the hands of robbers and Mexican authorities,
which is worse than the [U.S. INS] migra because there everything is
bribes.” A Mexican woman in Phoenix corroborated this point: “I un-
derstand the poor Guatemalans. If they get deported, vdlgame Dios [God
save mel], it’s a thousand times more difficult to get back. So if they come
here, that’s it, they’re stuck, they can’t think of going back in a long
time.”

Notwithstanding legal barriers, many Central Americans have contin-
ued to enter the United States. Salvadorans and Guatemalans who arrived
in the United States prior to January 1, 1982—the cutoff point to apply
for amnesty under the IRCA—applied for this benefit (Menjivar 2000).
However, fewer than half of Salvadorans and Guatemalans arrived prior
to that deadline. The thousands who arrived at the height of the political
conflicts in their countries in the 1980s were ineligible for this provision.
Once on USS. soil, Salvadorans and Guatemalans could apply for political
asylum, but historically they did not fare well in obtaining it. Throughout
the 1980s less than 3% of these applicants were granted such status.
Immigrants’ rights groups lobbied on behalf of the Guatemalans and
Salvadorans, and eventually, in 1990, Congress granted temporary pro-
tected status (TPS) from deportation to all Salvadorans who arrived prior
to September 19, 1990.’° TPS can be granted to aliens who are temporarily

‘© The granting of TPS for Salvadorans can be attributed to intense lobbying by re-
ligious and community organizations, but also to the efforts of different Salvadoran
presidents who asked the U.S. government not to deport Salvadoran citizens, as their
remittances have been the backbone of the Salvadoran economy during and after the
war years. Such lobbying put these heads of state in the rather unusual position of
asking a foreign state to take in and protect their citizens. In a similarly odd act, the
Salvadoran government makes available consular services to aid Salvadorans in pre-
paring their TPS applications.
unable to return to their home countries due to a political conflict or
natural disaster.'' The U.S. government only began granting TPS to Sal-
vadorans toward the end of the Salvadoran civil conflict in January 1992,
a move that further exposes the deep links between foreign policy and
immigration and refugee admissions. This dispensation was not extended
to Guatemalans because they were not deemed as deserving of this pro-
tection, even though the U.S. State Department had noted on different
occasions the disastrous human rights record of the Guatemalan govern-
ment and the severity of the political conflict there.

TPS allowed Salvadorans to live and work in the United States for a
period of 18 months, and approximately 187,000 applied for this dispen-
sation. In June 1992, TPS rolled into deferred enforced departure (DED),
a dispensation (designated by the Office of the President) that ended in
December 1994 but was extended until September 1995 when it ended
for good. Fewer Salvadorans resubmitted applications for this extension.
Some had changed their status to permanent residents, but others found
the application process confusing and reliable information hard to obtain,
particularly because the name of the dispensation changed. TPS and DED
granted neither asylum nor refugee status, and the only privileges obtained
were a work permit and suspension of deportation for the duration of the
dispensations. Also in 1990, as a result of the settlement of a class action
suit (American Baptist Churches v. Thornburgh [hereafter, ABC]) that
alleged discrimination against Guatemalans and Salvadorans on the part
of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), Salvadorans and
Guatemalans were allowed to resubmit asylum applications. Initially the
success rate of applications increased to 28% for Salvadorans and 18%
for Guatemalans in 1992 (National Asylum Study Project 1992) but has
since leveled off and declined.

Some Salvadorans and Guatemalans were included as beneficiaries of
the 1997 Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NA-
CARA).” Salvadorans who entered the country before September 19,
1990, and Guatemalans who entered before October 1, 1990, and regis-
tered under the ABC settlement, or who had filed an asylum application
before April 1, 1990, could be granted a “cancellation of removal” (can-
cellation of deportation) (Menjivar 2000). NACARA confers a work permit
to Guatemalans and Salvadorans, but obtaining this status requires filing
a renewal form and paying a fee once a year as it is renewed. Salvadorans
and Guatemalans already placed in deportation procedures are required
to appear before an immigration judge. They can then request a cancel-
lation of removal, and their immigration status will be later readjusted
to that of a permanent resident. They must prove seven years of contin-
uous residence in the United States, good moral character, and that a
return to their countries would result in extreme hardship to them or to
their spouse, child, or parent who is a US. citizen or permanent resident.
Immigrant rights groups have lobbied on behalf of the Salvadorans and
Guatemalans so that the benefits NACARA confers to other nationals
included in this act—adjustment to legal permanent residence without a
hearing on a case-by-case basis—would also be extended to them. How-
ever, in October 1998 (as well as in subsequent years), Congress denied
this request. And the prospects of obtaining full NACARA benefits have
decreased sharply with further tightening in immigration law after Sep-
tember 11, 2001.

Although the civil conflicts in Central America officially ended in 1992
in El Salvador and in 1996 in Guatemala, immigration from the region
to the United States has continued. The structures of inequality behind
both the civil conflicts and massive migration are still in place, and now
many Central Americans face high levels of violence associated
with”common” crime. Many former soldiers found themselves unem-
ployed at the end of the conflicts but had access to weapons and were
lured into the gangs established by youngsters deported from the United
States.’ Now membership in gangs in Central America has grown ex-
ponentially (many of the new recruits are no longer former soldiers), and
associated crime is rampant. As has occurred in other postconflict contexts,
the political violence of the past has been transformed into other forms
of violence, often called “common” crime. The local economies do not
offer many opportunities, and trends of inequality have widened. More-
over, in spite of improved economic growth rates, both countries have
high levels of unemployment and underemployment. Thus, there are ripe
structural and social conditions in these origin countries for continued
U.S.-bound migration. At the same time, the channels through which
many Central Americans migrated have expanded and become more so-
phisticated, as more and more people have relatives and friends in the
United States, and “each act of migration alters the social context within
which migration decisions are made, thus increasing the likelihood of
additional movement” (Massey et al. 2002, p. 20). Also, El Salvador suf-
fered two devastating earthquakes in early 2001 that exacerbated many
of the problems left by the years of civil war. The United States granted
TPS for a period of nine months starting in March 2001 to those Sal-
vadorans who arrived following the disasters. This dispensation already
has been extended a few times and at the time of this writing will expire
in September 2006. Approximately 263,000 Salvadorans applied for this
TPS and are eligible to benefit from the extension. Again, this is temporary
relief—with forms, fingerprinting, photos, fees, and proofs of residence
every time it is renewed—not permanent status. Furthermore, one must
bear in mind that the Central Americans’ legal circumstances are em-
bedded in a larger framework of stiffer immigration law. Thus, the Illegal
Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) of 1996
also affects the lives of Central Americans, particularly their families,
both in the United States and in their origin countries (see Rodriguez and
Hagan 2004). Unfortunately, due to size of the INS bureaucracy and its
huge backlogs, applications take several years to be processed, and often
an individual’s record is lost and the process must start again. For ex-
ample, the backlog to process change of address forms alone takes two
years. All of this means that a large proportion of Salvadoran and Gua-
temalan immigrants have been and remain in the United States in a state
of liminal legality. The INS estimated that close to 60% of Salvadorans
and Guatemalans were undocumented or protected only temporarily (INS
1997), and Lopez, Popkin, and Telles (1996, p. 287) calculate this pro-
portion to be 49%.

Thus, the Salvadorans’ and Guatemalans’ position vis-a-vis immigra-
tion law has translated into a legal limbo, for sometimes they are protected
by temporary amnesties with multiple deadlines that apply to certain
individuals but not to others, even if they are members of the same family.
Immigration law has effectively produced a population of longtime res-
idents with suspended lives. At the same time, their countries do not offer
any real opportunities if these immigrants were to return because they
still suffer the social and economic consequences of decades of civil wars.
The Central Americans’ situation differs from that of being simply un-
documented in that the series of temporary permits that continues today,
the ups and downs in the acceptance rates of asylum applications, and
the lengthy adjudications of ABC and NACARA benefits have given them
the illusion and hope that they will become permanent residents if they
only wait a little longer.’ Those who were granted TPS in 1990 believed
that this status would become permanent when it was extended into DED,
but it ended, apparently permanently, in 1995. The ABC cases began to
be adjudicated in 1998, and those who applied for NACARA are still
waiting for their cases to be adjudicated. Often individuals apply for the
multiple dispensations, like ABC and NACARA, in hopes that one will
eventually materialize into permanent status. In a study of Central Amer-
ican immigration conducted in Boston, Uriarte et al. (2003) found that at
the center of the most pressing issue—legal status—were the difficulties
and lengthy process that those who are eligible for legalization programs
face. And the process itself is fraught with anxiety—especially around
expiration and renewal time—because any wrong step, missed deadline,
lack of information, or an error on a form may result in denial and
deportation (Uriarte et al. 2003, pp. 37-38). Meanwhile, immigrants must
plan out their lives, their marriages, their children’s lives, and make a
host of other short- and long-term decisions. Thus, it is precisely this
aspect of their condition—their extended liminal legality—exacerbated by
the trauma of their emigration, that has reverberated to multiple aspects
of their lives.
of the immigrants’ lives that are affected,” but they illustrate the range
of the effect that a liminal legality has on these immigrants for they include
the immediate family and social networks, the community level of reli-
gious institutions, and the broader area of artistic expression. To highlight
my points I will rely on data I collected through extensive fieldwork from
late 1989 through 2001 among Salvadorans in San Francisco, Washington,
D.C., and Phoenix, and among Guatemalans in Los Angeles and Phoenix,
complemented with interviews with other Latin American-origin immi-
grants in Phoenix. The data from San Francisco include ethnographic
fieldwork in the Salvadoran community from late 1989 to 1994, 50 in-
depth interviews, and a survey of 150 respondents. I collected data in
Los Angeles from 1994 to 1995 that contains ethnographic observations
and 26 in-depth interviews with Guatemalan immigrant women. The data
from Washington, D.C., were gathered between 1996 and 1997, and come
from qualitative observations, 25 intensive interviews, and a survey of
87 Salvadoran respondents. The data from Phoenix come from qualitative
field research conducted between 1998 and 2001, where 25 Salvadorans
and 14 Guatemalans were interviewed (for further details see my earlier
work [Menjivar 1999a, 1999b, 2000, 2001)).

The examination of these immigrants’ experiences in these different
sites is central for my argument. San Francisco is a well-established re-
ceiving area for Salvadorans and the city with the longest continuous
history of Salvadoran migration to the United States (Menjivar 2000).
Los Angeles is home to the largest concentrations of both Salvadorans
and Guatemalans in the United States. Washington, D.C., is a relatively
new destination point for Salvadorans; the majority arrived in the past
two decades. Yet Washington is the only U.S. city where Salvadorans
make up (a slight) majority of the Latino population. Finally, Phoenix is
one of the newest points of destination for both groups—the majority
having arrived either directly from their countries or from California in
the 1990s—and they constitute a minority of the Latino population. These
diverse local configurations could result in different experiences of legal
uncertainty. However, immigration law is created at the federal level and
thus it is constant in all destination points. Thus, whether the study’s
aim was to understand immigrants’ social networks (as was the case in
the study in San Francisco), women’s informal ties (as in Los Angeles),
religious participation (as in Washington, D.C.), or an exploratory study
Family and Social Networks

Among immigrants living in liminal legality, family separations resulting
from migration can be indefinite. To be sure, migration is also accom-
panied by separation among other immigrants, as the migration process
itself is often characterized by a transitional phase whereby one family
member comes to work in the United States and the rest of the family
stays in the home country (see Briody 1987). However, what might be a
temporary disruption among other groups has turned into a permanent
situation for many Central Americans. Many live with the hope that their
temporary permits will become permanent, that their asylum, ABC, or
NACARA applications will soon be approved, or that there will be an-
other temporary protected status or perhaps an amnesty that will guar-
antee them the right to live and work permanently in the United States.
Eternally waiting to regularize their status and with trips back home
physically and economically costly, they put off family reunifications in-
definitely, with serious consequences for all involved.’

A temporary status restricts international travel; individuals in this
situation need permission to reenter the United States (advance parole)
after traveling abroad. Their application for a travel document (with
forms, photos, and fees) must be approved before leaving the United
States; otherwise they risk termination of their pending applications.
When a person needs to travel on short notice, this requirement makes
such a trip nearly impossible. A comparison with Mexican undocumented
immigrants is useful here. Until recently, a feature of Mexican undocu-
mented migration was these immigrants’ mobility across the border. Mex-
icans have been known for visiting their origin communities regularly,
particularly during holidays, to marry, as well as to visit family (see Hirsch
2003; Massey et al. 2002). Interviews I conducted in Phoenix among Mex-
icans corroborate this observation, for several immigrants mentioned that
not much time goes by without seeing relatives in Mexico. “I always visit,
or they come here sometimes, but I can’t go on without seeing the faces
of my family. When it has already been a year I feel a need to see them
and I go, no matter what,” said an undocumented Mexican woman, a
situation that might change as the militarization of the southern border
continues and interferes with the immigrants’ wishes. Salvadorans have
engaged in back-and-forth travel, but this is more common among busi-
ness owners and courier services who cater to individuals and families at
both ends, in which case the difficulty to travel for many has become
lucrative for a few (Landolt, Autler, and Baires 1999; Menjivar 2000).

Some Guatemalans and Salvadorans have come to the United States
single and have established families here; others have arrived alone but
have left their families back home. Some of those with families back home
have established new families here. In the face of constrained avenues
for legalization, Central Americans sometimes turn to marrying U.S. cit-
izens or permanent residents in the hope of obtaining permanent legal
status; in some cases such marriages become “real” ones and lead to the
rupture of a previous union, but in as many cases such unions fail and
legalization never materializes. A Salvadoran woman I interviewed in
San Francisco was in her fourth marriage—two of them to gain legali-
zation and two “for love” as she put it—but her legal status was still in
limbo, and her political asylum application had been turned down. As
her fourth marriage turned sour she applied for and obtained TPS though
she knew well this was only a “temporary cure.”

Many Central Americans could not bring their children with them
because traveling undocumented and by land was far too dangerous.
Some, having brought their children, sent them home after seeing the
high crime rates and ubiquity of drugs in the neighborhoods where they
settled (Miller Matthei and Smith 1998; Menjivar 2000, 2002a).’’ In other
cases, the youngsters have been deported.” Children who stay behind or
are sent back home live in the care of other relatives while their parent
(or parents) labor(s) in the United States to send them money for the
necessities of life. Although the material and financial lot of these children
(and their relatives) improves when they receive money and gifts from
the United States, this betterment does not come without a price (see
Hondagneu-Sotelo and Avila 1997). The unstable legal status of many of
these families and their still precarious financial situation make it difficult
to see each other regularly or to reunite permanently.*’ Moreover, the
possibility of an imminent deportation affects their long-term plans as
well. As other parents commented, a Guatemalan woman in Los Angeles
said that even though it was painful to be separated from her children,
she had decided to send them back. In case she was deported, she did
not want the children to go to a detention center alone for an indefinite
period, as she had heard could happen to families that are deported.” A
tactic that immigration officials use to get people to sign deportation
documents is to separate family members and to tell one spouse that the
other has already signed a request for voluntary departure. And a Sal-
vadoran mother in Oregon wanted to put up for adoption her 12-year-
old son in hopes of improving his chances of staying in the United States,
as she had had temporary protected status for over 10 years and was
unsure whether it would eventually become permanent. The boy had
lived in El Salvador with his grandmother, and he had traveled to the
United States alone at age 10 to be reunited with his mother (Wright
2005).

Family separations are originally meant to be temporary, but they often
extend for indefinite periods due to the immigrants’ uncertain situation.
Many Central Americans left their homes at a moment’s notice expecting
to return immediately after the conflict ended. But the forces of resettle-
ment are strong and their origin countries have little to offer. Thus, many
immigrants stay put and live with the illusion that they will become legal
permanent residents, so they can travel to visit loved ones or bring them
over through family reunification.” During these separations no one is
exactly sure of when or how they will reunite. When they finally meet
again, the parents and children often find little semblance of a family in
each other and sometimes cannot even recognize each other physically.
A Salvadoran woman I interviewed in San Francisco laughed endlessly
when she told me about her encounter with her son, whom she had left
a child in El Salvador and had not seen in 10 years. When she went to
meet him at a coyote’s house in Los Angeles, she kissed and hugged the
wrong man because she could no longer recognize her own son. And in
Phoenix, after obtaining his permanent residence, a Salvadoran man de-
cided to travel to his country, but he first asked for photographs and
videos of his family there as he prepared for his first trip in 17 years: “I
don’t want to go home with the wrong family from the airport! I have
heard that bandits wait for distracted and excited visitors to rob them
Not only had this young woman grown up hearing people refer to her
mother by her first name, but, she said: “I hardly know this lady and she
wants me to call her mamd. One should reserve that word for the person
who’s been a mother.” Other times the children, accustomed to the ma-
terial goods financed by the parents’ labor in the United States, demand
the same when they join the parents, but the parents often cannot provide
these material goods because having the children in the United States
means substantial additional expenses (Menjivar 2000). And in some cases,
children who are sent back or who were left in their home countries opt
for migrating on their own to be with their parent or parents. It has been
noted that the great majority of children entering the United States alone
through the southern border are Central Americans, not Mexicans (How-
ley 2005), which highlights family separations among Central Americans.

Some Guatemalans and Salvadorans have tried to keep a sense of
family, developing novel ways to stay connected with loved ones back
home. With limited ability to travel, they have communicated through
telephone, family, friends, letters, and even video conferencing. Some of
the Guatemalans I met in Los Angeles even synchronized an event such
as a birthday celebration, so that physical distance would not attenuate
the family’s efforts to remain connected. Thus, at least during their time
of separation, these families may be more inclined to develop and maintain
transnational links. However, such efforts cannot simply be celebrated as
part of these immigrants’ enduring links with their communities of origin,
but should be tempered by the numerous costs and the anxiety, dislocation,
Other times, family reunifications do not work out smoothly because
the new families that have been formed in the United States, particularly
the step- and half-sibling combinations, do not always get along. During
lengthy and uncertain separations it is not uncommon for Central Amer-
icans to form new unions in the United States, mostly acompandndose
(cohabiting) with partners who themselves have children from previous
unions. Problems arising from these new family formations are sometimes
exacerbated when newcomers come to join relatives in overcrowded
homes (Menjivar 2000), living conditions that are common among many
poor Central Americans. It is noteworthy that the women and men in the
U.S.-established unions are often responsible for their own families in
their countries of origin and, therefore, are more likely to keep earnings
and expenditures separate. In these cases, the women feel that it is im-
perative to earn their own incomes in order to spend them as they please,
mostly to support their own families back home (Menjivar 1999a). A
Guatemalan woman I interviewed in Los Angeles works seven days a
week cleaning houses because she needed to work to meet her respon-
sibilities for her children back home: “I can’t stop working even if my
husband works because if he supports me I won’t be able to send money
to my children. Besides, he can’t give me enough money because he has
his own family to support. If both of us work, both of us can dispose of
money and do with it whatever one pleases. It’d be different if we only
had one family, but we really have three families to support and because
we’re poor, we need to work more” (Menjivar 1999a, p. 614).

In addition to family separations, a liminal legality has other effects on
family members who are in the United States, particularly on the children,
with the potential to affect their future. For instance, the uncertain legal
status of many Guatemalans and Salvadorans precludes them from ob-
taining an education that could help them to advance socioeconomically.
Although immigration status itself is not a barrier to access K-12 edu-
cation, it does present an obstacle to higher education; most colleges and
universities require that students be permanent legal residents or citizens
in order to obtain in-state tuition and to qualify for student loans and
other financial aid. Therefore, many youngsters with uncertain legal stat-
uses cannot further their education and are left with only a high school
diploma, even when they are academically strong. Sometimes the children
are US. citizens but their parents are not; to qualify for financial aid
students must present extensive information about their parents’ status
and sources of income. Many parents who are not fully documented avoid
providing this information for fear of being deported when their permits
expire. Options for advancement, therefore, stop abruptly when these
youngsters finish high school, and a high school diploma is certainly not
a key to success in today’s U.S. labor market.

I would also like to note the deleterious effects of these immigrants’
liminal legality on their social and kin networks. Guatemalans and Sal-
vadorans usually borrow from friends and family to make the expensive
trip north, which can easily cost at least three times as much as travel
for Mexicans due to the greater geographical distance. Upon arrival, al-
ready indebted to family and friends, they must take low-paying jobs with
no security and earn wages that are not enough even to support them-
selves. Elsewhere (Menjivar 2000, 1997) I have documented how precar-
ious living conditions affect exchanges among these immigrants. With
scant material resources and legal entanglements with no end in sight,
they end up with little to share with others, and their networks sometimes
weaken. In these cases reciprocity and norms of exchange are difficult to
uphold because people do not have enough even for themselves, much
less to help others, as cultural norms and expectations would dictate
(Menjivar 2000). I have observed similar situations among Guatemalans
in Los Angeles and Phoenix as well. In the Guatemalan case, however,
“qnternal ethnicity” (Bozorgmehr 1997) further complicates the picture, as
Maya and Ladino Guatemalans rarely seek out one another for support
(Menjivar 20026). This situation reflects interethnic relations in Guate-
mala, which are rooted in an ideology that has placed Ladinos in a superior
position to the indigenous since colonial times. Nonetheless, for both Maya
and Ladino Guatemalans, as well as for Salvadorans, the material and
physical conditions—shaped largely by the immigration laws that govern
their lives—have deeply affected the dynamics of their social networks.
The Church in the Immigrants’ Lives

Sometimes the relatives who await Central American newcomers do not
have the resources to help them, and the newly arrived must procure
assistance from others around them. One of the most important spaces
for Salvadorans and Guatemalans to obtain varied forms of assistance
and to connect with others is the church, a situation that is intimately
linked to the immigrants’ marginal legality (Menjivar 2003). Religious
institutions have been highly significant for immigrants—past and pre-
sent, an idea that lies at the core of the sociological study of immigration
and religion (Warner 1998, p. 15). In the case of Central Americans,
religious congregations have been central; the Catholic Church and main-
line Protestant denominations have offered these immigrants the assis-
tance and protection that the U.S. government has refused to extend to
them or that their relatives cannot provide. Basing their actions on re-
ligious teachings, faith-based workers have filled the vacuum of govern-
ment assistance for these immigrants and have been actively involved in
improving their lives. In the 1980s they created sanctuaries throughout
the country to protect them from deportation to life-threatening conditions
in their homelands, and religious groups were pivotal in championing the
legal struggle that eventually conferred temporary protected status to
Salvadorans and gave both groups an opportunity to resubmit asylum
applications. Since the initial years of massive Central American migration
these workers have provided settlement assistance, opened up community
clinics, and developed English-language and vocational classes. In ad-
dition, they have issued pastoral calls to remind their congregations to
welcome immigrants into their communities. Faith-based workers also
have taken a stand against restrictive immigration laws and have spoken
out on the harmful effects that these laws might have on the immigrants
(Menjivar 2003). Religious congregations also have created infrastructures
to help Central Americans to apply for the multiple legal dispensations,
track application deadlines, and make sense of the conundrums that have
accompanied these immigrants’ legality.

Although evangelical (mostly Pentecostal) churches have not created a
similar infrastructure of support and lack the institutional organization
that permits larger congregations to coordinate efforts at national and
even international levels, they too have played a central role in the im-
migrants’ lives (Menjivar 1999b, 2001, 2003). In this case, newcomers
themselves have established churches and have opened up their new
temples to welcome their brothers and sisters in need. Thus, religious
institutions have been pivotal in easing the anxiety of these immigrants’
legal limbo. The relationship of the Central Americans with religious
institutions, therefore, will likely differ from that of other contemporary
immigrants (Menjivar 2001, 2003).”* Indeed, the Central Americans’ ex-
periences are perhaps more similar to those of the preformalized refugee
programs, a time when no government resettlement aid was available,
and it was the church that provided assistance for newcomers in need.
As such, religious institutions will likely play a central role in these im-
migrants’ incorporation and eventual participation as full members of
society (through permanent legality and then as citizens).

Not surprisingly, Salvadorans and Guatemalans in all the sites where
I have conducted fieldwork brought up the importance of the church in
their lives.** They often traveled long distances to get to their places of
worship and did not hesitate to explain how the church helped them in
their daily lives. In my conversations with them, they emphasized that
help from the church should be not only spiritual or moral but also ma-
terial and financial, because they have no other institutional sources for
this assistance. A Salvadoran woman in Phoenix commented, “Yes, I think
the church should help. If not the church, who else? There are many
people who need food, clothes, and the church can assist those who are
in most need because there is no one else we can turn to for help.” Also
in Phoenix a former Salvadoran soldier commented: “I come to church
every week. They help everyone with all sorts of things. Sometimes you
don’t have money to pay the rent or a bill or you need clothes or shoes,
they help you with that here. This is the only place where you can find
this kind of help” (Menjivar 2001, p. 81).

The centrality of the church’s support for Salvadorans and Guate-
malans is perhaps better illustrated through a comparison. In a study of
Latin American-origin immigrants in Phoenix, I asked immigrants if and
how the church had helped them in their lives (Menjivar 2001). Cubans—
who automatically qualify to enter the country legally and have obtained
a generous resettlement package—had received spiritual and moral sup-
port from the church. The Central Americans said that they had been
offered, in addition to this kind of help, material and financial assistance.
For a Cuban man, this is how attending a Lutheran church had helped
him:
Some Central Americans even frequented churches of different denom-
inations simply because they had found support in more than one con-
gregation. For instance, a Salvadoran woman in San Francisco attended
both a Catholic and a Southern Baptist church because in both she had
received the help she could not obtain elsewhere, such as food, clothing,
and loans of money. Therefore, religious institutions take on a more fun-
damental role for Central Americans, by providing them with vital as-
sistance that ranges from legal counsel for the multiple dispensations and
applications to financial support to pay for a month’s rent, from orga-
nizational strategies to deal with problems in their neighborhoods to a
kind word in a desperate moment. Indeed, my observations in San Fran-
cisco, Los Angeles, Washington, D.C., and Phoenix indicate that religious
institutions are focal points in the lives of many Salvadorans and Gua-
temalans, regardless of the locality where they live. A Salvadoran man
in Washington, D.C., observed: “The church has been central in our lives
in many ways. Where else would you go to ask God for a favor and at
the same time fix your papers? . . . It’s also the symbolism. Symbolically,
it’s been important what the church did with the Sanctuary movement.
It was the biggest thing for us Central Americans fearing deportation to
a certain death. To give you a place to eat and sleep where no one can
touch you, deport you.”

Thus, independent of the community dynamics in specific locations,
religious institutions have been vital for Guatemalan and Salvadoran
immigrants as they have helped to mitigate the detrimental effects of their
liminal legality. More important, this situation may have long-term con-
sequences for the immigrants’ incorporation. In preliminary findings,
Cadge and Ecklund (in press) note that church assistance to immigrants
may serve more as a buffer from society than as a vehicle of incorporation.
Artistic Expression

In spite of the many adversities and challenges they face, one must not
lose sight of the Central Americans’ resilience, for many are contributing
meaningfully and in diverse forms to their communities, schools, and
families. Central American writers, filmmakers, musicians, painters, and
poets—some born and raised in their countries of origin, some in the
United States, and others having arrived at young ages—are actively
enriching Latino cultural expressions and contributing to the national U.S.
community from their specific social locations. Some are capturing in their
art particular historical events and in doing so help to recuperate a col-
lective memory that provides the generations born or raised in the United
States with a fragment of their own history. Characters in novels and in
short stories often embody Central American immigrants’ experiences, as
they express the perennial state of ambiguity and liminality in which these
immigrants still live. These immigrants’ liminal legality is, of course, not
the only aspect of their lives reflected in their artistic expressions. Indeed,
the literary production of young Guatemalans and Salvadorans who were
born or raised in the United States also touches on issues of identity, on
the difficult lives in the cities in which they live, and on intrafamilial
relations (see Herndndez-Linares 2002; Morales 2001; Epicentroamerica
2001). My point here is that liminal legality is also prominently reflected
in the immigrants’ artistic expressions, especially among those who em-
igrated as adults (the immigrant generation), and thus shapes these im-
migrants’ particular forms of participation in society.

The Massacre of El Mozote, one of the most gruesome episodes of
the Salvadoran civil war, has been reproduced in a musical compo-
sition and in a film entitled Homeland (Rodriguez 2002b). The pro-
tagonist escaped the war in El Salvador and has lived all his life in
New York, but as with many of his compatriots in real life, he is still
in legal limbo, and when he gets involved with a gang he is eventually
deported to a land he hardly knows. Salvadoran cultural critic Ana
Patricia Rodriguez (2002b) argues that this character is the incarnation
of the Central American immigrant, as his situation expresses the pe-
rennial state of ambiguity and liminality in which they still live after
more than two decades. Furthermore, these expressions inscribe onto
a larger canvas the traumatic memories associated with Central Amer-
ica’s recent history, a history that many immigrants still carry with
them and will pass on to their children.

Some artists capture more generally the Central Americans’ experience
of living in legal limbo, lengthy family separations, memories of violence,
of having lost their homes and sometimes their relatives in the armed
conflicts, and of a harsh settlement in the United States. The musical
production of other immigrants, for example Mexicans, also expresses
nostalgia for loved ones in Mexico and for Mexico itself, but it is also
infused with other, often romantic, themes.”® That of Central American
artists tends to reflect their compatriots’ experiences. Indeed, a song that
a popular Mexican group (Los Tigres del Norte) wrote for Salvadorans
is entitled “Tres veces mojado” (“Three Times a Wetback”) and chronicles
the penuries of Salvadoran immigration, which, in the eyes of this musical
group, are Salvadoran specific.

The musical production of the Salvadoran group “Lilo Gonzalez y
los de la Mt. Pleasant” recounts the experiences of Central American
immigrants in the Washington, D.C., area in songs such as “Amor sin
papeles” (“Love without Documents” or “Undocumented Love”). The
lyrics of “Amor sin papeles,” for instance, express the legal uncertainty
of these immigrants’ lives and the expectation of deportation at any
moment (my translation):
The songwriter Lilo Gonzalez told me it was the contradiction that he
feels Salvadorans have had in their hearts, of wanting to be back in their
country but being unable to do so lest they cannot return, that has led
him to write his songs. He explained: “Coming here was nice . . . to be
able to sleep soundly knowing that nobody was going to knock on your
door to disappear you in the middle of the night... . But at the same
time, not having a driver’s license, good documents, nothing here, this is
what I mean by the contradiction in which Salvadorans have lived.” When
I asked him why and how he started to write songs and music, he re-
sponded: “It’s pure nostalgia, depression that overwhelms you here, and
it’s something that stays with you for the rest of your life. Look at me,
I’m a [US.] citizen now, but I’m marked for life. I still write and sing
about that desperation that Salvadorans feel, to live longing for something
that you carry in your soul and heart, but that you consciously have to
put off seeing because you have to stay put, work, and send money.” I
asked him why he thought the Salvadorans’ experience was any different
from that of other Latin American immigrants, and he commented:
Lilo’s comment about the “suspended lives” he thinks Salvadorans have
lived in the United States, and his references to “real papers” and the
consequences of not having them, highlight the core of liminal legality I
examine here. Sadly, even when these immigrants attain full legality and
even citizenship (as in the case of Lilo) their early experiences in liminal
legality continue to shape their views of their adopted country as well as
those of their natal land.

The Salvadoran painter Karla Cecilia Rodas also captures the liminal
state in which many Central Americans find themselves (Rodriguez 2005),
as she poetically inscribes onto her canvas the endless legal entanglements
in their lives. She devotes special attention to Central American women,
who in Washington, D.C. (where Rodas is based), have been pioneers of
Central American migration (Repak 1995). In Lamento Indigena II, one
of Rodas’s paintings, a mestiza woman is represented as having a foot
in two worlds, one in an idealized tropical space with cornfields and
volcanoes, and the other in a world of colorless and blurred buildings
and the gray Capitol. Caught in midstride and looking back to the ide-
alized space, this “border-crossing woman,” Rodriguez (2005, p. 35) ob-
serves, captures the Salvadorans’ ambivalent legal situation. But rather
than a picture of nostalgia for a nation that cast her out, the painting
represents the symbolic space of her immigration status (TPS), of living
in a condition of permanent temporariness (Rodriguez 2005, p. 34). In
this as well as in other paintings, Rodas represents the in-between nar-
ratives of Salvadoran women.

The same depictions are found in literature, as in two of the best-known
Central American novels in the United States, where the issue of an
uncertain legality is paramount. In the novel The Ordinary Seaman (Gold-
man 1997), Francisco Goldman, a journalist and writer of Guatemalan
origin, depicts the lives of Central American refugees as an endless state
of homelessness and uprooting, of people leaving harsh economic con-
ditions and dislocation only to find the same in the United States due to
their legal marginality. In Tattooed Soldier (Tobar 2000), the Guatemalan
writer and journalist Héctor Tobar tells the story of two Guatemalan men,
a revolutionary who fled his country to avoid execution and the soldier
who murdered the revolutionary’s wife and child. The two men live in
Los Angeles where their legality is central. One of the men works for a
courier company that specializes in sending goods and money to El Sal-
vador and Guatemala, and the other is homeless and struggles even harder
to survive. Both deal with the uncertain legality that makes their ad-
justment in the United States difficult. The book discusses conditions in
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

It is important to recognize that even though Central Americans have
faced many challenges, they are not simply victims of political maneuvers
beyond their control. To meet the challenges they have faced in the United
States, Central Americans who arrived in the past two decades have
organized to help fellow compatriots and to advocate for their rights.
They have joined forces with Chicanos, Anglos, and others who share
their political ideologies to lobby on behalf of their compatriots, to fight
for improved working conditions, and to obtain permanent legal status.
An important objective of these organizations has been to provide legal
assistance, working both to help immigrants through the legalization pro-
cess and to lobby for just immigration policies. It was largely due to the
mounting pressure from immigrant-rights groups that the Justice De-
partment eventually agreed to provide temporary protected status to Sal-
vadorans and opportunities to resubmit asylum applications both to them
and to Guatemalans. As Central Americans have settled and established
their families, the objectives of these solidary organizations have switched
to issues associated with a more permanent settlement. They now ad-
vocate for longer-term projects, rights, and approaches that reflect the
increasing settlement of this group as well as the end of the armed conflicts
in Central America. An important fact to note is that Central American
immigrants work with the law as a means to obtain justice. Coutin (2000b)
observes that in their efforts to define themselves as legal, these immi-
grants and their advocates contest and sometimes even redefine and re-
interpret the law so as to demonstrate that their claims to legal status are
valid.

Central Americans also have organized to advocate for their rights as
workers and as members of the communities in which they live. They
have lobbied city councils to legalize street vending, have organized jan-
itors to fight for better working conditions and pay, have worked tirelessly
to open and maintain day laborer centers, and have worked arduously
to make their neighborhoods safer. Hamilton and Chinchilla (2001) detail
the history of the organization Justice for Janitors in Los Angeles, in which
Central Americans took a leadership role. Thus, even though their claims
to permanent legal status have not been heard and many still live in the
“shadow of the law,” many of these immigrants have responded by or-
ganizing, working with the law, and contesting the conditions in which
they live.

The case of Salvadorans and Guatemalans attests to the enduring power
of the nation-state in defining who belongs, who is excluded, and the
formal basis for the rights and responsibilities of the individual in the
state, as through its policies it channels individuals to different paths or
assimilation. This case demonstrates the impact immigration law has on
the lives of immigrants, and how in turn they adjust and attempt to
conform to the law, possibly redefining structures in the process, including
their relationship to the polity and the institution of citizenship. This case
also demonstrates that what states do through their immigration policies
still matter a great deal (Weil cited in Miller 2001). It exposes novel ways
of immigrant participation in the national community—reconfigured fam-
ily forms, new and varied perceptions of religious institutions, and new
voice and views in the creation of art. This examination brings into focus
the quotidian effects of the multiple categories created by the law, as the
experiences of Central Americans blur the black-and-white distinction
between legal and undocumented statuses and allow us to examine what
living in this gray area may be like for immigrants. Although the im-
migrants in situations of suspended or liminal legality live in the same
communities and neighborhoods as other immigrants, and their children
attend the same schools, a close-up look at the social and cultural spheres
of their lives reveals the mighty impact of the law.

Extended periods of liminal legality may eventually change the very
notion of citizenship, as these fragmented, bumpy relations to the state
might transform the institution of citizenship through migration. Immi-
gration policies shape immigrants’ incorporation, and thus debates about
the appropriateness of classical frameworks of assimilation for the study
of contemporary immigrants (see Alba and Nee 2003) should seriously
REFERENCES

Alba, Richard, and Victor Nee. 2003. Remaking the American Mainstream:
Assimilation and Contemporary Immigration. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Aleinikoff, T. Alexander. 2001. “Policing Boundaries: Migration, Citizenship, and the
State. Pp. 267-291 in E Pluribus Unum? Contemporary and Historical Perspectives
on Immigrant Political Incorporation, edited by Gary Gerstle and John Mollenkopf.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Andreas, Peter. 2000. Border Games: Policing the U.S.-Mexico Divide. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press.

Bailey, Adrian J., Richard A. Wright, Alison Mountz, and Ines M. Miyares. 2002.
“(Re)producing Salvadoran Transnational Geographies.” Annals of the Association
of American Geographers 92 (1): 125-44.

Baubéck, Rainer. 1994. Transnational Citizenship: Membership and Rights in
International Migration. Aldershot: Edward Elgar.

Bean, Frank, Edward E. Telles, and B. Lindsay Lowell. 1987. “Undocumented
Migration to the United States: Perceptions and Evidence.” Population and
Development Review 13 (4): 671-90.

Bernstein, Nina. 2004. “Concern Grows for Families Broken Up by Deportation.
Arizona Republic, A10, November 24.

Bloemraad, Irene. 2004. “Who Claims Dual Citizenship? The Limits of
Postnationalism, the Possibilities of Transnationalism, and the Persistence of
Traditional Citizenship.” Internationa Migration Review 38 (2): 389-426

Briody, Elizabeth K. 1987. “Patterns of Household Immigration into South Texas.”
International Migration Review 21:27-47

Bosniak, Linda. 1991. “Human Rights, State Sovereignty and the Protection of
Undocumented Migrants under the International Migrant Workers Convention.”
International Migration Review 25 (4): 737-70

. 1998. “The Citizenship of Aliens.” Social Text 16 (3): 29-35.

. 2000. “Citizenship Denationalized.” Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies
7:447-92

Bozorgmehr, Mehdi. 1997. “Internal Ethnicity: Iranians in Los Angeles.” Sociological
Perspectives 40 (3): 387-408.

”
Cadge, Wendy, and Elaine Howard Ecklund. In press. “Religious Service Attendance
among Immigrants: Evidence from the New Immigrant Survey-Pilot.” American
Behavioral Scientist, vol. 49.

Calavita, Kitty. 1998. “Immigration, Law and Marginalization in a Global Economy:
Notes from Spain.” Law and Society Review 32 (3): 529-66.

Canadian Council for Refugees. 2004. More than a Nightmare: Delays in Refugee
Family Reunification. Report issued November 11. http://www.web.ca/~ccr/
nightmare.pdf.

Castells, Manuel. 1989. The Informational City: Information Technology, Economic
Restructuring, and the Urban-Regional Process. Oxford: Blackwell.

Chavez, Leo R. 1991. “Outside the Imagined Community: Undocumented Settlers and
Experiences of Incorporation.” American Ethnologist 18 (2): 257-78.

Chiswick, Barry P. 1984. “Illegal Aliens in the United States Labor Market: Analysis
of Occupational Attainment and Earnings.” International Migration Review 18 (3):
714-32.

Coutin, Susan. 2000a. “Denationalization, Inclusion, and Exclusion: Negotiating the
Boundaries of Belonging.” Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies 7:585-91.

. 2000b. Legalizing Moves: Salvadoran Immigrants’ Struggle for U.S. Residency.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

De Genova, Nicholas P. 2002. “Migrant ‘Illegality’ and Deportability in Everyday
Life.” Annual Review of Anthropology 31:419-47.

Dow, Mark. 2004. American Gulag: Inside U.S. Immigration Prisons. Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Epicentroamerica. 2001-2. Bienvenidos a Epicentroamerica: Selections. Long Beach,
Calif.: Guacamaya Publishing.

Freeman, Gary. 2004. “Immigrant Incorporation in Western Democracies.”
International Migration Review 38 (3): 945-69.

Gamburd, Michele Ruth. 2000. The Kitchen Spoon’s Handle: Transnationalism and
Sri Lanka’s Migrant Households. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Goldman, Francisco. 1997. The Ordinary Seaman. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.

Grasmuck, Sherri. 1984. “Immigration, Ethnic Stratification, and Native Working
Class Discipline: Comparisons of Documented and Undocumented Dominicans.”
International Migration Review 18 (3): 692-713.

Guiraudon, Virginie, and Christian Joppke. 2001. “Controlling a New Migration
World.” Pp. 1-27 in Controlling a New Migration World, edited by Virginie
Guiraudon and Christian Joppke. London: Routledge.

Guttmacher, Sally. 1984. “Immigrant Workers: Health, Law, and Public Policy.” Journal
of Health Politics, Policy and the Law 9 (3): 503-14.

Hamilton, Nora, and Norma Stoltz Chinchilla. 2001. Seeking Community in a Global
City: Guatemalans and Salvadorans in Los Angeles. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press.

Hammar, Thomas. 1990. Democracy and the Nation State: Aliens, Denizens and
Citizens in a World of International Migration. Brookfield, Vt.: Ashgate Publishing.

Hernandez-Linares, Leticia. 2002. Razor Edges of My Tongue. San Diego, Calif.: Calaca
Press.

Heyman, Josiah M. 1998. “State Effects on Labor Exploitation: The INS and
Undocumented Immigrants at the Mexico-United States Border.” Critique of
Anthropology 18 (2): 157-80.

Hirsch, Jennifer S. 2003. A Courtship after Marriage: Sexuality and Love in Mexican
Transnational Families. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Hondagneu-Sotelo, Pierrette, and Ernestine Avila. 1997. “I’m Here, but I’m There:
The Meanings of Latina Transnational Motherhood.” Gender and Society 11:548-71.

Howley, Chris. 2005. “Young Migrants Crossing All Alone.” Arizona Republic, p. Al.
January 19.
INS (Immigration and Naturalization Service). 1997. “INS Releases Updated Estimates
of U.S. Illegal Population.” News release, February 7. U.S. Department of Justice,
Washington, D.C.

Jacobson, David. 1996. Rights across Borders: Immigration and the Decline of
Citizenship. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Jones-Correa, Michael. 1998. Between Two Nations: The Political Predicament of
Latinos in New York. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Kil, Sang, and Cecilia Menjivar. In press. “The Criminalization of Immigrants and
Militarization of the Border: Recent Lessons from Arizona.” In Immigration and
Crime: Ethnicity, Race and Violence. Edited by Ramiro Martinzez, Jr., and Abel
Valenzuela, Jr. New York: New York University Press.

Landolt, Patricia, Lilian Autler, and Sonia Baires. 1999. “From Hermano Lejano to
Hermano Mayor: The Dialectics of Salvadoran Transnationalism.” Ethnic and
Racial Studies 22 (2): 290-315.

Leslie, Leigh A. 1993. “Families Fleeing War: The Case of Central Americans.”
Marriage and Family Review 19:193-205.

Lopez, David E., Eric Popkin, and Edward Telles. 1996. “Central Americans: At the
Bottom, Struggling to Get Ahead.” Pp. 279-304 in Ethnic Los Angeles, edited by R.
Waldinger and M. Bozorgmehr. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Mahler, Sarah J. 1995. Salvadorans in Suburbia: Symbiosis and Conflict. Boston: Allyn
& Bacon.

Malkki, Liisa H. 1995. Purity and Exile: Violence, Memory, and National Cosmology
among Hutu Refugees in Tanzania. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Martiniello, Marco. 1997. “Citizenship, Ethnicity, and Multiculturalism: Post-national
Membership between Utopia and Reality.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 20 (3): 635-41.

Massey, Douglas S., Jorge Durand, and Nolan J. Malone. 2002. Beyond Smoke and
Mirrors: Mexican Immigration in an Era of Economic Integration. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.

Menjivar, Cecilia. 1997. “Immigrant Kinship Networks and the Impact of the Receiving
Context: Salvadorans in San Francisco in the early 1990s.” Social Problems 44 (1):
104-23.

. 1999a. “The Intersection of Work and Gender: Central American Immigrant

Women and Employment in California.” American Behavioral Scientist 42 (4):

595-621.

. 1999b. “Religious Institutions and Transnationalism: A Case Study of Catholic

and Evangelical Salvadoran Immigrants.” International Journal of Politics, Culture

and Society 12:589-612.

. 2000. Fragmented Ties: Salvadoran Immigrant Networks in America. Berkeley

and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

. 2001. “Latino Immigrants and Their Perceptions of Religious Institutions:

Cubans, Salvadorans, and Guatemalans in Phoenix, AZ.” Migraciones

Internacionales 1 (1): 65-88.

. 2002a. “Living in Two Worlds? Guatemalan-Origin Children in the United

States and Emerging Transnationalism.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies

28:531-52.

. 2002b. “The Ties that Heal: Guatemalan Immigrant Women’s Networks and

Medical Treatment.” International Migration Review 36 (2): 437-66.

. 2003. “Religion and Immigration in Comparative Perspective: Salvadorans in
Catholic and Evangelical Communities in San Francisco, Phoenix, and Washington,
D.C.” Sociology of Religion 64:21-45.

Miller, Mark. 2001. “The Sanctioning of Unauthorized Migration and Alien
Employment.” Pp. 318-36 in Global Human Smuggling: Comparative Perspectives,
edited by David Kyle and Rey Koslowski. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Miller Matthei, Linda, and David A. Smith. 1998. “Belizean ‘Boyz ‘n the ‘Hood’?
Garifuna Labor Migration and Transnational Identity.” Pp. 270-90 in
Transnationalism from Below. Edited by M. P. Smith and L. E. Guarnizo. New
Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers.

Morales, Marlon I. 2001. A Tease: Selections from the Forthcoming Collection: Turning
Tricks: Poems. Los Angeles, Calif.: Izote Press.

Mountz, Alison, Richard Wright, Ines Miyares, and Adrian J. Bailey. 2002. “Lives in
Limbo: Temporary Protected Status and Immigrant Identities.” Global Networks 2
(4): 335-56.

National Asylum Study Project. 1992. “An Interim Assessment of the Asylum Process
of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.” Washington, D.C., and Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University, Harvard Law School, Immigration and Refugee
Program.

Pantoja, Adrian. 2005. “Political Orientations, Gender and Naturalization among
Latino Immigrants.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Western Political
Science Association, Oakland, Calif. March.

Phillips, Julie A., and Douglas S. Massey. 1999. “The New Labor Market: Immigrants
and Wages after IRCA.” Demography 36 (2): 233-46.

Popkin, Eric. 1999. “Guatemalan Mayan Migration to Los Angeles: Constructing
Transnational Linkages in the Context of the Settlement Process.” Ethnic and Racial
Studies 22 (2): 267-89.

Portes, Alejandro, and Rubén G. Rumbaut. 1996. Immigrant America: A Portrait.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Portes, Alejandro, and Min Zhou. 1993. “The New Second Generation: Segmented

milation and Its Variants.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science 530:74-96.

Reitz, Jeffrey G. 1998. Warmth of the Welcome: The Social Causes of Economic Success
for Immigrants in Different Nations and Cities. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Repak, Terry A. 1995. Waiting on Washington: Central American Workers in the

Nation’s Capital. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Rodriguez, Ana Patricia. 2001. “Refugees of the South: Central Americans in the U.S.
Latino Imagery.” American Literature 73 (2): 387-412.

. 2002a. “Fronteras Centroamericanas, Centroamericanos Fronterizos.” A Quien

Corresponda: Literatura Virtual. http://www.angelfire.com/va3/literatura/

ANAPATRICTIA. htm. Viewed 23 February.

.2002b. “Projections of Homeland: Remembering the Civil War in El Salvador.”

Paper presented at the conference “The Interpretation and Representation of Latino

Cultures: Research and Museums Conference Documentation, Smithsonian Center

for Latino Initiatives.” Smithsonian Institution, May 14.

. 2005. “‘Departamento 15’: Cultural Narratives of Salvadoran Transnational
Migration.” Latino Studies 3 (1): 19-41.

Rodriguez, Nestor P. 2003. “What’s Old and What’s New: Guatemalan Immigrants
in Houston.” Paper presented at the Latin American Studies Association Meetings,
Dallas, March.

Rodriguez, Nestor P., and Jacqueline Hagan. 1999. “Central Americans.” Pp. 278-96
in The Minority Report: An Introduction to Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Relations,
3d ed. Edited by A. G. Dworkin and R. J. Dworkin. Dallas: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.

. 2004. “Fractured Families and Communities: Effects of Immigration Reform
in Texas, Mexico, and El Salvador.” Latino Studies 2 (3): 328-351.

Rubenstein, Kim, and Daniel Adler. 2000. “International Citizenship: The Future of
Nationality in a Globalized World.” Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies 7:
519-40.

Rubio-Marin, Ruth. 2000. Immigration as a Democratic Challenge: Citizenship and
Inclusion in Germany and the United States. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Salcido, Olivia, and Madelaine Adelman. 2004. “‘He Has Me Tied with the Blessed
and Damned Papers: Undocumented-Immigrant Battered Women in Phoenix,
Arizona.” Human Organization 63 (2): 162-72.

Sassen, Saskia. 2000. “The Need to Distinguish Denationalized and Postnational.”
Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies 7: 575-81.

. 2002. “Towards Post-National and Denationalized Citizenship.” Pp. 277-91

in Handbook of Citizenship Studies, edited by Engin F. Isin and Bryan S. Turner.

London: Sage.

. 2003. “The Participation of States and Citizens in Global Governance.” Indiana
Journal of Global Legal Studies 10:5-28.

Simon, Rita J., and Margo DeLey. 1984. “The Work Experience of Undocumented
Mexican Women Migrants in Los Angeles.” International Migration Review 18 (4):
1212-29.

Soysal, Yasemin Nuhoglu. 1994. Limits of Citizenship: Migrants and Postnational
Membership in Europe. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

. 2000. “Citizenship and Identity: Living in Diasporas in Post-War Europe?”
Ethnic and Racial Studies 23 (1): 1-15.

Tobar, Héctor. 2000. Tattooed Soldier. New York: Penguin.

Turner, Victor. 1967. The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press.

Uriarte, Miren, Phil Granberry, Megan Halloran, Susan Kelly, Rob Kramer, and Sandra
Winkler. 2003. “Salvadorans, Guatemalans, Hondurans and Colombians: A Scan of
Needs of Recent Latin American Immigrants to the Boston Area.” Manuscript.
University of Massachusetts, Boston, Program in Public Policy, John W. McCormack
School of Policy Studies.

Warner, R. Stephen. 1998. “Immigration and Religious Communities in the United
States. Pp. 3-34, in Gatherings in Diaspora: Religious Communities and the New
Immigration, edited by R. S. Warner and J. G. Wittner. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press.

Wright, Jeff. 2005. “Judge Extends Immigration Case for Boy.” Register-Guard, D1.
November 30.

Zolberg, Arisitide R. 2000. “The Dawn of Cosmopolitan Denizenhip.” Indiana Journal
of Global Legal Studies 7:511-16.

Zolberg, Aristide, Astri Suhrke, and Sergio Aguayo. 1989. Escape from Violence:
Conflict and the Refugee Crisis in the Developing World. New York: Oxford
University Press.
