Organizational Task and Institutional Environments in Ecological Perspective: Findings
from the Local Newspaper Industry

Author(s): Glenn R. Carroll and Yangchung Paul Huo

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 4 (Tan., 1986), pp. 838-873
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2779960

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:45 UTC
Drawing on the distinction between task and institutional environ-
ments, this article analyzes changes in the organizational structure
of a local newspaper industry over a 125-year period. The analysis
first examines the relationship between environmental phenomena
and the patterns of founding and failure observed in the lives of
2,168 newspaper organizations. To study another relationship, that
between organizational environments and performance levels, four
long-lived newspapers were investigated separately. The findings
show that institutional environmental variables, especially political
turmoil, strongly affect the rates of founding and failure but only
weakly affect performance. In contrast, task environmental vari-
ables are more closely associated with the performances of individ-
ual organizations and less with the organizational demographics of
the industry.
and constraints. Commonly studied institutional variables include na-
tional culture, the market structure of the economy, and the organization
of political and legal systems.

Although considerably more research has been conducted on the task
environment, the existing empirical evidence shows that variables in both
types of environment affect the structure and performance of organiza-
tions (see Scott 1983). Yet, in current empirical studies, researchers
rarely, if ever, analyze these two types of environmental variable simulta-
neously. As a consequence, the roles they play in shaping the structure of
organizational populations are not well understood.

This article reports findings from an organizational analysis using both
task and institutional environmental variables. The substantive problem
was to explain the long-term changes in the organizational structure of
the local newspaper industry in a large metropolitan area of the United
States. This industry was chosen because it is thought to be sensitive to
both types of environment and because it has left historical records that
make it possible to reconstruct the evolution of the industry over a period
of 125 years.

By long-term changes in the structure of the industry, we mean simply
the change over time in the number and distribution of the organizational
population. By the modern bioecological definition of evolution (e.g.,
Pianka 1983), such an analysis is properly classified as evolutionary, even
though it implies nothing about the progressiveness of temporal change.”
Empirically, the analysis used three important dimensions of structural
change as dependent variables: (1) the founding rate of new organiza-
tions, (2) the rate of death of organizations across the life cycle, and (3) the
performance of ongoing organizations over time. The goal was to explain
variations in these dimensions in terms of environmental change.

This analysis is best understood as the culmination of an ecological
research program on the newspaper industry. In an earlier companion
study of seven metropolitan areas, Carroll (1985) examines in detail the
competitive dynamics of organizations in the American local newspaper
industry. In this article, we emphasize the political environment and its
effects. We adopted this focus in part because previous research has
convincingly demonstrated the importance of the political environment
for the development of the press (Hgyer 1975, 1982; Carroll and Delacroix
ORGANIZATIONAL TASK AND INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENTS

Most previous empirical research on organizations uses variables in the
task environment rather than in the institutional environment (Scott
1983). As originally conceived by Dill, the task environment of an organi-
zation consists of all external factors that are “potentially relevant to goal
setting and goal attainment” (1958, p. 410). Despite the all-inclusive na-
ture of this definition, Scott (1981) points out that task environments can
be reduced to four major groups of actors, or sectors: (1) customers of the
organization’s output; (2) suppliers of the organization’s input; (3) compet-
itors of the organization; and (4) regulatory groups, including labor
unions. In actual empirical research, the task environment has usually
been conceptualized from the perspective of a focal organization (Evan
1966). Specific task environmental variables used sometimes consist of a
single identifiable actor or organization (e.g., Selznick 1949); at other
times these variables are constructed across a large number of environ-
mental indicators or organizations (e.g., Emery and Trist 1965).

The popularity of task environmental variables can be attributed to the
widespread use of exchange-oriented models of organizational structure
and functioning (Scott 1983). In many popular models of organization,
theorists have concentrated on the exchange of goods and services and the
interdependencies it creates. In closed systems models (e.g., Blau 1970),
internal exchange between organizational subunits is emphasized. In
open systems models (e.g., Thompson 1967; Pfeffer and Salancik 1978),
environmental exchange receives primary attention, especially as it con-
cerns the securing of inputs and the placement of outputs. Such con-
ceptual imagery directs attention to specific environmental exchanges
between the organization and external actors. It also invokes an organiza-
tion-set level of analysis (Scott 1981).

Variables in the institutional environment do not compose such an
easily definable group. Although Selznick (1948) first used the term in an
organizational context, a more recent line of theory makes the connection
to the environment more explicit. Within what is becoming known as
“the institutional perspective,” theorists focus on the institutionalized be-
liefs and rules of society and the ways they become incorporated into
organizational structures (Meyer and Rowan 1977; Zucker 1983). Empir-
ical research within this perspective traces the development, legitimation,
and widespread adoption of the organizational implications of these rules
(Rowan 1982; Tolbert and Zucker 1983). Here the institutional environ-
ment is “broadly defined as including the rules and beliefs, as well as the
relational networks that arise in the broader societal context” (Meyer and
Scott 1983, p. 6).

But institutional environments need not be defined so narrowly. Social
institutions have been defined “as regulative principles which organize
most of the activities of individuals in a society into definite organiza-
tional patterns” (Eisenstadt 1968, p. 410). By this and most other
definitions, the market would be considered an institution of capitalist
societies. Since markets operate on the basis of institutionalized rules and
beliefs (both formal and informal), few would disagree that these factors
should be considered as part of the institutional environment. However,
rules and beliefs are not the only important features of this institution.
Other important aspects of the market, which vary across locations and
which affect behavior within those locations, concern its size, shape,
condition, and stability. Variables measuring such concepts, although
they are not likely to be normative in character, are in fact also properly
classified as institutional variables because they are measures of or about
an institution. Thus, the study of economic cycles is frequently considered
to fall within the domain of institutional economics.

As contrasted with variables in the task environment, institutional
environmental variables are global. They are hypothesized to affect or-
ganizations in diffuse and indirect ways. They are also seen to have
relatively uniform effects on large groups of organizations within homo-
geneous sectors; task environmental variables, in contrast, usually differ-
entiate the same organizations. Examples of previously examined institu-
tional environmental variables of organizations include national culture
(Lammers and Hickson 1979), the national educational system (Lutz
1981), the organization of occupations (Child et al. 1983), the political
system (Stinchcombe 1965), and the level of infrastructural development
(Azumi 1972). Theorists have grouped these variables under the labels of
macroenvironment (Zey-Ferrell 1979), suprasystem (Evan 1972), social/
cultural environment (Scott 1983), and social structure (Stinchcombe
1965).
the institutional environment and patterns of press foundings and deaths
in Argentina and Ireland. Using data for the 19th and 20th centuries,
these investigators found the organizational dynamics of the press in both
countries to be highly sensitive to political turbulence but much less
sensitive to economic cycles and development.

These studies only begin to address the environmental factors affecting
newspaper organizations. Consider the four sectors of the task environ-
ment. First, customers for U.S. newspapers consist predominantly of the
residents and advertisers within the metropolitan area of publication.’
Since newspaper production displays strong economies of scale (Rosse
1978, 1980), metropolitan population size should play a major role in
shaping the local newspaper industry. On the one hand, a large popula-
tion contains more potential readers, advertisers, and publishers. Each of
these groups should expand the organizational carrying capacity of the
industry. On the other hand, large populations set the stage for the opera-
tion of scale economies, which are likely to create barriers to entry. Simi-
larly, although in historical perspective it seems to be fundamentally
important, the literacy level of the population has also shown paradoxical
effects on the local newspaper industry. Periods of press development are
not strongly associated with periods of increased literacy (Schudson
1978), and early purchasers of newspapers were sometimes motivated by
the desire to learn to read (Park 1929).

Second, suppliers for newspapers provide the two critical input re-
sources of skilled labor and newsprint. As the availability of these sup-
plies increases locally, barriers to entry should be lowered and continued
operation should be easier: labor can be replaced without much difficulty,
and favorable terms of trade can be established with newsprint manufac-
turers. Price fluctuations in both commodities should also have rational
effects on ease of entry and operating viability.

Third, competitors for individual newspapers are primarily other local
papers, although historically the organizational forms of the industry
show considerable variety. Large city dailies compete among themselves,
but they also show both competitive and symbiotic relationships with
many of the less visible specialized weeklies. Carroll (1985) has examined
these dynamic relationships in detail with a resource-partitioning model
that uses market concentration as the primary explanatory variable. In
this article, we focus on the effects of organizational births and deaths
within potentially competitive populations. In general, increases in the
number of newspapers—especially within the same organizational form
and birth cohort—should increase competition and consequently death
rates.

Fourth, in the United States, labor unions compose the primary regula-
tory groups in the newspaper environment.* Unions for newspaper em-
ployees were organized early and in many locales. Historically, these
unions have been able to negotiate good wages and working conditions
and, when threatened, have been effective in using strikes. Labor orga-
nized so strongly may create barriers to entry, but it also plays a major
role in screening, training, and disciplining workers. That is, the unions
regulate the quality, quantity, and price of labor in the industry. These
factors may, in fact, make it easier for a would-be publisher to assemble a
group of competent workers. Moreover, the unions often facilitate egali-
tarian terms of trade by standardizing the costs of labor across all partici-
pants in the market.

The institutional environment of the newspaper industry is more
difficult to specify, but it seems useful to distinguish among economic
factors, infrastructural factors, and political factors. Institutional eco-
nomic factors, defined here as variables related to the general state of the
economy, have often been thought to be related to rates of new firm
formation and firm failure. Because cyclical variations in the economy
should affect factors such as the availability and terms of capital, organi-
zational foundings may coincide with prosperous years and failures with
depressed years (Schumpeter 1939; see Dahmen 1970 for an empirical
analysis of these issues).

Infrastructural factors include those related to the physical and social
development of the environment. Development of the physical infrastruc-
ture provides locations and facilities for complementary activities and
services. Through networks of information transmittal, development of
the social infrastructure reduces the costs of establishment and operation
of a firm by reducing the need to learn by doing. The social infrastructure
also provides symbiotic network support from other organizations (Haw-
ley 1978) and beneficial linkages with other industries (Hirschmann
1958). For these reasons, economists often argue for the protection of
“infant industries” (see Krueger and Tuncer 1982).

The impact of institutional political factors on newspaper organizations
is better understood. Because the press can be used to influence opinions,
interpret events, recruit followers, and increase solidarity among those
already holding a particular view, it is in essence a political tool. As
Carroll and Delacroix (1982; Delacroix and Carroll 1983) have shown,
newspapers are highly sensitive to political turmoil: founding rates in-
crease sharply in periods of turbulence, and newspapers founded in these
periods have shorter life expectancies. Three plausible arguments might
explain these associations. First, political turmoil is news. All other things
being equal, political violence means there is more news to report; it is
also likely to motivate potential readers to buy newspapers to find out
what is going on. If news is regarded as an environmental resource, then,
as with any environmental resource, an increase in its supply will likely
lead to a larger organizational carrying capacity. However, since turmoil
is episodic, a greater number of newspapers can be sustained for only a
short period.

A second explanation recognizes that those behind political violence
might be publishing their own newspapers. If so, the new papers that
appear in these periods are likely to be explicitly political, serving the
purposes of recruitment, organization, solidarity, or simply propaganda.
Such papers would not be reacting to the turmoil so much as they would
be an integral part of it; they should lose their purpose after the turmoil
subsides.

A third interpretation relies on the research of Tilly and colleagues,
who have shown repeatedly that collective violence is essentially political
in nature, involving interest-oriented groups that are created by broad
social and economic transformations and that exhibit high levels of sol-
idarity and articulate specific concerns (Tilly 1978; Tilly, Tilly, and Tilly
1975). If collective violence does indeed reflect such an underlying re-
structuring of the social and economic order, then the newspapers that
appear in these periods may simply reflect the general interests and views
of these recently mobilized groups. Although these groups may be contend-
ers for power in a concrete sense, their motivations are not political in a
general sense. Instead, they tend to organize around articulated, specific
local concerns that are not being addressed properly by the ruling groups.
The differences between this argument and the previous one are subtle
but fundamental. Whereas in the previous argument groups are fighting
for power and using political newspapers as a tactical device, in this
argument the contending groups publish general newspapers that appeal
to their members.
reconstruct the complete historical population of newspaper organiza-
tions that ever appeared in the area.> Dates of founding, death, and last
observation were recorded for each organization.® Structural information
on the internal characteristics of the organization was also collected when
available. Since American newspaper organizations depend on markets
bounded by metropolitan areas, the data constitute the history of a rela-
tively autonomous organizational environment.

Figure 1 shows historically the number of newspaper organizations
operating in the area. A total of 2,168 organizations were found to ever
exist. The general curvilinear pattern of development is similar to that
observed for many other industries (Carroll 1984).

We searched historical sources for data on both task and institutional
environmental variables. As with all historical research, the selection of
variables was severely limited by their availability and by their compara-
bility across time. Sometimes we had to settle for imperfect measures that
were aggregated at a level of analysis other than the ideal one. At other
times we found ideal variables, but for only short periods of time relative
to the overall length of the study. Nonetheless, after much effort, we were
able to identify and collect a fairly broad range of environmental vari-
ables.

The task environmental variables can be grouped into the four sectors
defined by Scott (1981). The variables related to customers include:

POPN = Population size of the metropolitan area. The nine-county
SMSA definition was used to reconstruct historically
the population of the entire area. These data were
available from the U.S. Census Bureau (various years)
for every 10-year period from 1850 to 1970. An esti-
mate was used for 1975. Individual intervening years
were estimated by interpolation. This variable is con-
structed in units of 10,000 persons.
ILLIT =

Illiteracy rate of the population, defined as the percentage
of the population 10 years of age and older unable to
read. These data were available at the state level from
the U.S. Census Bureau (various years). From data
points at every 10-year period from 1850 to 1930, we
interpolated values for intervening years.

Newspaper organizational population variables that measure competitors

include:

FOUNDS =
PFOUNDS =

PFOUNDS

NFAILS =
PFAILS =

PFAILS
PNEWS

GNEWS

Total number of newspapers founded in a year.

Total number of explicitly political papers founded in a
given year.

Total number of newspapers founded in a given year,
except explicitly political papers.

Total number of newspapers dying in a given year.

Total number of explicitly political papers dying in a
given year.

Total number of newspapers dying in a given year, except
explicitly political papers.

Dummy variable for explicitly political newspapers (takes
the value of one for these papers and zero for others).

Dummy variable for general interest newspapers (takes
the value of one for these papers and zero for special
interest newspapers of any kind).

The variables related to suppliers include:

EMPS

STRIKE

WSTRIKE

NEWSA

NEWSB

NEWSC

I

Skilled employees. This variable records in thousands the
numbers of workers in printing, publishing, and allied
industries within the San Francisco metropolitan area.
This variable, which is interpolated annually from data
points every five years, is available only from 1950 to
1970 through documents of the Division of Labor Sta-
tistics and Law Enforcement (various years, a, b).

Work stoppages in printing, publishing, and allied indus-
tries. Available annually from 1927 to 1956 at the state
level of aggregation, this variable measures general
labor unrest in the regional industry. Sources are the
Division of Labor Statistics and Law Enforcement
(various years) and the Division of Labor Statistics and
Research (various years).

Number of workers involved in work stoppages. Com-
panion variable to STRIKE, this variable is from the
same source, covers the same period, and is also avail-
able annually.

Wholesale price of newsprint. Available every year from
1935 to 1970, this variable records the annual average
national wholesale price in dollars per ton. It is col-
lected from the U.S. Census Bureau (1976).

Wholesale price of newsprint. This variable, which is re-
corded from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1977),
measures the average annual national indexed price of
standard newsprint from 1947 to 1975.

Wholesale price of newsprint. Collected on an annual
basis from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1927),
this variable also reports an indexed price of newsprint
and covers the period from 1890 to 1926. The three
newsprint variables cover different periods and use
slightly different indexing procedures.

The variables related to regulatory groups include:

UWAGE = Union wage for the newspaper industry. Available every

year from 1907 to 1969, this variable indexes national
union hourly wage scales in the newspaper trade. It is
compiled from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
(1970).
CWAGE = Wage for compositors. This variable, available annually
from 1907 to 1926 from the U.S. Department of Labor
(various years), consists of an index of hourly wages for
day work by compositors in San Francisco.

MWAGE = Wage for machine operators. This variable is the same as
CWAGE, except for machine operators.
SWAGE = Wage for stereotypers. This variable is the same as

CWAGE, except for stereotypers.
Institutional environmental variables include:

PEAK = Peak years of economic cycles. Available annually from
1853 to 1961, this variable takes a value of one for years
at the peak of the national economic cycle as identified
by Burns (1968); in other years the value is zero.

TROUGH = Trough years of the economic cycle. This variable is simi-
lar to PEAK but takes the value of one for years at the
bottom of the cycle.

Business failures. This records the annual number of
business failures per 10,000 nationally listed in Dun
and Bradstreet (1978). This variable is available annu-
ally from 1920 to 1975.

IEST = Industrial establishments. Interpolated annually from
quasi-decennial U.S. Census Bureau (various years)
data and covering the period from 1860 to 1972, this
variable gives the total number of industrial establish-
ments in the San Francisco metropolitan area.

ELECT = Presidential election years. This variable takes the value

of one for election years; zero otherwise.

POLIT = Political turmoil. This variable takes the value of one for
years characterized by local political turmoil and vio-
lence; in other years it has the value of zero. It is coded
using standard historical sources and the consensus of
historians. The Appendix identifies the years of tur-
moil, provides a brief description of the tumultuous
events, and gives references to more detailed discus-
sions.

FAIL
Area shows temporal cyclicality (see fig. 2). Delacroix and Carroll (1983)
offer the explanation that such cycles may be the result of entrepreneurs
emulating the success of others—a process culminating in the collective
overshoot of the environment’s organizational carrying capacity. Follow-
ing Delacroix and Carroll (1983), we modeled this process as a curvilinear
function with a first-order autoregressive disturbance. The baseline
model was

FOUNDS() = ao + a,FOUNDS(t — 1) + a2FOUNDS*(E — 1) + U(t),

where the disturbance U(t) = pU(t — 1) + e, and e was assumed to be
normally disturbed with mean zero and constant variance. For consis-
tency with the argument, we expected that the coefficient associated with
the linear lagged dependent variable (a,) would be positive and the
coefficient associated with the second-order term (a2) would be negative.
The absolute value of the second-order term was also expected to be
smaller than the absolute value of the linear term. We estimated this
model with generalized least squares techniques.

In table 1, we report estimates of the baseline model with the task
environmental variables included. Because the task environmental vari-
ables each span different periods of time and because these periods fre-
quently do not overlap, we first report the estimates of models including
these variables individually. Six of the 12 environmental variables have
a statistically significant relationship with the number of newspapers
founded. POPN, STRIKE, NEWSC, and UWAGE are negatively asso-
“SO Sdx
“sasayjuared ut uMoyYs siolia plepuejG—"FLON

 

 

(st) so’) (12 2) (y's2)

02 2% Stz"~ 220° @I- tbh" (21)
(str) (1s0)  (S2"2)— ($2)

02 621 291" — SIT $68" — ree “°° (11)
(st1) (1s0')— ($z"2),— (2)

oz 62° 291 — Sto $68" — T6¢ °*** (01)
(660°) (p10) (Izv) (Tes)

Ob 279" x6SE°— ¢20°— —-¥£0'T aSLT " (6)
(6%0°) (veo) (£59) (09°9)

82 £08" #101 — 8e0'— 62" aVlE 77" (8)
(420°) (b10") — (8¢8") (e"€1)

Le p02" seo" — ozo = 848-0 CL)
(210 ) (920°) (v9s") (28°2)

9¢ 640 900° — 1zo- 89° vos 7" (9)
(p10°) (zs0") (2e1) (16)

et £81" £10 — ¥000' ss T9T* sor *** (S)
(90°1) (v0) (9E"1) (V-01)

£1 69%" «Sh7— 60" veT— «eZ °° CH)
(ore") (e€0°) (099) (16. 9)

12 vr #216 T20'—  821'— = T'B— EE)
(619°) (400°) (soe) (Soe)

18 60b x60T O10"—  x80T SEZ — (2)
(¥s0") (soo’) (10°) (bez)

S@l 229 «POT — $00°— «268° #219 777" (1)

 

Low a-7) (-7a aq-a) (-+ aq-a) G-a (I-47) (I-47) aq-) G@-) G@-) a@-+ a-a (I-17) quRysuoD uopenby
FOVMS ZOVMW FOVMO FOVMN OSMAN GSMAN VWSMON FNIALISM FNWLS SHWA LITE NdOd -SGNNOd SGNNO

 

 

SNOILVZINVOUO AIdVASMAN JO SONIGNNOY NO SATAVINVA IVINAWNOYIANY ASV, JO SLOTIag

T ATavL
ciated with foundings, whereas ILLIT and EMPS are positively associ-
ated. Rational economic reasoning can explain the findings for UWAGE,
NEWSC, STRIKE, and EMPS: higher wages, increased supply costs,
and labor unrest each increase barriers to entry. Conversely, for EMPS,
an expansion in the pool of available skilled labor should have the oppo-
site effect.

The findings for ILLIT and POPN are more difficult to explain. Park
(1929) has shown that there is no simple relationship between illiteracy
and newspaper reading—ethnic papers have survived historically on
large groups of recently arrived, primarily illiterate immigrants. We sus-
pect that the finding for ILLIT is related to the immigration of such
ethnic populations into California and the San Francisco area. In general,
the late 19th century was characterized by an increase in the illiteracy
rate, a rapid increase in the population due to large-scale immigration
(including many foreign-born persons), and the highest annual average
number of newspapers founded (see fig. 2).

POPN shows a negative effect because in the recent period, press
growth has slowed while population has continued to increase. We
thought that the relationship between foundings and population might be
curvilinear, but a statistical test did not support this hypothesis. One
plausible explanation for the negative effect concerns economies of scale,
to which newspapers are particularly sensitive (Rosse 1978, 1980). A
larger population represents a market of increased scale, and this is likely
to affect competition among newspapers in two ways. First, general inter-
est dailies grow larger and compete head-on. Eventually, such competi-
tion generates a local monopoly or oligopoly, and the remaining firms can
block new large-scale entrants through limit pricing (see Scherer 1980).
Second, as the general interest newspaper market becomes concentrated,
specialist newspapers live longer (Carroll 1985) and the specialist market
is likely to stabilize. Such a saturated market probably discourages poten-
tial new entrants because most potential niches are already occupied.

Table 2 reports the estimates of models with the institutional environ-
mental variables. Equations (1)—-(6) report models paralleling those in
table 1: each exogenous variable is included by itself to allow its max-
imum effect across the observation period. Among these variables only
the political turmoil variable, POLIT, shows a statistically significant
effect. As in Delacroix and Carroll’s earlier analyses, this variable in-
creases the newspaper founding rate dramatically; almost three addi-
tional papers are started in periods of political turbulence.

Equations (7)—(12) in table 2 report multivariate models. Here we show
reestimates of the effect of each previously significant exogenous variable
from both the task and institutional environments, with population size
also included in the model. Because of missing values, the data used in
“SOS dx
“sasayjuared Ur UMOYS s1011a prepue}g—-aLON

 

 

(bso) — (6€°T) (so0")

S21 089° #611" SSE 00° —
(pre") (sv6") (p10")

Ob 279 ety — $02 ¥70°—
(680°) (€61") (10°)
82 tlh tbe — +L09° $00"
(486°) (9t°2) (€v0")
el 19° #027 — BLE 090
(122°) (262 ) (4€0°)

12 vty cry 861 900 —
(lot) (oze) (200°)

18 68¢° a2 Leb" 600 —
(le) (vo0")

set Lee #617 400° —
(et) (v00")

set eS." 9h 1 400°—
(v00") (s00")

€1t 902 00° — 400 —
(0z0') (810°)

ss Ssh" 820° £00" —
(es"T) (v00")

zt ten $61 600° —
(pst) (b00")

tz Tel" B21 600° —
L 2a aq-) (-a Q@-) G@-) G@-) G@-) G-) A-) A-A A-) C-) A-D -+”

GOVMN OSMAN GIELS SdWH LITI NdOd LI10d LOATH ISA WVd HONOYL AVad -SANNOI

 

 

 

(102")
#L6L
(9¢¢")
+¥0'T
(seg )
Lug" —
ev
96°T-
(9v2")
Tey —
(ze)
#598"
(er)
+60
(et )
¥f0T
(gt)
Pras
(oe)
$99"
(8¢t")
«SUT
(81)
«SUT

a-7

sannosi

(e¢°2)
4819
(09 9)
s99T
(s6's)

a9 OZ "7
(s's¢)

al BT
(vs'8)
ee
(0z"9)
coe
(ett)
v6"
(611)
ato
(87 2)
wee
(ep°2)
18°
(o¢'1)
wt
(6z"1)
|

 

SNOILVZINVDAO AddVdSMAN JO SONIGNNOY NO SATAVINVA TVLNAWNOYIANY TYWNOILOALILSN] JO SLOG4AY

@ aTaVvi

(21)
(11)
(on)
(6)
(3)
()
(9)
(s)
()
(¢)
(2)

(1)

queysuog uonenby
estimation of these equations vary considerably in historical timing and
length of observation. Inclusion of the population-size variable eliminates
all except four of the previously significant effects. ILLIT, NEWSC,
STRIKE, and POLIT each continue to display their earlier effects, and
controlling for population increases the size of each effect. The largest
effect, as measured by the absolute value of the associated coefficient,
continues to be from political turbulence.

Having established an association between political turmoil and total
newspaper foundings, we sought next to find out whether the observed
effect was due simply to an increase in the number of political papers. We
coded as political those papers that had explicitly identified themselves to
our sources as being affiliated with, or advocates of, political groups,
causes, ideologies, or parties other than mainstream ones. This proce-
dure, of course, undercounts the number of political papers, since some
probably preferred not to identify themselves in this way.

Inspection of the 133 papers identified as political shows a wide range
of views, but the most prevalent are within the relatively moderate cate-
gories of local politics and labor. Analysis of founding patterns for these
papers showed no significant association with the political turmoil vari-
able. Analysis of the total data set excluding these explicitly political
papers continued to show a large positive and significant association
between turmoil and foundings. These findings strongly suggest that the
association between political turmoil and newspaper foundings is due to
something other than just an increase in political papers.
= . + BKX,
r(t) = e% + efor BXH + . + Bx KDeyot,

where the X(t)’s represent exogenous variables. Following Stinchcombe
(1965), Carroll and Delacroix (1982), and Freeman et al. (1983), we con-
centrate on the social conditions at the time of organizational founding
and report estimates of models using X(t’), where t' is the year of initial
establishment.

Table 3 reports estimates of Makeham’s law with the task environmen-
tal variables each included separately. The estimates for yo are negative
in all but three equations (each of which uses data for only very short
periods). Thus, the overall model, especially the interpretation that as-
sumes declining age dependence, appears appropriate.

Of the 12 task environmental variables, only four show statistically
significant effects: POPN, ILLIT, NEWSB, and NEWSC. The es-
timated effect of each of these variables is consistent with the expectations
of rational economic reasoning. Population increases represent additional
‘SO Sd
“sasayjuazed Ul UMOYS sIOIIa prepue}S—"aLON

 

 

(600°) (eee) (910°) (zt)

wp € SEIT £00" ¥€0'7— —ebBO— LOE (21)
(800°) (ete) (910°) (912)

wef) OTT soo" - 4bT'Z— — b80— LOE a)
(00°) (ete) (90°) (9tz")

wp 0 )OETT $00" — ebT'Z— —xbB80'— LOE on)
(200°) (cer) (sto) ez")

71g «6 '0T 200° - #9S7— 90" bE ©
(290°) (zor) (tor) (880°)

oor fet +9581 *907— LOT «Ll 8Z— (8)
(490°) (won) (Tor) (880°)

662 f | LT 40 #L8Z— 4617 486'7— (wo
(100°) (zor) (eto) (121)

616 f Lele 100° — #€0'7— 660-8" — 9)
(z00") (s9e") (120°) (z0z")

sor £896 200° #88'7— SIT 4078 — (s)
(161°) (yoy) (p80) (ror)

sor L06 oor — x887— PET wT - ()
(see) (016) (860) (116")

9st £ £26 Lue zi- tor Pi (2)
(620°) (vst) (810°) (090°)

808'T € O'S +0¢T alVT— POT — TE @
(810) (gz) (szo')_ (190°)

gol'z £ F828 #f80'— eIET—  l22'— gl @

fe  X AOVMS AOVMIK 3OVMO @OVMN OSMAN @SMAN VWSMAN @YMISM FNS SdWG LIT NdOd og ok Oo — uonenby

 

 

 

SNOILVZINVOUO AAdVdSMAN AO HLVAC AO SALVY NO SATAVIEVA TVLNAWNOUWIANY ASV] JO SLOadsy

€ ATaVL
readers who provide a greater potential base of support for new papers.
Large metropolitan areas are also more heterogeneous (Duncan and Reiss
1956), thus representing a wider range of environmental dimensions
available for niche establishment. Higher illiteracy rates mean fewer po-
tential subscribers, and thus ILLIT has the opposite effect of population.
So too do the two newsprint price variables; evidently the operating
constraints placed on new papers by these higher costs lessen their ex-
pected survival times.

Economically rational effects are not, however, ubiquitous among the
task environmental variables. Labor factors, as measured by EMPS,
STRIKE, WSTRIKE, UWAGE, CWAGE, MWAGE, and SWAGE,
show no significant effects on rates of death. This may be because most
papers face similar labor constraints within a local area caused by strong
geographically organized unions. Or, maybe new papers find ways to
operate that avoid the costs and constraints imposed by unionization
(e.g., third-party printing and distribution).

Table 4 gives estimates of models with the institutional environmental
variables. Equations (1)—-(6) report the effects of these variables when
included one at a time. Surprisingly, the findings show no significant
association between newspaper rates of death and the economic-cycle
variables. Only two institutional variables are significant statistically:
IEST and POLIT. Industrial establishments are negatively associated
with death rates, which supports Hirschmann’s (1958) and Hawley’s
(1978) arguments about the importance of industry linkages. Political
turbulence shows a positive effect on death rates and thus replicates the
earlier findings of Carroll and Delacroix (1982) for Argentina and Ireland.
In fact, the similarity of estimates across the three locations is amazing—
the comparable parameter for Argentina is .289, and for Ireland, .190.

Equations (7)—(12) of table 4 report estimates of models that include
various combinations of previously significant task and institutional vari-
ables. As in the analysis of foundings, we report equations only for those
variables available over long periods of time—others do not provide
sufficient information for estimation. Of the previously significant vari-
ables, this constraint excludes only NEWSB and NEWSC.

We found equations (7) and (8) in table 4 quite surprising. Whereas
previously the POLIT variable had shown strong significant effects, here,
when population and the other significant variables were controlled for,
its effect was diminished considerably, and, more important, the co-
efficient associated with the variable lost statistical significance. In fact, in
these two equations only POPN retained statistical significance.

We thought that the loss of statistical significance by POLIT in these
equations might be due to the process by which political turmoil affects
newspapers rather than to the lack of any real effect. In particular, recall
‘SO Sd
“sasayjuared ul UMOYS siolIa prepue}gG— “ALON.

 

 

 

(or) (960) (¢20") (920°) (zze") (910°) (690°)

89'T 9 BLED IBZ 910° x60" — 110- ayLT—  48ST'— «198 (1)
(str) (810°) (sz) (so) (€90")

gor'z by O'SER e208 #080" — x68T— 6127-2 (mp)
(ror) (260°) (ort) (490°) (sto) (z90")

WZ §  6'ShL eth 780" — 960° *80'%—  ¥6ST'— TOE COD)
(z8€") (por) (80°) (6s0°) (pI0) (290°)

Une § $'Bse 600" ol Ll” ¥L0%— «BST 19 }
(4¥0")(€20") (660°) (9¢0") (oze) (910°) (690°)

set 9 OLED 220° x6h0"- 190" L10°— afLT— 49ST 29 E- (8)
(610°) (60°) (eT) (szo") (290°)

Bore ob 9828 880° — 8£0 wf8ET= 4022 PE TT (LY
(180°) (8s0") (p10) (290°)

Ure € sess +2082 #80°7— lS lL (9)
(980°) (4s0°) (p10) (z90")

WZ -€  O'9bL zo" — 007 — ST’ = IE (S)
(z¢0") (oT) (s10)— (€40°)

zor -€ —«O'BSS #660" ~ aSLT— 08-2 E— Oh)
(¢00") (ite?) (920) (zbe")

ess fee £00 elTP—  e8S0"— STE TT)
(80°) (090°) (910°) (090°)

o1o'z ff wee ¥S0 xl6T— lL 9098-71" (2)
(060°) (8s0") (910°) (090°)

oo’? ff O'e9e 160'— s€61'— LT 409° - a

we: SMAND SMINd SMAND SMINd LIT NdOd LITOd LOSTA LS Tivd HONOWL Vad og oe © uonenba

x x

Lil0d = LITOd

 

 

SNOILVZINVOUO AddV¥dSMAN AO HLVAC AO SALVY NO SATAVIAVA TVINAWNNOYIANY TYNOILNLILSN] dO SLOddAG
our earlier suggestion that previous findings of this sort could be due to
the short-lived nature of political papers founded in tumultuous periods.
Or, as Carroll and Delacroix (1982) argued, these findings could be due to
newspapers attaching themselves to societal resources freed temporarily
during the realignments associated with collective violence; later periods
of less turbulence are characterized by consolidation that selects out these
opportunistic organizations (“r-strategists” in the ecological lexicon). By
this interpretation, the social realignment that accompanies turmoil
should spawn general interest papers that appeal to the groups contend-
ing for power and later lose appeal once these groups become incorpo-
rated into the polity.

These two alternative interpretations lead to different empirical expec-
tations. By the first argument, papers that are explicitly political should
show shorter lifetimes overall and especially when they are founded dur-
ing political turbulence. By the second argument, it is not political papers
but general interest ones that should show shorter lifetimes when founded
during political turmoil. Tests of the two arguments are given in equa-
tions (9) and (10) in table 4. Each equation reports estimates of a model
that includes the political turmoil dummy (POLIT), a dummy for type of
paper (PNEWS indicates the dummy for explicitly political papers;
GNEWS, for general interest papers), and a multiplicative interaction
between the two. The estimates, which show only the interaction be-
tween POLIT and GNEWS to be significant, support the second argu-
ment (concerning resource distribution) but not the first (concerning polit-
ical usefulness). Moreoever, as equations (11) and (12) show, this finding
remains strong and significant even when the other important environ-
mental variables are included.
developed almost exclusively from the study of existing organizations. We
found this line of argument enticing and pursued it by collecting temporal
data on the performance of ongoing newspaper organizations. If the task
environmental variables continued to show no relationship with this more
conventional dependent variable, it is likely that our measures were
somehow flawed. However, if the task environmental variables showed
significant associations with performance, an important empirical finding
could be at hand. If so, an additional comparison with the effects of
institutional environmental variables would seem worthwhile.

Our research strategy was to select four long-lived newspaper organiza-
tions and to record the annual circulation figures for each. We restricted
our attention to long-lived papers so as to have observations across as
many environmental variables as possible and for the longest possible
time. We used circulation figures to measure performance because it was
the only comparable variable available across long historical periods and
because for many newspapers it is a highly reliable measure verified by
third-party audit agencies.

Within the restrictions imposed, we selected four newspapers. Two
were general interest papers with large circulations: the San Francisco
Chronicle and the San Francisco Call. Two were small, specialized publi-
cations: the Chinese World (an ethnic weekly published in Chinese) and
the Commercial News (a weekly publication for the local maritime indus-
try). Circulation data for the Chronicle were available from 1908 to 1975,
for the Call from 1909 to 1959, for the Commercial News from 1929 to
1975, and for the Chinese World from 1909 to 1942 and again from 1949
to 1970.

We estimated the effects of task and institutional environmental vari-
ables on the circulations of each of these four newspapers. We treated
each paper as a separate time-series data set and estimated the effects of
environmental variables within a first-order autoregressive model of the
form
TABLE 5

EFFECTS OF TASK ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES ON THE CIRCULATIONS
oF FouR NEWSPAPERS

 

 

 

Pre-WWII — Post-WWII
Independent Commercial Chinese Chinese
Variable Chronicle Call News World World
POPN(t — 1) .....-. 12,116* 3,222* = - 72.8 555* -62.1
(1,684) (798) (90.5) (145) (94.4)
ILLIT¢ - 1) ....... —32,851* —42,450* — 4,080*
(12,300) (13,290) (1,343)
EMPS(t - 1) ....... 38,058* —3,853 767* ~313
(14,709) (2,744) (254) (309)
STRIKE(t - 1) ..... 836 — 462 -15.1 51.3
(1,036) (1,015) (44.0) (38.2)
WSTRIKE(¢t — 1) ... 36.6* 2.13 185 .671
(11.1) (14.3) (.642) (.507)
NEWSA(t — 1) ..... 155* 99.4 20.6*
(66.5) (79.5) (7.01)
NEWSB(¢t — 1) ..... 1,710* 374 —9.65 — 18.0 16.0
(630) (201) (20.8) (12.5) (26.5)
NEWSC(t - 1) ..... 1,035 —1,081* —.055 6.88
(566) (194) (15.1) (46.0)
UWAGE(t — 1) ..... 2,217* 2,125" 346% 149*
(320) (383) (91) (40.4)
CWAGEG¢ - 1) ..... 757 597 102*
(578) (655) (50.6)
MWAGE(t - 1)..... 787 597 102*
(578) (655) (50.6)
SWAGE(t - 1) ..... 1,108* 1,034 136*
(617) (706) (51.7)

 

Nore.—Standard errors shown in parentheses Data not available for the relevant years.

*P = 08.
overrides any other effect on the costs of newspaper production. We do
not have a good explanation for the positive effect of newsprint prices on
the Chronicle’s circulation; we are more inclined to believe the negative
effect of this variable in the NEWSC version on the circulation of the
Call. We suspect that these opposite effects on the two competitors are
interrelated. Increases in newsprint prices damaged the then-ailing Call
by causing either price increases or declines in quality. Lost readers then
migrated to the Chronicle, which, because of its larger size, could offer a
better product at a lower price.

Table 6 reports the estimates of similar circulation models using the
institutional environmental variables. Here the situation is reversed.
Only five of the 30 estimated environmental effects are significant, and
four of these are on the circulations of the specialized papers. Business
cycles show a positive effect on two of the papers, which possibly reflects
a greater interest in commercial activities during depressed periods. In-
dustrial establishments have a positive effect on the Chronicle’s circula-
tion but a negative one on the Chinese World’s. These relationships seem
entirely reasonable given the Chronicle’s dependence on the mainstream
economy of the area and the possibly countercyclical relationship of this
economy with the local Chinese economy, on which the World depends.
Finally, the political turmoil variable, POLIT, which showed so many
strong effects before, shows only one effect here: a negative relationship
with the postwar circulation of the Chinese World. This finding may
reflect turmoil directed against the Chinese, but such turmoil would prob-
ably have generated an increase in Chinese readers of Chinese papers.
Instead, it is likely that the turmoil was not directed against the Chinese
and consequently was not followed closely by the Chinese paper. Interest
in the turmoil by Chinese readers may have deflected attention to other
papers (which were reporting the turmoil) and consequently led to a
circulation decline for the World.
preneurial emulation to explain the cyclical pattern of organizational
foundings. We modeled this process above by estimating equations of the
founding process that included as independent variables the linear and
squared number of newspapers founded in the previous year. We now
consider the second part of Delacroix and Carroll’s argument, that which
concerns the effects of previous deaths on foundings. They write, “The
demise of a newspaper, which incites entrepreneurs, should have a swift
and positive effect on foundings, disproportionate to the resources it re-
leases. However, there must be some absolute limit to the positive effect
of deaths on births. A large number of newspaper deaths either signals
the presence of a noxious, countervailing force in the environment or is
interpreted as such by potential entrepreneurs” (p. 279). In modeling
terms, this argument translates again into a predicted curvilinear effect—
this time of deaths and deaths-squared on the number of foundings.
Table 7 reports tests of both aspects of the Delacroix and Carroll
model. Equation (1) reports estimates of a first-order autoregressive
model including POLIT and the number of foundings squared and lagged
one year. Equation (2) reports the same model but with deaths squared
and lagged one year also included. These estimates continue to support
the argument that concerns the effects of previous foundings but show no
support for the argument that concerns the effects of previous deaths. As
indicated by the coincidence of the positive coefficient associated with the
linear term and the negative coefficient associated with the squared term,
(211) (8b0") (120°) (s00") (900°) (062°)
#£08" «L0l'— x71 — : us 200° aa +810" xv T— syyeep IV ()
(280°) (s00") (v00") (ezt’)
+017" us 700" — aa #820" #897 — syseep IV (2)
(te) (s00") (002°) (v00") (281) (82'T)
4817 £00° i) 600° — «@7'T 9e'T sdurpunos TTy (2)
(TT) (00°) (eT) (et'T)
#67 aa aa 200° — *60°T v6L" sSurpunos [Ty (1)
SMIND X  (xPLITH (a)NdOd (eLTIOd (9), STIVAN («)STIVAN (x9)SGNQOU — (x?)SCNQO03 queysusg aqqenea uonenbg
(x LIIOd quapuadeg

 

 

SOINVNAC NOILV1NdOg IWNOILVZINVOAC AO STAGO|, AO SALVWILSY
previous births show the predicted curvilinear relationship with current
births. In contrast, the previous deaths variable has positive coefficients
on both terms and neither is statistically significant.

We continued this line of inquiry by examining the effects of previous
foundings and deaths on the other dependent variables under study—
rates of death and circulation levels. Rational economic reasoning led us
to expect that, owing to intensified competition, previous foundings
would increase death rates and deflate circulation levels. By similar rea-
soning, previous deaths should have exactly the opposite effect, since they
signal, at least some of the time, lessened competition. Although our
expectations were not firm, they were supported by the previous research
of Carroll and Delacroix (1982).

Equations (3) and (4) of table 7 report tests of these ideas using the rate
of death as the dependent variable. Equations (5)—(8) report estimates for
the circulation models. In both instances, we used the modeling
frameworks established above. For the rate models, our tests used the
number of foundings and the number of deaths calculated for the year of
newspaper founding. For the circulation models, we used the time series
of newspaper foundings and newspaper deaths, each lagged one year.

The estimates show some support for the notion that newspaper found-
ings heighten competition. The FOUNDS variable has a positive and
significant effect on the rate of death in all estimates. It also has a nega-
tive effect on the circulations of three out of the four papers used in this
analysis, although only one of these effects is statistically significant. We
were also particularly encouraged by the continued significance of the
political turmoil effects in the mortality models. After demonstrating that
POLIT increases the founding rate, we had to demonstrate that our
earlier mortality findings for this variable were not operating spuriously
through the competition created by the additional new papers.

The estimates for NFAILS show no evidence that organizational disap-
pearances lessen competition. Coefficients for this variable switch signs
frequently and never reach significant levels. Most likely, effects of the
sort we hypothesized occur only within specific classes of organizational
forms, if at all.

These findings, as well as our earlier ones that indicate a curvilinear
relationship between previous foundings and current foundings, suggest
that, when all newspapers are considered, both symbiotic and competi-
tive interorganizational relationships are operating. We thought that dis-
aggregating the analysis by using different organizational forms of news-
papers might help us disentangle these apparently opposing forces. Our
analysis was rather simple, involving the distinction between political
and nonpolitical papers only. We chose to focus on these two forms
because of our earlier interest in the greater sensitivity of nonpolitical
papers to events in the political environment. From an ecological perspec-
tive, this empirical finding suggests that, rather than being unresponsive
to the political environment, political papers are, in fact, part of the
political and institutional environment. Like collective violence, political
papers are forms of expression for unenfranchised groups. Unlike collec-
tive violence, political papers are—at least in democratic political sys-
tems—legitimate forms for such expression. Thus considered, collective
violence and political papers appear to be alternative modes of expres-
sion, each reflecting the efforts of newly created social groups to press
their specific demands on the local polity. Since they are alternative
courses of action, it is not irrational to find no strong association between
the two.

If, as with political turmoil, the rise of political papers reflects an
underlying restructuring of the social order, we would expect its effects to
be similar to that of turmoil. More specifically, political papers should
have positive effects on the general newspaper founding rate. Further-
more, nonpolitical newspapers founded at the same time as many polit-
ical papers should show higher death rates. Each of these effects should
be above and beyond the similar effects of political turmoil as well as the
similar effects of the number of foundings of nonpolitical papers. More-
over, we expect that, because of the evolutionary role of political papers
and the more advantageous competitive position that accompanies it, the
effects of political foundings will be larger than the effects of nonpolitical
ones. This is an extremely strong expectation given the small number of
political papers, their generally small size, and their relatively low
visibility.

Equations (1) and (2) in table 8 report estimates of the effects of politi-
cal foundings on nonpolitical foundings, with each earlier observed
significant variable controlled. Equations (3) and (4) report similar esti-
mates for the models of newspaper mortality. The findings are striking.
Political foundings have significant positive effects on both the founding
and death rates of nonpolitical papers. These effects are above and be-
yond the effects of political turmoil, which persist, and above and beyond
the effects of nonpolitical foundings, which also persist. Perhaps even
more striking, the effect of political foundings, as measured by the size of its
coefficients, is greater than the effect of nonpolitical foundings in both types
of models. In addition, the size of the estimated political turmoil effect
increases substantially in the equations including the PFOUNDS variable.
wee AOene’ eee Meh hE

 

al € ~ 7 afTT +L 10° — +#90°T 196° s8urpunoy

Teopyjoduon ***** (1)

SMAND x (sDLITI = (x)NdOd («LITTON (s)STIVAd — («I)STIVdd = (x SCNQO4d = («?),SGNQOSd (x SCNOO4d queysuol aqeue,, uonenby:
(eDLIIOd quapuadaq,

 

 

SuadVdSMAN AAHLO AO SOINWNAC NOILV1NdOd AHL NO SdadVdSMAN ‘TIVOILIIOg JO SLOIAAY AHL AO SALVWILSY
should be obvious: at a general level our analysis suggests that institu-
tional environmental variables, especially political turmoil, more strongly
affect the founding and death rates of organizations in the newspaper
industry, whereas task environmental variables more strongly affect the
performance of ongoing organizations. This suggests a fundamental dis-
tinction between the roles that these two types of environmental variables
play in shaping organizational populations. Although both types of vari-
ables affect the distribution of organizational forms, task environmental
variables are more closely associated with dominance, whereas institu-
tional environmental variables are more closely associated with entry into
and exit from the competitive process. These findings run directly counter
to Scott’s observation that it has “long been argued that technical envi-
ronments give rise to organizations” (1981, p. 208). They also suggest
different images of evolution according to the type of environment consid-
ered. Task environmental criteria invoke an image of gradual change;
institutional environmental criteria invoke one of punctual change.

The question of the generality of this interpretation remains open. At
present we are impressed by the consistency of existing evidence from the
newspaper industries of many areas. As we have discussed throughout,
our earlier studies of the newspaper industries in Argentina and Ireland
reached similar conclusions about the sensitivity of the press to political
turmoil (Carroll and Delacroix 1982; Delacroix and Carroll 1983). In
another set of studies concerning the press in Scandinavia, Hgyer and his
colleagues (Hgyer 1975, 1982; Hgyer, Hadenius, and Weibull 1975) have
shown through careful historical research that voting patterns strongly
affect the distribution and viability of newspapers that endorse specific
parties. Other, more anecdotal, evidence from countries such as Israel
also shows a strong connection between political events and the organiza-
tional structure of the press. That Argentina, Ireland, and Israel are
known for their tumultuous histories and that Scandinavia is known for
the partisan character of its newspaper industry suggest that the findings
reported here, from an industry that fits neither of these categories com-
pared with those of most countries, may be broadly applicable.

It takes little insight to recognize the sensitivity of the press to the
political environment. The press responds to, and sometimes even
creates, political scandals of all kinds. Perhaps more important, it shapes
public opinions and thus is foremost a political tool. It is well known that
these factors make the content and personnel of individual newspapers
sensitive to the political world. What has not been well known, and what
this study has demonstrated, is that political change, prompted by social
and economic change, shapes the overall organizational structure of the
industry itself. This discovery has important theoretical implications for
organizational ecology because it shows clearly that noneconomic criteria
having little to do with efficiency can play major roles in selection pro-
cesses among organizations. Such a demonstration is important: it shows
that the ecological framework is broader than that of microeconomics and
cannot be equated simply with the “survival of the fittest” and economic
efficiency.

The models and findings reported here also imply much about the role
of seemingly random historical events on industrial organization. Labor
struggles unrelated to the newspaper industry showed strong effects on
newspaper founding and death rates. Preston (1982), in a lucid discussion
of the relationship between individual life cycles and population charac-
teristics, has shown that the effect on foundings has primary impact on
the structure of the population, whereas the effect on mortality has pri-
mary impact on the life cycle of individual organizations. But perhaps
even more important is the observation from stable population theory
that both effects take extremely long periods of time to be fully realized in
the equilibrium distribution. In fact, before one set of such effects can be
fully realized, another environmental jolt has probably occurred, setting
off another series of effects. Organizational populations viewed in cross-
sectional perspective will thus appear irrational because they reflect in
part the memory of the population across a series of unrelated historical
events.
“Nearly all the banks in San Francisco and 3 in Los Angeles
suspended operations. Widespread unemployment caused
long bread lines. Serious riots broke out in San Francisco
and were unchecked for many days. . . . The Secretary of
the Navy ordered several ships into the harbor of San Fran-
cisco in case aid was needed” (Wood and Bush 1962, p. 122).

Leaders of the anti-Chinese movement formed the Working-
man’s Party and won the municipal elections. Although
racist, this group advocated the eight-hour workday; state
regulation of banks, railroads, and other corporations; tax
reform; compulsory education; and an improved monetary
system. This third party had a profound impact on Califor-
nia politics for four years (Delmatier et al. 1970).

Riots erupted against the Chinese. One person was killed, and
15 were wounded.

The legislature passed the Murphy Riot Act, making it illegal
to incite a riot. This act was a deliberate attempt to curb the
periodic outbreaks of violence in San Francisco (Mayer
1974).

A constitutional convention was held because of the popular
belief that the existing constitution had been unable to meet
the needs of the era (Wood and Bush 1962).

The Coast Seamen’s Union was formed. A strike of 1,200
members of the Iron Trades Council lasted several months.
The employers attempted to use nonunion labor, which re-
sulted in frequent clashes. Labor agitation led to the arrest
of socialist leaders (Mayer 1974).

These were years of bitter struggle between organized labor
and management (Eaves 1910, p. 69). Many unions struck,
leaving the “business of city and entire state at a standstill”
(Eaves 1910, p. 71). The San Francisco waterfront was the
site of the most violence, probably reflecting the high degree
of organization among labor there. In 1891, the Coast Sea-
men’s Union and the Steamshipmen’s Union merged.

Another time of great labor strife, especially from spring to the
November elections. On July 30, 13,000 longshoremen went
out on strike (Lewis 1980; Mayer 1974). Organized labor
formed the Union Labor Party, which won the municipal
elections.

The bloody United Railroads Strike paralyzed city transporta-
tion from May to September. Up to 39 persons died and
possibly 700 were injured (Wood and Bush 1962; McGloin
1978). Mayor Schmitz was found guilty of extortion, which
caused the Board of Supervisors to appoint a new mayor. In
July, the electorate chose a different mayor. For a few
months, San Francisco had three individuals and then two
who saw themselves as the legitimate mayor.

The Longshoremen’s Strike of June 1 was the first unified
strike of waterfront workers (Mayer 1974). In July, employ-
ers organized a law-and-order committee, ostensibly to
bring industrial peace but really to institute an open-shop
policy. At the Preparedness Day Parade on July 22, six
people died in violence between labor and management.
Although two radical labor leaders were indicted for the
killings, most viewed them as innocent (Lewis 1980). On
November 22, the Board of Supervisors enacted an ordi-
nance prohibiting picketing of any kind (Mayer 1974).

From May 9 through July, the city experienced the large
Maritime and General Strike of 1934, the most important
strike in its history (Mayer 1974). Ocean commerce was vir-
tually stopped because of unified strike action by the
Longshoremen, the Maritime Union, the Industrial Union,
and the Industrial Seamen’s Union, among others. On July
3, the Industrial Association attempted to break the strike;
two days later, two people were killed and 63 injured
(Mayer 1974). The governor sent in the National Guard. On
July 16, labor called a general strike, which brought practi-
cally all the city’s activities to a halt (McGloin 1978).

The period of the Free Speech Movement at Berkeley cul-
minated in the arrest of 814 demonstrators, the “largest
mass arrest in state’s history” (Lewis 1980). The president
and the chancellor of the university resigned.

A student strike at San Francisco State College started in
November and did not end until March.

On May 15, the “Battle of Berkeley” occurred at People’s
Park. Governor Reagan declared a state of emergency
(Mayer 1974).

Widespread student unrest occurred in May because of the
U.S. invasion of Cambodia and the Kent State killings. All
California colleges were forced to close. Seven thousand
students marched on Sacramento (California Journal 1970).
Azumi, K. A. 1972. “Environmental Needs, Resources and Agents.” Pp. 91-100 in
Organizational Systems, edited by K. A. Azumi and J. Hage. Lexington, Mass.:
Heath.

Bagdikian, B. 1971. The Information Machines. New York: Harper & Row.

Blau, P. M. 1970. “A Formal Theory of Differentiation in Organizations.” American
Sociological Review 35:201-18.

Brigham, C. S. 1947. History and Bibliography of American Newspapers, 1690-1820.
2 vols. Worcester, Mass.: American Antiquarian Society.

Bruce, J. 1948. The Gaudy Century. New York: Random House.

Burns, A. F. 1968. “Business Cycles.” Pp. 230-34 in International Encyclopedia of
the Social Sciences, vol. 2. Edited by D. Sills. New York: Macmillan.

California Journal. 1970. The California Journal (May). Sacramento: California Jour-
nal Press.

Carroll, G. R. 1983. “A Stochastic Model of Organizational Mortality: Review and
Reanalysis.” Social Science Research 12:303-29.

. 1984. “Organizational Ecology.” Annual Review of Sociology 10:71-93.

. 1985. “Concentration and Specialization: Dynamics of Niche Width in Popu-
lations of Organizations.” American Journal of Sociology 90:1262-83.

Carroll, G. R., and J. Delacroix. 1982. “Organizational Mortality in the Newspaper
Industries of Argentina and Ireland: An Ecological Approach.” Administrative
Science Quarterly 27:169-98.

Child, J., M. Fores, I. Glover, and P. Lawrence. 1983. “A Price to Pay? Professional-
ism and Work Organization in Britain and West Germany.” Sociology 17:63—78.
Daggett, E., supervisor. 1939. History of Journalism in San Francisco. Vols. 1-6.

O.P. 665-08-3-12. San Francisco: Works Project Administration 10008.

Dahmen, E. 1970. Entrepreneurial Activity and the Development of Swedish Indus-
try, 1919-1939. Homewood, IIl.: Irwin.

Delacroix, J., and G. R. Carroll. 1983. “Organizational Foundings: An Ecological
Study of the Newspaper Industries of Argentina and Ireland.” Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly 28:274-91.

Delmatier, R. D., C. F. McIntosh, and E. G. Waters. 1970. The Rumble of California
Politics. New York: Wiley.

Dill, W. R. 1958. “Environment as an Influence on Managerial Autonomy.” Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly 2:409-43.

Division of Labor Statistics and Law Enforcement. Various years a. California Labor
Statistics Bulletin. San Francisco: State of California, Department of Industrial
Relations.

Division of Labor Statistics and Law Enforcement. Various years b. California Labor
Market Bulletin. San Francisco: State of California, Department of Industrial Re-
lations.

Division of Labor Statistics and Research. Various years. Handbook of California
Labor Statistics. San Francisco: State of California, Department of Industrial Re-
lations.

DuBick, M. A. 1978. “The Organizational Structure of Newspapers in Relation to
Their Metropolitan Environments.” Administrative Science Quarterly 23:418-
33,

Dun & Bradstreet. 1978. The Failure Record. New York: Dun & Bradstreet, Industry
Studies Department.

Duncan, O. D., and A. J. Reiss. 1956. Social Characteristics of Urban and Rural
Communities 1950. New York: Wiley.

Eaves, L. 1910. A History of California Labor Legislation. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Eisenstadt, S. 1968. “Social Institutions.” Pp. 409-29 in International Encyclopedia of
the Social Sciences, vol. 14. Edited by D. Sills. New York: Macmillan.
Emery, F. E., and E. L. Trist. 1965. “The Causal Texture of Organizational Environ-
ments.” Human Relations 18:21-32.

Evan, W. M. 1966. “The Organization-Set: Toward a Theory of Interorganizational
Relations.” Pp. 175-91 in Approaches to Organizational Design, edited by J. D.
Thompson. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

1972. “An Organization-Set Model of Interorganizational Relations.”
Pp. 181-200 in Interorganizational Decision Making, edited by M. F. Tuite, M.
Radnor, and R. K. Chisholm. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.

Freeman, J., G. R. Carroll, and M. T. Hannan. 1983. “The Liability of Newness: Age
Dependence in Organizational Death Rates.” American Sociological Review
48:612-710.

Granovetter, M. 1979. “The Idea of Advancement in Theories of Social Evolution and
Development.” American Journal of Sociology 85:489-515.

Gregory, W., ed. 1937. American Newspapers, 1821-1936. New York: Wilson.

Hawley, A. 1978. “Cumulative Change in Theory and History.” American Sociolog-
ical Review 43:787-96.

Hirschmann, A. O. 1958. The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press.

Hgyer, S. 1975. “Temporal Patterns and Political Factors in the Diffusion of Newspa-
per Publishing: The Case of Norway.” Scandinavian Political Studies 10:157-
71.

 

 

. 1982. “Recent Research on the Press in Norway.” Scandinavian Journal of
History 7:15-30.

Hyer, S., S. Hadenius, and L. Weibull. 1975. The Politics and Economics of the
Press: A Development Perspective. London: Sage.

“Journals of the Bay Cities.” n.d. Unpublished manuscript. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Library.

Krueger, A. O., and B. Tuncer. 1982. “An Empirical Test of the Infant Industry
Argument.” American Economic Review 72:1143-52.

Lammers, C. J., and D. J. Hickson, eds. 1979. Organizations Alike and Unlike.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Lewis, O. 1980. San Francisco: Mission to Metropolis. 2d ed. San Diego: Howell-
North.

Lutz, B. 1981. “Education and Employment: Contrasting Evidence from France and
the Federal Republic of Germany.” European Journal of Education 16:73-86.

Mayer, R. 1974. San Francisco: A Chronological and Documentary History. Dobbs
Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana.

McGloin, J. B. 1978. San Francisco: The Story of a City. San Rafael, Calif.: Presidio.

Meyer, J. W., and B. Rowan. 1977. “Formal Structure of Organizations as Myth and
Ceremony.” American Journal of Sociology 83:340-63.

Meyer, J. W., and W. R. Scott. 1983. Organizational Environments. Beverly Hills,
Calif.: Sage.

Park, R. E. 1929. The Immigrant Press and Its Control. New York: Harper & Bros.

Pfeffer, J., and G. Salancik. 1978. The External Control of Organizations: A Resource
Dependence Perspective. New York: Harper & Row.

Pianka, E. R. 1983. Evolutionary Ecology. 3d ed. New York: Harper & Row.

Preston, S. H. 1982. “Relations between Individual Life Cycles and Population Char-
acteristics.” American Sociological Review 47:253-63.

Rosse, J. N. 1978. “The Evolution of One Newspaper Cities.” Technical Report,
Studies in Industry Economics. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University.

. 1980. “The Decline of Direct Newspaper Competition.” Journal of Communi-
cation 30:65—71.

Rowan, B. 1982. “Organizational Structure and the Institutional Environment: The
Case of Public Schools.” Administrative Science Quarterly 27:259-79.
Rowell, G. P. & Co. Various years. Rowell’s American Newspaper Directory. New
York: Rowell.

Scherer, F. M. 1980. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance. 2d ed.
Chicago: Rand McNally.

Schudson, M. 1978. Discovering the News. New York: Basic.

Schumpeter, J. A. 1939. Business Cycles. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Scott, W. R. 1981. Organizations: Rational, Natural and Open Systems. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

. 1983. “The Organizations of Environments: Network, Cultural and Historical
Elements.” Pp. 155—75 in Organizational Environments, edited by J. W. Meyer and
W. R. Scott. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.

Selznick, P. 1948. “Foundations of the Theory of Organization.” American Sociolog-
ical Review 13:25-35.

. 1949. TVA and the Grass Roots. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Stinchcombe, A. S. 1965. “Organizations and Social Structure.” Pp. 153-93 in Hand-
book of Organizations, edited by J. G. March. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Thompson, J. D. 1967. Organizations in Action. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Tilly, C. 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Tilly, C., L. Tilly, and R. Tilly. 1975. The Rebellious Century, 1830-1930. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Tolbert, P., and L. G. Zucker. 1983. “Institutional Sources of Change in Organiza-
tional Structure: The Diffusion of Civil Service Reform, 1880-1930.” Administra-
tive Science Quarterly 28:22-39.

Tuma, N. B., and M. T. Hannan. 1984. Social Dynamics: Models and Methods. New
York: Academic Press.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1976. Historical Statistics of the United States. Washing-
ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

. Various years. Census of Population. Washington, D.C.: Government Print-
ing Office.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1927. Wholesale Prices: 1890 to 1926. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.

. 1970. Handbook of Labor Statistics, 1970. Bulletin no. 1666. Washington,

D.C.: Government Printing Office.

. 1977. Wholesale Price Index, 1902-1977. Chicago: U.S. Department of
Labor.

U.S. Department of Labor. Various years. Report of the Commission of Labor. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Wheeler, J. F. 1973. “Historical Directory of Santa Clara County Newspapers, 1850—
1972.” Occasional Paper no. 1, Sourisseau Academy for California State and Local
History. San Jose, Calif.: San Jose State University.

Wood, R. C., and L. Bush. 1962. California History and Government. San Francisco:
Fearon.

Zey-Ferrell, M. 1979. Dimensions of Organizations. Santa Monica, Calif.: Goodyear.

Zucker, L. G. 1983. “Organizations as Institutions.” Pp. 1-47 in Research in the
Sociology of Organizations, vol. 2. Edited by S. B. Bacharach. Greenwich, Conn.:
JAI.
