Influence of the Marital History of Parents on the Marital and Cohabitational Experiences
of Children

Author(s): Arland Thornton

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 96, No. 4 (Jan., 1991), pp. 868-894

Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780734

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:58 UTC
A growing body of research demonstrates the importance of the marital
experiences of parents for their children. The intergenerational conse-

! This work rests on the contributions of a large number of people. Particularly impor-
tant are the contributions of the mothers and children who participated in the 23-year
panel study on which it is based. The interviewers, coders, and computing personnel
of the Survey Research Center provided expertise and perseverance in collecting and
processing the data. Ronald Freedman, David Goldberg, and Lolagene Coombs di-
rected the early data collections while Deborah Freedman collaborated with the author
in directing the later waves. Donald Camburn provided assistance in collecting the
later waves of data, and Linda Young-DeMarco provided assistance in managing the
data and in carrying out the analyses reported here. Blake Thornton assisted in
the preparation of the tables, and Judy Baughn prepared the manuscript. Bill Axinn
and Fran Goldscheider provided useful feedback on an earlier version. Funding for
the data collection and analysis was provided by the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development. The author is greatly appreciative of these many excellent
contributions but retains the usual responsibility for any errors. Requests for reprints
should be sent to Arland Thornton, Institute for Social Research, University of Michi-
gan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106.

© 1991 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0002-9602/91/9604-0003$01.50
quences of divorce have been studied, with documented consequences
that include economic deprivation, reduced educational accomplish-
ments, reduced psychological and physical health, more rapid initiation
of heterosexual relationships, and higher levels of marital instability.
There is also a growing literature documenting the importance of early
childbearing on the lives of the children. Theoretical explanations of
the intergenerational mechanisms that transmit the effects of parental
behavior to the lives of children have also grown increasingly sophisti-
cated, although there is still room for considerable improvement.

In this article, I examine the intergenerational effects of parental mari-
tal experience on the marital and cohabitational (union-formation) behav-
iors of their children. The article broadens and extends our knowledge
of intergenerational effects by extending the theoretical and empirical
analyses of union formation in three directions. First, this analysis ex-
pands the scope of parental marital characteristics and experiences con-
sidered. While past research has focused exclusively on marital disruption
and remarriage, this analysis also considers parental age at marriage and
the timing of the first birth. There are important theoretical reasons for
believing that these dimensions of the parental marital experience affect
the union-formation experience of children, and the empirical data pre-
sented here confirm that expectation. Second, I broaden the concept of
union formation from a narrow emphasis on legal marriage to a more
complex definition that includes nonmarital cohabitation. The inclusion
of nonmarital cohabitation in studies of union formation is useful because
of the recent dramatic increase in cohabitational experiences. As the theo-
retical conceptualization and empirical results will demonstrate, the in-
clusion of cohabitation in the study of the intergenerational effects of
parental marriage patterns on the union-formation experience of children
provides very useful insights into the processes operating. Third, I pro-
vide an expanded theoretical framework by developing several ideas use-
ful for linking the marital experiences of parents to the union-formation
experience of their children. The intervening causal mechanisms devel-
oped include status attainment, social control, pace of maturation, the
quality of the parental home environment, attitudes toward nonmarital
sex and cohabitation, and attitudes toward marriage. These intervening
causal mechanisms are used to develop predictions about the influence
of the parental variables on children’s cohabitation and marriage. Thus, I
break new theoretical and empirical ground in this article by considering
dimensions of parental marital history not previously considered in analy-
ses of the effect of parents on children’s union-formation behavior, by
considering an important new dimension of the union-formation experi-
ence of young adults (i.e., nonmarital cohabitation), and by providing a
broader theoretical framework to guide the interpretation of the data.
THEORETICAL LINKAGES BETWEEN PARENTS AND CHILDREN

Because of the centrality of parental and marital roles in adult lives and
children’s experiences, family scholars have long theorized about the
effects of premarital pregnancy, timing of marriage, and marital disrup-
tion in the lives of both parents and children (Hayes 1987; Pearlin and
Johnson 1977; Hetherington 1979). This theoretical development has
been accompanied by the accumulation of an extensive body of empirical
evidence showing significant correlations between the marital and child-
bearing experiences of parents and a number of behaviors, relationships,
and health outcomes for both children and adults (Hayes 1987; McLana-
han 1985; McLanahan and Bumpass 1988; Glenn and Kramer 1985;
Wallerstein and Kelly 1980; Thornton and Camburn 1987; Menaghan
and Lieberman 1986; Hogan and Kitagawa 1985; Udry and Billy 1987).
Although the causal structure underlying them remains debatable—par-
ticularly on the issue of cause versus effect (Blechman 1982; Edwards
1987)—many of the correlations are well established, and there is increas-
ing evidence about the causal role of marital and childbearing experience
(Menaghan and Lieberman 1986).

While discussion of all theoretically expected and empirically observed
outcomes of parental marital history is beyond my scope here, I will first
focus on a set of mechanisms that theory suggests are particularly rele-
vant to the linkage of the courtship and marriage behavior of children
to the marital histories of their parents. Where possible, I will identify
mechanisms that differentially affect the entry of young adults into mari-
tal and cohabitational unions and the ways in which remarriage would
modify the effect of a marital disruption. In considering these causal
mechanisms it is important to note that they are neither mutually exclu-
sive nor exhaustive. Several of them could operate to explain the effects
of parental marital history on children’s union-formation experience, and
their effects could be interactive as well as additive. Although I primarily
consider the mechanisms one at a time, I also discuss one of the more
interesting combinations.
Status attainment.—Family composition and structure play a promi-
nent role in theories of social mobility. Separation and divorce have been
shown to have dramatic negative effects on the financial well-being of
mothers and their children (Duncan and Hoffman 1985). Couples who
marry young and with the wife already pregnant also have lower educa-
tional attainments and economic accomplishments (Hayes 1987). We also
know that the socioeconomic achievements of parents have important
implications for the educational attainments of children (McLanahan
1985). Lower parental resources may have a negative effect on accom-
plishments in elementary and high school and may reduce aspirations for
college attendance. They will almost certainly have a negative effect on
the ability of parents to assist their children with college expenses and
will thus ultimately reduce the educational achievements of these children
(Goldscheider and Goldscheider 1988).

School attendance has been identified in several theoretical models of
the family-formation process as one of the major role alternatives to
early courtship, marriage, and parenthood (Hogan 1978; Marini 1978;
Rindfuss and Morgan 1984). By negatively affecting the school accom-
plishments of children, early parental marriage and marital disruption
reduce one of the major factors impeding early family formation. This
influence of school achievements, aspirations, and attendance on premar-
ital sexual intercourse, premarital pregnancy, and early marriage has
been documented by a number of empirical studies (Hayes 1987). These
consequences of reduced children’s education would be expected to lead
to a higher rate of union formation among children whose parents have
experienced a premarital pregnancy, early marriage, and a marital dis-
ruption. Because marriage is often seen as a more permanent and institu-
tionalized relationship than cohabitation, educational attainment may
have a stronger impact on marriage than it does on cohabitation, produc-
ing a larger effect of parental marital disruption on children’s entry into
marriage than on their entry into cohabiting unions.

Social control.—There are many theoretical reasons to expect a reduc-
tion in the ability of parents to influence and control their children follow-
ing a marital disruption. A marital disruption halves the number of par-
ents available for monitoring and socializing children. By its removal of
a primary earner from the family, it also increases the mother’s financial
responsibility, which often leads to her entry into the labor force or to the
extension of her hours of employment (Hetherington 1979). The mother’s
ability to interact with and supervise her children may be reduced by
more time spent away from home. A marital disruption also weakens the
abilities of parents to reinforce each other. Some scholars have theorized
that separation and divorce might cause a deterioration of parent-child
relations, a decrease in the respect of children for parents, and more
emphasis on relationships with peers, all of which can result in the decline
of parental influence on children (Hetherington 1979; Longfellow 1979).
An out-of-wedlock birth and single parenthood could also produce many
of the same results. Marriage, either a first marriage following an out-
of-wedlock birth or remarriage following divorce, results in the doubling
of parents in the household, which would expand the opportunities for
adult supervision and influence in the household. The ability of a steppar-
ent to supervise and influence children may, however, be hampered by
a lesser amount of legitimacy being associated with stepparenthood.

There are also good theoretical reasons to expect that weak parental
controls over children would lead to earlier dating, earlier and more
intensive heterosexual involvement, and earlier coresidential unions. As
compared with parents, young people have substantially more approving
attitudes toward premarital sexual intercourse and cohabitation without
marriage (Thornton and Camburn 1987; Thornton 1989). Because single
parents probably have a lower capacity to monitor and influence chil-
dren’s behavior, one would expect that a parental marital disruption
would lead to more frequent premarital sexual intercourse and pregnan-
cies among children, a relationship that has been demonstrated in the
literature (Hogan and Kitagawa 1985; Thornton and Camburn 1987;
McLanahan and Bumpass 1988), and to more rapid initiation of cohabit-
ing and marital unions. Because of the continued preference of parents
for marital cohabitation over nonmarital cohabitation for their children,
one would expect this mechanism to influence cohabitation more than
marriage.’

Earlier maturation.—Weiss (1979) suggests that two-parent families
have an “echelon structure” wherein there is an implicit agreement that
those on the superordinate level have authority over those on the subordi-
nate level. With this kind of authority structure, the rights and responsi-
bilities of children are defined differently from those of parents. This
echelon structure is substantially weaker in single-parent families, and
the responsibilities of children and parents are more alike. In effect, the
children in a single-parent family are more like junior partners; they have
additional rights and authority as well as more responsibilities and duties.
The result, according to Weiss, is that children in single-parent families
grow up faster, take on adult responsibilities earlier, and operate as their
parents’ peers at a younger age than children of stably married families.
Earlier maturation and independence make it likely that children in sin-
gle-parent families will initiate heterosexual relations and enter into co-
habiting and marital relations earlier.

There is a potentially important biological mechanism linking the mari-
tal histories of parents and children. Parents who marry young and are
expecting a child at marriage may have matured earlier than others.
Since physical development undoubtedly has a biological component,
children of parents who matured early are, on average, also likely to
mature more rapidly. These children could begin dating, intimate hetero-
sexual relations, cohabitation, and marriage at younger ages themselves.

Parental home environment.—The quality of the environment in the
parental home has been identified as one of the determinants of the timing
of residential separation from the parental home and entry into marriage
(DaVanzo and Goldscheider 1990; Goldscheider and DaVanzo 1988).
Children who grow up in families living in pleasant environments with
adequate standards of living, and in which parents and children are
physically and mentally healthy and there are close relationships among
family members, are less likely than others to rush into marital or cohabi-
tational relationships as a means of getting away from a negative family
environment.

A substantial body of research findings points to a negative association
between the quality of the home environment and parental experience
with early marriage, premarital pregnancy, and marital disruption. The
negative effect of single parenthood on family finances has already been
mentioned. Another negative effect is that the custodial parent and the
children frequently need to move from the home in which they were
living before the disruption of the marriage (Weitzman 1985). Such resi-
dential moves can disrupt existing networks of friends and neighbors. In
many instances, the conflict between former spouses continues after the
divorce, often involving the children. Marital disruption has also been
shown to be related to higher levels of physical and mental illness, alcohol
usage, and suicide (Menaghan and Lieberman 1986; Bloom, Asher, and
White 1978).

Couples who marry young and expect a child at marriage report lower
levels of marital satisfaction and substantially higher levels of separation
and divorce (Furstenberg 1979; Bumpass and Sweet 1972; Thornton and
Rodgers 1987). These findings indicate an overall lower quality of marital
relationship, which is probably related to less positive home environ-
ments for children as well. Single parenthood has been shown to reduce
the psychological well-being of children, and some of these effects appear
to be very long lasting (Peterson and Zill 1986; Glenn and Kramer 1985).
Marital disruption is also associated with children’s antisocial behavior
and difficulties in school (Newcomer and Udry 1987; Peterson and Zill
1986). These behavioral and psychological changes in a child—or in the
child’s siblings—may also increase strain and conflict in the family.

Attitudes toward nonmarital sex and cohabitation.—Previous research
has demonstrated a substantial intergenerational transmission of atti-
tudes toward sexual and family issues (Thornton, Alwin, and Camburn
1983; Thornton 1985; Thornton and Camburn 1987). Parents who were
expecting a child at marriage have more positive attitudes toward pre-
marital sex (Thornton and Camburn 1987) and probably more positive
attitudes toward nonmarital cohabitation as well. These parental atti-
tudes are probably transmitted to children, leading them to be more
inclined to enter into cohabiting relationships.

Divorce and remarriage can modify attitudes about nonmarital sex
and cohabitation. Many divorced parents reenter the courtship system in
which they must deal personally and directly with issues of intimacy in
nonmarital relationships. While many of the issues that parents confront
as they reenter the courtship process are similar to those they dealt with
before their first marriage, several important circumstances are different.
First, having had substantial experience with the marital role, in which
sexual relations are normative, previously married people are likely to
have different views about sex the second time around. Second, there
have been important long-term trends toward the acceptance of nonmari-
tal sex and cohabitation, with marriage becoming less relevant as a legit-
imator of intimate relations (Thornton 1989). These trends would be
particularly relevant for people reentering the courtship system. With
both personal and historical changes conducive to the adoption of more
approving attitudes toward sex among unmarried people, it is not surpris-
ing that such approving attitudes are more prevalent among previously
married people (Thornton and Camburn 1987). Many previously married
people also initiate sexually intimate relationships after their marriages
have been disrupted, and their rate of nonmarital cohabitation is particu-
larly high (Gwartney-Gibbs 1986; Bumpass and Sweet 1988).

A third difference the second time around is the frequent presence of
children. As previously married parents become involved in new sexually
intimate relationships and initiate cohabitational relationships, the be-
havior and values these represent become open information to members
of the family (Webb 1988; Wallerstein and Kelly 1980). Thus, it is not
surprising to find that single mothers’ dating frequencies and their experi-
ences with nonmarital cohabitation are both related to their children’s
sexual experiences (Moore, Peterson, and Furstenberg 1984; Inazu and
Fox 1980). Also, on average, children of previously married parents are
more approving of premarital sex and more sexually active themselves
(Thornton and Camburn 1987).

These influences can affect children’s marital and cohabitational expe-
riences in at least two ways. The increased involvement of young people
in sexual relations may propel them more rapidly toward both marital
and cohabitational unions, resulting in higher rates of both types of union
formation. Also, the attitudinal and behavioral role models that many
previously married people provide their children probably result in more
approving attitudes toward nonmarital cohabitation. Consequently, it is
likely that the influence of marital disruption on union-formation rates
would be much more marked for cohabitation than for marriage.

Attitudes toward marriage.—There are theoretical reasons for expect-
ing that a parental marital disruption will lead to both more personal
apprehensions about marital success and more negative attitudes toward.
marriage as an institution (Blechman 1982). The hypothesis of more nega-
tive attitudes toward marriage among children of divorce has been sup-
ported by previous empirical research (Thornton and Freedman 1982).
One would expect that these more cautious attitudes toward marriage
would slow the pace of entry into marriage. Such negative attitudes
toward marriage could also lead to increased cohabitation. This could
happen because young people who are cautious about marriage might
see cohabitation as an attractive way to ensure a lasting marriage or as
a substitute for marriage.

It is likely that parents who marry young have a positive orientation
toward their children’s marrying young. These attitudes may be passed
on to the children, leading them to marry earlier.

Summary of empirical expectations.—Most of the empirical predic-
tions derived from this causal reasoning are direct and uniform. All six
of the causal mechanisms outlined predict that parents who expect a
child at marriage and married at a young age will have children with
higher rates of cohabitation and marriage. In addition, five of the six
explanatory factors lead to a similarly uniform prediction concerning the
effects of separation and divorce: children whose parents have experi-
enced a marital dissolution will have higher rates of union formation,
both cohabitational and marital, than children of continuously married
parents. The exception to the uniform prediction of higher marital and
cohabitational rates among the children of divorce is the effect through
attitudes toward marriage where our theoretical reasoning leads to an
expectation of a lower marriage rate. Nevertheless, unless the influence
of this causal mechanism is particularly strong, the overall effect of a
parental marital disruption would be higher rates of cohabitation and
marriage among children.

Two of the causal mechanisms, attitudes toward marriage and atti-
tudes toward nonmarital sex and cohabitation, could result in a shift of
union formation from marriage to cohabitation. By producing more posi-
tive attitudes toward nonmarital sex and cohabitation, a parental marital
disruption could cause an increase in the overall rate of union formation
and encourage a shift from marriage to cohabitation. Similarly, the more
negative attitudes toward marriage associated with a parental marital
dissolution could cause an overall lower rate of union formation and a
shift from marriage to cohabitation. The combination of more positive
attitudes toward cohabitation and less positive ones toward marriage
could produce a dramatic shift from marriage to cohabitation. Such a
shift could result in children from disrupted marriages having higher
cohabitational rates, lower marital rates, and more unions being formed
by cohabitation than by marriage.

Remarriage.—For the most part, remarriage can be expected to ame-
liorate many of the influences of a marital disruption. When another
adult is brought into the family, income should increase, social control
should become more effective, and the echelon structure should be at
least partially reestablished. Remarriage may also cause a diminution of
negative attitudes toward marriage. Of course, the efficacy of remarriage
in reducing the positive effects of parental marital dissolution on the rate
of children’s union formation depends largely on the relationship of the
stepparent with other members of the family.

A different prediction of the effect of remarriage is provided by the
mechanism of changed attitudes toward nonmarital sex and cohabitation.
By definition all remarried people have entered into the courtship process
and have presumably had to deal with nonmarital sexuality. Significant
numbers have probably modified their earlier positions concerning pre-
marital sex, and many have probably been sexually intimate during the
new courtship process. While many of those who have not remarried
have probably had many of the same experiences and shifts of attitudes
as those who have, there are undoubtedly others who, being less involved
in dating and courtship, have had less need to reconsider their positions
on premarital sex. These considerations lead to the expectation that chil-
dren of divorced parents who have remarried will have even more pro-
clivity to marry and cohabit early than children of divorced parents who
have not.

Empirical strategy.—A full empirical investigation of the theoretical
ideas developed in the preceding paragraphs would require a four-part
strategy: (1) investigation of the overall effects of parental marital history
on children’s union-formation experience, (2) investigation of the influ-
ence of parental marital history on each of the intervening mechanisms,
(3) evaluation of the effect of each of the intervening mechanisms on the
children’s union-formation experience, and finally, (4) an evaluation of
the extent to which the intervening mechanisms can account for the
overall effects of the parental variables on the children’s experience.
Unfortunately, while the data set includes measures of some of the inter-
DATA AND METHODS

The sample.—The data I use here come from a panel study of mothers
and children that used a probability sample of first-, second-, or fourth-
born white children, drawn from the July 1961 birth records of the De-
troit metropolitan area. Approximately equal numbers were selected from
each parity group. The mothers were first interviewed in the winter of
1962, and subsequent interviews were conducted in the fall of 1962, in
1963, 1966, 1977, 1980, and 1985. The children were interviewed in 1980
when they were 18 years old and in 1985 when they were 23 years old.

The original 1962 survey interviewed 92% of the sampled mothers,
and the study has maintained the cooperation of a large percentage of
the families over the full 23 years. In 1985, interviews were obtained
with both mothers and children in 867 families, representing 82% of the
families originally interviewed in 1962.°

Marriage and cohabitation variables.—The marriage and cohabitation
data were obtained through a life-history calendar, described in detail
elsewhere (Freedman et al. 1988). This information was obtained
monthly for the period when the participants were aged 15 through the
time of the 1985 survey, which was conducted when they were between
the ages of 23.5 and 24.*

The marriage domain was introduced with the question, “Have you
ever been married?” Ever-married respondents were asked the dates of
all marriages and marital dissolutions. The cohabitation domain was
introduced by the question, “Have you ever lived together as a partner
in an intimate relationship with a (man/woman) without being married
to (him/her)?” For respondents who had ever cohabited, information
was ascertained about the dates cohabiting unions began and the dates
and reasons for their termination. The data-collection procedures also
allowed identification of cohabiting unions subsequently transformed into
marital unions.

Although the data contain complete marital and cohabitation histories,
the analysis was limited to entry into first cohabitation and first marriage
and the process of termination of first cohabitation. This limitation was
necessary because an analysis of subsequent cohabitation and marriage
for people less than 24 years old would provide a heavily selected set of
individuals at risk of a second cohabitation or marriage.

A previous article (Thornton 1988) provides a detailed description of
the process of entry into cohabiting and marital unions, including both
age-specific and cumulative rates of union-formation experience. That
analysis shows that, by the time the young women in the sample were
23.5 years old, 30% had exited single life to cohabitation and another
30% had exited single life to marriage. For men, a similar percentage had
exited single life to cohabitation, but only 14% had exited to marriage. Of
course, a number of those who first cohabited went on to marry. By age
23.5, 45% of the women and 24% of the men had married.

Since the young people in the study were only 23 years old at the time
of the survey and only 60% of the females and 45% of the males had
experienced a cohabiting or marital union, this analysis is clearly about
marital and cohabitation timing and experience through that age and
not about lifetime experience or ever marrying or cohabiting. The latter
analysis would be interesting but is not feasible with respondents in their
early twenties.

Parental marital history variables.—Premarital pregnancy status was
ascertained by a comparison of birth and marriage records (Pratt 1965).
This measure was coded as a dichotomous dummy variable, with one
indicating pregnancy before marriage and zero indicating a probable
postmarital first conception. Age at marriage is the mother’s age at mar-
riage coded in years and was treated as an interval-level variable.*
Four categories of marital dissolution experience between 1962 and
1980 were used in the analysis. The primary distinction is between those
whose parents had been continuously married and those whose parents
had experienced a marital disruption. And my theoretical framework
divides the latter group into those who did and did not remarry. While
the timing of separation, divorce, and remarriage, if any, and the amount
of time spent in each marital status might also influence children’s union-
formation experience, this analysis does not include these dimensions
since the number of families experiencing a marital disruption was too
small for further meaningful subdivision. The fourth category consists of
families who had experienced the death of one of the parents. Again,
sample size prevents further subdivision of the widowed group; this in-
ability to distinguish between those who did and did not remarry limits
the theoretical predictions concerning widowhood.

Control variables.—I used three control variables in the analysis in
order to minimize the chance that observed relationships were spurious
in the sense that they were produced by other variables. The father’s
and mother’s educations were two of these, with the father’s education
being measured in 1962 and the mother’s in 1980.° Both were treated as
interval-level variables. The third control variable was the child’s reli-
gious affiliation in 1980. Five religion categories were used: Catholic,
nonfundamentalist Protestant, fundamentalist Protestant or Baptist,
other, and none. The five categories were converted to four dummy
variables with nonfundamentalist Protestants treated as the reference
group.

In addition to including these three control variables in the multivari-
ate equations, I analyzed all of the parental variables simultaneously
in the same equations. Thus, the difference between the bivariate and
multivariate effects of any parental marital variable reflects the effects
of the other parental marital variables as well as the variables entered
exclusively for control purposes. Of course, I do not claim that this set
of control variables is exhaustive of all factors that might influence both
the parents’ and children’s union-formation experiences.

Methods.—I used continuous time-hazard models. The specific event-
history technique used is the proportional hazards model first developed
by Cox (1972; see also Namboodiri and Suchindran 1987 and Teachman
1983). This model has the advantage of allowing the form of the hazard
curve to remain unspecified but also the disadvantage of requiring that
differences in hazards be proportional across time. A preliminary analysis
checked the possibility that the effects of the predictor variables were not
the same across different ages. This analysis revealed no consistent, large,
or easily interpreted interactions of the effects with age, providing confi-
dence in the assumption that the effects were proportional across time.
This finding also suggests that the substantive effects of the parental
variables were quite uniform across the life course.

The hazard or rate of marriage or cohabitation can be written as h(a)
= ho(a) X exp(B,Z,), where h(a) is the rate of cohabitation or marriage,
ho(a) is an underlying baseline rate, Z, is the explanatory variables in-
cluded in the equation, and B, is the effect parameters associated with
the explanatory variables (Namboodiri and Suchindran 1987; Teachman
1983). In the model the underlying hazard rate, ho(a), is not estimated
but is adjusted multiplicatively by the effects of the predictor variables.
In order to facilitate interpretation of results, in the tables I report exp (B,),
which can be interpreted as the amount that the underlying hazard is
multiplied for each unit change in the explanatory variable (Namboodiri
and Suchindran 1987; Teachman 1983). Also the percentage change in
the underlying hazard associated with each unit of change in the explana-
tory variable is equal to 100(exp[B] — 1).
dichotomy, the statistical procedure was switched from hazard analysis
to logit regression.

Since cohabitation is frequently followed relatively quickly by mar-
riage, a third analysis focused on the total rate of marriage, ignoring
whether or not cohabitation had occurred earlier. This analysis permits
evaluation of the effect of the parental variables on the overall rate of
marriage. Persons who had not married before the 1985 interview were
treated as censored at the time of the interview. The investigation of the
importance of cohabitation as a route to marriage was also supplemented
by a logistic regression analysis that included only people who had mar-
ried and examined whether cohabitation had preceded the marriage. This
permits analysis of the effect of the parental variables on cohabitation as
a pathway to marriage. A fourth analysis shifts the focus specifically to
the determinants of the outcome of cohabitation. Here the analysis is
limited to those who first cohabitated and examines the rate of subsequent
entrance into marriage, allowing determination of whether the same fac-
tors that influence entrance into cohabitation and marriage directly also
influence the marital behavior of those who first cohabited.

Total union formation.—In table 1, I document the effects of the ex-
planatory variables on the total union-formation rate. All three maternal
history variables have substantively important and statistically signifi-
cant effects. The general pattern of relationships is very similar for males
and females, with the combined data for males and females adequately
representing the relationships for both. In the multivariate analysis, chil-
dren whose mothers were pregnant at marriage had a union-formation
rate that was 44% higher than those whose mothers were not. The total
union-formation rate of children also was reduced 6% for each additional
year of age at marriage for mothers. This multivariate effect implies that
the union-formation rate for children whose mothers married at the age
of 24 would be 31% lower than for children whose mothers married at
the age of 18. The union-formation rates for children whose mothers were
divorced but not remarried were 44% higher than the rate for children in
stably married families.’ And the rate for children whose mothers had
divorced and remarried was 90% higher than the rate for children of
stably married mothers. Thus, a young age at marriage, a premarital
pregnancy, and a marital dissolution in the older generation clearly in-
crease the rate of early union formation in the younger generation.

Entering cohabitation and marriage from the single state.—The effects
of parental marital history on the two types of union formation are docu-
10" > d xx

“$0 > dx

“yueysajo1g ysl[ejuauEpUNyuoU st A10Zaze9 payaso ayy ,
“poreur Ajsnonurjuos st A1039}€2 payyTwo ayy, 4

“giqetea Japued ay} ATUO YIM PoraqUd st ajquiTEA Yue sasdyeue [e}0} OY} Jog “sisATeue seu pue afeUlay ay} 103 JJas}t Aq UOTENba a4} oVUT pasozue st ajqeIIeA YOR ,

“aBELIVUL JO UOFeVQUYyOo JeYzIe Aq poutuiajap ae ZuTUNTy Ss} pue yUaAa Ue Jo UOHIUYap ay} ‘

{91qQe} Iq) UT syuaAd [eoNUep! se payear} are aseLEM

 

pue uoneyqeyoD ‘g[qQeIIeA JOJDIpaid ay) UT aduUeYD ZUM aUO YIM payeIsosse ayes BuLAJJapuN ay} UT yIYS aATNeoTdHINU ay} Juaseidal a1ay UMOYs sPaJyo BY. —"LON

 

 

 

 

 

      

 

        

 

 

a II IT 2
ss°sit ST'6s 80°0S x
«x08'T 7 . Fe (eTeure3) repuad s,pryD
96° 16" 16° * uoTyeonpe S,1oy3eq
E60" 7 #488" S6° * UoRRONpe sray}0W,
66° 7 et . 16° * QUONT
aL 7 7 . 89° ‘PMO
O2T 7 ¥S8°T 96" ysndeg Jo ysifeyuaurepung
s8° 40'I eel ttt tet teees Rereereetenenen retreat senn seen ayoure)

2 UOIsTOY
axbo'T aa TST 40ST 48ST 8eT Sp T crrrrrrssteeressesesesesesecseseces “+ PaLLIVWal JOU Ue PIdIOAIG
#%06°T #%6E°7 #€S'T #x01'Z #827 #419°Z aan *poLieuiar pue padi0aiq

¥l ST 0ST 8oT ert al OT HSS er eresreresseceeeesessssesscecreceeeeeessssssssssssces pemopim
woRdnisip yeyrey
axd6" #06" #86" +468" 486" #16" aselreUl ye asy
anbb'T #%69'T 48ST #%96°T ST #40 S°T Aouvuseid yeyewelg
PPO el®POW PPOW ePPPOW PPOW el2poyy SUTAVIaVA AOLaTag
AVUCATINYL «=—««FOPIQ-01BJ_—-LUWAHMYL «=—«JpsQ-o1aZ_—BYELRANINY «—tepAQ-0197
(858 = N) (ote = N) (2eb = N)
TVLOL SaTVAL STIVWaY

 

 

CAINIGWOD SHTVWAY INV SHIVA HOA GNV YAGNAD Ad ‘NOLLVLIGVHOD,
¥O TOVIMAVI SVM NOINQ GHL YHLAHM ONTIONS] ‘NOILVWYOT NOIN() ISI] S.NFACTIHD NO AYOLSIP[ IVLIEVIN TVLNGUVg 40 SLOasay FHL

T OTav1L
mented separately in table 2. Maternal age at marriage and premarital
pregnancy status influence both marriage and cohabitation rates, and the
direction and magnitude of the parental effects on children’s marriage
and cohabitation rates are very similar. For example, the multivariate
models for the total sample indicate that a maternal premarital pregnancy
is associated with a 46% higher cohabitation rate and a 40% higher
marriage rate. Similarly, each additional year of maternal age at marriage
is associated with a 6% reduction in both the cohabitation and marriage
rates. Thus, these data provide compelling evidence that maternal age
at marriage and premarital pregnancy status have powerful and similar
effects on the rates of entry into both marital and cohabitating relation-
ships.

A very different story emerges for the effects of maternal marital dis-
ruption. While all groups of young adults who have experienced a paren-
tal marital disruption have remarkably higher rates of cohabitation, they
do not have higher rates of marriage. The multivariate cohabitation
model for the total sample indicates that a parental marital disruption is
associated with at least a doubling of the cohabitation rate, whereas the
estimated effects in the marriage model are not statistically significant
and vary across groups. Thus, a parental marital disruption increases
cohabitation rates dramatically but has no definite effect on the marriage
rate.

Comparing marriage and cohabitation.—The analysis summarized in
table 2 suggests that maternal age at marriage and premarital pregnancy
status have similar effects on cohabitation and marriage. That is, neither
maternal variable provides a differential impetus for young adult children
to choose either cohabitation or marriage over the other. This impression
was confirmed by an analysis using logistic regression that included only
young adults who had experienced a union formation and that examined
the choice between cohabitation and marriage. The multivariate analysis
demonstrated that the effects of these two variables on the choice between
marriage and cohabitation were small and statistically insignificant (not
shown in tables).

The data, however, demonstrate a substantial effect of maternal mari-
tal disruption and remarriage on whether children’s union-formation ex-
perience begins with marriage or cohabitation. In an analysis of young
adults who had either married or cohabited, half of the children reared
by continuously married parents entered a legal marriage in their first
union experience, whereas the percentages for the three groups of chil-
dren experiencing a marital disruption ranged from only 20% to 27%. A
multivariate logistic regression analysis of this issue (including all the
predictor variables of table 2) confirmed that growing up in a family
that has experienced a marital disruption produces a substantial and
a IT IT
9188 Le°9S cf by
8s8 sg oz oer 7b Zope ttt iteseseseeee teers reese eeceeeeneee “AN
s0°1 aaa : pe Se ectee arenemenne ete (a{eu293) xepuad s,py4>
16° 96° 00'T * uoryeonpe s.1947e 7
96° 06° TO'T “uoeoNpa s,JayOFAL
vel Ly t Avt ouONT
68° STT s9° PHO
sel #b0°7 CO tater te eneaneaaeaceceracererereseeers ysndeg Jo ystyequewepunyz
68° 66° LL “ ooyye_
eUOLs tay
#x61°Z #4887 x6 TZ axle 7 ale aK Sh 7 pealizeules jou pue pasioaiq
#%09°7 #a8E°E #&90°7 ¥4L8°7 #x97°E +#x00°Y * palireulal pue pesi0aiq
#e08°Z 4f7'Z «10% SLT eeST'E aeeGLZ Te rreirreeaeetetseeeteereeeeeeeenseeeesesereeneees pamoprm
suoRdnasip yee
D6" #68" $6" #4L8° +6" a6" “aseleul ye a8y
#901 weZL'T #8h'T #468 “Sb'T eal 9'T * AQuBusard peyeUerg
suonenqeyod “Vv
PPO [POW PPO ePPoWl PPOW elPPOWl SATavIaVA AOLIIGIaAg
ayeLeAn Nyy AaPIQ-0137 ayeuVAnN, JapiQ-0197, ayeueAnNyy 49P1Q-0197
VLOL sav STIVWa]

 

 

GANIGWOD SAIVNAY GNV SATVJ, AOA GNV AAANA Ad ‘SUSTY ONILAUWNOD SV SAdAL NOILVWUO.T
-NOINQ OM], FHL ONILVIAL ‘AOVINAVI LSAT GNV NOILVLIGVHOD LSal S.NIAATIHD NO AXOLSIEL TVLMVL TWLINAAVd JO SLOadAY AHL

@ aTavL
10’ >d x«
‘SO >d«
“Way} Joy Jayourered yayyja ue jo

uoreUNse ay} payuederd yorya ‘parizeu Utey} Jo euOU asne2eq paphjoxe ase suoHET[Ye snoidiar ,,JaUjO,, YM a[doad ‘sazeur 10} siskpeue aBepseW ayeLTeANNUI ay} UT P

“yueysajoig ysl[equeuepunyuou st A1oZaze9 payyUO ay, 5

“parsreur Ajsnonurjuod st A103a7e9 pazyWwo BJ, q

“eu ‘T a[qe} aas ‘s[apour Japso-o1az Jo UOTIUYap JO] »
“parosuas se

payean st aderzzeul ‘stskfeue UONe}qeyod ay) UI “parosuad se payear} SI UOTE}IQeYOd ‘sisAjeue aSeLieUL ay} UT “T F[qQe} 0} 9}0U ySIY aas s}DaqJo Jo UONTUYep J04—-ALON

 

er
Sv'68
8s8 8s8
x09 _
96"
x68"
er
es
801
18°

 

19" 19"
sTT set
64° sa

b6" #% 76"
+#0¢'T x09

ot
Iz'vz
p80b

00'T
¥£8"
1a"
prt
ort

se
ss"
v0

so"
#T6'T

tb

ee
LL
88°

«16°
x97

II
06°82
cep

v6"
+06"
69°
OL"
TOT
TL"
8L°
srt
Lo

b6"
“aT

 

cer

 

x76"
xbPT

               

* @yeuray) Japuas s.pYD
uoreonpe s,Jayye
uoTeonpe S,1ay}0J]
auON
“RYO
+ ysndeg Jo ystfeyuewrepung
aoqyeD
UOIsTTAY
palizeurad you pue paos0alq:
++ payiseulal pue pasi0aiq
aa “ “* pamoplm
suondnastp yewaeyr
‘oBeleU ye asy
wetteeees AnuVUseId [ey eWay
reseley] “g
statistically significant decrease in marriage as compared with cohabita-
tion (data not shown in tables). Clearly a parental marital disruption has
an effect on the relative experience with marriage versus cohabitation, a
conclusion that I will return to later.

Entry into marriage when cohabitation is ignored.—While the data
presented in table 1 and 2 document the effects of parental marital history
on the total union-formation rate and the rates of exiting single status for
cohabitation and marriage, they do not allow evaluation of the total
effects of these parental variables on marriage. This examination requires
looking at first-marriage rates, ignoring whether cohabitation preceded
the marriage. This analysis is summarized in table 3. Both maternal
age at marriage and premarital pregnancy have substantial, statistically
significant effects on the overall marriage process. The rate of first mar-
riage, ignoring cohabitation, is significantly higher for those whose moth-
ers married young and were pregnant at the time of their marriage.
Furthermore, the magnitudes of these effects are very similar to the mag-
nitudes of the effects of these two variables on the other rates already
examined, which suggests that a maternal premarital pregnancy and a
young maternal age at marriage provide a fairly uniform positive stimu-
lus to all dimensions of union formation.

The differences among the marriage rates for children whose mothers
had been continuously married, widowed, or divorced and not remarried
were neither particularly large nor statistically significant. However, the
overall marriage rate of children whose mothers had been divorced and
remarried was significantly higher than the rate of the stably married
group. It appears, however, that the effect of maternal remarriage holds
primarily for daughters and not for sons.

A comparison of the effects of maternal marital history on marriage in
a single-decrement framework (table 3) with those effects on marriage in
a competing-risks framework (table 2) reveals a useful insight. The rate
of marriage for children whose mothers had experienced a marital disrup-
tion was generally higher relative to the marriage rate for children with
continuously married parents when marriage was studied in a single-
decrement framework (table 3) than when it was studied in a competing-
risks framework (table 2). Some numbers from the multivariate models
for the total sample will illustrate this point. In the competing-risks
framework, the marriage rate for children in the divorced and not remar-
ried group was 36% lower than the rate for children of continuously
married mothers, whereas their rate was only 9% lower when the overall
marriage rate was examined. The differential for the divorced and remar-
ried group increases from a positive 15% to a positive 51% when the
dependent variable is shifted from marriage in a competing-risks frame-
work to a framework in which cohabitation is ignored.
10’ > d «x
‘SO >de

“safeUL JO SeBeLIIUL Y} JO SISATeUe sJeLTEAN[NUL ay} J0J afdures ay} Jo UOTLNWSAI v SuTe[dxe p “u ‘Z aIquL p

“yuRysajo1g yslfeyuauEpuNsuou st AloZayed payrwo sy ,

“palareur A[snonurjuod st A10393e9 payuio ay], q
“T 91@3 “& “u 29s sjapouL Jeps0-o1az Jo UOTUYap 104 ,

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

“pozcyeue
aq 0} Jada Ue se PapnhjUT st aFeTVU [eULIOJ [UC *9[4e} SY} UT pasOUs! st UOHEqeYyoo YM aoustadxY “1 eq"? 07 aJ0U ysIY aaS syDaJo Jo UONTUyap oe aoe
a or WW “fp
26°STT Of 4z 69° 7h “x
8S8 ss8 Or cer "ND
axl Z'7 7 7 (afewaj) Japua’ s.pyryD
96° s6° 86° “* uoreonpa sJaqyey
#06" 68° x065 atte tettt ase ecceeececeeecececesceecees uoTyeINpos s,J3ay}0/,
18° 96" TO sttrttrntsetnnaceacuecuecucuacenceeceuseustusereztecs 2au0N
ir aa 90 ttt tateteateteestteseeseseseeeesetseetetersenenes pmo
Ort 121 SOT “ ysndeg Jo ystjeyuawepun.y
£3" LOT EL0 ttt tte eneanannnncacccenaacacusuarenseseerssser sees oouyea
MOLT
16" $6" so 68° 16" 86° “"* pateulad jou pue paosoaiq,
axl ST x06 °T vO'T 8rT #408 'T aad 7 ** paliqeulas pue padioaiq
s6° £6" OL 69° aut JOT  rriirttrrrerestesseseesecseaseeaseessesseeses pamopim,
guondnistp [eye
ee £6" 06° b6" x88" #6" #416" ‘aBelreu ye ay
487°T aal ST 60'T ¥x€0°Z T2T #6E'T *Aoueusasd yeyrewelg
PPOW el?POW PPOW PPO PPOW POW SaTavIavA xOLOIGaad
aeURANNYL J9pIQ-0197, azene anny 39pi9-019Z, ayeLeAn NY, 29p19-0197
‘TWLOL SITVAL SHTIVWI

 

 

 

daNIGWOD SATVNGY ANV SATVJ XOd GNV YAGNA Ad
‘NOILVLIGVHOD ONIXOND] ‘AOVIGAVI LSUlY SNIACTIHD NO AMOLSIQ TLV IVLNaaVd JO SLOIIAY IHL

€ ATAVL
This pattern, together with other data presented earlier, suggests quite
a different process of entry into marriage among children who had experi-
enced a childhood parental marital disruption from children whose par-
ents had been continuously married. Growing up in a home in which
there has been a marital disruption results in a relative shifting of the
union-formation process from entering marriage directly from the single
state to entering marriage indirectly through cohabitation. It clearly in-
creases the rate of direct entry into cohabitation (table 2) and increases
the relative preponderance of direct cohabitation entries relative to direct
marital entries. However, many children of disrupted marriages who
cohabit also go on quite rapidly to enter marital unions. Consequently,
the overall rate of marriage of children who have experienced a parental
marital disruption is not appreciably lower than the rate for children who
have not. And, for children whose mothers divorced and remarried, this
process (of marriage preceded by cohabitation) results in a substantially
higher overall rate of marriage than for children whose parents had been
continuously married (table 3).

Cohabitation experience of those who married.—The cohabitation ex-
perience of those who married further highlights the differences in paths
to marriage. Of the children who had married by the time of the 1985
data collection, 29% of those with continuously married parents had
cohabitated before the marriage, whereas, for the three groups of children
who had experienced a parental marital dissolution, between 54% and
62% had cohabited before marrying. A multivariate logistic regression
analysis of whether marrying couples had previously cohabited (contain-
ing all the variables listed in table 3) confirmed that the effect of a paren-
tal marital disruption was both substantial and statistically signficant
(data not shown in tables).

Marriage rates of cohabiting couples.—I also wanted to know whether
the dimensions of parental marital history that explained entry into co-
habitation and directly into marriage also explained the marital behavior
of those who first cohabited. I accomplished this by limiting the analysis
to young persons whose first union experience was cohabitation without
marriage and analyzing two rates: (1) the rate of marrying the cohabiting
partner and (2) the rate of marrying anyone. The second rate includes
both marriages to the first cohabiting partner and marriages to someone
else following the dissolution of the cohabiting relationship. Both vari-
ables were defined in terms of time since the initiation of the first cohabi-
tational experience. In order to provide a sufficient number of cases for
analysis, I combined the three marital dissolution groups into one cat-
egory.

Two of the three variables, parental premarital pregnancy status and
experience with a marital dissolution, had no statistically significant ef-
fects on marriage following cohabitation for either men or women (data
not shown in tables). The third variable, the mother’s age at marriage,
however, did have an important effect for women, although not for men.
In the multivariate analysis for women, every additional year of the
mother’s age at marriage was associated with a 9% decrease in the rate
of marrying the partner and a 10% decline in marrying anyone (including
the partner), and both differences are statistically significant at the .10
level. This effect suggests that, at least among women, there is a perva-
sive effect of young maternal marital timing on the rapidity of entry into
unions, and this effect operates to increase marriage rates even among
those who are already cohabiting.

Remarriage of mother.—Although the data presented earlier document
the relative effects of divorce followed by remarriage with divorce not
followed by remarriage, the structure of the equations in those tables does
not allow estimation of sampling variability and statistical significance of
the differences between the remarried and not remarried groups. I calcu-
lated those parameters by reestimating the equations using the divorced
and remarried group as the omitted category (data not shown).

For females, the differences between having a divorced and remarried
mother and having a divorced mother who has not remarried are consis-
tent and striking. In every comparison the union-formation rate for the
daughters of remarried mothers is higher than for those whose mothers
had not remarried: for the total union-formation rate the relative differ-
ence was 1.63 (table 1); for cohabitation it was 1.47 (table 2); for marriage
in a competing-risks framework it was 1.90 (table 2); and for marriage
with cohabitation ignored it was 1.96 (table 3). Only the last difference
was statistically significant at the .05 level using a two-tailed test, while
the first and third differences were significant at the .10 level. For males,
differences between the two groups were inconsistent and relatively small
when compared with their sampling variability.
enter into cohabitational and marital unions at a substantially higher rate
than other children. The effects of these two factors are similar for both
marriage and cohabitation. Furthermore, among women, the consistent
effect of maternal age at marriage extends even to the decision to marry
after entry into a cohabitational union.

Several causal linkages were posited to connect a young maternal age
at marriage and premarital pregnancy status to children’s union-forma-
tion experience. These include theories about the lower status attainment
of children, the quality of the parental home environment, the pace of
maturation, and attitudes toward marriage and nonmarital sex and co-
habitation. Direct examination of these causal mechanisms was beyond
my scope here, and the pattern of results provided little help in evaluating
their relative importance. Additional research is needed concerning these
causal mechanisms and the ways they transmit the effects of parental
experience to the union-formation behavior of their children.

Marital dissolution and remarriage. —The influence of a parental mar-
ital disruption on children’s union-formation experience is both substan-
tial and complex. A childhood parental marital disruption substantially
increases the overall rate of leaving the single state for a union and shifts
the first union experience away from marriage and toward cohabitation.
The result is that the pathway to marriage differs significantly for chil-
dren who have experienced a childhood marital disruption and those
with continuously married parents; children who have experienced a
childhood marital dissolution are much more likely than others to cohabit
before marriage. There is also a tendency for parental remarriage to
increase the higher rate of union formation among children even further,
with this effect being more marked for young women than for young
men.

Although direct tests of the theoretical mechanisms posited to explain
the effects of parental marital dissolution and divorce are beyond the
scope of this article, indirect evaluations are possible because there are
some important differences in the predictions that the various theories
make about the pattern of effects. Comparisons of the predictions from
the different theoretical models with the patterns in the empirical data
provide a means for evaluating the relative usefulness of the different
mechanisms.

Five of the six theoretical mechanisms—status attainment, social con-
trol, earlier maturation, parental home environment, and attitudes to-
ward nonmarital sex and cohabitation—correctly predict the positive
influence of a parental marital dissolution on the cohabitation rate. How-
ever, these same five mechanisms also predict a positive effect of a paren-
tal marital disruption on the marriage rate, a prediction that is clearly
contrary to the empirical data. The lack of a positive effect on marriage
is especially problematic for the status-attainment mechanism because
there are reasons to believe it would affect marriage even more than
cohabitation. The negative implications of the lack of an effect of paren-
tal marital disruption on children’s rate of entry into marriage are least
severe for social control and attitudes toward nonmarital sex and cohab-
itation because these two mechanisms suggest more of an effect on co-
habitation than on marriage. In these two cases, the strong effect on
cohabitation could be contributing to a relative shift from marriage to
cohabitation.

The theoretical predictions of the attitudes-toward-marriage mecha-
nism are particularly important here. This is the only mechanism identi-
fied that does not predict a higher rate of exiting the single state for
marriage among those whose parents have experienced a marital disrup-
tion. In fact, it makes the opposite prediction—that children who have
experienced a parental marital disruption may actually have lower rates
of exiting the single state for marriage.

Only one of the theoretical mechanisms is able to account for the effect
of a parental remarriage on the rate of children’s union formation: atti-
tudes toward nonmarital sex and cohabitation, which predicts that a
remarriage would increase rather than reduce the positive union-forma-
tion effect of a marital dissolution. The other causal mechanisms suggest
that a maternal remarriage might even ameliorate the effects of the origi-
nal disruption, and the data are clearly inconsistent with this expectation.

This review of the correspondence of the empirical results with the
various theoretical mechanisms suggests that the most promising single
theoretical mechanism may be the one focusing on the influence of a
parental marital dissolution on attitudes toward premarital sex and co-
habitation. This mechanism correctly predicts the positive effect on co-
habitation and suggests that the effect on cohabitation would be stronger
than the effect on marriage. This mechanism also correctly predicts the
increased positive effect on union-formation rates associated with a pa-
rental remarriage. The one shortcoming of this explanation is its predic-
tion of a positive effect of marital dissolution experience on entry into
marriage.

By adding the second attitudinal mechanism—attitudes toward mar-
riage—to the mechanism based on attitudes toward nonmarital sex and
cohabitation, this shortcoming can be overcome. The attitudes-toward-
marriage mechanism suggests that a parental marital dissolution may
make young people apprehensive about marriage and their success in it,
which causes them to proceed more slowly. This caution could counteract
any positive inclinations of children whose parents have experienced a
marital disruption to enter marriage more rapidly. In fact, if this caution
is strong enough, it could result in an overall slower rate of entry into
marriage for these children.

In the theoretical section, I also used the two attitudinal mechanisms
to posit that a parental marital dissolution would be associated with a
shifting of the union-formation experience from marriage to cohabitation.
The data are consistent with this expectation, in that children of dis-
rupted marriages were more likely than others to cohabit first and then
enter into a marital relationship.

While the theoretical predictions produced by a combination of differ-
ential attitudes toward marriage and toward nonmarital sex and cohabi-
tation are consistent with the empirical data, confirmation of the validity
of these causal influences on cohabitation and marriage will require more
direct measurement and evaluation. In addition, the inability of the other
mechanisms to account for all of the empirical results does not demon-
strate that they have no effects. They may, indeed, have the effects
hypothesized, but those effects could be weaker than those of the attitudi-
nal mechanisms. Thus, when their effects are in the same direction as
the attitudinal mechanisms, the effects would be mutually reinforcing,
but when the effects are in the opposite direction, the stronger effects of
the attitudinal variables would prevail. Resolution of these issues also
awaits further direct empirical measurement and testing of the specific
causal mechanisms.
Restrospective Data.” In Sociological Methodology, vol. 18. Edited by C. C. Clogg.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr. 1979. “Premarital Pregnancy and Marital Instability.”
Pp. 83-98 in Divorce and Separation, edited by G. Levinger and O. C. Moles.
New York: Basic.

Glenn, Norval D., and Kathryn B. Kramer. 1985. “The Psychological Well-Being of
Adult Children of Divorce.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 47:905-12.

Goldscheider, Frances K., and J. DaVanzo. 1989. “Pathways to Independent Living
in Early Adulthood: Marriage, Semiautonomy, and Premarital Residential Indepen-
dence.” Demography 26:597-614.

Goldscheider, Frances K., and Calvin Goldscheider. 1988. “The Intergenerational
Flow of Income: Family Structure and the Status of Black Americans.” Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, New
Orleans.

Gwartney-Gibbs, Patricia A. 1986. “The Institutionalization of Premarital Cohabita-
tion: Estimates from Marriage License Applications.” Journal of Marriage and the
Family 48:423-34.

Hayes, Cheryl D., ed. 1987. Risking the Future. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy.

Hetherington, E. Mavis. 1979. “Divorce: A Child’s Perspective.” American Psychol-
ogist 34:851-58.

Hogan, Dennis P. 1978. “The Effects of Demographic Factors, Family Background,
and Early Job Achievement on Age at Marriage.” Demography 15:161-75.

Hogan, Dennis P., and E. M. Kitagawa. 1985. “The Impact of Social Status, Family
Structure, and Neighborhood on the Fertility of Black Adolescents.” American
Journal of Sociology 90:825-55.

Inazu, J. K., and G. L. Fox. 1980, “Maternal Influence on the Sexual Behavior of
Teenage Daughters.” Journal of Family Issues 1:81-102.

Longfellow, Cynthia. 1979. “Divorce in Context: Its Impact on Children.” Pp.
287-306 in Divorce and Separation, edited by G. Levinger and O. C. Moles. New
York: Basic.

Marini, Margaret M. 1978. “The Transition to Adulthood: Sex Differences in Educa-
tional Attainment and Age at Marriage.” American Sociological Review 43:483—
507.

McLanahan, Sara. 1985. “Family Structure and the Reproduction of Poverty.” Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology 90:873—901.

McLanahan, Sara, and Larry Bumpass. 1988. “Intergenerational Consequences of
Family Disruption.” American Journal of Sociology 94:130-52.

Menaghan, Elizabeth G., and Morton A. Lieberman. 1986. “Changes in Depression
Following Divorce.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 48:319-28.

Moore, K. A., J. L. Peterson, and Frank F. Furstenberg, Jr. 1984. “Starting Early:
The Antecedents of Early Premarital Intercourse.” Revised version of a paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, Minne-
apolis.

Namboodiri, K., and C. M. Suchindran. 1987. Life Table Techniques and Their
Applications. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press.

Newcomer, Susan, and J. Richard Udry. 1987. “Parental Marital Status Effects on
Adolescent Sexual Behavior.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 49:235—40.

Pearlin, Leonard I., and Joyce S. Johnson. 1977. “Martial Status, Life-Strains and
Depression.” American Sociological Review 42:704-15.

Peterson, James L., and Nicholas Zill. 1986. “Marital Disruption and Behavior Prob-
lems in Children.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 48:295-307.

Pratt, W. 1965. “A Study of Marriage Involving Premarital Pregnancies.” Ph.D.
dissertation. University of Michigan, Department of Sociology.
Rindfuss, R. R., and S. P. Morgan. 1984. “The Transition to Motherhood: The
Intersection of Structural and Temporal Dimensions.” American Sociological Re-
view 49:359-72.

Teachman, Jay D. 1983. “Analyzing Social Processes: Life Tables and Proportional
Hazards Models.” Social Science Research 12:263-301.

Thornton, Arland. 1985. “Changing Attitudes toward Separation and Divorce:
Causes and Consequences.” American Journal of Sociology 90:856—72.

. 1988. “Cohabitation and Marriage in the 1980s.” Demography 25:497-508.

. 1989. “Changing Attitudes toward Family Issues in the United States.”
Journal of Marriage and the Family 51:873-93.

Thornton, Arland, Duane F. Alwin, and Donald Camburn. 1983. “Causes and Con-
sequences of Sex-Role Attitudes and Attitude Change.” American Sociological Re-
view 48:211-27.

Thornton, Arland, and Donald Camburn. 1987. “The Influence of the Family on
Premarital Sexual Attitudes and Behavior.” Demography 24:323-40.

Thornton, Arland, and Deborah Freedman. 1982. “Changing Attitudes toward Mar-
riage and Single Life.” Family Planning Perspectives 14:297-303.

Thornton, Arland, and Willard L. Rodgers. 1987. “The Influence of Individual and
Historical Time on Marital Dissolution.” Demography 24:1-22.

Udry, J. Richard, and John O. G. Billy. 1987. “Initiation of Coitus in Early Adoles-
cence.” American Sociological Review 52:841-55.

Wallerstein, Judith S., and Joan Berlin Kelly. 1980. Surviving the Breakup. New
York: Basic.

Webb, Marilyn. 1988. “Sex and Single Parents.” Pp. 104-9 in Marriage and Family
88/89, edited by Ollie Pocs. Guilford, Conn.: Dushkin.

Weiss, Robert S. 1979. “Growing Up a Little Faster: The Experience of Growing Up
in a Single-Parent Household.” Journal of Social Issues 35:97-111.

Weitzman, Lenore J. 1985. The Divorce Revolution. New York: Free Press.
