An Empirical Study of Military-Industrial Linkages

Author(s): Stanley Lieberson

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Jan., 1971), pp. 562-584
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776429

Accessed: 08-06-2016 02:59 UTC
A major controversy exists in macrosociology over the forces which in-
fluence national policy in the United States and other advanced industrial
societies. On the one hand, the elitists argue that a relatively small group
of people, representing a narrow range of interests, determine national
policy across a range of domains including foreign affairs, military spend-
ing, and major domestic programs. By contrast, the pluralist school
views national decision making as a process influenced by a broad and
diverse array of interest groups, with no single group or set of groups
powerful enough to consistently dominate the national political system.
Although the two schools are not diametrically opposed, as Kornhauser’s
comparison (1968) suggests, they are contradictory on a number of
counts.? However, despite the fact that national political systems are a

1 T am deeply indebted to Mrs. Lynn K. Hansen for her invaluable research assistance
and critical suggestions. The paper also benefited from a critical reading by Mr.
Gordon W. Clemans and helpful suggestions from Professors Herbert L. Costner,
Richard M. Emerson, and S. Frank Miyamoto. In addition, I received many com-
ments from colleagues and students in the Center for Studies in Demography and
Ecology, University of Washington. The figures were prepared by Mr. Charles B. Mc-
Vey, former draftsman in the Center for Studies in Demography and Ecology.

2 Both Rose (1967) and Pilisuk and Hayden (1968) provide excellent reviews of the
rather extensive literature developed by both the elitists and pluralists. There are
Military-Industrial Linkages

central concern in sociology, efforts to untangle the conflicting theories
often appear more like ideological debates than contributions to scien-
tific knowledge.

There are two special obstacles to overcome before the contradictory
implications of elitism and pluralism can be resolved. First, scholarly
positions on this subject must be judged by their ability to develop a
comprehensive system that takes account of the available information
rather than by their implications for contemporary politics. Because of
the political overtones, both the elitists and pluralists approach the issues
polemically, as if total rejection of the rival theory is the only possible
way such a dispute can be resolved. It is true that some scientific con-
troversies are eventually resolved when a body of empirical research per-
sistently supports one theory and is incompatible with another.* But
rival theories in the social sciences often turn out to be incomplete and
distorted parts of a greater truth, such that neither is consistently sup-
ported by empirical research. The theoretical controversy over heredity
versus environment, for example, is now rejected because it involved a
false and unnecessary polarization..

The second major obstacle stems from the difficulties of conducting
empirical research relevant to these theories. Not only are sociologists
unable to make direct observations on the decision processes, but it is
difficult to design research that encompasses the broad range of political
events covered by these conflicting theories. No single research effort can
be sufficiently comprehensive or critical, for example, to provide a con-
clusive test of the Marxist argument that capitalism generates a surplus
that can only be used up through war and waste (see Baran 1957; Baran
and Sweezy 1966). As a consequence, overinterpretation of the results is
all too easy. Actually, each empirical study must be viewed only as con-
tributing to an aggregate of investigations that deal with national power.
“coincidence of interest between those who control the major means of
production and those who control the newly enlarged means of violence.”
Pluralists also recognize the existence of a military-industrial complex
(see, e.g., Rose 1967, pp. 94-98), but they view this as but one of many
interest constellations. Accordingly, they deny the elitist claim that this
particular complex has unique breadth, scope, and coordination (see the
review by Pilisuk and Hayden 1968).

Several facets of the dispute can be submitted to empirical study. In-
deed, unless one claims that power and influence are unrelated to position
in the social strueture, it is clear that many of the issues raised by the
elitists and pluralists call for a quantitative approach, dealing with mat-
ters of degree and frequency rather than absolutes. How extensive are
the overlapping interests of major institutions? To what degree, and in
what domains of national policy, do these connections modify and influ-
ence the decision-making processes? Has there been a substantial change
in these relations over time?

There is little reason to doubt that a “military-industrial complex”
exists if by this phrase is meant a set of commonly shared interests be-
tween the military and some major corporations. Certain striking fea-
tures of these linkages, recognized by both theoretical schools, are: the
interchange of personnel between the military and their corporate sup-
pliers, the network that exists within the business sector, and the role of
large corporations as suppliers to the military.
TABLE 1

OUTSIDE BOARD MEMBERS OF THE MORGAN GUARANTY TRUST COMPANY,
NEw York, 1965, BY PRIMARY COMPANY AFFILIATION

 

Corporation (and Rank)

American Machine and Foundry (150)......

 

American Telephone and Telegraph (U-1)
Bethlehem Steel (18). . .

Campbell Soup (93)

Coca Cola (68).
Columbia Gas System (U- 10)
Continental Oil (39)........
E. I. duPont de Nemours (12).
Gillette (204)..............
International Nickel (F-70).
New York Life Insurance (J-4)
Pennsylvania Railroad (T-2)..
Procter and Gamble (24).
Singer (60)...............
Standard Oil of New Jersey (2)
J. P. Stevens (86).........
State Street Investment...

 

   
   
 
  

 

 

Principal Activities

Bowling, leisure time products, spe-
cialty industrial machinery

“Bell” system, electronics

Steel

Soup, other food products

Soft drink syrup, juices

Natural gas distributor

Crude oil, fertilizer, petrochemicals

Chemicals, synthetic fibers

Razors, wave kits, pens

Nickel, platinum, copper

Insurance

Railroad

Soap, foodstuffs from vegetable oils

Sewing machines, calculators

Petroleum

Textiles

Mutual fund

 

Nore.—Data not available on two additional organizations represented on the bank’s board: Bechtel

Corporation; The Duke Endowment. Letters F, I,

T, and U indicate corporation is ranked, respective-

ly, as foreign, life insurance, transportation, or utility. All other rankings refer to 500 largest indus-

trial corporations.

(1965)

Source.—Rankings from Fortune (1965a, 1965b); principal activities from Standard and Poor's
Major Contractors

Clearly a segment of American industry is deeply dependent on the mili-
tary for survival. Attempts by the aircraft industry, for example, to
diversify and reduce their dependency on the government have been
unsuccessful for the most part (Weidenbaum 1963, pp. 79-83). Even
more significant, major industrial corporations obtain a lion’s share of
the largest primary military contracts. Three-fifths of the fifty largest
industrial corporations (as measured by sales in 1967) are among the
100 largest military contractors for the 1968 fiscal year (see table 2).
Altogether, sixty-eight of the 100 biggest contractors were among the
500 largest industrial corporations in the United States. Moreover, the
remaining thirty-two contractors include two leading utilities (ranking
first and forty-third in assets among U/S. utilities) and four leading
transportation companies (ranking among the leading fifty in operating
revenues). In short, three-fourths of the largest military contractors are
major corporations.
Military-Industrial Linkages

the two theoretical approaches. For pluralists and elitists do not differ
on the question of whether there is a close tie-up between some industrial
companies and the military, rather they differ on the magnitude of the
interlock and its causes. In order to evaluate these approaches, it is
necessary to examine the relative importance of military spending for
large businesses. Pluralists view military-industrial relations as but one
of many powerful influences on government policy ; whereas the elitists see
this as a dominant and pervasive influence caused by an inherent neces-
sity for the survival of a capitalistic system.

TABLE 2

OVERLAP BETWEEN 100 LARGEST PRIMARY
MILITARY CONTRACTORS AND 500
LARGEST INDUSTRIAL CORPORATIONS,

 

1968
Number among

100 Largest

Rank of Industrial Corporation Contractors
1-50 . 29
51-100. 11
101-150... 5
151-200. . 7
201-250. 3
251-300. 4
301-350. 5
351-400. 1
401-450. 1
451-500. 2
Other*. . 6
Total..............00005 74

Source.—One hundred largest military contrac-
tors in 1967-68 fiscal year from Congressional Record
(U.S., Congress, Senate 1969). Largest 500 industrial
corporations and other leading nonindustrial corpora-
tions obtained from Fortune (1968).

* Includes nonindustrial companies that are among
the fifty largest commercial banks, life insurance com-
panies, merchandising firms, transportation companies,
and utilities.
American Journal of Sociology

leading industrial companies in the the nation rather than on simply the
leading contractors.

Among the fifty largest industrial companies, all with sales well over
$1 billion in 1967, primary military contracts vary greatly in significance
(see table 3). Contracts obtained by General Dynamics, the largest mili-
tary contractor in the 1968 fiscal year, were nearly equal to its total sales
in 1967 (the ratio is .993). Another corporation has a contract-sales ratio
of more than .75; one has a ratio of .60; and there are seven others with
ratios exceeding .25. Twelve of the fifty largest industrial companies, on
the other hand, have ratios of .04 or less—even though they are among
the 100 largest military contractors. Military ties are very minor for an

TABLE 3

RATIO OF MILITARY CONTRACTS TO TOTAL
SALES AMONG 100 LARGEST INDUSTRIAL
CORPORATIONS, 1968

 

 

 

 

 
  

NomBer
50 Largest 50 Next
Ratio Corporations _ Largest
.75 and above........ 2 0
-50-.74.... 1 2
-25-.49. 7 4
-10-.24. 1 5
-05-.09... ae 6 24*
Under .05.............005 33 15

 

Sourcy,—See table 2.

* Ratios for all twenty-four of these companies are esti-
niated in terms of maximum possible values. Undoubtedly,
most would have lower ratios if actual contract data were avail-
able (see text).
tracts. Moreover, there are numerous merchandising companies that do
not enjoy any direct benefits from military contracts. Among these com-
panies, there are twenty-one with sales equal to at least the one-hun-
dredth-largest industrial company (eight have sales greater than the
fiftieth-largest industrial company). Undoubtedly, stores are located in
communities that receive sizable military contracts, but military ex-
penditures per se, as opposed to government spending in other sectors, is
probably not particularly beneficial to major retailers.

Although the data reported above fail to support the notion that
American industry is deeply dependent on a military economy, the re-
sults are hardly conclusive. First, they fail to take into account the in-
direct consequences of military spending for the nation’s major corpora-
tions. Large corporations may supply many of the primary contractors
and thus benefit from the demands created by military expenditures.
Steel mills, for example, produce the armor plate used in tanks or needed
for the hulls of war vessels. Further, there may be general indirect bene-
fits that are based on the prosperity generated by military expenditures.
If military spending pumps large amounts of money into the economy,
then consumer and industrial demands may be of substantial benefit to
all sectors of the economy, not merely the “munitions makers.” Finally,
military contracts may still be very important if they are unusually profit-
able or utilize plants and equipment that might otherwise be idle. For
General Motors, the largest industrial corporation in the nation and the
tenth-largest military contractor, the ratio of military contracts to total
sales is only .031. However, the contracts do amount to nearly two-thirds
of a billion dollars, a sum that can hardly be considered trivial.

In short, the data fail to support the hypothesis that large American
businesses are deeply dependent on military spending. The results are
inconclusive, however, because there may be substantial indirect benefits
for a broad spectrum of American businesses that are not military con-
tractors.
Overall, there is a high association between corporate income and the
two facets of government expenditures; the coefficient of multiple deter-
mination R?,.,,2,, is 88. This is not altogether surprising, given inflation-
ary trends through the period as well as the necessary relationships be-
tween corporate income and government expenditures. On the zero-order
level, corporate income is more closely linked to nonmilitary expenditures
than to military spending (see table 4). Even more significant, military

TABLE 4

REGRESSION ANALYSIS: CORPORATE INCOME
AS A FUNCTION OF FEDERAL GOVERN-
MENT EXPENDITURES, 1916-65

 

 

 

Variable r b
68 .30
93 17
76 1,42
: — .08 — .02
Y¥Xo-X.. Oc 82 -89

 

 

Source.—Xi based on U.S. Bureau of the Census (1960;
1965a, column Y358; 1965b, table 534); X2 based on U.S. Bu-
reau of the Census (1960; 19654, column _Y357 minus column
‘Y358); Y based on U.S. Bureau of the Census (1960; 1965a,
column Y283 minus columns Y288 + Y289); and 1962-1965
data based on U.S, Bureau of the Census (1968, table 694).

Nors,—X1 = federal government expenditures for national
security (in millions of dollars); X2 = federal government ex-
penditures not for national security (in millions of dollars); ¥ =
net corporate income after taxes (in thousands of dollars).

expenditures have less impact on corporate income than does an equiva-
lent amount spent by the government on nonmilitary items (compare
byz, With b,:,). Both the correlation and regression of corporate income
on military expenditures are virtually nil after nonmilitary spending is
taken into account. By contrast, the partial correlation and regression for
income on nonmilitary expenditures remain very high, .82 and .89, respec-
tively.

Following the procedures described by Blalock (1961, 1964) and
Fendrich (1967), the zero-order and partial correlations fit two models.
The first one shown below is supportive of Mills, whereas the second
model is not. Both models suggest that: ryz,.2, be approximately zero;
that r,z, be lower than either 7,2, or 7z,2,; and that r,z, be approximately
equal to the cross product of the other two correlations. All of these
conditions are met. Without additional variables, it is impossible to
distinguish between them.

X, ————> X,

we
—
Even under the first causal model, however, efforts to increase cor-
porate income would be directed towards raising nonmilitary spending
rather than the military budget. First, it is necessary to recognize that
the two facets of government spending operate somewhat independently
of each other (r? is .58). This means that there are other factors influenc-
ing nonmilitary spending. Since the regression coefficients indicate that
a unit change in nonmilitary spending will increase corporate income far
more than will an equivalent military expenditure, the first model would
still suggest that nonmilitary spending receive preference by those seek-
ing to raise corporate income. In short, during the past fifty years a
dollar spent on the military appears to have generated far less corporate
income than a dollar spent by the government in other realms.

Although the results fail to support the contention that corporate in-
come is deeply dependent on military expenditures, again the analysis is
not conclusive. For one, the relationship between government spending
and corporate income involves some feedback, a complexity not found in
the models reported above. In addition, other lag combinations could be
used besides the one where corporate income trails government expendi-
tures by a half year. Moreover, it is entirely possible that the political
limits on nonmilitary spending are much greater than for military spend-
ing. If a shift from the military budget to nonmilitary needs interferes
with private enterprise, then the military option might be encouraged.
Finally, elitists can argue that military spending provides an umbrella for
foreign investments. Such expenditures are therefore necessary, the argu-
ment would run, even if a greater immediate return is possible from a
budgetary shift to nonmilitary spending.
would suffer percentage losses exceeding the percentage gain enjoyed by
any single one of the remaining industries. These five industries are: air-
craft (—16 percent), ordinance (—15 percent), research and develop-
ment (—13 percent), electronics equipment (—5 percent), and nonfer-
rous metals (—2.2 percent). The sector with the greatest increase, agri-
cultural services, stands to gain only 2.1 percent.

These results, although basically an exercise in economics, have pro-
found sociological implications for the pluralism-elitism controversy.
They mean that the economic consequences of a substantial step toward
disarmament are lopsided; most industries would gain, but the percent-
age of business lost in each of five industries (particularly the first three
named above) would be far greater than the percentage gained in any
single sector. Although the economy as a whole is not harmed by such
military cutbacks, the small number of industries with a substantial
vested interest in military spending would suffer far more than other
industries would gain. This means that the industries benefiting from
military expenditures are more narrowly concentrated than are the eco-
nomic interests that stand to gain through disarmament. The implica-
tions of these conclusions are considered in greater detail later.

An even more elaborate application of input-output analysis by
Kokat (1967, pp. 805-19), based on the assumption of a 50 percent cut
in the defense budget, also leads to the conclusion that a shift to non-
defense expenditures would have an expansionary impact on the ma-
jority of industries. If there are compensating increases within either the
private or public sectors, only a very limited number of industries would
suffer from such a severe cutback in military expenditures.

Although input-output analysis fails to support the hypothesis that
military spending is a prerequisite to corporate prosperity, an alternative
interpretation is possible that is consistent with elitist theory. Despite
the results reported above, an elitist might argue, shift to peacetime con-
sumption would be resisted if the transitional costs were very high in
comparison with the gains that might ensue. Retooling, new marketing
procedures, investment in specialized plants and equipment, greater
competition, and other costs might well outweigh the small benefits in
sales and employment that most sectors of industry would enjoy through
a shift from military to nonmilitary expenditures. Moreover, an abrupt
cutback in military spending would have serious social and economic
consequences in a number of communities. Large cities such as Fort
Worth and Seattle, as well as some industries, would be particularly
affected by drastic changes in military policies (Halverson 1969; Ames
1969).
HISTORICAL TRENDS

Rather than restrict the issue to elitism versus pluralism, at this point one
could argue that neither theory provides an adequate interpretation of
the available data. Although reinterpretation consistent with the elitist
perspective is possible, the data above suggest that a high level of mili-
tary spending is not vital to the prosperity of either the nation or its
largest businesses. On the other hand, given the findings of Russett
(1969a, 1969b) that a wide variety of consumer and other public civilian
activities suffer when there are substantial military expenditures, the
pluralist perspective is not entirely satisfactory. For, if more interest
groups would benefit from alternative government-spending policies,
then how can pluralist theory explain the maintenance of such a sub-
stantial military commitment?

Since it is almost inevitable that any valid macrosocietal theory have
implications for social change, a historical perspective provides addi-
tional clues to the theoretical issues at hand. The historical trends for
both government spending, generally, and military spending, in particu-
lar, fail to fit neatly into either the pluralistic or the elitist interpretations.

Thepercentage of federal expenditures devoted to the armed forces has
fluctuated considerably during the nation’s history, ranging from about
10 percent during the Great Depression to over 90 percent during the
Civil War (fig. 1). There is no evidence that military spending currently
occupies an unusually large proportion of the total federal budget; rates
during the 1960s are no higher than those in the 1830s and 1840s. The
United States, compared with other nations, spends a relatively large
part of its gross national product (GNP) on the military (see Benoit and
Boulding 1963, pp. 301-6), but the current percentage is by no means
uniquely high when compared with the nation’s past record. In this re-
gard, there is no support for the thesis that the role of the military in the
government has expanded in recent decades (Mills 1959).

On the other hand, there is some evidence that military spending after
the Second World War failed to drop as sharply as it had after previous
wars. The War of 1812, the Mexican War, the Civil War, and World
War I were followed by periods of very low levels of military spending—
even when compared with the period preceding the war. By contrast,
military expenditures after World War II never declined to the levels
found in the 1930s. This feature is compatible with the elitist perspective
which emphasizes the change in military-industrial relations that oc-
curred in recent decades.

Although the proportion of government expenditures devoted to the
military shows no clear-cut temporal trend, a historical analysis does
reveal that the role of government in the national economy has con-
*S20INOS BUOUIG S91U94SISUODUT JOUTUT SUIOS BIB STOUT, ‘OOGT Jee ,, PSusyep [BUOT}eU,, 10 ,,AqLINoas peUONyeU JofeUL,, IF pus
O06T ex0Joq ,,SeOTAIEs pouLIE,, 94 IO} samyrpuadxe uo posed ‘(FHS PUT Es 824%} ‘BOGT ‘FES A147 ‘QGO6T ‘OBcEA PUP OGEA SUUMIOo ‘gggT

'8GEA Pus OGEA SuuNjoo ‘O96T) SnsuED oY} Jo NBaINg “g"/ :Se0INOg “G96T-OGLT ‘AIBPTTUI 94} 10} oBpnq [elepoj oy} Jo oBv}Us0I9g—T “D1

O46! 0961 OS6I OF6I OF6I OZEI
WYN
LBA
v3u0H
I
MM
m
MM

Ol6I

YyVaA
oo6i O6ei OCegi Oe! OSs OSE OFel
uvM
NVOINaNV
HSINVdS
uvM
NVOIX3N
uM
AID

oEsi

ozs! ols!

Z1¢1
40 UWM

coe!

O61
°

ol
Hl oz
oc

ov
UM
WIGNI

os

09

OL

ool

AYVLITIN YOS LABOGNG WWwesaGss JO LN3Du3d
sistently increased through the years. From the postbellum period until
the First World War, government expenditures ranged between 2 and 3
percent of the GNP (fig. 2). After a sharp increase during World War I,
the percentage remained above earlier peacetime levels. The federal
budget increased to 10 percent of the GNP during the 1930s and reached
even higher levels after the emergencies created by World War II had
ended. Current government expenditures are about 15 percent of the
GNP.

Figures 1 and 2 suggest that changes in the role of the military in the
national economy are to be seen largely as a consequence of changes in
the role of government in the economy. Consumption of an increasing
portion of the total national output by the federal government means
that both its nonmilitary and military expenditures are of growing sig-
nificance to the total economy. Therefore, although the elitists are correct
in arguing that military spending amounts to an expanding part of
national productivity, the fact remains that the federal government’s
impact on many other sectors of the society is also growing. In the case of
research, for example, the government plays an exceedingly important
role (Barber 1968, p. 225). Likewise, there is some evidence of an ‘“‘educa-
tion-industrial complex”’ that operates with considerable effectiveness in
influencing federal expenditures for edueation (Miller 1970). The govern-
ment’s ability to command an increasing portion of national productivity
through taxes and other revenues means that a focus solely on the chang-
ing military-industrial relations could lead to a very misleading conclu-
sion.

In short, since this brief review of historical trends fails to consistently
support either the elitist or the pluralist approaches, it appears all the
more reasonable to consider another perspective. Suggested below is an
alternative interpretation of military-industrial relations based on what
might be called the mechanism of compensating strategy.
“HS 21GB ‘BOGT ST UUUNTOD “DEgGT O9G6T) SNSUED ey} Jo NBeINg *g°)
[ ‘3g Jopun poyst] esoy} 0} UOIpIppe UT :s90IN0g *296T-698I ‘AND ey} Jo eBezusosed & sv JUSUTUIEAOS [B1Opay 94} JO sonpipusdxy—zZ “1

 

       

  

 

UVAA
OL61 S961 0961 SS6I OS6I S¥6I OPE SEEI OE6I SZEI OZEI SI6I O16! S06 COB SEel CEG! See! Osi Szel Ooze!
t T T Tr T T } poe aE tT mn SSO z
v
9
8
ol
2
vl
91 2
g! m
a
oe a
cm
z
ve 5
92
°
e 9
oe oO
ze >
SSN3I5Q LON  seesemme re 5
3SN3330 ~~~ se *
AN3SWNYSAOD 1V dee
QN3937 40v
472%
4p
American industry is dominant. Given the different economic and or-
ganizational resources that various segments possess, obviously interest
groups in the society do not have equal power. Compare, for example, the
resources available to the urban poor with those available to the pe-
troleum industry. Nevertheless, policies detrimental to the numerical
majority will occur even if a smaller group does not dominate the entire
political system. Rather, a process of decision making may be postulated
in which the political system’s output can fail to reflect the interests of
the majority without this necessarily meaning that a power elite controls
the government. Even if interest groups were alike in organization,
wealth, and other competitive resources, under certain conditions a
“compensating” strategy could be pursued such that political decisions
would not invariably reflect the direct interests of the majority.

In order to specify the conditions necessary for a compensating power
system to operate, two additional characteristics of interest groups should
be noted. First, populations within advanced industrial societies are
atomized into a highly diverse set of groups, with interests that are
neither fully harmonious with one another nor fully competitive. Not
only does an expanding division of labor subdivide a nation into increas-
ingly specialized needs and vested interests, as Durkheim noted, but
there is also an increased territorial division of labor such that spatial
subunits of a nation also develop distinctive concerns. A second key ele-
ment involves recognition of the fact that interest groups differ more
than in terms of whether they are for or against a specific proposal.
Rather they also differ in the degree of importance that each issue holds.
What this means is that groups vary widely in how far they are prepared
to go to achieve a specific end.

Accordingly, an advanced industrial society, regardless of its political
ideology, must be viewed as one in which a wide variety of interest
groups are each attempting to balance an array of potential gains and
losses in order to generate the maximum net gain. Advantages that might
accrue from opposing another segment are not necessarily pursued if even
larger gains are possible through the expenditure of an equivalent amount
of political capital in some other government domain. In other words, if
interest groups are not by themselves able to obtain the political out-
comes they desire, then it is necessary for them to form alliances and
coalitions with other interest groups. Such combinations mean that each
interest group sacrifices some issues in order to obtain the greatest net
rewards. As a consequence, a political body’s decision with respect to a
particular issue may reflect the intense concern of a minority of interests
coupled with the support obtained from other segments whose major
interests are found elsewhere.

Four conditions are necessary for a “compensating” power situation to
operate. First, power must be an exhaustible commodity such that each
interest group has limited political influence. Second, the interests of the
population must be diverse enough so that a given proposal will not have
an equal impact on all segments. Third, governmental actions that favor
a particular interest group must not eliminate the disadvantaged ma-
jority’s potential for other gains. In the case at hand, it means that funds
are available for more than the military budget or that nonbudgetary
legislation can be passed that will yield sufficient gains for other seg-
ments of the population. Fourth, legislation beneficial to a specific inter-
est must not at the same time create too great a loss for the majority of
other interests. Otherwise, a concerted effort to combat the legislation
will provide a net gain to the majority that is even greater than would
occur under their use of a compensating strategy.

When these conditions are met, it follows that a given group will not
attempt to exert its influence on all issues to the same degree, but rather
will concentrate on those that generate the greatest net gain. To obtain
passage of particularly beneficial legislation, an interest group may in
turn support other proposals that, by themselves, create small losses (see
Coleman 1964). The third and fourth conditions are suggested by the
controversy over military spending during the Vietnam war. The “guns
and butter” policy first meant that other sectors of the population could
pursue compensating strategies, such as are required by the third condi-
tion. On the other hand, the monetary and domestic crises generated by
this series of compensating gains, coupled with the unpopularity of the
war, make it increasingly hard to meet the last condition. That is, the
potential net gains that would be achieved by the vast majority of the
population through a decline in military spending begins to approach or
exceed the gains that many segments obtain through a compensating
strategy.

According to the notion of compensating strategies, military spending
can be explained by a high level of interest on the part of one segment of
American business accompanied by a relative lack of concern on the part
of other segments of industry. The majority of industries disregard the
small losses they incur from defense spending and turn their attention to
other aspects of government policy that affect them more directly. De-
fense spending will influence the profits of dairy farmers, for example, but
so too will other government policies such as price supports, marketing
restrictions, exports and imports on dairy products, grading practices,
trucking costs, and so forth. Accordingly, the area of government action
with the most substantial direct impact on the goals of the dairy industry
is probably not the military.

Indeed, barring a major war emergency, there are other facets of fed-
eral activity that are far more crucial to the interests of many industrial
Senate Committees

This propensity for each segment of the society to pursue its areas of
greatest direct interest is illustrated by the states represented on various
congressional committees. Although residents of all states are in some
manner affected by the policies of any committee, it is clear that political
efforts emphasize those areas with the greatest potential returns. Hence,
each state tends to be represented on committees affecting those facets
of the legislative process that are of greatest importance to the state. The
House Agriculture Subcommittee on Tobacco, for example, is loaded
with legislators from tobacco-producing states; six of the seven members
come from Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Kentucky.
Table 5 illustrates the association between special interests and mem-
bership among several Senate committees. A crude index of vested inter-
est is developed for each committee. States ranking above the national
average on this indicator are classified as states with a special primary
interest in the committee’s work; states below the national average are
classified as having a secondary interest. The index of vested interest for
the Senate Agriculture and Forestry Committee, for example, is the per-
centage of the 1960 labor force in agricultural and related industries.
There are thirty states with a higher percentage than the national figure
of 6.7 and twenty states with a lower percentage. These thirty states
supply all thirteen members of the Senate’s Agriculture Committee.
Although the residents of all states are affected by the prices for food
and other agricultural products, the Agriculture Committee is almost
entirely in the hands of southern and midwest senators from states with a
particularly high vested interest in this domain. Such a pattern is con-

7 A gain of 1.76 percent under the conditions described by Leontief et al. (1966).
TABLE 5

VESTED INTERESTS OF STATES AND THE MEMBERSHIP
oF SENATE COMMITTEES, 91ST CONGRESS, 1969-1970

 

 

STATES ON THE

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

Aut Srares CoMMITTEE

Primary Secondary Primary Secondary

ComarrTEE Interest* Interest Interest* Interest
Agriculture and Forestry sears 80 20 13 0
Indian Affairs......... -. 17 33 10 0
Minerals, Materials, and Fuels 20 30 8 1
Merchant Marine....... 30 20 9 1
Housing and Urban Affairs... ... 20 30 7 8
Labor. ...........0-55 5 or 15 33 7 5
Armed Services. . -. 25 23 14 3

International Organization and

Disarmament....... PeEeeEeeee 23 25 5 2

 

Nors.—Committee membership based on Congressional Index (no date).

* Primary interests of the states in various committees based on the following criteria: Agriculture
and Minerals—states whose labor force in 1960 exceeds the United States percentage in the agriculture
and mining industries, respectively; Indian Affairs—states in which the Indian percentage of the popu-
lation exceeds that. for the total United States; Merchant Marine—states contiguous to an ocean, the
Gulf, or the Great Lakes; Housing and Urban Affairs—states exceeding the national percentage of resi-
dents who reside in standard metropolitan statistical areas; Labor—states exceeding the national per-
centage of population in the AFL-CIO (data available for forty-eight states); Armed Services—states
that would suffer a net loss in output and employment after compensated cut in armament expendi-
tures (Leontief et al. 1966, p. 197) (data available for forty-eight states) ; International Organization—
same as above, except states gaining in output and employment (data available for forty-eight states).
DISCUSSION

No single empirical study can determine the nature of military-industrial
relations, to say nothing of resolving the elitist-pluralist controversy in
which it is enmeshed. However, the data are suggestive both about the
empirical question and the theoretical restatement that may be neces-
sary.

In terms of the empirical facets of the study, several elements of the
elitist position are supported. Some major corporations are deeply de-
pendent on armament contracts; and the decline after World War II in
the proportion of government spending on the military is less than would
be expected from the patterns after earlier wars. Moreover, the federal
government is a growing factor in the national economy, and hence its
expenditures for the military are of increasing importance to the business
world. There is no reason to doubt the existence of a military-industrial
complex if by that phrase is meant an intense dependency on military
contracts among some very large corporations.

On the other hand, there is no evidence to support the contention that
the general success of large businesses in the nation depends on substan-
tial expenditures for the military. Indeed, there is evidence to indicate
that most would benefit from alternative government spending or from
equivalent expenditures in the private sectors of the economy. For the
majority of the largest corporations, military contracts at most amount
American Journal of Sociology

to a very small portion of their total business. Moreover, both the regres-
sion and input-output analyses suggest that corporate prosperity would
be increased in the absence of military spending.

To be sure, a substantial and sudden drop in military expenditures
would create difficulties for a few sectors of the economy and certain cities
and regions that are deeply dependent on the military. Nevertheless, the
consequences of disarmament should not be interpreted as the cause of
its initial buildup. Cities do not first grow and then develop military
industries that support them, rather the growth of cities may reflect the
expansion of their economic base. Moreover, the bulk of American in-
dustry would gain under alternative spending policies.

If these inferences about military-industrial relations are valid, then
both of the major current theories provide inadequate perspectives on the
nature of societal power. Crucial to the reconceptualization suggested
earlier is recognition of the fact that each of the diverse interest groups
may, under some circumstances, take stands that are counter to their
interests. This will occur when four necessary conditions are met such
that a “compensating” strategy is possible. If each group attempts to
generate the greatest net gain for itself, then a given policy need not be
the product of simply the majority of interests, nor need it mean that a
small set of interests is dominant. Rather, the policy may mean that the
losses to a majority of interests are small, whereas the gains to some
sectors are substantial.

From this perspective, military spending is but one among many sets
of vested interests. To be sure, this domain could reach the point where it
dominates the entire economic and social life of the nation. However, the
results suggest that military expenditures are not, currently, a vital and
necessary prerequisite to general corporate prosperity. Using the hy-
pothesis of compensating strategies, the high level of military expendi-
tures need not be interpreted as the product of a common vested interest
in such spending among major businesses. Rather, extensive military
spending may be viewed as reflecting the operations of an important and
powerful interest group in a setting where other legislative issues have an
even greater direct bearing on the prosperity of the remainder of eco-
nomic segments. In the same fashion, senators tend to concentrate on
areas of greatest direct benefit to their states despite the fact that all
legislation is in some way relevant to all states.

Admittedly, this position must be treated as an alternative hypothesis
since the results reported earlier may be reinterpreted so as to be con-
sistent with either the pluralist or elitist schools. For example, the latter
may claim that large businesses will support military expenditures, even
when not directly beneficial, in order to provide a military umbrella for
overseas investment. The hypothesis developed here of a “‘compensat-
REFERENCES

Ames, William E. 1969. “Seattle Payrolls Fattened by War.” Christian Science Moni-
tor, May 23, p. 3.

Baran, Paul A. 1957. The Political Economy of Growth. New York: Monthly Review
Press.

Baran, Paul A., and Paul M. Sweezy. 1966. Monopoly Capital: An Essay on the
American Economic and Social Order. New York: Monthly Review Press.

Barber, Richard J. 1968. ‘“The New Partnership: Big Government and Big Business,”
in The Triple Revolution: Social Problems in Depth, edited by Robert Perrucci and
Marc Pilisuk. Boston: Little, Brown.

Bell, Daniel. 1958. “The Power Elite—Reconsidered.”” American Journal of Sociology
64 (November) : 238-50.

Benoit, Emile, and Kenneth E. Boulding, eds. 1963. Disarmament and the Economy.
New York: Harper & Row.

Blalock, Hubert M., Jr. 1961. “Evaluating the Relative Importance of Variables.’’
American Sociological Review 26 (December) : 866-74.

. 1964. “Controlling for Background Factors: Spuriousness Versus Develop-
mental Sequences.’’ Sociological Inquiry 34 (Winter) : 28-40.

Coleman, James 8. 1964. “Collective Decisions.’ Sociological Inquiry 34 (Spring):
166-81.

Congressional Index. 1969-70. 91st Cong. New York: Commerce Clearing House.

Fendrich, James M. 1967. ‘Perceived Reference Group Support: Racial Attitudes
and Overt Behavior.”’ American Sociological Review 32 (December) :960-70.

Fortune. 1965a. ‘The Fortune Directory of the 500 Largest U.S. Industrial Corpora-
tions.” (July), pp. 149-68.

. 19650. “The Fortune Directory: Part 2.” (August), pp. 169-80.

. 1966. “The Fortune Directory of the 500 Largest U.S. Industrial Corpora-

tions.” (July), pp. 230-64.

. 1968. “The Fortune Directory of the 500 Largest U.S. Industrial Corpora-
tions.”’ (June), pp. 186-220.

Gracey, Harry L., and C. Arnold Anderson. 1958. ‘Review of the Power Elite.”
Kentucky Law Journal 46 (Winter) :301-17.

Halverson, Guy. 1969. “Air Power Propels Fort Worth’s Upward Economic Spiral.”
Christian Science Monitor, March 28, p. 14.

Horowitz, Irving Louis, ed. 1963. Power, Politics, and People: The Collected Essays of
C. Wright Mills. New York: Oxford University Press.

Janowitz, Morris. 1960. The Professional Soldier: A Social and Political Portrait.
Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Joint Economic Committee. 1968. Economics of Military Procurement, Part 2. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Kokat, Robert G. 1967. “Some Implications of the Economic Impact of Disarma-
ment on the Structure of American Industry.” In Joint Economic Committee,
Economic Effect of Vietnam Spending. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office.

Kornhauser, William. 1968. ‘Power Elite or Veto Groups.” In Reader in Political
Sociology, edited by Frank Lindenfeld. New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

Lapp, Ralph E. 1968. The Weapons Culture. New York: Norton.

Leontief, Wassily, Alison Morgan, Karen Polenske, David Simpson, and Edward
Tower. 1966. “The Economic Impact—Industrial and Regional—of an Arms
Cut.” In Input-Output Economics, edited by Wassily Leontief. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Miller, Norman C. 1970. “How Educators Build Support in Congress for Fatter
School Aid.” Wall Street Journal, January 20, p. 1.

Mills, C. Wright. 1959. The Power Elite. New York: Oxford University Press.

National Resources Committee. 1939. The Structure of the American Economy. I.
Basic Characteristics. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Pilisuk, Marc, and Thomas Hayden. 1968. “Is there a Military-Industrial Complex
Which Prevents Peace?: Consensus and Countervailing Power in Pluralistic Sys-
tems.” In The Triple Revolution: Social Problems in Depth, edited by Robert Per-
rucci and Marc Pilisuk. Boston: Little, Brown.

Rose, Arnold M. 1967. The Power Structure: Political Process in American Society.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Russett, Bruce M. 1969a. ‘Who Pays for Defense?” American Political Science Review
63 (June) : 412-26.

. 19690. “The Price of War.” Trans-Action 6 (October) : 28-35.

Standard and Poor’s Corporation. 1965. Security Owner’s Stock Guide, October 1965.
New York: Standard & Poor’s Corp.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1950. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial
Times to 1957. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

. 1965a. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1957; Con-

tinuation to 1962 and Revisions. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

. 1965b. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1965. Washington, D.C.: Gov-

ernment Printing Office.

. 1968. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1968. Washington, D.C.: Gov-
ernment Printing Office.

U.S., Congress, Senate. 1969. Congressional Record, 115 (March 24):83072-81.

Weidenbaum, Murray L. 1963. ‘‘Problems of Adjustment for Defense Industries.”
In Disarmament and the Economy, edited by Emile Benoit and Kenneth E. Boul-
ding. New York: Harper & Row.

. 1965. ‘“Defense—Space Business.” In Politics, Economics, and the General

Welfare, edited by Michael D. Reagan. Chicago: Scott, Foresman.
