Social Change, Premarital Nonfamily Experience, and Spouse Choice in an Arranged
Marriage Society

Author(s): Dirgha J. Ghimire, William G. Axinn, Scott T. Yabiku and Arland Thornton
Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 111, No. 4 (January 2006), pp. 1181-1218
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/498468

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:48 UTC
This article examines the influences of nonfamily experiences on
participation in the selection of a first spouse in an arranged marriage
society. The authors developed a theoretical framework to explain
how a broad array of nonfamily experiences may translate into
greater participation in the choice of a spouse. Analyses show that
premarital nonfamily experiences, in general, and media exposure
and participation in youth clubs, in particular, have strong positive
effects on individual participation in the choice of a spouse. These
findings suggest new ways of thinking about the relationship be-
tween social change and the transition away from arranged mar-
riage. Overall, changes in these nonfamily experiences can account
for a substantial fraction of the historical increase of youth involve-
ment in mate selection.
ganization of families and the formation of families, the study of marriage
has received great attention in this research literature. Moreover, as social
scientists discovered the many different forms of marriage processes
around the world, the study of how social change promotes changes in
marital processes became a central focus of research (Goode 1970; Thorn-
ton 2001, 2005; Thornton and Lin 1994). In fact, perhaps no transition
in marital processes has been more closely studied than the transition
from arranged marriage, with the choice of spouse determined primarily
by parents, to love marriage, with the choice of spouse determined pri-
marily by the individuals to be married (Caldwell, Reddy, and Caldwell
1983, 1988; Goode 1970; Rindfuss and Morgan 1983; Thornton, Chang,
and Lin 1994). Here we use a detailed combination of measures from an
arranged marriage society undergoing rapid social change to explore and
answer several previously unanswered questions about this trans-
formation.

Our work builds on the family mode of social organization approach
to studying social change and the family (Thornton and Fricke 1987;
Thornton, Fricke et al. 1994). A good deal of research documents im-
portant transformations in marital processes reducing the prevalence of
parentally controlled arranged marriages and increasing the prevalence
of individually chosen love marriages (Caldwell et al. 1983; Goode 1970;
Smith 1973; Thornton, Chang, and Lin 1994; Tilly and Scott 1978; Tsuya
and Choe 1991; Whyte 1990). Despite the now-widespread prevalence of
individual-choice love marriage, arranged marriages are still quite com-
mon in large parts of the world, including South Asia (Caldwell 1982;
Caldwell et al. 1983; Dyson and Moore 1983; Fricke 1986; Macfarlane
1986; Malhotra 1991). Previous studies of mate selection indicate that
individuals whose daily activities are more organized outside of the family
before marriage are more likely to participate in the choice of their marital
partner (Fricke and Thornton 1991; Goode 1970; Macfarlane 1986; Thorn-
ton, Chang, and Lin 1994; Thornton and Fricke 1987). We build on these
findings by examining how the impact of premarital nonfamily experience
may depend on gender and by expanding the scope of premarital non-
family experiences included in theoretical and empirical models.

First, this study adds early-life media exposure to the set of nonfamily
experiences likely to affect marriage processes. Previous studies focus on
the importance of nonfamily education and work (Caldwell et al. 1983;
Macfarlane 1986; Thornton, Chang, and Lin 1994). We also examine the
consequences of premarital nonfamily education and work for marital
behavior. However, many theorists argue that exposure to new ideas
through media plays an important role in shaping individuals’ attitudes,
beliefs, and values (Caldwell 1982; Janowitz 1981; Macfarlane 1986;
McQuail 1985; Thornton 2005). Others argue these ideational changes
have important consequences in individuals’ demographic behaviors such
as choice of marriage partner, age at marriage, age at first birth, birth
spacing, and number of children (Caldwell 1982; Caldwell et al. 1983;
Lesthage 1983; Macfarlane 1986; Preston 1989; Thornton 2001, 2005).
Thus, the addition of media exposure is likely to generate a more com-
prehensive understanding of the links between premarital nonfamily ex-
perience and participation in the choice of a spouse.

Second, changes in family organization such as an increase in nonfamily
work and education may stimulate new venues of social interaction, such
as youth clubs. Such clubs serve as forums for social interaction for un-
married youths, where they may spend their spare time with other un-
married youths. These clubs increase social interactions among young
people and open opportunities for the spread of new ideas and the creation
of shared experiences. As individuals participate in youth clubs, the ex-
perience may alter their views about marriage, in general, and the choice
of a marital partner, in particular. Thus, by including participation in
youth clubs in our model, we both provide a more comprehensive un-
derstanding of the relationship between nonfamily activity and spouse
choice, and we expand our understanding of the ways that nonfamily
work and education may affect family formation.

Finally, some previous studies indicate that nonfamily living may alter
individuals’ attitudes and values in ways that promote new family-
formation behavior across generations (Axinn and Barber 1997; Waite,
Goldscheider, and Witsberger 1986). In general, however, such studies do
not examine the potential impact of the number of residential moves, per
se, on family-formation values. This is important because there is reason
to believe that the instability associated with multiple moves, at least as
represented by parental family transitions, may have strong effects on
children’s family-formation behavior (Wu 1996; Wu and Martinson 1993).
Because the experience of premarital nonfamily living is closely associated
with the experience of residential moves, examination of either factor
requires consideration of the other. Here we examine the impact of both
nonfamily living and the number of residential moves on individual in-
volvement in spouse choice in order to understand the joint impact of
these important early life experiences.

These advances are possible because of the data from a setting in Nepal
where arranged marriage has been predominant. As described below, this
study area is currently undergoing rapid socioeconomic changes that shift
the organization of individuals’ daily activities outside the domestic
sphere. This setting provides an opportunity to study both changes in
individuals’ nonfamily experiences and changes in the level of partici-
pation in spouse choice. The study includes multiple measures of a broad
array of nonfamily experiences among both young women and young
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

Marriages in Hindu areas of South Asia have a long history of being
arranged by parents and the parental family, with no involvement of the
husband and wife-to-be in the choice of the spouse (Banerjee 1984; Ber-
reman 1972; Majupuria and Majupuria 1989). In fact, numerous Hindu
religious doctrines prohibit the involvement of young people themselves
in the choice of a spouse, appealing to both spiritual and social reasons
(Majupuria and Majupuria 1989; Banerjee 1984; Berreman 1972). How-
ever, during the period of British colonization of the Indian subcontinent,
Hindus began to interact with people who had vastly different beliefs
about marriage—people who believed spouse choice should be based on
love, and that two individuals to be married should choose each other
freely and independently (Macfarlane 1986; Smith 1973; Tilly and Scott
1978; Tsuya and Choe 1991; Whyte 1990). Nepal, however, was never a
colony, and Hindus in this country had little exposure to such alternative
views of marriage until the very recent past. In fact, Nepal remained
politically and economically isolated from other countries until the mid-
1950s, when Nepal’s king first opened the country to interact with non-
Hindu nations and peoples (Bista 1972; Blaikie, Cameron, and Seddon
1980). Since that time, and particularly beginning in the mid-1970s, Nepal
has experienced social and economic change, including the spread of for-
mal education, wage work, government services, transportation and com-
munication infrastructure, and the mass media. The result has been a
reorganization of individuals’ daily social lives within the lifetimes of
Nepal’s current population. The first signs of the impact of these social
changes on marriage, in the form of increasing prevalence of individual
spouse choice, are already apparent.

Note that the processes of arranged marriage in Nepal vary greatly by
ethnic group, with a range that includes bride price, dowry, exogamous
marriage, endogamous marriage, and polygyny and polyandry (Acharya
and Bennett 1981; Bennett 1983; Fricke 1986; Gurung 1980; Macfarlane
1976). It is common for exchanges to flow in multiple directions—from
bride’s family to groom’s family, from groom’s family to bride’s family,
and from bride’s and groom’s families to the bride and groom—but many
of these exchanges are symbolic in nature and do not represent the transfer
of great wealth. The most common scenario among the Hindus of central
Nepal is exchanges between families in multiple directions, with the ma-
jority of wealth transferring from bride’s family to groom’s family
(Acharya and Bennett 1981; Bennett 1983; Fricke and Thornton 1991).
Among Tibeto-Burmese ethnic groups, on the other hand, majority trans-
fer from the groom’s family to the parents of the bride is more common.
Although this heterogeneity of process is also changing over time, the
focus of our study is on the changes over time in choice of a spouse as
the first step in these processes.

To guide our investigation of the links between the social change in
Nepal and individual participation in the choice of a spouse, we use the
family mode of social organization framework (Thornton, Fricke et al.
1994; Thornton and Fricke 1987). This framework focuses on the extent
to which the activities of daily social life, including authority patterns,
information flow, living arrangements, production, consumption, social-
ization, leisure, and reproduction, are organized by the family versus other
nonfamily social institutions and organizations. Rural Nepal has expe-
rienced a rapid increase in access to new social organizations and services
such as schools, employment centers, marketplaces, bus services, movie
halls, dormitories, and government services. The proliferation of these
new social organizations significantly increased the locus of individuals’
daily activities outside the domestic sphere. The result has been wide-
spread experience, even in youth, with new nonfamily activities, including
education, work, nonfamily living, residential change, exposure to mass
media, and participation in youth clubs. The key prediction from the
family mode of organization framework is that increased exposure to
nonfamily social activities among youths will create greater independence
between youths and the parental generation (Thornton, Fricke et al. 1994;
Thornton and Fricke 1987). Three specific mechanisms operate together
to produce this relationship: increased parental respect for children, chil-
dren’s changing attitudes toward family formation, and children’s op-
portunities to interact with new same-generation people.
Children’s Changing Attitudes toward Family Formation

The new information children learn outside the domestic sphere may also
have important consequences for the way they view family and marriage.
Previous studies of education and attitudes in Asia indicate that schooling
fosters an independent outlook in children, which may include more pos-
itive attitudes toward individuals choosing their spouse (Thornton, Chang,
and Sun 1984; Thornton and Lin 1994). This is likely to be particularly
true in South Asia, where educational materials themselves often include
British-based examples of family life and individual choice (Caldwell
1982; Caldwell et al. 1988). Caldwell (1982) and Thornton (2005) argue
that present-day schooling and mass media in many settings outside the
West are crucial factors in changing cultures and values toward those in
the West. In fact, multiple mechanisms may link media exposure to new,
more Western ideas about marriage. First, some scholars suggest that the
media usually tends to favor the elite and represents their views of social
issues (McQuail 1985). Mass media such as radio, television, and movies
in Nepal overwhelmingly represent Western worldviews (Axinn and Bar-
ber 2001), including positive views of love marriage. Second, there is also
a long-standing argument that the media encourages a breakdown of
social control (Janowitz 1981). In Nepal, since the public was allowed to
open schools by the Ranas in the 1950s, virtually all schools use Indian-
and British-model curricula (Beutel and Axinn 2002) with very limited
teaching in religious schools. Thus, increased awareness of Western views
that are not compatible with the common values in Nepalese society may
encourage the breakdown of historical social control mechanisms. There-
fore, more education and exposure to the media are likely to promote
Western views in this setting. As a result, we expect that both formal
education and media exposure encourage Western ideas such as love mar-
riage and the involvement of individuals in their choice of a spouse in
this setting.

Children’s experiences with nonfamily living may also promote new
New Opportunities to Interact with Similar-Age People

Before the spread of mass education, transportation, employment centers,
and markets, most personal interactions in Nepal were limited to those
who lived within walking distance. In most cases, social interactions
among close family members, extended family, and other relatives pre-
dominated over interaction with nonrelatives. As a result, young people
had relatively little interaction with others of the same age—others who
might include potential spouses. But with the spread of mass education,
employment opportunities outside of home, more reliable and regular
transportation, and marketplaces, there has been a significant increase in
the number and kinds of people with whom young people have access to
interact. Evidence from other settings is consistent with the conclusion
that these new interaction patterns may influence marriage. In Taiwan,
Thornton, Chang, and Yang (1994) found that, compared to an older
marriage cohort (1955-59), a significantly large proportion of a younger
marriage cohort (1980-84) met their spouses at school and through work.
Improved access to schooling, nonfamily employment, better transpor-
tation facilities, and marketplaces substantially broadens the pool of po-
tential social contacts available to an individual. This contact is likely to
stimulate greater participation in spouse choice.

In rural Nepal, participation in youth clubs is a nonfamily activity
especially likely to produce this effect (Macfarlane 1976). Nepalese youth
clubs are often designed around a specific set of activities, such as sports,
Age at Marriage and Spouse Choice

Unfortunately, all efforts to study the determinants of participation in
spouse choice face a common empirical problem: the correlation between
age at marriage and spouse choice. Those who have marriages arranged
by their parents tend to have early marriages, and those who choose their
own spouse tend to have late marriages. Waiting for a later marriage gives
an individual more opportunity to meet a spouse on his or her own,
without assistance from parents. Moreover, waiting for a later marriage
also gives individuals more opportunity to experience the same nonfamily
activities that we predict will increase the chances they participate in the
choice of their spouse. Thus, both age at marriage and spouse choice may
be codetermined, and, in fact, one can observe neither age at marriage
nor spouse choice without the other also occurring. Thus, it is virtually
impossible to separate effects on age at marriage from effects on spouse
choice. Our primary aim in this article is to examine the determinants of
spouse choice, not the determinants of age at marriage. Therefore, we
first test models of the total effects of nonfamily activities on spouse choice,
ignoring age at marriage. We then add age at marriage to our model of
spouse choice to determine the extent to which our initial estimates are
robust even when this potentially confounding mechanism is included.
Although this approach does not solve the basic empirical problem of the
association between age at marriage and spouse choice, we believe that
the two estimates of influence on spouse choice we calculate are good
bounds on the true causal effects. By omitting age at marriage, we cal-
culate one bound under the assumption that spouse choice is exogenous
of marital timing. By including age at marriage, we calculate a second
bound under the assumption that marital timing is exogenous of spouse
choice. Though neither assumption is totally correct, these two bounds
determine the range of magnitude for the effect of each determinant
considered.

As a further refinement, we also test the effects of nonfamily experiences
on the rate of marriage using hazard models. These models focus on the
timing of the transition from single to married, but separate the transition
to marriage into two competing risks: the hazard of arranged marriage
and the hazard of marriage involving some individual participation. Al-
though this approach focuses on effects on the timing of marriage, it allows
us to estimate separate effects for the timing of arranged marriage and
the timing of marriage that involves some choice. Factors that affect the
timing of marriage via these alternative routes differently also affect the
likelihood of an arranged versus a choice marriage. Thus we expect to
find substantive results in this analysis that are consistent with the results
from our other analyses of spouse choice, and this consistency increases
our confidence that variations in age at marriage do not explain the ob-
served associations with spouse choice. As described in our discussion of
results, this competing-risks hazard formulation of the problem has other
advantages as well.
all-weather roads (Shivakoti et al. 1997). As a result, over time, there has
been a massive expansion of schools, health services, markets, bus services,
and employment centers in Chitwan (Axinn and Yabiku 2001). This mas-
sive expansion of services resulted in more young people going to school,
working outside the family, living away from family, interacting with mass
media, and participating in youth clubs. For example, among those born
between 1936 and 1945, only 31% ever attended school, whereas among
those born between 1966 and 1975, fully 84% had ever attended school.
Likewise, among those born between 1936 and 1945, only 5% ever par-
ticipated in youth clubs, whereas among those born between 1966 and
1975, 14% ever participated in youth clubs, nearly a threefold increase.
In another example, rates of nonfamily living more than doubled between
the same birth cohorts.

Even more important, virtually all marriages in this setting were ar-
ranged by parents up until the recent past. Ethnographic evidence from
Nepal indicates arranged marriage was normative in most ethnic groups
in the region before the 1950s (Acharya and Bennett 1981; Ahearn 1994,
2004; Bennett 1983; Bista 1972; Fricke 1986; Macfarlane 1976). Survey
data from the CVFS support this conclusion and indicate a rise in indi-
vidual participation in spouse choice. The proportion of individuals in
each marriage cohort who participated in the choice of a spouse rose from
virtually zero in the 1936-45 marriage cohort to approximately 50% in
the 1986-95 marriage cohort (not shown in tables). This trend was mono-
tonic and virtually linear. Thus, this study area offers an opportunity to
test hypotheses regarding the relationship between individuals’ premarital
nonfamily experiences and their participation in the choice of their own
spouses.

The CVFS selected a systematic probability sample of 171 neighbor-
hoods in western Chitwan (Barber et al. 1997). The CVFS defined a
neighborhood as a geographic cluster of 5-15 households. Once a neigh-
borhood was selected, all individuals ages 15-59 residing in the sampled
neighborhood were interviewed. If any of these study respondents had a
spouse living elsewhere, that spouse was interviewed as well. A total of
5,271 individuals were interviewed with a 97% response rate. This study
provides rich retrospective measurement of the occurrence and timing of
individual life events collected using a life-history calendar and linked
measures of the characteristics of those events using a structured ques-
tionnaire. The life-history calendar method provides more accurate ret-
rospective measurement of life events and the characteristics of those
events (Belli 1998; Freedman et al. 1988). Moreover, the life-history cal-
endar used in the CVFS was specially designed to use local events to help
respondents recall the timing of personal events and to allow respondents
to report their recall of marital events in a manner most consistent with
Measures

Marriage.—Historically in Nepal virtually all marriages were arranged
by parents. Instead of using a dichotomy of arranged marriage versus
individual choice, we treat the process of transformation from arranged
marriage to individual-choice marriage as a continuum, and we focus on
the level of respondent participation in the choice of her or his spouse.
The study measured spouse choice using responses to a question that asks,
“People marry in different ways. Sometimes our parents or relatives decide
whom we should marry, and sometimes we decide ourselves. In your case,
who selected your (first) spouse? Your parents or relatives, yourself, or
both?” We coded our measure of participation in spouse choice as one if
a respondent answered “parents or relatives” and five if the respondent
answered “myself.” If the respondent answered with “both” she or he was
asked a follow-up question, “Although both of you may have decided,
one of you may have had a little more influence than the other. Who had
more influence in choosing your spouse? You or your parents and rela-
tives?” If the respondent answered with “parents or relatives,” we coded
that answer as two; if he or she responded with “myself,” we coded that
answer as four; and if the respondent answered with “both equally,” we
coded that answer as three. This gives us an ordinal scale of one to five,
in which one means respondent did not participate in the choice of her
or his spouse (arranged marriage), and five means respondent solely chose
her or his spouse (individual-choice marriage). Out of 2,788 ever-married
respondents interviewed, 65% reported that their first marriages were
solely arranged by parents or relatives, and the remaining 35% reported
they have either participated to some degree in the choice of spouse or
solely chose their spouse.’
The study also collected a complete marital history using the life-history
calendar method (Axinn et al. 1999). These histories provide a measure
of the timing of first marriage, which we use to operationalize the discrete-
time hazard rate of first marriage. By combining these marital history
measures with respondents’ answers to the questions regarding their par-
ticipation in spouse choice, described above, we are able to further sub-
divide first marriages into those in which respondents had no choice
(values of one on the measures described above) and those in which the
individual had some choice (values of two, three, four, or five on the
measures described above). This information gives us the means to es-
timate the hazard of first marriage by an arrangement, treating first mar-
riage in which an individual has some choice as a competing risk, and
the hazard of first marriage through some individual choice, treating ar-
ranged marriage as a competing risk. Thus, we conceptualize arranged
and individual-choice marriage as two different ways to exit from the
single state and treat these two ways of exiting the single state as com-
peting risks.

In order to capture the multidimensional nature of nonfamily experi-
ences, we focus on five nonfamily experiences: schooling, employment,
nonfamily living, exposure to media, and participation in youth clubs.
Below we describe the measurement of each of these nonfamily experi-
ences. Descriptive statistics for each of these measures are displayed in
table 1.

Educational experiences——The CVFS collected a complete history of
respondents’ educational experiences using life-history calendar methods.
Every year the respondent was in school was recorded on the life-history
calendar. This procedure allows us to record both the respondent’s school
enrollment and the total length of time she or he spent in school. In
addition, respondents were also asked whether they ever attended adult
education (basic literacy programs for adults), and this is included in our
measures of educational experiences. The great flexibility of these life-
history-calendar-based measures allowed us to investigate many different
potential functional forms for the effects of education on marriage.’ Based

of a spouse (two to five on the ordinal scale), and zero if the respondents had no choice.
Results from models of this dichotomous outcome are exactly parallel to those presented
for the ordinal outcome.

*In fact, we used this flexibility to investigate a wide array of functional forms for all
of our measures of nonfamily experiences. Our investigation included linear, quadratic,
log, categorical, and dichotomous forms. Using model-fit criteria, these investigations
led us to choose dichotomous indicators for ever having experienced work or nonfamily
living arrangements and the separated enrollment and attainment measures for edu-
cation. In fact, varying functional form assumptions produce equivalent substantive
results for these measures, but the dichotomous form yields both simplified interpre-
tation and superior model fit for work and living arrangements.
on that investigation we chose to follow the previous literature on the
effects of education on marriage and separate the total effects of education
into effects of education enrollment and effects of educational attainment
(Thornton, Axinn, and Teachman 1995; Yabiku 2005). Enrollment is
coded as one for years respondents enrolled in school, and zero otherwise.
Years of schooling is the cumulative total of the years respondents spent
in school or adult education up to one year before the particular time a
person was at risk of marriage. The value for years of schooling ranges
from 0 to 22 (see table 1). For the event-history models, our measures of
education include time-varying measures of school enrollment and num-
ber of years of schooling.

Nonfamily work.—Our measure of nonfamily employment before mar-
riage also uses information from the life-history calendar. All years that
a respondent was employed outside the family were recorded in the life-
history calendar. From this record we created a dichotomous measure of
whether or not the respondent ever worked for pay outside of home. In
the event-history models, the measure of employment is a time-varying
measure of whether or not a respondent was ever employed in nonfamily
work before the year of risk of marriage.

Nonfamily living —Young people who leave their parents’ homes either
for higher education or for nonfamily work have adopted new living
arrangements away from family, such as living in school dormitories or
renting an apartment. Others who choose the military live in army bar-
racks. Our measure of exposure to these nonfamily living arrangements
before marriage comes from the life-history calendar. Respondents were
asked, “Have you ever lived separately from your parents for six months
or more?” If the respondent answered yes to this question then they were
asked “In which year did you start living away from your parents for six
months or more for the first time?” Next, respondents were asked a series
of questions about all the other living arrangements they had ever ex-
perienced. Spells of each different living arrangement were recorded on
the life-history calendar (Axinn et al. 1999). From this record we created
a dichotomous measure of whether or not a respondent ever lived in a
nonfamily living arrangement. In the event-history models, the measure
of nonfamily living is a time-varying measure of whether or not a re-
spondent ever lived away from family members (alone, in a dormitory or
barracks, or with unrelated housemates) prior to the risk of getting
married.

Media exposure.—tIn our study area, the first movie hall was established
in late 1969. Television first began to appear in Chitwan in the late 1980s.
However, once these new media technologies arrived, they drew tremen-
dous attention among the population of Chitwan, so that many, many
people traveled to nearby theaters, listened to friends’ radios, or watched
ol I sLz +409 “ou [e1OL, “* UdIPIYD JO “ou S$, 1IyIOP
:punoasyseq Ayre
Sr Ss esr Sst saat Ul a3By aseLIeU ye osy
I 0 os" 1s aewmay=] ‘ayew=o sores gre ua
<epuayy
T 0 aa 90° (saX=] ‘ou=() sqn]> yyNod ul uoyedpHAeg
£ 0 60°T rel €-0 xapuy sereeeesees gansodxa BIpayAy
I 0 se sr SOk=]TOUHQ ttt SULAT] AyrueyuoU Ul paat] 9A
T 0 iv +e saf=] ‘ou=0 yom Aprureyuou pey Jaq
ce 0 AVS orb srvak [B10], “s** (Zulpooyps jo savad) JuaUUTe}e [eUOTFeONp|
I 0 os’ es” saX=] ‘ou=0 . . . * JUaUT[OIU [OOYIS
ssaouatiadxa Aprureyuou [eyareUlosg
T 69'T eTz YsIy=S MOT] To tts uorqayas asnods ut uonedinaeg
xe] UAL ds ueoyl BuIpoD a1qeney,

 

 

(88Z‘7= AN) ASMOdS LSAIY JO NOILOAIAS AHL NI NOILVdIOILaVg
GHL NO SAONAIMAdIXY ATINVANON IVLINVNGAd JO SLOAIAY AHL AO SISAIVNY AHL NI GAS SAANSVAJ AO SOILSILVLS AALLATIOSAd

1 ATaVL
mano

oo

coooo

ocooo

 

ca

 

orl
6"
tl
se"

sv
ee
cr

8st
8
90°
7
or"

7
or
zo"
1@

sok=]
sok=]
soX=JT

sok=]
soX=JT
sok=]
sok=]
soX=JT

‘ou=0
‘ou=0
‘ou=0

‘ou=0
‘ou=0
‘ou=0
‘ou=0
‘ou=0

SdAOUI JO ‘ON

sok=T
sok=]
sok=]

‘ou=0
‘ou=0
‘ou=0

 

es Cg q10YOo “bE—Sp SABE) TS—ZhET WIOg,
(Z WoYod ‘pp—sE saBe) 19-7 S61 Wig
(I Wooo ‘pe-Sz saBe) 11-7961 WIOg
sMoyoo yyig
asoULANg-OJaqL], Tela],

* asouling-oqly, [TH
sete ees so TeMaN,
seeeeeees snpurgy 238e9-MNo]

snpury oyse2-yStEy
ory
SdAOU [PNUIPISAY,

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

vere uonvonpe s, 19438]
“'* uoTBoNpa $s, 1ayOPAL
Aed 10} YOM S$, 19YOI
a neighborhood television. Our measure of media exposure is an index
constructed from responses to three sets of questions in the individual
interview. Respondents were asked, “Have you ever listened to radio?”
If the respondent said yes, they were asked, “How old were you when
you listened to a radio for the first time?” We only include experiences of
listening to the radio that occurred before marriage in our measure of
premarital media exposure. Similar questions were asked about watching
television and seeing movies. We coded each item one if the respondent
has been exposed to radio, television, or movies before marriage, and zero
otherwise. Because responses to these questions are correlated, and in
order to avoid problems of multicollinearity, we sum these three variables
to a scale with values ranging from zero to three. In this scale, zero means
the respondent was exposed to none of the media sources before her or
his marriage, whereas a value of three means the respondent was exposed
to all three media sources. In addition, for the event-history models, we
coded exposure to media as zero for all the years before the respondent
was exposed to any of the media sources, one when exposed to any one
source of media for the first time, two when exposed to any second media
source, and three when exposed to all three media sources. Thus, the
measure of exposure to media varies by time, and the values again range
from zero to three.

Participation in youth clubs—The expansion of mass education, em-
ployment opportunities outside the family, transportation, and commu-
nication have recently created new venues for social interactions: youth
clubs. These youth clubs may be organized with a wide range of objec-
tives, including 4-H clubs to help young farmers to learn new agriculture
technology, cultural youth clubs to preserve the heritage and culture of
a specific ethnic group, or political youth clubs designed to support one
of Nepal’s many political parties. However, the most common feature of
these clubs is that they bring together unmarried youth with varied back-
grounds including different sexes, ethnic groups, and education. Our mea-
sure of participation in youth clubs comes from responses to a question
asking, “Have you ever been a member of a youth club?” If respondent
answered “yes” then she or he was asked, “How old were you when you
became a member of a youth club for the first time?” We only include
participation in youth clubs that occurred before marriage in our measure
of premarital participation in youth clubs. We coded this measure one if
the respondent became a member of a youth club before she or he got
married, and zero otherwise. For the event-history models, we coded this
measure as zero for all the years before the respondent became a member
of a club, and one for the years after she or he became a member of a
club.

Controls.—An individual’s ethnicity, gender, birth cohort, and family
background may also affect the level of participation in the choice of a
spouse in this setting. Because these factors may also influence an indi-
vidual’s level of participation in nonfamily activities, it is important to
control for these factors in examining the impact of nonfamily activities
on individual variations in involvement in spouse choice. In fact, precisely
because of this problem, many previous studies are limited to a single
ethnic group, a single gender, or a single birth cohort. For example, even
among studies of marital processes in Nepal most studies focus on a single
ethnic group: Macfarlane’s (1976), Fricke’s (1986), and Ahearn’s (1994)
studies on the Gurung, the Tamang, and the Magar, respectively. Our
research extends this previous work by examining spouse choice among
the general population, but this design requires individual models to in-
clude controls for these subgroup distinctions.

Nepalese society consists of many ethnic and linguistic subgroups (Bista
1972; Dahal 1993; Gurung 1980, 1998). These subgroups differ in many
respects that have important consequences for both premarital nonfamily
experiences and participation in spouse choice. Although ethnicity in Ne-
pal is complex, scholars have often categorized ethnicity into five major
groups for analytical purposes: high-caste Hindus, low-caste Hindus, Ne-
war, Hill Tibeto-Burmese, and Terai Tibeto-Burmese (Axinn and Yabiku
2001; Blaikie et al. 1980). We have adopted the same categories. Although
the first two groups, high-caste Hindus and low-caste Hindus, have the
same Indian origin and both practice Hinduism, the first group has his-
torically had much more control over political decisions and access to
opportunities in both the formal and informal sectors. Hill Tibeto-Bur-
mese are of Tibetan origin and tend to practice Buddhism. This category
includes groups such as the Tamang, the Gurung, and the Magar (Fricke
1986). The Terai Tibeto-Burmese people are the original inhabitants of
the Chitwan Valley (Guneratne 1994). They were jungle dwellers before
the valley was opened for settlement, and they adopted farming only after
the people from surrounding areas started growing crops in this valley.
Newars are distinct from all of these other groups in the sense that they
practice a mixture of Hinduism and Buddhism and are heavily involved
in the business sector of the country. High-caste Hindus and Newars are
groups who hold more restrictive values about an individual’s choice of
marriage partner, whereas low-caste Hindus, Hill Tibeto-Burmese, and
Terai Tibeto-Burmese are groups who have more relaxed attitudes toward
as individual’s choice of marriage partner. (For more information about
these ethnic groups, see Fricke [1986], Gurung [1980], Macfarlane [1976],
and Bista [1972].) We coded individuals one if they are members of a
specific category, and zero if not, and treated high-caste Hindus as a
reference group for comparison. We also tested for interactions between
ethnic group and exposure to nonfamily experiences.
As elsewhere, gender inequalities in various aspects of social life are
deeply rooted in Nepalese society (Acharya and Bennett 1981; Bennett
1983; Morgan and Niraula 1995; UNICEF 1998). Compared to men,
women have lower social status in South Asian societies in general (Cald-
well et al. 1983; Dyson and Moore 1983; Morgan and Niraula 1995). Most
women, regardless of their ethnic group, wealth, and age, are constrained
from participation in various activities, such as education, employment,
politics, and business. This disadvantaged position of women has sub-
stantially reduced their ability to voice their wishes freely. As a result, we
expect that compared to men, women have fewer premarital nonfamily
experiences and also participate less in spouse choice. We included gender
as a control in our analysis, coded one if the respondent is female, and
zero if male. We also test for interactions between gender and nonfamily
experiences.

The intergenerational transmission literature suggests that there is a
significant parental influence on child outcomes. Parental resources (both
economic and human capital resources) during childhood are positively
related to children’s psychological and behavioral outcomes later in life
(Axinn, Clarkberg, and Thornton 1994; Bengtson 1975; Cooksey, Men-
aghan, and Jekielek 1997; Sewell, Hauser, and Wolf 1980). Because pa-
rental experiences may affect both children’s nonfamily experiences and
their participation in the choice of a spouse, we controlled for a number
of parental characteristics in our multivariate models. These include
mother’s work for pay during respondent’s childhood, mother’s total
number of children, and parents’ education. The measure of mother’s
work comes from a response to the question, “Did your mother ever work
for pay outside your home before you were 12 years old?” We coded “yes”
responses one, and “no” responses zero. The total number of mother’s
children comes from the response to the question, “How many children
did your mother have?” The measure of parental education comes from
the response to a series of questions beginning, “Did your father ever go
to school?” Positive responses are coded as one, and negative responses
are coded zero. The same question was asked regarding the mother’s
education and coded exactly the same as father’s education.

Because residential moves alter the group of people with whom un-
married youth have an opportunity to interact, this may have important
influence in spouse selection. However, because the decision about resi-
dential moves is primarily associated with parents’ decisions, we consid-
ered residential move as related to family background and treated it as
a control. Our measure of residential moves comes from the migration
history included in the life-history calendar. Each respondent was asked
a series of questions beginning with: “In what year did you move to this
neighborhood? How many years have you lived in this neighborhood?
Where did you live before moving to this neighborhood? How many years
did you live in that place?” A completed record of all places of residence
was gathered. From this record, we calculated the total number of resi-
dential moves before marriage and also a time-varying cumulative num-
ber of residential moves prior to the year in question.

Previous studies suggest significant differences between birth cohorts
both in terms of nonfamily experiences and participation in mate choice
(Goode 1970; Thornton, Chang, and Lin 1994). Compared to older cohorts,
more recent cohorts have a significantly higher level of nonfamily expe-
riences and participate more in the choice of their spouses (Thornton,
Chang, and Yang 1994). Therefore, we include a control for the respon-
dent’s birth cohort. Respondent’s birth cohort is coded in three catego-
ries—cohorts born 1962-71, 1952-61, and 1942-51. We treated the oldest
cohort born 1942-51 as the reference group in our analyses. We also test
for interactions between cohort and exposure to nonfamily experiences.

We also use the birth cohort variable as an indication of social change
in this population. We do so by both examining the overall effect of birth
cohort on trends in mate choice and the extent to which the effect of this
historical change can be accounted for by trends in the nonfamily ex-
periences of young people. Our expectation is that the introduction of
nonfamily experiences of young people into the analysis explains much
of the historical change in mate choice, thereby suggesting that changes
in nonfamily activities have played a substantial role in the tremendous
historical increase in the involvement of young people in mate choice.
the respective independent variable. If the coefficient is greater than one,
the effect is positive, and every unit change in the independent variable
increases the odds of being in the next-higher category of participation
in spouse choice. If the coefficient is less than one, then every unit change
in the independent variable decreases the odds of participation in spouse
choice.

As a refinement of our analysis, we also estimate the effects of nonfamily
experiences on the rate of marriage using discrete-time hazard models.
These models focus on the timing of the transition from single to married,
but separate the transition to marriage into two competing risks: the
hazard of arranged marriage and the hazard of marriage involving some
participation.

Our time-varying measures of characteristics of the respondents are
measured in the year prior to the current year of exposure to marriage.
In other words, all time-varying covariates are lagged by one year. We
adopt this strategy to guard against the possibility of reciprocal causation
within a particular year. Person-years of exposure are the unit of analysis.
We use logistic regression to estimate these discrete-time hazard models.
The tables present exponentiated log-odds coefficients, which can be in-
terpreted as the multiplicative effect of a one-unit change in the inde-
pendent variable on the odds of marrying. Also note that because the
probability of marrying is so small within each year, the odds of marrying
are similar to the rate of marrying. Thus we sometimes refer to the effects
of the covariates on the rate of marriage.
* Note that the discrete-time hazard formulation of the spouse-choice outcome avoids
problems associated with the censoring of those who have not yet married, but who
may eventually go on to marry, from our analyses.

* Because the sample design generating these data included clustering by neighborhood,
we reestimated all of our models of degree of participation in spouse choice using
multilevel ordered logistic regression technique in hierarchical linear modeling (HLM).
This alternative estimation technique yielded the same results as those presented in
table 2. Because the sample also includes husbands and wives, we also reestimated
our models using this same technique to allow for couple-level clustering. This alter-
native estimation sometimes yielded somewhat smaller estimates of specific parameters,
but in no case altered the substantive conclusion based on these results.

° Recall that 35% of our respondents reported that they participated to some degree
in the choice of their first spouse, whereas the remaining 65% reported that their first
marriages were solely arranged by parents or relatives. Among the 35% who reported
some degree of participation, 6% reported that although they had participated, their
parents or relatives had more influence on the decision, 2% reported that both parents
or relatives and the respondent equally participated in the choice, about 5% said that
although their parents or relatives had participated it was mostly their decision, and
the remaining 22% reported that they solely chose their spouse.
TABLE 2
ORDERED LociT ESTIMATES OF IMPACT OF PREMARITAL NONFAMILY EXPERIENCES ON
THE DEGREE OF PARTICIPATION IN THE SELECTION OF THE FIRST SPOUSE

 

 

DEGREE OF PARTICIPATION IN SPOUSE

SELECTION
Controls Without Age With Age
VARIABLE Only at Marriage at Marriage

 

Premarital experiences:
School enrollment (enrolled in school) ..... -93 1.06
below, the hazard model format reveals important differences in the effects
of enrollment and attainment on rates of marriage via different
arrangements.

Second, we present estimates of the effects of nonfamily work on the
degree of participation in spouse choice. Nonfamily work has a strong
statistically significant, positive effect on participation in spouse choice,
as predicted. The odds ratio of 1.53 indicates that the odds of being in a
higher category of participation in the choice of spouse for an unmarried
youth who had ever worked for pay outside of home is 53% greater than
that for a young person who had never worked for pay outside of home.
This finding is consistent with our hypotheses and the findings of previous
studies from other settings (Thornton, Chang, and Yang 1994).

Third, we present estimates of the effects of nonfamily living. Although
previous studies from other settings suggest nonfamily living may be an
important influence on marital behavior, we find no evidence for this
effect in any of our models (including those not shown here). However,
because changes in living arrangements generally include residential
moves, and we control for residential moves, the effect of residential moves
eclipses the effect of nonfamily living. In fact, residential moves have a
statistically significant, positive effect on participation in spouse choice,
as predicted. The odds ratio of 1.08 indicates that the odds of being in a
higher category of participation in the choice of spouse for an unmarried
youth who had made at least one residential move is 8% greater than
that for a young person who never experienced a residential move.

Next, we present estimates of the effects of media exposure (see table
2). Previous studies have rarely had an opportunity to examine the influ-
ence of media exposure on participation in the choice of a spouse. We
find that exposure to media has a positive, significant effect on partici-
pation in spouse choice. Every one-unit increase in the media exposure
index increases the odds of higher participation in the choice of spouse
by 19%. The media exposure index is the sum of three dichotomous
measures: listening to the radio, watching television, and seeing movies.
The odds ratio of 1.19 means that the odds of participation in a higher
category of spouse choice for those who have listened to a radio, watched
television, and seen a movie (all three experiences) are 69% greater than
for those who had never listened to a radio, watched television, or seen
a movie before their marriage (none of the three experiences).’ This is a
large effect on the variations in individual participation in the choice of
a first husband or wife, an effect that is also not statistically different for
men and women (not shown in tables).

Finally, our estimates of the effects of participation in youth clubs on
spouse choice are presented in table 2. We find that participation in youth
clubs has a strong influence on the degree of participation in the choice
of a spouse. The odds of greater participation in spouse choice for those
who participated in youth clubs are 40% higher than for those who did
not participate in youth clubs. Several scholars have argued that such
relationships between media exposure, participation in youth clubs, and
marital behaviors are likely to exist (Caldwell 1982; Caldwell et al. 1983;
Macfarlane 1986), but few have actually had the opportunity to test these
hypotheses empirically. We find that these relationships are, in fact,
substantial.

Controlling for age at marriage.—Table 2 displays our estimates of the
effects of premarital nonfamily experiences, controlling for age at first
marriage. As we indicated above in our theoretical framework, all studies
of spouse choice face the potential problem that the selection of a spouse
may be closely associated with age at marriage, and later marriage creates
more time to be exposed to nonfamily experience. Because neither age at
marriage nor participation in the selection of a spouse can be observed
without the occurrence of the other, it is not possible to estimate the
independent effects of one on the other. This makes separation of effects
on participation in selection of a spouse from effects on age at marriage
particularly difficult. To address the issue, we reestimate all the models
calculated without age at marriage in table 2 over again, this time in-
cluding a control for age at marriage. Age at marriage is operationalized
as age in years at the time the respondent first married, as established by
the life-history calendar method.

First, notice that age at marriage does have a strong positive association
with participation in spouse selection, as expected (see table 2). In fact,
according to these estimates, a one-year increase in age at first marriage
increases the odds of participation in spouse choice 8%. Thus, a five-year
increase in age at marriage increases the likelihood of participation in
spouse selection by about 47% (1.08, raised to the fifth power; see table
2). Note that our focus on participation in spouse selection leads us to
include age at marriage as a predictor of participation in spouse selection.
It may also be that participation in spouse selection actually determines
age at marriage. If this is the case, then the appropriate estimates of the
total effects of nonfamily experience on spouse selection are presented in
table 2.

In general, we find that including age at marriage in these models leads
to a reduction in total effects of each nonfamily experience. This reduction
suggests that part of the total effect we observed may work through age
at marriage, if age at marriage determines participation in spouse choice.
However, even after we control for the age at marriage, all three nonfamily
experiences—nonfamily work, media exposure, and participation in youth
clubs—that have statistically significant effects continue to have statis-
tically significant, positive effects on the odds of participation in the se-
lection of spouse. Thus, overall, treating age at marriage as a control in
this model still leads us to the conclusion that several different dimensions
of premarital nonfamily experience have important implications for the
participation of individuals in the selection of their spouses.

Differences by gender and ethnicity.—Because gender and ethnicity
condition so many aspects of marriage processes in Nepal, and because
we find substantial effects of gender and ethnicity on spouse choice, we
also investigated variations in the effects of nonfamily experiences on
spouse choice by gender and ethnicity. Separate analyses of males and
females do show differences in the effects of nonfamily experiences, but
when tested in a model that includes a term for the interaction between
gender and nonfamily experiences, none of these interactions were sta-
tistically significant (analyses not shown in tables). For example, the odds
multipliers for the effects of media exposure on spouse choice are 1.24
and 1.15 for females and males, respectively, in separate models. However,
this difference is not statistically significant when tested formally using
an interaction term in a pooled model (analysis not shown in tables).
Overall, we find that all of the important determinants of spouse choice
we document in table 2 influence the marital process similarly among
both men and women in this setting.

We also investigated differences by ethnic group, including high-caste
Hindus, low-caste Hindus, Hill Tibeto-Burmese, Newar, and Terai Tibeto-
Burmese. Again, we investigated both separate models and interactions
in our main pooled model. These analyses suggest that among low-caste
Hindus, Hill Tibeto-Burmese, and Newar, nonfamily experiences—par-
ticularly nonfamily work and exposure to mass media—tend to lower the
degree of participation in spouse choice.* These somewhat surprising in-
teractions with ethnicity may be the result of lower-caste and non-Hindu
groups who have access to more nonfamily experiences modeling their
marital behavior on the behavior of high-caste Hindu groups. This process
is sometimes described as Hinduization in Nepal and is thought to exist
because the country has been a Hindu monarchy ruled by high-caste
Hindu groups for centuries (Dastider 1995; Hofer 1979; Srinivas 1956).
A comprehensive explanation of these interactions clearly requires a de-
tailed investigation of these ethnic groups, their identity, and their marital
behavior within the specific cultural context of our study site.

Finally, we also investigate the possibility of interactions between age
at marriage and our measures of nonfamily activities. This is a particularly
interesting extension of our overall concern about the relationship between
age at marriage and arrangement of marriage. The results from models
testing the interaction between age at marriage and nonfamily activities
show that except for school enrollment, all of the interactions between
nonfamily activities and age at marriage have statistically significant,
negative effects on the odds of being in the next-higher category of par-
ticipation in the selection of spouse (not shown in tables). This means
with an increase in age at marriage, the effect of each nonfamily activity
decreases. This interesting finding has a sensible substantive interpretation
that extends what we have learned about the relationship between age
at marriage and participation in spouse choice. Premarital nonfamily ex-
periences increase the likelihood of participation in selection of one’s own
spouse, and these effects are particularly strong for marriages at young
ages. Premarital nonfamily experiences have much less influence on par-
ticipation in the selection of a spouse among marriages that take place
at older ages—ages at which individuals are more likely to participate in
Understanding Historical Trends

As we explained earlier, there have been enormous historical increases in
the involvement of young people in the spouse choice process in this
setting. This process can also be seen in the results for cohort presented
in table 2. More recent cohorts are substantially more involved in spouse
choice than were the earliest cohorts (at the bottom of table 2).
As shown in model 1 of table 2, in an equation containing only birth
cohort, gender, mother’s number of children, mother’s work for pay,
mother’s education, father’s education, number of residential moves, and
ethnicity, we found that people born 1962-71 were 81% more likely to
have greater participation in the choice of spouse than were those born
1942-51. With the introduction of all of the young individual’s nonfamily
experience measures in model 2, this difference was reduced to 36%. One
of the informal ways to calculate this change is (81 — 36)/81 = .56. This
means that 56% of the total trend in spouse choice can be explained by
these changes in nonfamily experiences. Thus, our expectation that the
changing individual family experience has played a significant role in
changing marriage patterns in Nepal is strongly supported by these data.’
Further analysis shows that exposure to mass media is a central force
in explaining these changes in the mate-choice process. Adding exposure
to mass media to the equation reduces the cohort effect for those born
1942-51 from 81% to 39% or a reduction of 52% of the original differences,
(81 — 39)/81 = .52 (not shown in tables). Thus, this one factor alone can
explain as much of the cohort trends in spouse choice as all of the non-
family experiences together. This is because mass media exposure has a
large effect on participation in spouse choice, and because mass media
exposure has changed substantially. For example, the number of people
with no mass media exposure declined from 61% to only 15% between
the earliest and most recent cohort, while exposure to all three forms of
media increased from 2% to 32%. It appears that these large trends in
mass media exposure have had an important influence on trends in par-
ticipation in spouse choice.
Hazard Model Estimates of Timing of Choice and Arranged Marriage

Two concerns motivate us to reexamine the estimates presented in table
2 using a much different analytic technique. The first concern is the
potential association between arrangement of marriage and age at mar-
riage discussed at length above. By reframing the spouse-choice question
in terms of the hazard of marrying, with competing alternatives for mar-
rying by parental arrangement and marrying with some involvement in
the choice of one’s spouse, we recast the problem explicitly in terms of
marriage timing. This event-history-analysis approach focuses on the tim-
ing of marriage via these two alternative processes and draws our atten-
tion to factors that affect the timing of arranged marriage differently than
the timing of choice marriage. The second concern is the potential cen-
soring problem characterizing the models displayed in table 2, which only
include those who have married by the date of the survey. Event-history
analysis is particularly useful in addressing this type of problem because
it allows us to include everyone in our models, even those who have not
yet married but may eventually go on to marry. In order to learn the
extent to which this alternative estimation strategy yields results consistent
with those in table 2, we estimate the effects of nonfamily experiences on
the rate of marriage using discrete-time hazard models. Again, these mod-
els focus on the timing of the transition from single to married, but separate
the transition to marriage into two competing risks: the hazard of arranged
marriage and the hazard of marriage involving some participation.
Table 3 displays these alternative estimates. We begin with estimates
of models of the hazard of first marriage by individual choice, treating
first arranged marriage as a competing risk. Table 3 also presents our
estimates of models of the hazard of first arranged marriage, treating first
marriage by individual choice as a competing risk. The contrast between
results for choice marriage and the results for arranged marriage highlight
factors which contribute to differences in these two routes of exiting the
single state for marriage.

This event-history specification of the problem also allows us to in-
vestigate the potentially independent consequences of educational en-
rollment and educational attainment. Results displayed in table 3 show
that enrollment in school dramatically reduces the hazard of first marriage
via either route, with a somewhat stronger influence delaying choice mar-
riage. The odds multiplier of .56 indicates that those who are enrolled in
school have rates of individual-choice marriage 44% lower than those
who are not enrolled in school. Comparison to the results for arranged
marriage shows enrollment reduces the rate of arranged marriage by 41%.
Thus, enrollment in school reduces the overall rate of marriage via either
process and contributes little to the difference between marriages via
parental arrangement versus marriage involving some individual choice.
This finding is consistent with previous research demonstrating important
effects of school enrollment on marriage timing (Thornton et al. 1995;
Yabiku 2005), but it tells us little about the factors promoting an increase
in individual choice of first spouse.

By contrast, educational attainment (table 3) significantly increases
rates of first marriage involving some individual choice, but has no sig-
nificant effect on rates of the first marriage by parental arrangement. The
comparison of these two sets of effects is evidence that educational at-
tainment promotes individual participation in the choice of first spouse.
The educational attainment effect of 1.03 means that those who have
completed five years of schooling enter choice marriage at approximately
a 16% higher rate than those who have no schooling. Nonfamily work,
on the other hand, has no significant effect on rates of marriage via either
route of marrying.

Table 3 presents our estimates of the effects of nonfamily living. Non-
family living has a strong statistically significant, negative influence on
rates of first marriage arranged by parents, but no statistically significant
influence on rates of first marriage by choice. The odds multiplier of .82
indicates that those who lived in nonfamily living arrangements have
rates of arranged marriage 18% lower than those who never lived away
from their family. This finding is consistent with findings from other
settings (Thornton and Lin 1994)—young people who experience non-
family living are less likely to follow historical family-formation patterns
(Axinn and Barber 1997; Waite et al. 1986). Residential moves, on the
other hand, have a strong, statistically significant influence on rates of
first marriage via both routes. In fact, residential moves increase the
overall rate of marriage via either process and contribute little to the
difference between marriages via parental arrangement versus marriage
ee SF

 

 

 

(Ss'T) (69°T)
BL" seeO CT ss (BurAreA aur) sqnys yINoA ut uoNEdrnAeg
(€1'2) (tr)
ae CO” 86° * (xapul SursieA-aui) ainsodxa vrpayAy
(s8'1) (09")
ee CS" 9OT tn nns (BulArea aur) Surat Ayrueyuou prey 19Aq
(96) (er)
£6" TET nis (SutAreA outT}) YOM ATTUeyUOU peYy JAG
(48°) (68°2)
TOT 0 (stea4 Jo ‘ou SuTAIA-aWI}) JUOUTUTe}e [PUOBONpy
(res) (9¢"s)
ax OS” seeeDS (Jooyss ul APUsIand ZursreA-ault}) JUsUT|[OIUa [OOYIS
aseLuey, posuviiy aseLUey, V10Y4D, ATAVRIVA

 

(sysry Suneduiog se o8er1
Ivy] posuviry pue a1oyD sunvaiy) AOVIAAVIA, LSU JO ONINIL,

 

 

TOVREA,
ISU 10 ONINIT, AO SAGO NO SAONAIAAXY ATNVANON ‘IVLIIVINGAd JO SLOAAAY JO SALVWILSY TACO GUVZVH AWIL-ILaAAOSIG]
© ATaVL
uasiajg {2861 UOStITY) SAS ay) EY AT[eIIyT We Jou saop sxvaé-uossad Jo ‘ou YSIY oy, “sfapour prezey outt}-ajor9sIp ay} Ut s1va4-UOssad Jo “OU AY} St 9OLTZ »

s[ppow asay.y,

TO >d xxx

SO>d sve
“sysaq payrey-auo “OT >d x
“(1661

‘dnoaB aguasayar se (¢ WOYOS “pe-sp sae) Tg-ZPHT WIOg ,
“dnoa8 aouasayar se snpUutyy aiseo-YBIH] 4
dno aouarayar sv aeT ,

‘SPPpoul prezey suMty-ajaisIp aBUVATNU Sursn payeuttysa aaa

“sfapowt pautq wos Wo1y atUOD s}UaLYFa0, ‘aUT| PUOdas oY} UO sasayjuaed UT SoNSTIeIS-7 YILA ‘auT] Is4y ay} UO payiodar are sone sppO—“ALON.

 

 
 
 
 

 

  

 
 
 
 

pl86'07 p99LTZ pl86'07 POOL TZ qeas-uosiog
oz +1 oz +1
78 TSZ'T P0°6E7'T SSL66 720°9L6
(gr'21) (6°21) (er'21) (84'€T)
sex BO" e860" sex 8O" se BO" + parenbs o3y
(00°41) (8s'8T) (41°91) (te°6T)
sexo SPT sex bb T sexe €9T sex OL "T ue ee ee ue co aBy

ee
involving some individual choice. It is important to note that the observed
effect of nonfamily living is independent of this effect of residential moves.

Exposure to mass media has no statistically significant negative impact
on rates of the first marriage involving some individual choice, but media
exposure has a statistically significant negative impact on rates of the first
marriage arranged by parents (see table 3). The odds multiplier of .92
means that those who are exposed to at least one source of media have
rates of arranged marriage 8% lower than those who have not had ex-
posure to any of the media sources before their marriage. This finding is
consistent with our findings from the ordered logistic regression analysis
and with the idea that mass media promotes the breakdown of existing
social norms favoring arranged marriage (McQuail 1985).

The effects of participation in youth clubs are also consistent with our
previous findings. The odds multiplier of 1.23 suggests that young people
who are members of youth clubs have rates of choice marriage 23% higher
than do those who never became members of youth clubs (see table 3).
On the contrary, the odds multiplier of .78 (table 3) indicates that young
individuals who are members of youth clubs have rates of arranged mar-
riage 22% lower than do those who are not members of youth clubs.
Again, the impact of participation in youth clubs is in the direction our
theoretical framework predicted—it speeds up rates of choice marriage
and slows down rates of arranged marriage. These effects of participation
in youth clubs are particularly important because the consequences of
this type of premarital nonfamily experience have not been documented
in previous research.
models of participation in the selection of a spouse also does not change
the relationships we observe between young people’s premarital non-
family experiences and their participation in choosing a spouse (not shown
in tables). Second, we investigated interactions between birth cohort and
exposure to premarital nonfamily experiences, because unobserved var-
iation in parental characteristics may be correlated with the birth cohort
of their children. However, this investigation did not produce any evidence
of significant interactions between birth cohort and young people’s pre-
marital nonfamily experiences (not shown in tables). Thus, our investi-
gation did not identify empirical evidence of parental-generation expla-
nations for the effects of premarital nonfamily experiences on marital
arrangement that we observe. Of course, as with all observational study
designs, we cannot eliminate the possibility that other parental charac-
teristics we have not observed produce the relationships we do observe—
investigation of this possibility remains an important subject for future
research.

However, the history of the setting we study may provide part of the
explanation for our failure to identify parental characteristics that explain
the relationship between premarital nonfamily experience and partici-
pation in spouse choice. Because our study site has only recently begun
to experience a wide array of contextual changes, these changes have
created a great deal of variance across the generations. In one generation
neither the parents nor children had the opportunity to experience these
changes, in the next generation parents did not have the opportunity but
some of their children did, and in the following generation both the parents
and their children will be exposed to these changes. Our study of this
setting corresponds to a historical period in which the parents of our
respondents (who were born in 1971 and earlier) are characterized by
little exposure to nonfamily experiences. As a result there is little variance
in nonfamily experience among the parental generation to explain vari-
ations in their children’s behavior. As this generation of young people
ages and becomes parents themselves, stronger intergenerational influence
on behavior may be observed.

Ethnographic evidence from rural Nepal is consistent with this expla-
nation. Detailed studies of the courtship behavior of young people indi-
cates that the shift from arranged marriage to love marriage is associated
with the young people’s exposure to formal schooling, magazines, love
letters, novels, and watching Hindi and Nepali films (Ahearn 2004). These
findings are quite consistent with the empirical results we summarized in
tables 2 and 3.
CONCLUSION

To summarize, we expected positive effects of nonfamily experiences on
the participation of unmarried youth in the choice of their spouse, and
that is what we found. The results from both ordered-logistic-regression
models and discrete-time hazard models provide strong evidence of a
positive association between nonfamily experiences and greater partici-
pation in the choice of a spouse. The findings associated with nonfamily
schooling, nonfamily employment, and nonfamily living are consistent
with previous studies of mate choice in Taiwan, Japan, China, Europe,
and India (Caldwell et al. 1983; Smith 1973; Thornton and Lin 1994;
Tilly and Scott 1978; Whyte 1990). However, we have gained a number
of insights into the processes of social change that may drive changes
from arranged marriage to individually chosen consensual unions by ex-
ploring the effects of media exposure and participation in youth clubs.

Increasingly, both social scientists and policy makers are beginning to
argue that exposure to the mass media may have important consequences
for family formation and dissolution processes. The evidence we present
is consistent with that idea. In this rural agrarian setting, in which vir-
tually all marriages were arranged by parents only decades ago, exposure
to the media increases the chances that young adults will themselves
participate in the choice of their future husband or wife. The fact that
this strong effect is independent of a broad range of other nonfamily
experiences and other individual and family characteristics only serves to
underscore the importance of this mechanism of change. It is quite likely
that those who are exposed to the media in this setting, through radio,
television, or the movies, are coming in contact with new ideas and foreign
examples of behavior, originating predominantly in Western Europe and
the United States. These messages from Western countries include the
information that those who are the very richest in today’s world chose
their own spouse and do not necessarily marry a person of their parents’
choosing. These messages may also indicate that independence from par-
ents and exercising one’s own decision-making prerogatives may help in
the goal of social mobility and achievement of the good life. These pow-
erful messages may have important implications for behavior producing
the relationship between media exposure and the participation in spouse
choice we document here (Thornton 2001, 2005). This message also ap-
pears to be an important element in leading many more young people to
be involved in the choice of their spouse.

Youth clubs provide a venue for interaction among same-age unmarried
youths. Participation in these clubs may be stimulated by other nonfamily
experiences, such as school or work, but the clubs themselves provide an
opportunity for the discussion and exchange of ideas, as well as an op-
portunity for meeting potential spouses, that probably goes beyond what
comes from school and work alone. So, it is not surprising to find that in
models that combine the effects of multiple nonfamily experiences, par-
ticipation in youth clubs remains an important determinant of partici-
pation in spouse choice even when the effects of nonfamily school and
work are greatly reduced. The ideas about alternative forms of marriage
and feelings of independence that may be fostered in these groups prob-
ably fuel young peoples’ drive to have some say in the choice of their
marital partner. The exposure to potential mates undoubtedly increases
the chances that club participants will have their own ideas about a likely
spouse as well. Together, it is not surprising that the various dimensions
of participation in these clubs increases the chances that young adults
will have some input into the choice of their spouses. Social changes that
stimulate the proliferation of such youth clubs, are, thus, quite likely to
reduce the prevalence of parental-arranged marriage.

We began by expanding our focus on the relationship between non-
family experiences and participation in the choice of a spouse. Unlike
most of the previous studies that focus on only a few nonfamily experi-
ences, such as schooling and employment, this study examines the effects
of five nonfamily experiences on participation in the choice of spouse. We
examine the effect of schooling experiences, nonfamily employment, non-
family living, exposure to media, and participation in youth clubs before
marriage. The results of our analyses broadly support our hypotheses that
nonfamily experiences increase the participation in the choice of first
spouse. However, our analyses also reveal that the new nonfamily ex-
periences, which we added in this study, have robust effects on the choice
of spouse. In fact, the effects of nonfamily living, media exposure, and
participation in youth clubs documented here lead us to argue that future
research on a wide variety of family formation and dissolution processes
should include consideration of these same factors.

Finally, the strong influence of mass media and schooling trends in
bringing changes in mate choice is important in interpreting marital
trends. It suggests that ideational forces have been especially important
elements of marital change and should play a more central and significant
role in studies of family change.
Magaras in Nepal. Ph.D. dissertation. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,

Department of Anthropology.

. 2004. Invitation to Love: Literacy, Love Letters, and Social Change in Nepal.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Allison, Paul D. 1982. “Discrete-Time Models for the Analysis of Event Histories.
61-98 in Sociological Methodology, edited by Samuel Leinhardt. San Franci:
Jossey-Bass.

Axinn, William G., and Jennifer S. Barber. 1997. “Living Arrangements and Family
Formation Values in Early Adulthood.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 59 (3):
595-611.

. 2001. “Mass Education and Fertility Transition.” American Sociological
Review 66 (4): 481-505.

Axinn, William G., Marin E. Clarkberg, and Arland Thornton. 1994. “Family Influence
on Family Size Preference.” Demography 31 (1): 65-79.

Axinn, William G., L. D. Pearce, and D. Ghimire. 1999. “Innovations in Life History
Calendar Applications.” Social Science Research 28:243-64.

Axinn, William G., and S. Yabiku. 2001. “Social Change, the Social Organization of
Families, and Fertility Limitation.” American Journal of Sociology 106 (5): 1219-61.

Banerjee, Sir Gooroodass. 1984. The Hindu Law of Marriage and Stridhana. 4th ed.
Delhi: Mittal.

Barber, J., G. Shivakoti, W. G. Axinn, and K. Gajurel. 1997. “Sampling Strategies for
Rural Settings: A Detailed Example from the Chitwan Valley Family Study Nepal.”
Nepal Population Journal 6 (5): 193-203.

Belli, R. F. 1998. “The Structure of Autobiographical Memory and the Event History
Calendar: Potential Improvements in the Quality of Retrospective Reports in
Surveys.” Memory 6:383-406.

Bengtson, V. L. 1975. “Generation and Family Effects in Value Socialization.” American
Journal of Sociology 40 (3): 358-71.

Bennett, Lynn. 1983. Dangerous Wives and Sacred Sister: Social and Symbolic Roles
of High Caste Women in Nepal. New York: Columbia University Press.

Berreman, Gerald D. 1972. Hindus of the Himalayas: Ethnography and Change. 2d
ed. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Beutel, Ann, and William G. Axinn. 2002. “Social Change, Gender, and Educational
Status Attainment.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 51 (1): 109-34.

Bista, D. B. 1972. People of Nepal. Kathmandu: Ratna Pustak Bhandar.

Blaikie, P., J. Cameron, and D. Seddon. 1980. Nepal in Crisis: Growth and Stagnation
at the Periphery. Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Caldwell, J. C. 1982. Theory of Fertility Decline. London: Academic Press.

Caldwell, J. C, P. H. Reddy, and P. Caldwell. 1983. “The Causes of Marriage Change
in South India.” Population Studies 37:343-61.

. 1988. The Causes of Demographic Change: Experimental Research in South
India. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Cooksey, E. C., E. G. Menaghan, and S. M. Jekielek. 1997. “Life-Course Effects of
Work and Family Circumstances on Children.” Social Forces 76 (2): 637-65.

Dahal, D. R. 1993. “Rethinking Fertility Transition: Some Observation from Nepal.”
Pp. 49-58 in Population Dynamics in Nepal, edited by Bal Kumar K. C. Kathmandu:
Tribhuvan University, Central Department of Population Studies.

Dastider, Mollica. 1995. Religious Minorities in Nepal. New Delhi: Nirala.

Demaris, Alfred. 1992. Logit Modeling: Practical Application. London: Sage.

Dyson, T., and M. Moore. 1983. “On Kinship Structure, Female Autonomy and
Demographic Behavior in India.” Population and Development Review 9 (1): 35-60.

Freedman, D., A. Thornton, D. Camburn, D. Alwin, and L. Young-DeMarco. 1988.
“The Life History Calendar: A Technique for Collecting Retrospective Data.”
Sociological Methodology 18:37-68.
Fricke, T. E. 1986. Himalayan Households: Tamang Demography and Domestic
Processes. Ann Arbor, Mich.: University Microfilms Research Press.

Fricke, T. E., and A. Thornton. 1991. “Rethinking Marital Transitions: Social Change,
Marriage Process, and Inter-Familial Relation in Two Nepali Communities.” Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America,
Washington, D.C., March.

Ghimire, D. J. 2004. “The Social Context of First Birth Timing in Nepal.” Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, Boston,
April.

Goode, W. J. 1970. World Revolution and Family Patterns. New York: Free Press.

Guneratne, Upali Arjun. 1994. “The Tharus of Chitwan: Ethnicity, Class and the State
in Nepal.” Ph.D. dissertation. University of Chicago, Department of Anthropology.

Gurung, H. B. 1980. Vignettes of Nepal. Kathmandu: Sajha Prakashan.

. 1998. Nepal Social Demography and Expressions. Kathmandu: New Era.

Hagan, John, R. MacMillan, and B. Wheaton. 1996. “New Kid in Town: Social Capital
and the Life Course Effects of Family Migration on Children.” American Sociological
Review 61 (3): 368-85.

Hofer, Andras. 1979. The History of the Muluki Ain: The Caste Hierarchy and the
State in Nepal: A Study of the Muluki Ain of 1854. Innsbruck: Universitatsverlag
Wanger.

Janowitz, Morris. 1981. “Mass Media: Institutional Trends and Their Consequences.”
Pp. 303-21 in Reader in Public Opinion and Mass Communication, edited by M.
Janowitz and P. M. Hirsch. New York: Free Press.

Lesthage, Ron. 1983. “A Century of Demographic and Cultural Change in Western
Europe: An Exploration of Underlying Dimensions.” Population and Development
Review 9 (3): 411-35.

Macfarlane, Alan. 1976. Resource and Population: A Study of the Gurung of Nepal.
London: Cambridge University Press.

. 1986. “Who Controls the Marriage Decision?” Pp. 119-47 in Marriage and
Love in England: Modes of Reproduction, 1300-1840, edited by Alan Macfarlane.
New York: Basil Blackwell.

Majupuria, I., and T. C. Majupuria. 1989. Marriage Customs in Nepal: Traditions and
Wedding Ceremonies among Various Nepalese Ethnic Groups. Bangkok: Craftsman.

Malhotra, Anju. 1991. “Gender and Changing Generational Relations: Spouse Choice
in Indonesia.” Demography 28 (4): 549-70.

McQuail, D. 1985. “Sociology of Mass Communication.” Annual Review of Sociology
11:93-111.

Morgan, S. Philip, and B. Niraula. 1995. “Gender Inequality and Fertility in Two
Nepali Villages.” Population and Development Review 21 (3): 541-61.

Petersen, Trond. 1991. “The Statistical Analysis of Event Histories.” Sociological
Methods and Research 19:270-323.

Preston, H. S. 1989. “The Social Sciences and the Population Problem.” Pp. 1-26 in
Demography as an Interdiscipline, edited by J. Mayone Stycos. New Brunswick,
N,J.: Transaction.

Rindfuss, Ronald R., and S. P. Morgan. 1983. “Marriage, Sex and First Birth Interval:
The Quiet Revolution in Asia.” Population and Development Review 9 (2): 259-78.

Sewell, W. H., R. M. Hauser, and W. C. Wolf. 1980. “Sex, Schooling and Occupational
Status.” American Journal of Sociology 86 (3): 551-83.

Shivakoti, G., W. G. Axinn, P. Bhandari, and N. Chhetri. 1997. “The Impact of
Community Context on Land Use in an Agriculture Society.” Population and
Environment 20 (3): 191-213.

Smith, D. S. 1973. “Parental Power and Marriage Patterns.” Journal of Marriage and
the Family 35:419-28.
Srinivas, M. N. 1956. “A Note on Sanskritization and Westernization.” Far Eastern
Quarterly 15 (4): 481-96.

Thornton, Arland. 2001. “The Development Paradigm, Reading History Sideways and
Family Change.” Demography 38 (4): 449-65.

. 2005. Reading History Sideways: The Fallacy and Enduring Impact of the
Developmental Paradigm on Family Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Thornton, Arland, William G. Axinn, and Jay D. Teachman. 1995. “The Influence of
School Enrollment and Accumulation on Cohabitation and Marriage in Early
Adulthood.” American Sociological Review 60 (5): 762-74.

Thornton, A., J.S. Chang, and Hui-Sheng Lin. 1994. “From Arranged Marriage toward.
Love Match.” Pp. 148-77 in Social Change and the Family in Taiwan, edited by
Arland Thornton and Hui-Sheng Lin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Thornton, A., J. S. Chang, and L. S. Yang. 1994. “Determinants of Historical Change
in Marital Arrangements, Dating, and Premarital Sexual Intimacy and Pregnancy.”
Pp. 178-201 in Social Change and the Family in Taiwan, edited by Arland Thornton
and Hui-Sheng Lin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Thornton, Arland, Mcing-Cheng Chang, and Te Hsiung Sun. 1984. “Social and
Economic Change, Intergenerational Relationships, and Family Formation in
Taiwan.” Demography 21 (4): 475-99.

Thornton, A., and T. Fricke. 1987. “Social Change and the Family: Comparative
Perspective from the West, China and South Asia.” Sociological Forum 2 (4): 746-72.

Thornton, A., T. Fricke, L. S. Yang, and J. S. Chang. 1994. “Theoretical Mechanisms
of Family Change.” Pp. 88-115 in Social Change and the Family in Taiwan, edited
by Arland Thornton and Hui-Sheng Lin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Thornton, A., and Hui-Sheng Lin. 1994. Social Change and the Family in Taiwan.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Tilly, Louise A., and Joan W. Scott. 1978. Women, Work and Family. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.

Tsuya, N. O., and M. K. Choe. 1991. “Changes in Intra-Familial Relationship and
Roles of Women in Japan and Korea.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of
the Population Association of America, Washington, D.C., March.

UNICEF. 1998. Children and Women of Nepal: A Situation Analysis. Kathmandu:
UNICEF.

Waite, L. J., F K. Goldscheider, and C. Witsberger. 1986. “Non-family Living and the
Erosion of the Traditional Family Orientation among Young Adults.” American
Sociological Review 51 (4): 541-54.

Whyte, M. K. 1990. “Changes in Mate Choice in Chengdu.” Pp. 181-213 in Chinese
Society on the Eve of Tiananmen: The Impact of Reform, edited by Deborah Davis
and Ezra F. Vogel. Cambridge: Harvard University, Council on East Asian Studies.

Wu, Lawrence L. 1996. “Effects of Family Instability, Income, and Income Instability
on the Risk of a Premature Birth.” American Sociological Review 61 (3): 386-406.

Wu, Lawrence L., and Brian C. Martinson. 1993. “Family Structure and the Risk of
a Premarital Birth.” American Sociological Review 58 (2): 210-32.

Yabiku, S. T. 2004. “Marriage Timing in Nepal: Organizational Effects and Individual
Mechanisms.” Social Forces 83 (2): 559-86.

. 2005. “The Effect of Non-family Experiences on Age of Marriage in a Setting

of Rapid Social Change.” Population Studies 59 (3): 339-54.
