From Ambushes to Golden Parachutes: Corporate Takeovers as an Instance of Cultural
Framing and Institutional Integration

Author(s): Paul M. Hirsch

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 4 (Tan., 1986), pp. 800-837
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2779959

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:43 UTC
Ownership contests for control of large American corporations have
become increasingly problematic and public with the advent of the
“hostile takeover.” This article examines the diffusion of this once
“deviant” innovation. Its focus is on the relationship between
changing business practices and American business culture; more
specifically, on how the processes of the normative framing of hos-
tile takeovers facilitated their diffusion and legitimation, helping to
recreate or sustain order despite the disruptions engendered by
takeovers. Three eras in the diffusion of this deviant innovation are
delineated. Each is characterized by a language and argot that serve
to cushion the hard fact of status loss by acquired executives.
Neither culture nor social structure is seen here to dominate this
interactive process. The provision of incentives to remain within the
institution while career goals and pathways are redefined consti-
tutes a case study of institutional reintegration, within a subsystem
of society seldom examined from this perspective of changing values
and ideologies.
During the past decade, professional managers have been sharply re-
minded they are hired agents for the owners of the corporation. Top
managements and boards of directors of large business firms have experi-
enced a loss of power and autonomy to set the firm’s future course. As the
corporation itself is increasingly defined as a salable bundle of liquid
assets, rather than as a producer of goods and services, top executives’
incentives and orientation are channeled to accord priority to what Per-
row (1972) calls “system” (i.e., financial and share price) goals, over and
above a commitment to the firm’s product or products.

This article addresses both the organizational and cultural sides of this
institutional transformation. It analyzes a change in the rules and tradi-
tions whereby transfers of ownership and control of large U.S. corpora-
tions are accomplished. The institution here is big business and the dis-
ruption to be examined is the advent of the “hostile takeover,” wherein
more than 50% of the shares of a large, publicly held corporation are
purchased by another over the loud, public protestations of the target
company’s management, board of directors, and/or minority sharehold-
ers. Such takeovers have widespread effects and ominous implications for
workers and managers of the “target” corporations. Existing social ar-
rangements such as plant and headquarters locations; product lines and
services offered; union contracts; pension and retirement benefits; and
contracts with local suppliers, banks, and other community organizations
are all called into question. Although some mergers are characterized by
the management as “friendly” rather than “hostile,” “a good guess is that
one-quarter to one-half the employees at the combined organizations are
directly affected. Fortune estimates that the ten largest of 1983’s 1500
mergers changed the lives of up to 220,000 employees. . . . No statistics
show how many employees [in merged companies] get relocated, lose
jobs, status, benefits, or opportunities . . . , or develop health or family
problems” (Magnet 1984, p. 44).
The ease with which takeovers of big companies can be executed, and a
widespread fear of their occurrence among top managements throughout
the United States, pose a challenge to “corporate cultures” and the expec-
tations of advancement held by workers at any potential target firm. Two
taken-for-granted assumptions underlying the stability of any social in-
stitution are its participants’ knowledge of the rules to be followed and
their sharing of a common culture. When a disruption in the structure of
institutional relations calls these into question, the individuals and groups
most directly affected face the problems of (a) making sense out of experi-
ences for which existing vocabularies may be inadequate and (b) con-
structing new rules of the game, or “traditions,” to better map and under-
stand their changed surroundings and in terms of which they can seek to
adapt and orient their behavior. In sociology, it is typically at this point
that concepts such as culture, ideology, politics, and symbols reenter our
structural models to become more than composite residuals, epiphe-
nomena, or some combination of superstructure and random error terms.
The institutionalization of the hostile takeover is integrally bound up with
its normative framing and with associated changes in the language of
public discourse located most easily through modern channels of com-
munication.

This article will focus on three interrelated aspects of the hostile
takeover:

1. Its origin, initial reception, and diffusion throughout the business
community. I begin by examining the structural context in which the
hostile takeover was developed and diffused as a deviant innovation
bearing few similarities to earlier forms of intercorporate mergers and
combinations.

2. Its novel symbolic framing, the language used, the rituals followed,
and the meanings attributed to the event sequence by participants and
close observers, that is, executives, investors, and the business press.
Here, I analyze the linguistic framing of the takeover and trace out its
quest for legitimacy in the face of initial hostility from the business com-
munity.

3. Ways in which the symbolic framing of hostile takeovers functions,
on several levels, to mitigate the loss of status and income experienced by
target firms and managements;’ this leads to a final discussion of ways in
which this linguistic framing has served cognitive, social-psychological,
and institutional functions for members of the business establishment.

The intent of this article is not to endorse a view of culture as the
dependent variable, simply reflecting or mirroring structural change.
Rather, I trace out both the structural changes associated with hostile
takeovers and their symbolic framing as concurrent developments, in-
fluencing each other and resembling two sides of the same coin. This does
not accord primary causal significance to either culture or social struc-
ture, as virtually all extant frameworks for the study of business are at
best partial. For example, while perspectives emphasizing rational ac-
tors, bureaucratic imperatives, social networks, or interlocking director-
ates all have made important contributions (Hirsch 1985), none of them is
concerned with the role of symbolic or cultural resources in explaining
social change within institutional settings. In the context of Parsons’s
classic typology, these structural approaches account best for adaptation
and goal attainment while at the same time downplaying integration and
pattern maintenance.

Data sources.—The data on which this study is based are drawn from
three major sources: (1) a systematic examination of the coverage of
takeovers by three major business periodicals (Wall Street Journal, For-
tune, and Business Week) between 1965 and 1985; (2) candid discussions,
averaging two hours in length, with 60 executives whose major respon-
sibilities and experiences include takeover activity;> and (3) a thorough
review of transcripts of congressional reports and hearings and numerous
other publications concerning the rise of, and responses to, this innova-
tion. Each of these sources cross-validated the others, insofar as most of
the terminology discovered and the interpretive frames into which it is
THE SOCIAL HISTORY AND DIFFUSION OF A DEVIANT
INNOVATION: THE “HOSTILE TAKEOVER”

Students of capitalism have long associated institutional changes and
innovations with a continual process of outsiders, or marginal partici-
pants, seeking to alter the rules of the game instituted by those benefiting
from existing arrangements. Since the adoption of such changes is likely
to bring gains to the former at the latter’s expense, we find American
business periodically characterized by internal conflicts between propo-
nents of these competing interests. This process, summarized by Pareto
(1980) as the conflict between foxes and lions, and by Veblen (1934) in his
depiction of predatory, industrious hunters conquering diligent farmers
and ranchers, also underlies Merton’s (1972) analysis of entrepreneurial
innovators, Smith’s ((1776] 1937) model of competition, Marx’s conten-
tion that capitalists will thereby devour each other (Marx and Engels
1978), and contrasts by Chandler (1962, 1977) and Schumpeter (1954) of
entrepreneurs and administrators. In this connection, the hostile takeover
represents an innovation, promulgated by outsiders (foxes or predators)
and resisted initially by many insiders (lions or ranchers), with both sides
appealing to broader values and traditions (competition, entrepre-
neurship, stability, and both charismatic and rational-legal authority) to
legitimate their positions and/or negotiate terms and procedures for a new
game of coordination (Schelling 1960; Merton 1972).

The assumption of control over one corporation by another, of course,
did not originate with the form we analyze here, nor, in its earlier forms,
did it take place only between willing participants. Indeed, the passage of
American antitrust laws can be seen historically as successful efforts by
numerous small corporate lions and ranchers to deter foxes and predators
(such as Rockefeller and Morgan) from forcing them into the consolida-
tions and trusts formed earlier in this century. In large part, because these
laws challenge or prohibit large-scale horizontal (same product) and verti-
cal (supply or distribution of product) combinations, the “conglomerate”
merger—the acquisition of firm(s) in unrelated industries—came into
being. Since 1960, the appearance and initial success of (1) large new
corporations with a portfolio of unrelated product lines, (2) obtained
through acquisitions, some of which were notably (3) hostile, or forced
upon the executives of the purchased firms, have altered the definitions of
acceptable intercorporate behavior and the ideology and culture sur-
rounding the transfer of ownership of large business firms.

The advent of conglomerate corporations thus encompassed two inno-
vations. First, it accelerated a model of diversification, wherein a small
core staff of executives manage large firms whose “portfolios” include
products and services that bear no clear relation to each other (Chandler
1962): for example, the acquisition of Sheraton Hotels, Hartford Insur-
ance, and Hostess Cupcakes by ITT, a “telephone” company; or Gulf and
Western’s growth from an auto-parts company to one encompassing divi-
sions involved in mining, chemicals, movies and television features,
sugar, machinery, and cigar manufacturing. Second, it promoted the
acquisition of existing companies through (a) purchasing shares of a target
firm’s stock in the public market, then (b) offering its other shareholders a
price higher than they could obtain otherwise if they would tender (sell)
their shares to the potential acquirer. This procedure is greatly facilitated
by the separation of owners from managers in the large corporation and
by many firms’ having thousands of shares of stock that are traded openly
on one of the major exchanges. It is this second innovation—the change
in the manner by which transfers of ownership are effected, often outside
and beyond the control of the target firm’s own executives—that directly
challenged the norms and traditions in force at the time of its initial
appearance.®

The hostile takeover differed from earlier forms of intercorporate merg-
ers and consolidations insofar as the acquirer was (1) most likely to be
from an industry sector or region unfamiliar to the current executives and
The Diffusion of Hostile Takeovers: First Wave (1960-70)

What, then, do people who have been labeled deviant have in
common? At the least, they share the label and the experience
of being labeled as outsiders. . . . We must see deviance, and
the outsiders who personify the abstract conception, as a con-
sequence of a process of interaction between people, some of
whom in the service of their own interests make and enforce
rules which catch others who, in the service of their own inter-
ests, have committed acts which are labeled deviant. [Becker
1963, pp. 9-10, 163].

The early adopters of the hostile takeover as a technique were outside
the mainstream of the big business community and brought it to the
“awareness” stage of the diffusion process. After outlining this early
phase of the diffusion process (Rogers 1962), I will examine its later
“trial,” modification, and, albeit ambivalent, full-scale adoption by the
institution of big business as a recognized procedure and widely employed
“new tradition.”

Hostile takeovers, as a means for acquiring ownership of another firm,
were reportedly conceived and initially undertaken during the 1950s in
the American Southwest.° Most of the acquiring and target corporations
were small—relative to those listed on the major U.S. stock exchanges—
and this early adoption of the technique attracted little attention in
financial centers. During this same period, however, other and larger
firms (e.g., Litton Industries, ITT, and LTV) were formed or refashioned
with an explicit commitment to the conglomerate strategy of growth
through acquisition. The resultant organizational form attracted substan-
tial and widespread attention: during the 1960s the appreciation of these
“go-go” firms’ stock prices exceeded that of established and more tradi-
tional corporations. It was these same companies, committed to growth
through acquisition, that subsequently would bring and apply the hostile
tender offer to larger and better-known firms when these targets for
absorption (merger) refused friendlier approaches and overtures.

By the mid-1960s, the established business community had become
aware of, but remained largely unaffected by, the hostile takeover as a
technique. At this stage the total number and size of tender offers, as well
as of conglomerate firms and those they acquired, remained small.” Many
of the mergers effected by conglomerates also were unopposed by the
acquired companies. In addition, far more than is usually the case among
large corporations (Lowenthal 1944), the entrepreneurial chairmen and
chief executives of conglomerate firms, as individuals, were visibly
identified and popularly equated with their corporations rather than con-
sidered “professional managers.” Through much of the 1960s, most of
those employing the hostile takeover remained apart from and non-
threatening to what, by any significant measure, constitutes the business
elite. By such criteria as flamboyance, regional location, ethnicity, lack of
formal education, and humble background, they remained outside the
business mainstream and relatively devoid of conventional ties, net-
works, and linkages.* This association of marginality with their early
adoption of this innovation is consistent in the diffusion literature with
Menzel’s (1960) suggestion that early adopters include those cut off from
positions of status and centrality and not well integrated into their peer
community. It also meshes with Cancian’s (1967) hypothesis that in any
community, risky innovations will be adopted disproportionately by per-
sons of lower rank, who have more to gain by taking chances.?

As foxes or predators entering the territory of corporate lions and
ranchers, these early adopters encountered, in short order, two major
challenges to a continuation of their utilization and successful implementa-
tion of the hostile takeover between 1968 and 1970. These occurred in the
forms of (1) sharp drops in the share price of practically all conglomerates
when, after about 10 years of steadily increasing reported profits, several
firms experienced declines (but not losses) and (2) congressional hearings,
passage of federal and state laws, and antitrust prosecutions all directed
(a) explicitly at making it more difficult to accomplish a hostile takeover
and (b), to a lesser extent, at slowing the pace of large intercorporate
mergers more generally (Barmash 1971). Many actions of the latter sort
followed, within months, an effort by two of the conglomerate “takeover
artists” to effect hostile acquisitions of firms larger than previous target
corporations: Goodrich Rubber and the Chemical Bank of New York (in
December 1968 and February 1969, respectively). For each firm, share-
holders would have received premiums over the prices at which the stock
of each company had been trading. These target firms, unlike the newer
“upstart” conglomerates, were long established and clearly linked to ma-
jor sources of credit, investment banks, and governmental authorities
(Glasberg 1981; Barmash 1971).!° Earlier in 1968, passage of the Wil-
liams Act had already imposed regulations on the utilization of hostile
takeovers (Jarrell and Bradley 1980; Schipper and Thompson 1983) and
had been preceded (in hearings) by expressions of concern over the behav-
ior of conglomerate firms (see Lorie and Halpern 1970).'!

Although its early adopters had brought the hostile takeover to the
attention of the business world as a deviant innovation, it was generally
defined as illegitimate and not widely adopted as an institutional innova-
tion at that time. As more of the affected “lions” and “ranchers” came to
participate in the revision of the rules, procedures, and normative fram-
ing of the transaction, the hostile takeover (by 1976) achieved more wide-
spread adoption and inclusion as acceptable behavior in a new “game of
coordination.”
From Periphery to Center: The Widespread Adoption

of the Hostile Takeover (1973-85)
Viewed sociologically, the process of diffusion may be charac-
terized as (1) the acceptance, (2) over time, (3) of some specific
item—an idea or practice, (4) by individuals, groups or other
adopting units, linked (5) to specific channels of communica-
tion, (6) to a social structure, and (7) to a given system of
values, or culture. . . . Most studies in sociology, rural sociol-
ogy and marketing have considered only consumer-type items,
those intended for adoption by an individual. But some inno-
vations are intended for—indeed they may require—groups,
in the sense that it takes two to tango (or to telephone, or to
perform the peyote ritual, etc.). And among such group-
oriented innovations a further distinction seems useful. There
are items which require collective adoptions but permit any
given individual to adopt or not . . . ; there are other items,
however, where the group adopts as a single unit leaving no
room for individual options. . . . [Katz, Levin, and Hamilton
1963, pp. 240-44]

Takeover activity, which had grown steadily from 1960 to 1967, de-
clined sharply between 1969 and 1972 (Jarrell and Bradley 1980). It
appeared that this innovation lacked acceptance by potential adopting
and target units and that its usage had been deterred and effectively
sanctioned for violating the values and culture of both the institution and
the surrounding polity. In their analysis of support for passage of the 1968
Williams Act, Austin and Fishman (1970)—two pioneer researchers and
proponents of the hostile tender offer—conclude that “direct and overt”
pressure for governmental regulation of this innovation came solely
from private industry, “especially from those potentially vulnerable to
attack. .. .” They continue, “The cry for disclosure of the intent, identity,
and stock ownership of the bidding firms . . . was initiated by American
corporations who [sic] were becoming quite terrified that they might be
attacked at any moment. . . . By depriving the bidder of some of his
weapons... the defense of the target has been aided. . . . The cash tender
offer . . . has been made more tame by [placing unnecessary restrictions
upon the successful execution of interfirm takeovers]” (pp. 33-34, 40).

Austin and Fishman concluded their review with a prediction that the
cash tender offer would “continue as the mid-twentieth century gadfly of
weak and inefficient American corporations,” and noted that “the ele-
ments of surprise and glamour still exist” (pp. 39-40). More interesting,
they also anticipated that by acknowledging and regulating the tech-
nique, the act’s passage could “bring about more offers because it may
increase the status of the method and thus bring more firms into the open
market to utilize this [now] more respectable overthrow and merger de-
vice” (italics added). In brief, the regulatory changes of 1968-70 did not
outlaw the hostile takeover. Instead, they restricted access to the utiliza-
tion of this innovation by requiring that (1) its users be able to afford
higher prices and have assured funding prior to making a tender offer and
that (2) its targets be provided greater access to alternative outcomes, in
the form of more time to locate merger partners they deemed more accept-
able or to seek shareholders’ outright rejection of the acquisition offer(s).
One effect of these new regulations was that conglomerate firms (whose
earnings and stock prices had already decreased) and other “marginal”
players undertook significantly fewer takeover attempts after 1969. !”

The strong reaction against the deviant innovation of hostile tender
offers appears to have stemmed as much from the problem of establishing
rules determining which players could most easily participate in the new
game as from concern over whether the game itself should continue. In
much the same way as the principal owners represented in Balinese
cockfights must be roughly equal in status and bet equal amounts (Geertz
1973), these regulations served to deter or preclude the most unwelcome
and unpredictable “outsider” players from engaging in the “main match”
of hostile takeover bids. To the distinction by Katz et al. among types of
group adoptions this adds an instance of successful diffusion hinging on:
(a) delineating the boundaries showing which members would have
easiest access to the use of the innovation and (b) structuring a situation
whereby group adoption permits these members to partake and at the
same time provides additional techniques for resisting implementation.
Instead of disappearing at this point, the hostile tender offer now came to
be adopted by the better established and more status-equal “corporate
lions” themselves, for use against one another.

Takeover patterns since 1973.—After this short period of adjustment,
hostile takeovers rebounded in 1973. Among large firms, they were initi-
ated by companies in the oil and tobacco industries, which were the first
to break the tradition whereby large companies honored one another’s
autonomy as independent entities. Although estimates of the actual num-
ber vary, there is general consensus that all interfirm tender offers (for
cash or exchange of stock, whether hostile or friendly) increased modestly
in 1972 over the previous (low) year, then nearly tripled during 1973
(Jarrell and Bradley 1980; Austin 1980).'? Table 1 presents the numbers
of announced tender offers for publicly held firms from 1974 to 1984.
These range roughly from 50 to 100 per year, with the number coded as
TABLE 1

TENDER OFFERS, 1974-84

 

 

No of Tender

 

Total No of Offers for Firms
% of Tender Tender Offers for with Publicly Traded
Offers Valued At Firms with Publicly Stock Coded as
Year >$75 Million Traded Stock “Hostile”
6 76 12
58 20
11 70 18
18 69 11
28 90 27
31 106 26
35 53 12
46 75 28
56* 68 29
59* 37 lit
70* 79 16¢

 

 

SouRcE.—All data courtesy of W. T. Grimm & Co., Chicago.

* Estimated by Tomi Simic, director of research, W T. Grimm & Co.

+ Excludes all instances of “greenmail,” in which a firm is threatended by potential acquirers and then
either (a) pays a “ransom” to buy back the “greenmailer’s” stock or (b) “escapes” by agreeing to be pushed
into acquisition by another company in what Grimm then codes as a “nonhostile” merger. “Greenmail”
increased markedly after 1982 and explains the apparent paradox of the number of tender offers increas-
ing while the number coded as “hostile” goes down. Examples of well-publicized instances of firms
paying “greenmail” since 1982 are Phillips Petroleum (to Boone Pickens) and Walt Disney (to Saul
Steinberg) Under this coding scheme, neither Pickens’s 1983 hostile tender offer for Gulf Oil nor that
company’s subsequent acquisition by “white knight” Standard Oil of California would appear in this
series as a “hostile” acquisition. (This understates the extent to which such mergers involve conflict.)
billion; 1981, during which the comparable figure nearly doubled to $82.6
billion, was described in Institutional Investor as the year of the
“megadeal” (Feinburg 1982). That the hostile takeover technique has
been widely adopted and accepted by big business is attested to by the
centrality and sheer scale of both the acquiring and target firms involved,
more than by dramatic increases in the number of firms employing it.

Post-1974 examples of acquired target firms encompassed in table 1,
column 1, include: 7-Up, Pet Foods, Marathon Oil, Marshall Field’s,
National Airlines, Hanes Clothing, Sunbeam, Del Monte, Bache Group,
Conoco, Gulf, and Cities Service Petroleum. Well-known and large cor-
porate acquirers (though not all initiators of the subsequent takeovers)
include: DuPont, Philip Morris, Pan American, U.S. Steel, Beatrice
Foods, Prudential Insurance, and R. J. Reynolds. (Large firms on either
end of friendly tender offers to which target firms’ boards agreed or
acquiesced from the outset include Pillsbury, Nabisco [since acquired],
Green Giant Foods, Montgomery Ward [MarCor], American Express,
General Electric, Sears, and Dean Witter Reynolds.) Unlike the entrepre-
neurial and “upstart” conglomerate companies that were first to employ
hostile takeovers as a deviant innovation, these firms, on both sides of the
ownership contest, are or were larger and long-established “corporate
lions.” Their participation in these transactions provides a strong basis
for asserting that the innovation has clearly diffused from one employed
predominantly by “foxes” at the periphery of the institution to adoption
by the “lions” at its very core and center. The large scale and high
visibility of these takeover transactions also apparently led to the popular
media’s pronouncements of a “merger boom” since 1975, even though the
total number of announced mergers and acquisitions (of all types, includ-
ing, e.g., divestments, or the sale of a single product line by one company
to another) decreased from 1970 to 1980.!* The extent to which the hostile
takeover achieved widespread acceptance is suggested by an E. F. Hut-
ton & Co. executive’s estimate that, by 1976, the pool of attractive poten-
tial target candidates had expanded to “ten to twenty per cent of the
companies on the New York and American [stock] exchanges . . . , even if
you eliminate the top half of the Fortune 500 because of antitrust prob-
lems” (Brill 1976, p. 59).!5

Interestingly, there also was little or no recurrence of the earlier pres-
sure or demands from private industry for governmental regulation of
such acquisitions, in contrast to the strong support provided legislation
protecting target companies when takeovers were being executed by more
marginal firms and their entrepreneurial chairmen (Ricklefs 1976; Chavez
1981). Instead, many of the same players that either supported or took
no position concerning these deterrent actions became active participants
as the bidding corporations, or their agents, in hostile takeover contests.
Investment banking firms, many of which had refused earlier to partici-
pate in hostile acquisitions (Barmash 1971), established merger and ac-
quisition departments whose services to corporate clients include research
to locate and propose target firms as candidates for takeover and the
coordination of campaigns for, or against, tender offers made by the
would-be acquirers.'® Similarly, law firms with specializations in this
technique expanded rapidly and were placed on retainer by large corpora-
tions seeking to make acquisitions and/or avoid being acquired. Many big
corporations, between 1970 and 1980, also established acquisition com-
mittees and executive positions to propose strategies and targets (i.e.,
other firms) for “corporate development.”

This section has traced the hostile takeover’s history and structural
context from its initial appearance and icy reception as an unwelcome
innovation, through its diffusion from the periphery to the center of the
institution of big business. While it remains the object of substantial
debate and discussion, its widespread adoption signals a de facto increase
in the takeover’s status. The hostile takeover has become an acceptable
form of intercorporate conflict and, since the mid-1970’s, has been in-
cluded in the portfolio of investment and growth strategies pursued by
major American corporations.
LINGUISTIC FRAMING OF CONTESTS FOR OWNERSHIP

The language is as exotic as the techniques: “white knights”
rush to rescue “sleeping beauties” from “black knights”— or
end up “paying ransom” as a last, best defense. There are
“black books” and “bear hugs,” and “creative directors” who
use either “shark repellent” or a “plum picker.” [Vewsweek,
“The Merger Rage” (October 16, 1978), p. 88]

The hostile takeover usually follows a predictable order of events,
which can be subdivided into one of several scripts or scenarios. In simple
descriptive terms, the temporal order is: offer — decisions/actions taken
— outcome.

Although the corporate takeover can be interpreted as an essentially
simple purchase or an exchange of shares of stock between wealthy indi-
viduals or corporate actors, it has been transformed symbolically into a
high-stakes drama and spectator sport with a full panoply of characters
cast as heroes and villains. As noted above, the takeover presents an
industrial and corporate analogy to Geertz’s classic conceptualization of
the cockfight as an art form that is (a) “really real only to the cocks” but
also has been (b) symbolically transformed by the Balinese from “a rather
blank and unvarious spectacle, a commotion of beating wings and throb-
bing legs” into a means of expression for public displays between groups
roughly equal in status through a ritual that supports cultural integration
“in a medium of feathers, blood, crowds, and money” (1973, pp. 443-44).

The linguistic framing of takeovers, between 1965 and 1985, exhibits
clear parallels to the status composition of the players engaged in this
activity at different points in time and in the diffusion process. The
imagery adopted, for example, has been consistently more violent when
the bidding party is from outside the corporate community than when he
is a status equal. (Carl Icahn and T. Boone Pickens, in 1985, exemplified
the outsider as bidder.) Over time, the vocabularies used to describe
takeovers expand beyond exclusively pejorative adjectives, applied to the
earliest marginal players, to include more accepting and benign terms,
accorded competitors already known to the targets and representing less
social distance.

The expansion of language patterns to accord greater respectability to
takeovers as the practice diffused and attained more widespread adoption
correlates cultural symbols with structural movements. This section pre-
sents the linguistic changes corresponding to the increasing acceptance of
the takeover procedure. Subsequently, I will analyze the important part
played by these cultural symbols in enabling the takeover to obtain the
degree of legitimacy it has been able to achieve.

Prior to the corporate takeover, professional management gauged in-
vestors’ assessments of their performance by movements in the price of a
corporation’s shares on the stock market. Between 1933 and 1960,
dissatisfied shareholders usually exited silently by selling their shares and
moving on. Occasionally, a proxy contest to dislodge the board would be
waged by disgruntled shareholders, or a lawsuit would be filed. Neither
procedure was very effective. Professional managements successfully
labeled both as “shoddy exercises in corporate ambulance-chasing” and
fended them off almost routinely by acting like beleaguered and dignified
adults forced to deal with a gang of unruly, rambunctious children. To
achieve acceptance in this environment of managerial control, investors
seeking to take over the corporations faced a tough battle for support in
overturning entrenched ways of thinking and of doing business.

The business community’s initial ambivalence over the takeover’s
legitimacy is reflected by a slide in the self-imagery and expectations of
what, in this arena, constitutes acceptable intercorporate behavior—a
slide from the world of a gentlemen’s club toward that of a streetfighter’s
brawl. This is apparent from the rise of a small number of expressive and
often derogatory scenarios subscribed to and followed by participants in
these event sequences. Like descriptions provided by Geertz and Schel-
ling in other contexts, these scripts and scenarios are borrowed almost
entirely from common, popular culture.

The popular genres in which the language and ideologies of the
takeover have competed and been framed almost exclusively since its
appearance center on such settings as the western, in which the ambush
and shoot-out replace the offer made and actions taken; the love affair
and/or marriage; warfare, replete with sieges, barricades, flak, and sol-
dierly honor; mystery; and piracy on the high seas, with raiders and safe
harbors. Generic formulations also entail the frequent appearance of mer-
cenaries or hired guns (investment houses to which most of the negotiat-
ing is delegated) and black and white knights (culled from tales of
chivalry in which the distressed damsel is either undone or rescued).
Images are borrowed frequently from popular movies Jaws, Bonnie and
Clyde), melodramas, soap operas, and competitive games such as Pac-
Man. The emergent vocabulary employed to publicly frame and discuss
hostile takeovers is almost exclusively nonfinancial: all players are as-
signed parts, with each instance coded into the appropriate popular
genre, utilizing terminology evocative of the violence, adventure, sex,
and conflict found in dramas about the Old West, piracy on the high seas,
and other fictional conflicts in other locales. In virtually all formulations,
the acquiring executive is macho and the target company is accorded the
female gender (“sleeping beauty” or a bride brought to the altar); refer-
ence to rape also emerged early on, in the expressive, nonprocedural
scenarios following the first wave of hostile tender offers.

Table 2 presents a listing of terms found in common use, sorted into
TABLE 2

GENRES AND IMAGE CLUSTERS

 

 

Genre

Image

 

Courtship ...............

Warfare .....

 

Western .............065

Chivalry ................

Nautical ................

2] 0S eee EEE Eee eee ey

afterglow

bringing to the altar

confetti

dancing

Don Giovanni

Faye

marrying

matchmakers

on the rocks

pigeons

playing Cupid

preferred suitors

pursuit

Raquel

sex without marriage

sleeping beauties

studs

takeover by rape

wooing

cyanide pill

hot pursuit

running into flak

siege

summer soldier

throwing up barricades

wounded list

ambush

hired guns

shoot-out

surviving company

tombstones

black knights

white knights

Faye as Bonnie in
Bonnie and Clyde

hired guns

Saturday night special

on the rocks

pirates

raiders

safe harbor

chess

marbles

Monopoly

sharks

shark repellent
genre clusters. (For a detailed glossary of the terms, descriptions, and
epithets employed, the reader is directed to the Appendix.)!” Which genre
is used accords most often with the degree of “friendliness” perceived
between the parties. For example, the 1979 effort of American Express to
take over McGraw-Hill was widely considered to test the limits of the
normative boundaries for legitimate acquisition tactics: the rhetorical
genre employed here by the target firm was all-out warfare. A subse-
quent, friendly merger of General Electric and Utah International, in
contrast, conformed more to descriptive and less to conflictual terms
within the courtship cluster. In between fall the majority of publicized
contests, wherein the parties and their associates may now: (a) wage a
good fight, in terms closely approximating and often described in the
business press as a western; (b) stage a more complex, less well-defined,
hence less morally clear-cut melodrama; or (c) engage in an affect-less,
tennis-like match, in which the winner’s trophy is control of the company.

Table 3 presents a summary showing how the linguistic framing of
takeovers expanded as the procedure became more widely accepted and
its probability of success increased sharply. During the pre-adoption era
(col. 1), the normative framing of external challenges to corporate execu-
tives incorporated a process of one-way stigmatization. It produced an
imagery of negative epithets condemning deviant individuals and outsid-
ers, such as “pirate,” “pariah,” “proxy artist,” and “raider” (Austin and
Fishman 1970). Throughout this period, in direct contrast, the consensual
NE fe aes

 

ayer1odi09,, BULMATA S1Oye} 10y Ayyedurds {,,a}se} peq ut (uondaoxe jnoyM
~dads mou siaAsasqo ‘paysejeq: quapiour Arios,, & :Bulaoiddesiq, Ayyenqata) aaryeSau Apouiayxgq ccc aanpasoid
peprosoe uoNRyaidiazUt [IOP
S$8-€261 BOIsNIG pue 69-0961 uondopy Ajreq 6S-OS6I (SINBIY Axorg pue syns ADOTOUCY GNV
uondopy peasdsopray aaRALeg Jo seq) uondopy-e1g HOVAONV’] JO NOISNAWIG

 

YadIAQ AO JONVIATIOY ANV NOILAOAY 40 FOVIS

 

 

AMAHAIUAY WOUA AAOD TWNOLLALILSNY
OL daSNddIq NOILVAONN] SV ‘UdIAO AAGNAL, ATLSOH AHL ONIZAALOVAVHD ADOTOIG] NV ZOVOONV'T

€ ATaVL
sioppoyareys sway 0} AyIyYIGIsuods aouapuedaput

-a1 aAoge saunzioj uMO Bue Uuleyai 0} 143 Jo Jaso] [erUsjod
sqainysod payso1aqUl-JJas ose. pure aouatiedxeut ‘azts ur [feurs SNOLIO}TIA
faBeunt JUeBroUla {ys9}U0d aIqe Ajaatyexeduroo suzy ‘yequios ny aBIOUla []LM OYM saATINIExe

 

-ydos0" ue ut siaXeld [euoIssajoig —_-a}se}SIP Jo satyensed ayeunzojuQ. peylusip pue parenseajag “** preoq
image of the accused corporations’ executives in a proxy fight was that of
upstanding citizens placed in the role of “defenders of the faith.”

These images were relatively unaffected by the initial appearance of
the hostile tender offer: the “aggressor” individuals and (now) corpora-
tions continued to be portrayed in negative terms, though with a wider
descriptive range, taking account of their more diverse regional origins
and the higher likelihood of success for the tender offer procedure. The
addition of more strident epithets (e.g., “rapists”) here signals increased
intensity as it became apparent that target firms could be taken over more
easily; and the perceived impropriety of financial procedures utilized also
evoked new specialized terms used by both sides, such as “Chinese
money,” “Russian rubles,” and “funny money.” During this period, target
corporations continued to be viewed sympathetically as unfortunate vic-
tims or casualties entitled to express indignation or outrage.

By 1980, particularly after the innovation’s adoption by larger and
more centrally located corporate lions, the image and ideology surround-
ing takeover conflicts underwent several significant changes. First, the
direction of epithets employed becomes two-way and more balanced. The
motives of target firms’ managers and executives for resisting offers that
would enrich their shareholders are now called into serious question:
“feathering their own nests” and searching for “golden parachutes” to
provide side payments and cushion their landing are pejorative concepts
and images that appeared and took hold, to challenge and decry evasive
actions deployed in the name of the target companies. At this point, the
framing also expands from a simple shoot-out between the forces of good
and evil to a less clear-cut morality play, bordering on both a more
complex war game between status equals (e.g., competition between Mo-
bil Oil and U.S. Steel to acquire Marathon Oil) and a highly publicized
combination of spectator sport and corporate soap opera.

Second, the number and complexity of genres borrowed from popular
culture, and utilized to frame takeover dramas, expands correspondingly.
Epithets become parts of more complex and full-fledged scripts and
scenarios as takeover “conflicts” come to be seen more frequently as “con-
tests” between parties entitled to make fewer categorical claims about the
ethics and business morals of the opposing side. As described in a Wall
Street Journal reporter’s analysis of a more recent acquisition, “The Pull-
man example indicates how the game has changed from fast and dirty
back-room slugfests into Cecil B. De Mille-style battle scenes with casts
of thousands. No longer is it confined to the faintly disreputable so-called
corporate raiders of the 1950’s. Today, such blue-chippers as Inco, Ltd.,
Mobil Corp., General Electric Co., Kennecott Corp., Exxon Corp., and
Westinghouse Corp. aren’t too proud to take part” (Metz 1980, p. 1). The
additions of more players, more scripts and genres to adopt, and the
longer time periods allowed have all expanded the theatrical imagery for
framing takeovers and the complexity of the drama from a one-act play to
as many as four or five acts, separated by intermissions and interludes
and viewed by a far larger audience.

Third, with the growing acceptance of the hostile takeover as a normal
event rather than a deviant innovation, its normative framing becomes
more routinized. The performance of players comes to be assessed as
much for style as for substance, while the new “rules of the game” diffuse
and become more widely understood and accepted; professionalism is
expected and its absence is decried by fellow participants in takeovers
(e.g., as in the 1982 acquisition of Bendix Corporation [Sloan 1983; Blu-
stein 1982]). Relatedly, the credibility of strident (i.e., less “professional”)
epithets declines as the rules of “good sportsmanship” start to pre-
dominate.

We have found that the language employed by participants and the
press to describe takeovers corresponds closely to the status of the bidding
party and the adoption era in which the takeover was attempted.
Whereas in the early years of the diffusion process target firms were more
likely to win the battle, frame issues expressively, and succeed in the use
of one-way epithets, this process moved toward the opposite pole (table 3,
col. 3) in the 1980s. This does not mean that target firms now always lose
or that the language employed in the 1980s must necessarily frame each
ownership contest in the affect-less games genre. Recall that these latter
frames, while more probable now, were initiated for contests among large
corporate status equals. The appearance of such outsiders as speculators
Saul Steinberg, Carl Icahn, and Boone Pickens takes much of the norma-
tive framing back to the more bitterly fought contests of earlier eras, in
which the battles are more fiercely waged and the imagery is more ex-
treme (Wayne 1982).

These trends in adoption of language usage, imagery, and ideology
correspond to changes in the composition of parties employing the tender
offer procedure. Both sets of trends (which covary roughly, but not one to
one) constitute, respectively, the micro-cultural-subjective and macro-
structural-objective sides of a social change undergoing institutionaliza-
tion. Legitimacy for the procedure requires that each one be in place,
independently of the other. According to this formulation, these micro
and macro dimensions are conceived as “moments” of a process occurring
simultaneously (Berger and Luckmann 1966). For institutionalization
and legitimation to proceed, the micro side is critical: without concrete
terms, metaphors, and contexts in which to describe and interpret new,
unexpected events, it is unlikely that they can become conceptualized as
normal, routine, and acceptable, that is, become absorbed into the cul-
ture of the collectivity.
Even though the institutionalization of hostile tender offers has been
facilitated by shifts in language and ideology, their legitimacy is still not
fully established (Herzel and Rosenberg 1979). They remain surrounded
by an aura of normative ambivalence for several reasons. Even though
“contests” have partly replaced “conflicts” as an interpretive frame, the
stakes at issue continue to be treated (especially by target managements)
as extraordinarily high, for example, entailing the “death” of a corpora-
tion and the accompanying uncertainty and likely downgrading of posi-
tions for its management. Furthermore, the legitimacy status of hostile
takeovers remains clouded by a number of additional factors. First, many
economists see a firm’s valuation by the stock market as its “true” value at
any given point in time. Consequently, the payment of premiums over
share price often constitutes windfalls for the owners of the target firm
(Dodd and Ruback 1977). It follows from this perspective that many
tender offers are economically foolish, but it is even more foolish and
fiscally irresponsible for target firms’ boards to refuse them (Scholes
1979). Second, in the absence of clear gains on economic grounds (such as
efficiency and productivity), unbridled growth is inherently suspect in the
broader context of American culture. Here, big is not considered neces-
sarily better (e.g., Senator Kennedy’s bills to prevent firms of large size
and scale from making further acquisitions [Areeda 1979]). Third, there
remains a (decreasingly) frequent and intendedly negative attribution to
the promulgators of takeovers of being stock price “operators” and/or,
more interesting, short-term investors and manipulators with no real
interest in the firm’s “substance,” who will “loot,” abuse cash flows, or
otherwise “milk” and effectively liquidate the acquired firm’s assets.
away from framing the hostile offer as a personalistic, moral affront). The
linguistic framing of takeovers moved toward the games genre, in which
corporations more than individuals engage in a competition with predict-
able moves and professional standards. This latter games frame norma-
tively shifts the interpretation of takeover events from the earlier em-
phasis on “substantive” rationality (Weber 1947)—with its associated
language of one-way epithets and expressive terminology—to the more
instrumental, affectively neutral emphasis on the correctness of the proce-
dures followed and the proficiency and creativity of the styles employed,
thereby closely approaching Weber’s “formal” rationality. This decrease
in concern over the violation of “traditional” manners and over the pro-
priety of displacing current executives, in favor of an emphasis on the
exercised rights of shareholders to maximize their short-term self-interest,
has facilitated the diffusion of hostile takeovers.

The discussion will now focus on the relationship between the struc-
tural transformation wrought by the hostile takeover and the shifts in its
linguistic framing. Their functional interrelationships will be discussed in
terms of three categories, which overlap empirically but are analytically
distinct. These categories are the cognitive, social-psychological, and in-
stitutional functions served by linguistic frames that have contributed to
shaping and facilitating the diffusion of hostile takeovers. Cognitive func-
tion refers to the use of linguistic frames as resources for helping partici-
pants and observers to describe, order, and make sense of a startling
innovation. Social-psychological functions are the ways in which such
frames helped to legitimate and thereby reduce the stigma and strain
experienced by participants placed at risk in hostile takeovers. Institu-
tional functions are the ways in which the language of hostile takeovers
facilitated the larger cultural processing of a business innovation, by
disseminating and routinizing it, and building consensus around it. Also
crucial at the institutional level was the role that language played in
integrating takeover participants on either side in a manner permitting
them to exchange roles—from target to aggressor and from defender to
perpetrator (or vice versa)—in ways that would not disrupt the consensus
and intimacy of the big business community.
tions should be expected to make a difference. [Schelling 1960,
p. 106]

The vivid images, rich symbolism, and expressive language of take-
overs do more than simply reflect the intensity of, and uncertainty sur-
rounding, the experience. They provide the medium, the common sym-
bolic glue and vocabulary by which the experience is processed and or-
dered, comprehended, and made explicable by both participants and
observers.

The language and symbols of takeovers serve at least four cognitive
functions. First, by grounding the event in well-known popular genres
and ideologies, they reduce an unfamiliar and unnerving experience, ren-
der it comprehensible, and make it more accessible for interpretation.
Extraneous detail is eliminated from accounts, and abstract ideas are
given a more concrete expression. For example, “we’ve been ambushed,”
or “my company’s in play” permits ready expression of a highly disruptive
experience. Amid wildly fluctuating stock prices, furious trading, and a
flurry of charges, countercharges, law suits, proxies and analyses, these
expressions reduce the experience in a way that makes it easier for partici-
pants to assimilate and for observers to disseminate.

Second, popular discourse defines and confers meaning on the roles and
parts played by participants in each takeover “drama.” The language
specifies the script: what is expected of participants, how they are to
interact with the other participants, what they should be feeling. In doing
so, the language helps to shape a consensus of expectations and choice of
responses for the relevant actors. Sleeping Beauty, the innocent victim
and target of the hostile raid, knows to feel violated. She knows how to
seek out the heroic white knight who, through merger, can save her from
the evil black knight intruder who has, using unscrupulous means, at-
tacked her virtue. Or, the savvy executive who suddenly discovers that
the firm is “in play” knows to activate the “pregame” strategy already
developed for the occasion. He or she is expected to outsmart and outplay
the opponent by anticipating and countering offensive moves with a
shrewd, coherent defense that maximizes the firm’s advantage, permit-
ting it to “win” the match and remain independent.

Third, well-known popular genres provide widely understood bound-
aries and patterns, which help to contain the experience. For example,
the genres that emerged earliest employed an analogous and stylized
violent imagery in a faraway setting. As rhetorical weapons, they
ritualized violence and controlled intensity by virtue of their sheer famil-
iarity. As symbolic representations of abstract battles for ownership, with
their attendant conflicts, hostility, and tension, these representations di-
verted attention from the real, practical consequences of takeovers. For
most participants during a takeover, the stakes are high. For top manage-
Social-Psychological Functions

“It’s the closest thing to combat I’ve seen since World War II,”
says R. Eberstadt, Jr., who found out one evening last Decem-
ber that his Microdot, Inc. was the target of a... raider called
General Cable Corporation. “There’s especially a lot of emo-
tion in it when you’re the one under attack,” adds John Grady,
former vice president for finance at Garlock. “It’s as if you’ve
just found out that someone’s made a more attractive offer to
your wife.” [Brill 1976, pp. 54, 58]

The size and scale of takeover conflicts has grown since 1974, expand-
ing the pool of large corporations and managers vulnerable as targets of
takeovers. The hostile takeover, with its frontal attack on the power and
status of the target, was initially perceived by the latter as the managerial
equivalent of a natural disaster. In a remarkably short time it has been
subjectively converted by executives into a merely normal—and, if not
sought after, at least acceptable—occupational hazard. The language of
takeovers facilitated this conversion in a number of ways. Legitimacy for
the hostile takeover required the construction of explanations and
justifications that reduced the conflict and softened its impact by provid-
ing normative dignity alongside its practical imperatives.

One method of reducing the degree of overt intrainstitutional conflict is
to publicly redefine the personal stakes for the participants by providing
new and face-saving constructions of the event for the losing players. By
transposing the conflict to a fictional basis, the linguistic framing of
takeovers cushioned their impact by providing scripts that distanced the
participants from the action at hand. These provide reference points
enabling judgments about the interpretation and/or propriety of particu-
lar actions that can be made implicitly and indirectly with a greater
degree of detachment and abstraction from the particular situation. For
example, in personal interviews, two former chief executive officers from
acquired corporations framed their own experience in terms of figures,
scripts, and parables from the Bible and Hollywood: Jonah swallowed by
the whale and Gary Cooper’s stalwart, steadfast roles. The distancing
function also contributes to draining off affectivity surrounding the par-
ticular conflict so that the interaction may be judged under the criteria of
the general abstracted category of takeovers.

This “rationalization” effect was further enhanced in the linguistic shift
that transformed the tender offer from a morality play to a routine busi-
ness game played by professionals. Here, the roles of hero and villain are
supplanted by more value-free shades of gray. The decline of the morality
play approach points to the impracticality of rhetorically treating the
offering parties as strangers and unconscionable “outside agitators” after
the entrance of corporate lions from the same club (e.g., the Fortune 500).
In addition, the target side loses the rhetorical weapon of one-way
epithets, while it is simultaneously provided alternative roles that at-
tenuate and compensate for the loss of dignity and reputation inherent in
being taken over. The cushioning of reputational loss is provided by a
script that permits participants to “lose the contest with dignity.” The
earlier image of having been publicly shamed and humiliated in a unique
(rather than routinized) event thereby becomes less problematic and en-
courages target executives to view the contest less as a matter of personal
honor. Because so many of the players in this arena have been or may
come to be on both sides of different takeover contests, it seems likely that
the post-1970 absence of support for further regulation of tender offers
reflects their understanding that the probability of incurring severe losses
has been minimized for all and that vocabularies providing an honorable
part for the acquired parties have been developed within each genre.
The social-psychological and cognitive functions of language just de-
scribed have clear institutional ramifications as well. Even to conceive of
an institution, as Berger and Luckmann point out, presupposes their
convergence: experience requires description and expression before it can
be ordered; sequences of experience must be routinized and legitimated as
roles before they can be constituted and analyzed as institutions. These
practices are reflexive, they are rooted in contextual action, and they are
embodied in individuals. Nonetheless, a shift in analysis to the institu-
tional level brings forth a category of different functions served by the
linguistic framing of hostile takeovers.

The disruption created by hostile takeovers when they first emerged
has already been described: hostile takeovers ended long-standing tradi-
tions in the business community; they changed the rules regarding the
conduct and aims of business; they generated conflict between firms and
within firms; they generated conflict between shareholders and manage-
ment, as these once-compatible interests became pitted against each
other. The hostile takeover set the values of owners (e.g., appreciation of
and return on investment) against those of management (e.g., running
“their” company, security, status, and orderly career paths). Prior to the
takeover’s initial appearance and subsequent implementation by estab-
lished corporate actors, these two clusters of values and interests had
seldom been placed in a setting of formal conflict that so highlighted the
nexus of contracts and theory of agency they embody (Fama 1980). Dis-
missal of top executives by their “own” boards of directors (e.g., coup
d’états; see Zald and Berger 1978), while engendering localized conflicts,
is more circumscribed, more predictable, and involves fewer players than
the challenge (to both the executive and his board) and prospect of tender
offers from outside sources. Indeed, prior to the adoption of this proce-
dure, the power relationship between management and the firm’s share-
holders was far more lopsided—in the executives’ favor, especially if they
retained the support of their boards (Austin and Fishman 1970; Manne
1965). With the advent of the takeover, friends and associates became
enemies and adversaries. To retain normative consensus within the in-
stitution in the face of takeovers and the potentially divisive conflicts they
generate, it was important to build support for their legitimacy and main-
tain the integration of the collectivity.

The linguistic framing of takeovers facilitated this process. The cogni-
tive and social-psychological functions already discussed—the creation of
distance between participants and the event, the establishment of roles
and scripts, the shift from value-laden to value-neutral terms—all served
the institution and the system, as well as the individual. Strain was re-
duced as new rules and roles were quickly defined. Conflict was mitigated
and parties were “cooled out” as the status of participants was made more
objective and abstract. In an institutional setting where it is crucial that
participants refrain from “exiting,” where sometimes, in Berger and
Luckmann’s terms, “circumstances force one to remain on friendly terms
with barbarians” (1966, pp. 93, 115), a normative framework is necessary
for “saving face.” It was critical that former high-status chief executive
officers think and behave like “good soldiers” after losing the battle to
keep the firm independent. If they engaged in public protests or overt
rebellion instead of accepting a lesser position in the firm, finding a new
job, or retiring quietly, the legitimacy of the takeover would have been
undermined. Considering the personal and reputational stakes in each
takeover attempt, the peaceful resolution of this classic “problem of or-
der” necessarily involved some combination of exercised power and a
reinterpretation of legitimate authority relations within the institution. '*

The shift in takeover language helped to provide such a normative
framework; the formerly protected status of the target firm (as Sleeping
Beauty, victim, Raquel, etc.) was supplanted by a normative justification
for its acquisition, as the imagery shifted to contest and game genres. The
preference shifted from banishing black knights and eradicating am-
bushes to finding more acceptable partners or developing winning strate-
gies to defeat the opposition. Business became secure with its own sanc-
tions again, no longer seeking outside help for the abolition or regulation
of takeovers.

The language, rooted as it was in widely understood fictional genres,
also appealed to the broader values of society. Had the discourse re-
mained entrenched in business and legal terminology, it is unlikely that
takeovers would have captured the attention of the media and the public
to the same extent. If the normative order of business is challenged and
forced to reconstruct itself, the basis for reconstruction and legitimation
must be found in a set of value definitions that both transcends the
business community and is known to and observed by its members. Posi-
tions in the conflicts are thus justified by reference to established and
This article has related a significant institutional change in the struc-
ture and economic behavior of American business to its normative fram-
ing by participants and knowledgeable observers. Some implications of
the language and ideologies developed to describe and interpret it have
also been examined and explored for their potential to aid in our under-
standing of business and society and of social change. This article has
deliberately maintained a rather narrow focus on the relationship be-
tween language and structural transformation. The emphasis has been
primarily on how linguistic framing facilitated, in functional terms, an
important business innovation. Language, of course, did not cause the
invention or adoption of the hostile takeover; yet its role was critical to an
explanation of how the change took place. This case should reinforce
attention to the importance of the role of culture in the study of business
and other important social institutions. Unraveling relations between cul-
ture and social structure is an arduous and often historically specific task.
It is important to reemphasize the role and force of new ideas in spurring
change, whether we consider them superstructural or accord them more
primary causal significance. It is important also to take account of the
symbolic form in which they are presented, for this feature too is very
likely to influence the outcome.

In this study I have examined the flamboyant language of business
takeovers. I consider it a specific example of a more general phenomenon
in which radical ideas, expressed symbolically, have critically influenced
organizational behavior. Again, the reference is to the increasing domi-
nance of the financial model and to the profound implications that result
from conceiving of the firm primarily as an “asset.” In an environment
where management is considered an abstract science governed by general
principles, where highly mobile managers are encouraged to remain
emotionally aloof from the firms that employ them, and where the
constituency of the firm is narrowing to exclude all but the investor, the
absorption of such ideas as “bottom line,” “book values,” “liquidity,” and
“price-earnings ratios” reveals a continuing process of rationalization
that requires sociocultural, as well as economic, interpretations.
internal procedures to prevent communication of
privileged information between bank lending
officers and trust department staff. Gaps in the
Chinese wall are objects of fear and resentment
by takeover targets.

stock traded by acquirer for that of acquiree, partic-
ularly if thought of as having little value (see also
“Russian rubles”).

merger discussions, relatively friendly, between top
executives of two firms.

role played by merger brokers (see also “matchmak-
ing”).

antitakeover finance strategy in which the potential
target arranges for long-term debt to fall due im-
mediately and in full if it is acquired (see also
“scorched earth”).

preliminary talks and negotiations in a more or less
friendly merger.

characterization of Charles Bluhdorn, chief execu-
tive officer of Gulf and Western, in his early so-
licitation of many target companies (see also
“Mad Austrian”).

target firm makes tender offer for the stock of its
would-be acquirer; employed by Martin Marietta
against Bendix Corporation.

outstanding assets that the target may carry into a
merger (e.g., low-interest loans, long-term con-
tracts).

code name used by Sol Steinberg’s Leasco Corpora-
tion in Chemical Bank takeover planning, taken
from actress Faye Dunaway’s role as bank robber
in Bonnie and Clyde.

strong declaration of target company’s opposition to
a raider’s offer; a gloves-off fight is likely to follow.

impediments to a takeover, raised by target (see also
“barricades”).

merger proposal cleared in advance with the target
company’s board and top management; usually
leads to the firm’s recommending it favorably to
shareholders for approval.

provision in the employment contracts of top execu-
tives that assures them a lucrative financial land-
ing if the firm is acquired in a takeover.
a rescuer no more desirable than the initial raider
and less attractive than a white knight.

a firm’s purchase of its own stock, at a premium,
from an investor who it fears will otherwise seek
to acquire it or else initiate a proxy fight to oust its
present management.

merger and acquisition specialists, other investment
bankers, and lawyers employed by either side in
any takeover.

warfare image for strenuous campaign by aggres-
sive, would-be hostile acquirer to obtain shares of
the target firm.

a variation of the bear hug. Here, the raider not
only notifies the target of its intention but also
adds pressure by advertising its bid for the firm’s
shares.

the powerful shark of movie fame, transformed into
a predatory takeover artist; initially used to de-
scribe Thomas Evans of Crane.

strategy for fending off raiders whereby target ap-
peals to customers and suppliers as part of a
“scorched earth” defense. Originally devised by
Joseph Flom for Sterndent, a dental supply
house; also used by McGraw-Hill against Ameri-
can Express.

high-risk, high-yield debt certificates traded pub-
licly, so called because they are rated below in-
vestment grade, either by Moody’s or by Stan-
dard & Poor’s; a specialty of Drexel Burnham,
junk bonds are often used to help finance hostile
takeovers.

Litton Industries Dropouts; i.e., executives who left
firms acquired by Litton during the late 1960s.
characterization of Charles Bluhdorn, chief execu-
tive officer of Gulf and Western, during the hey-
day of his fame as a takeover artist.

characterization of Harold Geneen, former chief ex-
ecutive officer of International Telephone and
Telegraph, known for placing extraordinary
growth demands on his executives, whether ac-
quired or home-grown.

advance promise of continued employment for
target’s executives by the firm’s would-be ac-
quirer.

accomplishing a merger.

searching for possible deals to join two companies; a
major activity of investment banking houses.

game image used by hired guns engaged in takeover
activity.

postmerger problems from an acquired executive’s
standpoint: “first they buried us in manure, then
they left us in the dark awhile, then they let us
stew, and finally they canned us” (Barmash
1971).

seafaring descriptions of contested mergers, based
on long-standing image of the firm as a ship.

failed, incompatible merger, often leading to divest-
ment.

highly vulnerable targets.

hostile acquirers.

see “scorched earth.”

hostile acquirers.

forcible, surprise hostile takeover, sometimes ac-
companied by looting of acquiree’s profitability.

code name used in Leasco’s takeover of Reliance
Corporation, inspired by the voluptuousness of
the target’s cash surplus.

a company that provides any substantial aid to the
target firm in a takeover battle (see also “white
knight”).

like confetti, worthless paper; image drawn from
Soviet currency, which is controlled at an inflated
exchange rate; early description of takeovers in
which target is not purchased for cash.

antitakeover advantage: company owns a sub-
sidiary in a heavily regulated industry (such as
broadcasting or interstate trucking). The long
time required for government approval to trans-
fer its ownership delays the acquisition process
and decreases the chances for successful
takeover.

a fast and predatory merger; originated with Colt’s
swift takeover of Garlock (see also “ambush”’).

a policy whereby the target company would rather
the purchase of majority ownership in a corpora-
tion; usually resisted by the target company but
accomplished nonetheless by paying a premium
above the current market price for the firm’s
shares.

corporation selected for takeover by a would-be ac-
quirer.

proposal to purchase a firm’s stock from its share-
holders for an amount higher than its current
market price.

advertisements in the financial press containing an-
nouncements of interest to investors and the busi-
ness community (e.g., tender offers, stock under-
writings, mergers, and divestments).

proposal to transfer a firm’s ownership to parties
viewed as hostile or unworthy by its current
board and executives; usually resisted and seldom
endorsed by the target company.

acceptable acquirer sought by a potential acquiree
to forestall an unfriendly takeover; the preferred
suitor.

negotiation for a friendly or uncontested merger.
REFERENCES

Aranow, E., and H. Einhorn. 1973. Tender Offers for Corporate Control. New York:
Columbia University Press.

Areeda, Philip. 1979. “Kennedy’s Anti-Oil Bill.” Wall Street Journal (August 6).

Austin, Douglas V. 1980. “Tender Offer Update: 1978-1979.” Mergers and Acquisi-
tions 15 (2): 13-32.

Austin, Douglas V., and J. A. Fishman. 1970. Corporations in Conflict: The Tender
Offer. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Masterco.

Barmash, Isadore. 1971. Welcome to Our Conglomerate—You’re Fired. New York:
Grosset & Dunlap.

Becker, Howard S. 1963. Outsiders. New York: Free Press.

. 1982. Art Worlds. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Berg, Ivar, and Mayer N. Zald. 1978. “Business and Society.” Annual Review of
Sociology 4:115-43.

Berger, Bennett M. 1971. “Working-Class Suburbia: A Study of Auto Workers in
Suburbia.” Berkeley: University of California Press.

. 1981. “The Survival of a Counterculture: Ideological Work and Everyday Life
among Rural Communards.” Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.

Berger, Peter L., and Thomas Luckmann. 1966. The Social Construction of Reality.
New York: Doubleday.

Berle, Adolph, and Gardiner Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private
Property. New York: Macmillan.

Bernstein, Basil. 1971. Class, Codes, and Control: Theoretical Studies toward a
Sociology of Language, vol. 1. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Blustein, Paul. 1982. “Marietta, Bendix ‘Pac-Man’ Tactics Cause Concern among
Merger Analysts.” Wall Street Journal (September 24).

Brill, Steven. 1976. “Two Tough Lawyers in the Tender-Offer Game.” New York
Magazine (June 21), pp. 52-61.

Brooks, John. 1984. The Go-Go Years. New York: Dutton.

Cancian, Frank. 1967. “Stratification and Risk-Taking: A Theory Tested on Agricul-
tural Innovation.” American Sociological Review 32:912-26.

Cavan, Sherri. 1979. Twentieth-Century Gothic: America’s Nixon. San Francisco:
Wigan Pier.

Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. 1962. Strategy and Structure. New York: Doubleday.

. 1977. The Visible Hand. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Chavez, Lydia. 1981a. “The Agglomeration of America.” New York Times (July 12).

. 1981b. “How to Stop a Takeover.” New York Times (August 30).

Coleman, James S. 1974. Power and the Structure of Society. New York: W. W.
Norton.

Deal, Terrence E., and Allan A. Kennedy. 1982. Corporate Cultures: The Rites and
Rituals of Corporate Life. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Dodd, Peter, and R. Ruback. 1977. “Tender Offers and Stockholder Returns.” Jour-
nal of Financial Economics 5 (3): 351-74.

Fama, Eugene. 1980. “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm.” Journal of
Political Economy 88 (2): 288-307.

Feinberg, Phyllis. 1982. “The Rise of the Megadeal.” Institutional Investor (May).

Fishman, Mark. 1980. Manufacturing the News. Austin: University of Texas Press.

Fliegel, Frederick, C., and J. E. Kivilin. 1966. “Attributes of Innovation as Factors in
Diffusion.” American Journal of Sociology 72:235—48.
Gans, Herbert J. 1979. Deciding What’s News: A Study of CBS Evening News, NBC
Nightly News, Newsweek, and Time. New York: Pantheon.

Geertz, Clifford. 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic.

Glasberg, Davita. 1981. “Corporate Power and Control: The Case of Leasco Corpora-
tion versus Chemical Bank.” Social Problems 29 (2): 104-16.

Grimshaw, Allen D. 1973. “Sociolinguistics.” Pp. 44-92 in Handbook of Communica-
tion, edited by I. De Sola Pool, W. Schramm, F. W. Frey, N. Maccoby, and E. B.
Parker. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Gusfield, Joseph. 1976. “The Literary Rhetoric of Science: Comedy and Pathos in
Drinking Driver Research.” American Sociological Review 41:16-34.

Herzel, Leo, and R. M. Rosenberg. 1979. “Loans to Finance Tender Offers: Borrow-
ers Problems That May Affect the Bank.” Banking Law Journal 96:581.

Hirsch, Paul M. 1985. “The Study of Industries.” Pp. 269-307 in Research in the
Sociology of Organizations, vol. 4. Edited by S. Bachrach and S. Mitchell. Green-
wich, Conn.: JAI.

Hirsch, Paul, and John A. Y. Andrews. 1983. “Ambushes, Shootouts, and Knights of
the Roundtable: The Language of Corporate Takeovers.” Pp. 145-55 in Organiza-
tional Symbolism, edited by Louis R. Pondy, Peter J. Frost, Gareth Morgan, and
Thomas C. Dandridge. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI.

. 1984. “Administrators’ Response to Performance and Value Challenges.”
Pp. 170-85 in Leadership and Organizational Culture: New Perspectives on Admin-
istrative Theory and Practice, edited by T. Sergiovanni and J. Corbally. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.

Hirschman, Albert O. 1972. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Jarrell, G., and Michael Bradley. 1980. “The Economic Effects of Federal and State
Regulations of Cash Tender Offers.” Journal of Law and Economics 23:371—407.

Katz, Elihu, Martin L. Levin, and H. Hamilton. 1963. “Traditions of Research on the
Diffusion of Innovation.” American Sociological Review 28:237-52.

King, Michael. 1981. “If a Sleeping Beauty Takes Cyanide during a Raid, Look for
Hired Guns.” Wall Street Journal (November 5).

Liebow, Elliot. 1967. Tally’s Corner: A Study of Negro Streetcorner Men. Boston:
Little, Brown.

Lorie, James, and Paul Halpern. 1970. “Conglomerates: The Rhetoric and the Evi-
dence.” Journal of Law and Economics 13 (1): 140-66.

Lowenthal, L. 1944. “Biographies in Popular Magazines.” In Radio Research 1942-
43, edited by P. Lazersfeld and F. Stanton. New York: Bureau of Applied Sound
Research. Reprinted in W. Peterson, ed., American Social Patterns. 1956. New
York: Doubleday.

Magnet, Myron. 1984. “Help! My Company Has Just Been Taken Over.” Fortune
(uly 9), pp. 44-49.

Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. 1978. The Marx-Engels Reader. Edited by R. C.
Tucker. New York: W. W. Norton.

Mencken, Henry L. 1936. The American Language: An Inquiry into the Development
of English in the United States. New York: Knopf.

Menzel, Herbert. 1960. “Innovation, Integration and Marginality.” American
Sociological Review 25:704-13.

Merton, Robert K. 1972. “Insiders and Outsiders: A Chapter in the Sociology of
Knowledge.” American Journal of Sociology 78:9—47.

Metz, Tim. 1980. “Merger Makers: Outside Professionals Play an Increasing Role in
Corporate Takeovers.” Wall Street Journal (December 2).

Pareto, Vilfredo. 1980. Compendium of General Sociology. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Perrow, Charles. 1972. Organizational Analysis: A Sociological View. Belmont,
Calif.: Wadsworth.

Polsky, Ned. 1967. Hustlers, Beats, and Others. New York: Doubleday.

Ricklefs, Roger. 1976. “We'll Buy You Out: Mergers, Acquisitions Come Back into
Style—but the Style Is New.” Wall Street Journal (April 28).

Rogers, Everett M. 1962. Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press.

Roy, Robert H. 1970. The Cultures of Management. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press.

Schelling, Thomas C. 1960. The Strategy of Conflict. London: Oxford University
Press.

Schipper, K., and Rex Thompson. 1983. “The Impact of Merger-related Regulations
on the Shareholders of Acquiring Firms.” Journal of Accounting Research 21 (1):
184-221.

Scholes, Myron. 1979. “Ten Suspect Excuses for Acquiring Another Company.” Infor-
mal presentation at the University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business.

Schumpeter, Joseph. 1954. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. 3d ed. New York:
Harper & Row.

Sloan, Allan. 1983. Three Plus One Equals Billions: The Bendix-Martin Marietta
War. New York: Carroll & Graf.

Smith, Adam. (1776) 1937. The Wealth of Nations. New York: Modern Library.

Stinchcombe, Arthur L. 1982. “The Deep Structure of Moral Categories.” In Struc-
tural Sociology, edited by Ino Rossi. New York: Columbia University Press.

Sutherland, Edwin H. 1937. The Professional Thief: By a Professional Thief. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Suttles, Gerald D. 1968. The Social Order of the Slum. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

. 1984. “The Cumulative Texture of Local Urban Cultures.” American Journal
of Sociology 90 (2): 283-304.

Tuchman, Gaye. 1978. Making News: A Study in the Construction of Reality. New
York: Free Press.

Veblen, Thorstein. 1934. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Modern Li-
brary.

Wayne, Leslie. 1982. “The Corporate Raiders.” New York Times (July 18).

Weber, Max. 1947. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York:
Free Press.

White, Lawrence J. 1981. “The Merger Wave: Is It a Problem?” Wall Street Journal
(December 11).

Wright, Will. 1975. Sixguns and Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Zald, Mayer, and Michael Berger. 1978. “Social Movements in Organizations: Coup
d’Etat, Insurgency, and Social Movements.” American Journal of Sociology 83 (4):
823-61.
