The Great Transition: China, Hungary, and Sociology Exit Socialism Into the Market
Author(s): Anthony Oberschall

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Jan., 1996), pp. 1028-1041
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782237

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:15 UTC
I welcome this opportunity to comment on the market transition in China
and Hungary, a topic I have been studying intermittently for a decade.
It gives me a chance to share my thoughts on how sociologists should
research and account for social change. In anticipation of my conclusions,
I state them briefly and cryptically at the start: (1) The conceptual appara-
tus many sociologists apply to social change leads them to the wrong
questions on institutional change. (2) Large sample surveys of households
and multivariate techniques as used in the two China papers are of lim-
ited use for understanding institutional change; structural analysis used
in the Hungary paper is an improvement but asked to bear too heavy a
freight. (3) Theoretical and methodological relief are available and sociol-
ogy does not have to reinvent the wheel: there exists an emerging social
science of institutions and organization.

I start with the China studies of Xie and Hannum and of Nee. Because
neither provides a description and account of Chinese social organization
necessary for understanding them and my critique, I begin with a brief
overview of Chinese institutions. A decade ago when I taught in Beijing
for a year, there were three institutions at the core of Chinese society:
the family, the work unit in the city and the collective farm in rural
China (just then changing), and the communist party-state. Each Chi-
nese citizen belonged to a family, and every family had been a permanent
member of a work unit (danwei) or a collective farm. The party-state,
accountable only to itself, penetrated and controlled every work unit and
collective farm, and thus also every family and every individual.

Chinese social organization was rigid and hierarchic. Work units were
isolated from each other—even physically bounded by brick walls—with
solidarity, loyalty, and collective identity encapsulating members against
outsiders. The style of organization resembled the traditional Chinese
house or palace, which was built as a set of nested walls, courtyards,
and gates defining a gradient of protection and secrecy to the outside
world and control, intimacy, and care within (Kahn-Ackerman 1982).
As a “foreigner,” the ultimate outsider, I was kept isolated as much as
possible, outside the outer gate, as foreigners had been in Imperial China
in the preceding centuries.

Halfway through the academic year, there were some occasions for
penetrating these barriers, both through personal relationships I had de-
veloped with my students and some other Chinese and for totally exogen-
eous reasons. For instance, one of my students had forged grades, includ-
ing those for two of my courses, on an application to a U.S. graduate
program. Chinese colleagues feared I would discover it since I personally
knew faculty at that U.S. university. They thought it prudent to inform
me and get my approval (pro forma) for their earlier disposition of the
case. I managed to extract a small quid pro quo for signing on, that is,
an account of how they had handled the deviance issue, always a source
of insight into the Goffmanesque world of total institutions. She was not
suspended or expelled. She was a well-connected party person; she had
publicly confessed to both the danwei party branch and to the work unit,
and her submission to public shaming and discipline were punishment
sufficient and appropriate to her “mistake” and the embarrassment she
had caused for the work unit.

As this occurred, the entire undergraduate student body had been col-
lectively punished to a half hour of calisthenics on the soccer field before
breakfast for at least a month, for a “general breakdown of discipline.”
According to the dean, some students had cut a few classes; some others
had played cards in the dorms at night after they were supposed to be
sleeping, and some women students had complained about males “whis-
tling” at them. To cap it, one student had thrown an empty beer bottle
out of a dorm window. Everyone deserved punishment because they had
failed to restrain the nonconformists. It was obvious to me that I had
stumbled into a world very different from the ones I had lived and
worked in: Europe, the United States, even East and Central Africa.
Gemeinschaft-Gesellschaft sociology, pattern variables, modernization
theory, critical theory, structuration, Marxism, and world systems was
going to experience rough treatment in the reflexive, postmodern habitus
of China.

Martin Whyte (1974) described social control in China at the micro
level; others have explained the intricate work-unit system (Henderson
and Cohen 1984; Walder 1986). The party-state and the work unit de-
cided where one works and what was produced there, who could marry,
when, at what ages, and how many children a couple would have, what
hospital one would die in, and where one’s ashes would be preserved,
and, in Beijing, even whether one would get a bicycle registration. These
controls worked because China was a society in which everything of
value was scarce: food, arable land, a place on the bus, a park bench to
sit with one’s sweetheart, even a patch of lawn behind the parkbench,
where to store the family’s cabbage allocation, where to meet with
friends, and so on.” Also, controls were effective because cadres and
officials in workplaces, neighborhoods, and villages controlled the alloca-
tion of scarce resources, and through asymmetry of information and ri-
valry among subordinates for small benefits and privileges, manipulated
an intricate vertical chain of patron-clientage, ensuring conformity
(Walder 1989).

Unlike a capitalist market economy, in Chinese socialism a high pro-
portion of total resources (goods, services, information, etc.) was pro-
duced and allocated as collective goods by and to work units and collec-
tives rather than as private property and resources owned and controlled
by individuals and families. A unit would decide whether to build addi-
tional living quarters with its revenues and state allocation, or to invest
in capital equipment, or to distribute bonuses to supplement wages.
Within the unit, internal allocation mixed pursuit of personal power, unit
collective goals, and distributive justice. Whereas in its relation to the
party-state and the outside world the unit sought to get as much as it
could for the least cost, its internal world was a hotbed of factions and
rivalries. Members of a unit were locked in a game of cooperation against
the outside while supporting a zero-sum game of gainers and losers
within. We are entering the world of game theory, of transaction costs
and agency, of strategic interaction, of collective goods and free riders.

The communist party-state as well was thus internally organized and
factionalized, full of intrigue and double-crossing, shifting coalitions,
purges. Not subject to democratic accountability to the people, the ulti-
mate source of scarcity was positional; that is, top leadership, decided
by internal power struggles that empowered appointment of lesser leaders
down the chain of command and patronage. Each faction had its support-
ers and opponents among the cadres of work units and collective farms,
and these in turn had rival patronage systems reaching to the grass roots.
A succession struggle at the top would easily spread to the remote corners
of China, as occurred in the Cultural Revolution. The stakes were high
and not just at the top, because scarcity and a zero-sum situation existed
throughout the whole society and the top winners picked the lesser cadres
and patrons in the hierarchy (Chan, Rosen, and Unger 1980; Oberschall
1993, pp. 303-8).

Nonetheless, China is a semideveloped country of continental size and
enormous population, with huge resource and development disparities
between provinces and regions from the coast to the interior and the
“Far West,” and between cities and villages and peri-urban townships
and inland villages. China is also characterized by great climatic, agricul-
tural, linguistic, and historic differences, the lack of an integrated trans-
portation and communication system that restricts the mobility of people,
goods, and information. All of these features contribute to making China
a decentralized and localized territorial state and economy. Only the
party-state and major transprovincial organizations such as the army,
the railroads, and elite higher education provided spokes from the center.
Even within the space of the five blocks from my residence to the Acad-
emy of Science complex, one had a wide slice of the development spec-
trum: the computer shops were selling chips and other computer hard-
ware for the scientific and engineering elite to “do it yourself” while
peasant men and women traders, like pack animals, pulled huge hand-
carts loaded with heaps of melon to nearby farmers’ markets. A three-
man plumbing crew sent to fix my drain showed up with only one wrench
and one screwdriver (of the wrong sizes) between them. Ill-equipped for
the task, they spent an hour drinking tea and resting on the floor and
were finally persuaded to look for another crew to swap tools with,
maybe.

To escape the rigidities and controls of the party-state and danwei,
and to get ahead of others in the scarcity queues, individuals, families,
cliques, subunits, and work units kept cultivating and modifying intricate
networks of horizontal exchange across vertical boundaries and compart-
ments, collectively creating and forever changing a parallel, informal
system of social organization that constituted a kind of no man’s land in
which conformity and deviance were blurred and could be manipulated
to advantage. The currency in these transactions was whatever was
scarce, including information about how to extend the exchange networks
themselves. Under socialism, resources are owned by the state or collec-
tive units, yet were in temporary custody of role incumbents who had
some discretionary power in stockpiling, diverting, appropriating, con-
suming, and exchanging some part of these resources, not only for per-
sonal use but for a small group or clique, and often with the connivance
or at the direction of their superiors. Thus much that was impossible,
forbidden, unobtainable, and frustrating in the vertical, official system
could and was in fact accomplished in horizontal, particularist, interper-
sonal transactions. Personal power and survival depended on two factors:
the organizational role that provided access to resources and the personal
networks based on trust, reciprocity, information built up over time—
that is, social capital.

We are now entering network models and methodology, but should be
cautious. Block modeling and network analysis as usually practiced by
sociologists is a simple, unproven tool for dealing with Chinese realities
(Gold 1985). These resembled the multiplex networks of the Max
Gluckman-Manchester social anthropologists I had known in Central
Africa (Mitchell 1969). My entry into guanxi was by way of the Foreign
Exchange Certificates we got for U.S. dollars, a currency not available
to most Chinese but in high demand for foreign travel and special con-
sumer goods. I had had some experience with interpersonal transaction
networks because it resembled the systeme D in France (D stands for
debrouille in polite company, and for demerde among friends). In my
Zaire experience, there was no formal system at all, only network deal-
ings with friend and foe alike. Still, guanxi was quite a learning expe-
rience.

In such a society, what are the most appropriate methods of study,
and more important yet, what are the key questions to ask about institu-
tional and social change? We are now into 15 years of economic reforms
in rural China and about 10 for urban China, reforms which had barely
started when I lived there. What sorts of changes would one expect
from these reforms, and has the social organization I described changed
fundamentally?

By the time of Mao’s death China was stagnating and falling behind
its much smaller East Asian neighbors on every indicator of well-being,
economic growth, and modernity. Most disturbing for the leaders of the
PRC, the country had fallen behind Taiwan. The Deng regime instituted
economic reforms to modernize China in science, technology, economic
organization, and performance and to restore the PRC’s standing and
prestige as a world power. For rural China this meant disbanding the
collective farms, dividing collective assets among village families who
had acquired ownership rights and responsibilities on top of use rights
to farm and village resources, and continuing the many rural industries
and enterprises as village corporations managed by a local elite that
operates much as a condominium in the United States manages some
shared facilities. Just as important, price and production controls pre-
venting rural people from efficient use of their resources were removed,
and taxes and subsidies that provided a higher standard of living in cities
at the expense of rural dwellers were changed. A surge of output and
prosperity followed in many rural districts, and a huge migration of
peasant labor took place from poor inland regions to the developing
coastal provinces and cities.

In cities and the large danweis in manufacturing, as the Russians and
East Europeans are now also finding out, the change to more efficient,
technologically advanced, competitive, private enterprise is a more for-
midable undertaking. All around there is some downsizing and diversifi-
cation of enterprises at the discretion of managers, more power to create
incentives for productivity and profit and the allocation of resources
within work units, more economic activity (especially in small trade and
services undertaken by risk-bearing entrepreneurs), and a growing popu-
lation outside the work-unit system falling through the minimum safety
net of the urban Chinese welfare system, the so-called iron rice bowl.

One consequence of economic reform is that the party-state and work
units have less control over the lives of many people. Rural folk especially
have gained much freedom. Rich peasants, even local cadres, violate the
one-child family policy and pay fines they can well afford. With economic
growth, scarcity diminishes. As more economic activity passes from the
party-state and the work units enmeshed with it to markets and enter-
prises freed from stifling central controls, the market transition is gather-
ing momentum. The authors under review here wrestle with a model
and imagery that expresses the “market transition” in its structural and
power dimensions. They come up with local corporatism, clans for mar-
kets, organization reflexivity, redistributive/corporatist/laissez-faire, po-
litical capital, and similar concepts. This is suggestive imagery, but it
falls short of theory. An appropriate mesolevel theory and models useful
for understanding market transition actually exist in the public choice
literature and is called the theory of clubs and of sharing groups. More-
over, club theory is based on the very microtheories that are suited to
analyze Chinese social organization with, that is, game theory, transac-
tion costs, rent seeking, contract certainty, property rights, agency, and
so forth. Oliver Williamson, one of the leading exponents of the new
institutional economics, has actually applied both meso and micro analy-
sis for a model of “hybrid” organization (between market and hierarchy)
in the institutional environment of postcommunism (see Williamson
1985). These models, which already exist, enable sociologists to move
from imagery to theory in social change analysis (if only they studied
them).

If one applies this thinking to the Chinese transition, one should note
that, in a fully developed market economy such as the United States,
large corporations are enmeshed in a complex system of financial institu-
tions, business services, accountants, advertisers and market researchers,
employment agencies and headhunters, consultants, subcontractors,
franchises, newsletters and information analysts, thinktanks and policy
analysts and lobbies—in short, an enormous slice of our total GNP,
which is now largely missing in China and other socialist transition coun-
tries. Though missing as discrete organizational units, the functions asso-
ciated with these institutions are performed by party-state cadres and
officials and new-style wheelers and dealers (not to mention outright
criminal organizations) in the parallel horizontal transaction system I
described. Thus social capital and role incumbency in the hierarchy are
transferred by cadres into the emerging capitalist sector. In the absence
of political accountability and with but shallow submission to the disci-
pline of the market, the fixers and wheeler-dealers thrive on corruption
that is forever denounced yet will not diminish until the institutions of a
market economy are more fully established. I am now ready to assess
the contributions of Xie and Hannum and of Nee.

1. How well people are doing in such a system depends not only on
their earnings from their principal job and occupation, but on what work
unit they belong to and what nonmonetary benefits they are getting
through the unit allocation system, which is variable across units and
industry categories. It also depends on opportunities for unofficial earn-
ings and benefits not likely to be asked and reported in surveys. Further,
in rural China, and especially in the poorer inland districts, there is still
much household production and local exchange that is not monetized
and difficult to measure; this tends to be underestimated. Consequently,
measures based on earnings should be supplemented by consumption and
lifestyle measures. Also, measures of income and earnings inequality, as
the Gini index, are very approximate measures of inequality.

2. Rank in the hierarchy matters a great deal, especially for increasing
“unofficial” earnings and benefits. In a random sample of households,
most respondents will have low rank. Household surveys are not particu-
larly well-suited for the study of political capital, or only its lower tail
effects. The Nee study, with its cadre, former cadre, and noncadre mea-
sures, is doing better on this score than the simple party/nonparty distinc-
tion of the urban survey. Still, one will obtain a “minimum” estimate
of political capital at best. Different design, populations, and comparison
groups will be necessary for giving “political capital” a fair shake.

3. In Chinese social organization, success and earnings depend on so-
cial capital in the horizontal parallel transaction economy, and not only
on human capital and the usual variables. Social capital is more difficult
to measure (and even conceptualize) than human capital. Its omission
from the analysis, and presumably the survey, weakens the conclusions
about corporatism against rival hypotheses. To be sure, the Nee study
gives us some nibbles. One would like direct measures of network and
status utilization and manipulation.

4. Human capital is not just quantity of schooling, but quality as well.
This is especially true for China because of the period and cohort effects
on disrupting education and the quality of schooling, especially during
the Cultural Revolution (Unger 1982). There are also huge regional and
provincial differences, not to speak of within-city variance in school
quality.

5. A part of the Chinese population, and probably the most critical
part for anyone interested in social and economic inequality during the
market transition, has not been included in the sampling design of either
study, that is, the huge migrant populations unleashed by the economic
reforms and by the loss of party-state and work-unit control over some
of the Chinese people, not only the migrants. Moreover, this migration
stream is causally linked to the major dependent variables of earnings
and inequality.

6. I question whether the focus on the two dependent variables, income
and income inequality, is what one wants for social change theory. Can
they give us any clue about the shape of emerging institutions? Are these
variables linked to any body of theory? For instance, does a certain
degree of income inequality lead to popular unrest, to a demand for a
welfare state, to a conflict between generations? Does a lack of income
rewards for human capital mean that innovation is stifled, that talented
people will be blocked from achieving, that they emigrate? Would it be
important to know whether those who earn well invest into productive
ventures rather than consumption, and further, whether the state and
its officials are losing their power to arbitrarily extract resources from
the people and that thus private property is becoming more secure? There
are many questions on institutional change for which these surveys have
no answers.

7. Both articles are marred by risky excursions into causal analysis
from a design and statistical techniques not appropriate for such a pur-
pose, though frequently so misused by sociologists (see below).

More specifically, the urban survey reports that only 1% of earnings
derives from self-employment or private business. This is unrealistically
low. When I taught a research methods course to graduate students in
Beijing in spring 1985, we undertook small research projects on this
topic in the Haidian district. The District Administration of Industry and
Commerce, which licensed self-employed traders and supervised street
and farmers’ markets, had issued 597 licenses in 1981 and 5,476 in 1985,
an indication of the growth rate in this sector. Since the economic reforms
started a decade ago, trade and self-employment have surged. We inter-
viewed a random sample of 38 self-employed persons in three locations.
They were retirees, waiting-for-job youths, temporary migrant farmers,
and some unemployed individuals. In another study of retirees, we found
in a nearby neighborhood committee (NC) that of 189 retired men and
women living in a few city blocks, 41% were working, and 27% had
found some work through self-employment with the NC’s help. They
sought income because their work units did not pay them an adequate
pension, because they wanted to help their families with cash (they did
of course provide a lot of services, e.g., child care), or because they did
not want to remain idle. Other forms of self-employment and work that
would not be captured in household surveys include the many construc-
tion workers in Haidian who were seasonal rural migrants living in tem-
porary shacks at the construction sites. Also, many nannies and house-
keepers were peasant women from Anhui and Hubei working for
two-career professional and managerial couples. They were saving or
remitting money to the village for weddings and marriage and were
swiftly succeeded by village kin when they left Beijing. Others were
moonlighting, including some of my graduate students whose proficiency
in English placed them in high demand. All indications are that self-
employment and labor migration in Beijing (as in other cities) has grown
a great deal since 1985; the statements of the Beijing authorities about
all those aliens from rural China who are bankrupting local government
and overloading public services is reminiscent of the way Californians
have been speaking out against Mexicans, Central Americans, and
Asians.

I am coming to the huge income and standard of life disparities be-
tween coastal and inland, and urban and rural, China and the massive
labor migration that uneven development has unleased. It is creating
second-class citizenship and social and economic inequalities on a large
scale. Using a back-of-the-envelope calculation from Nee (model 1 in
table 2), a 42-year-old male farmer from an inland province, with 10
years’ schooling, from a noncadre household of farmers, earns 1,189 yuan
(about the average of 1,103 for inland village). If he stops farming and
becomes self-employed, the household can expect to earn 393 yuan more;
if he gets a nonfarm job, 362; if he becomes a cadre and continues farm-
ing, an additional 391, taking interaction effects into account. If he be-
comes a cadre, as according to Nee’s account, he gets his son or son-in-
law a nonfarm job, and the household gains another 362 yuan. So far so
good. Now go to the urban earnings findings in tables 1 and 2 for a
42-year-old nonparty member male who has 10 years’ schooling and 25
years employment. His estimated individual earnings are 2,027 yuan.
His rural counterpart’s entire household (an average of 2.7 adult earners)
earnings are 1,103. I believe that this comparison is the most important
single datum and finding for understanding uneven development, in-
equality, and earnings and that it gives us an important clue to emerging
Chinese institutions.

We have observed Cairo, Mexico City, and Sao Paulo; what will mega-
Shanghai be like? And we should worry not only about the megame-
tropolis but also about the new migrant outcasts in the rich coastal vil-
lages reported by Chan et al. (1992). In addition, gender and age
differences in both studies exceed the effects our analysts are dissecting
and debating on corporatism and political capital. In the urban regres-
sions, the 42-year-old nonparty member expects to earn only nine yuan
less than his party member counterpart (2,027 compared to 2,036), which
hardly demonstrates Nee’s belief in the “importance of political capital
for maintaining an advantaged position.” Of course, as I have already
stated, these surveys are not a good way of getting at political capital to
begin with, but I am using the “internal” evidence. And even that inter-
nal evidence demonstrates that on a very elementary, descriptive level,
gender, generations, city versus village, inland versus coastal, and, in all
likelihood, some variables such as social capital and work unit not in-
cluded in these analyses are the big picture that has to be thoroughly
understood in light of knowledge about China from other studies with
different methodologies, before any headway can be made on the causal
models and theoretic disputes the authors engage in.

Beyond the problems listed above is a causal interpretation drawn
from coefficients produced by a design and methodology that simply do
not warrant such inferences. Just because a one-time survey has very
large samples from many provinces and levels, and asks some retrospec-
tive questions, just because computer programs allow the fit of complex
quantitative models to data in ways that were unimagined even 20 years
ago, does not mean that the usual cautions about cause and effect have
been lifted, as they are in these two studies (e.g. the statements of Nee
based on the relative size of coefficients). My remarks on the abuse of
statistical inference are not principally directed at the authors under re-
view, but at our entire profession. Sociologists ought to seriously ponder
and study what David Freedman (1991) tells them about these methods
and about scientific inquiry. It is the same message that many others
have made over the years, for example, Samuel Stouffer, Paul Lazars-
feld, Leslie Kish, Donald Campbell, John Tukey. I will only quote Otis
Dudley Duncan (1984, p. 226):
tician Frechet. After warning readers about multicollinearity, spurious
correlations, interaction effects, assumptions about independent errors,
and other difficulties with multiple regression applied to social data, he
cautioned about faulty inferences from regression results that were based
on absurd questions, such as, “How would a camel live if, remaining a
camel, he were transplanted to some polar region?” (Halbwachs [1935]
1972). In the absence of a clear theory of changing Chinese institutions,
the techniques used in these large household surveys are best thought of
as convenient data reduction procedures, to be supplemented with other
data reduction and summary measures such as means or medians and
frequency distributions for the pivotal variables of major comparison
groups and categories. The back-of-the-envelope calculations I did could
be done pretty well from these simple statistics and would have the
advantage that no one will mistake them for cause and effect statements.
Since any descriptive, factual statement and fancy data-reduction model
can be made to look, via a verbal trick of formulating hypothesis from
a diagram with all sorts of arrows on it, as derived from a causal theory,
we are toying with devices that have enormous potential for misuse.

I suspect our faith in statisticsm is due to the weakness of theory,
which leads us to demand more from quantitative statistical manipula-
tions than their creators ever intended, let alone promised. The typical
social change analysis postulates two groups, classes, or social formations
competing with each other for leadership in a society and for the benefits
that come with elite status and monopoly. Here it is “cadres” and “en-
trepreneurs”; but there is a long tradition of such dualism in social analy-
sis: bourgeoisie and proletariat; Pareto’s rentiers and speculators;
Mosca’s foxes and lions; St. Simon and Veblen had engineers, scientists,
and producers against the aristocracy, officialdom, and the leisure class.
These groups are motivated by “interests” that are so transparent that
they, their adversaries, the people, and the social scientists who observe
and write about them, find them self-evident. Collective action in the
pursuit of these interests is unproblematic. It leads to an inevitable zero-
sum conflict, though occasionally the two groups form coalitions against
everyone else (the people). From the intentional, calculated pursuit of
these “interests” the norms and institutions of the future society can be
derived in straightforward fashion, both by the elites who want them
and the social scientists whose theories have to predict and explain them.
Except for changes in vocabulary, such a mode of theorizing is not differ-
ent from a hundred years ago, and theory has stagnated.

In its stead, let me recommend that sociologists seriously study, mod-
ify, and apply the new institutional analysis in the social sciences. A
sampler of what is available, with eminent contributors (Kenneth Arrow,
Oliver Williamson, James Coleman, etc.) may be found in the special
1991 (vol. 7) issue of the Journal of Law, Economics and Organization,
but there are abundant other sources. Institutional analysis theorizes
about positive-sum situations and transaction as well as pure conflict and
social dilemmas; it analyzes ways in which antagonists cooperate for their
common benefit. It does not assume that “interests” are well-defined
and obvious; on the contrary, ideologies, information costs, and cognitive
processes bear close study. It treats collective action as problematic and
expects a lot of institutional and social change to result from unintended,
unplanned actions. Whereas inherited social change theory short-circuits
from groups and interests to institutions, all the action in the new institu-
tional analysis takes place at the microlevel to derive and account for the
meso- and macrolevel, including variance of norms and institutions, not
just types and central tendencies. It is a more powerful and promising
mode of theorizing than the usual sociological fare. Merely borrowing
some phrases and concepts, like “contract certainty,” and incorporating
them ad hoc in the usual social change discourse is not making use of
institutional theory. As I have suggested all along, institutional analysis
is superbly suited to deal with Chinese social organization and the “tran-
sition.” Armed with such a mode of theorizing and concrete hypotheses
to test, we shall pose the right questions and choose suitable methodology
mixes to test them. Instead of accumulating more data and information,
we shall gain knowledge. It will be hard work.

In the Hungarian privatization research and analysis, David Stark
makes more use of institutional analysis than the two China articles, but
he curiously refrains from utilizing its full power to draw some disturbing
inferences from his findings on the Hungarian market transition, or
rather, the nonmarket gridlock. Stark’s research is a painstaking detec-
tive investigation that eventually leads to the corpse, but not quite the
murderer, and thus we do not get a trial and guilty verdict at the end.

Stark’s research is a great achievement and a step forward in privatiza-
tion research on Eastern Europe. To put it in a nutshell, he discovers
that the privatization of state assets in the large industries and services
in Hungary is illusory. In some ways it is a cruel deception in which
many collude, a few profit, and the public at large is the great loser.
Far from leading to a “clarification of property rights,” to certainty in
contracting, to new property owners investing and risking their own
resources in their enterprises, which are required for a market economy,
privatization by the State Privatization Agency (SPA) and other elite
economic agents and units has consisted of debt consolidation and debt
shifting to the state treasury. This practice has increased the national
debt by means of complex organization and ownership manipulations in
which the managers of “privatized” state enterprises and banks end up
controlling and making a comfortable living from productive assets,
while unprofitable, loss-making, and inefficient parts of their enterprises
and corporate debts end up as the responsibility of the state. In the end,
the SPA and other state agencies and ministries end up owning worthless
shares that neither the Hungarian public nor foreign investors want (ob-
viously).

Because Stark does not do it, let me spell out some consequences.
A growing national debt and large, current budget deficits mean rapid
inflation, “real” cutbacks in all social welfare, health, education spend-
ing, the salaries of officials, and more taxes and attempts at tax collection.
The consequences are several: more poverty for pensioners, the elderly,
the unemployed, large families, all those on public salaries (e.g., academ-
ics, who will moonlight even more than earlier), brain drain of best
science talents, underinvestment in children and youth, and correspond-
ing public spending bias for employees in large, loss-making enterprises.
Other detriments include encouragement of consumption over investment
(the opposite of what the country needs); massive tax evasion and corrup-
tion; rent seeking by coalitions of managers, directors, and other eco-
nomic elites networked into cliques (Mancur Olson [1982] explains what
cliques mean for economic growth) which feeds the zero-sum, stagnant
economy and gridlocked society described by Lester Thurow (1981). Fur-
ther, contract uncertainty and blurred property rights discourage foreign
investors and the transition to the market. All in all, this situation makes
for a disturbing economic foundation for a democratic, civil society.

On theory, Stark believes in the emergence of a distinctively East
European capitalism that necessitates the novel concept of “recombi-
nant” property; he uses a mode of research consisting of structural analy-
sis and block modeling for identifying clans for markets. I suggest that
the new institutional analysis can do the job and that the wheel does not
have to be reinvented: risk spreading with diversified portfolios, rent
seeking by distributional coalitions, path dependent theory and models,
bankruptcy for profit (as in Chapter 11 bankruptcies), and so on, are
after all standard fare in the literature on capitalist institutions, as is the
shifting of private debts and liabilities to the public treasury (Medicare
does that and is indeed headed for bankruptcy). What Stark uncovers is
thus not a peculiarity of the East European transition, because much of
what he describes is found in economies around the world. What is
peculiar is that these things occur without a genuine market economy
being in place already. In 1990 the well-known economist Janos Kornai
published a blueprint for his countrymen on how to make the transition
from socialism to capitalism with a great deal of short-term pain but
good prospects for long-term success; and it would have worked. For
many reasons, the Hungarians ignored him and deluded themselves into
the phony privatization so well analyzed by Stark. Each group thought
REFERENCES

Chan, Anita, Stanley Rosen, and Jonathan Unger. 1980. “Students and Class War-
fare: The Social Roots of the Red Guard Conflict in Guangzhou.” China Quarterly
83 (September).

Chan, Anita, et al. 1992. Chen Village, rev. ed. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press.

Duncan, Otis Dudley. 1984. Notes on Social Measurement. New York: Russell Sage.

Freedman, David. 1991. “Statistical Models and Shoe Leather.” Sociological Meth-
odology 21:315-24.

Gold, Thomas. 1985. “After Comradship: Personal Relations in China since the Cul-
tural Revolution.” China Quarterly 104 (December): 657-75.

Henderson, Gail, and Myron Cohen. 1984. The Chinese Hospital: A Socialist Work
Unit. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Halbwachs, Maurice. (1935) 1972. “La statistique en sociologie.” In Classes sociales
et morphologie. Paris: Editions de Minuit.

Kahn-Ackermann, Michael. 1982. Within the Outer Gate. London: Marco Polo.

Kornai, Janos. 1990. The Road to a Free Economy. New York: Norton.

Mitchell, J. Clyde. 1969. Social Networks in Urban Situations. Manchester: Manches-
ter University Press.

Olson, Mancur, Jr. 1982. The Rise and Decline of Nations. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.

Oberschall, Anthony. 1993. Social Movements. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction
Books.

Unger, Jonathan. 1982. Education under Mao. New York: Columbia University
Press.

Thurow, Lester. 1981. The Zero-Sum Society. New York: Penguin.

Walder, Andrew. 1986. Communist Neo-Traditionalism. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.

. 1989. “Social Change in Post-Revolutionary China.” Annual Review of Soci-
ology 15:405-24.

Williamson, Oliver. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free
Press.

Whyte, Martin. 1974. Small Groups and Political Rituals in China. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
