Formal Education and Individual Modernity in an African Society

Author(s): Michael Armer and Robert Youtz

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Jan., 1971), pp. 604-626
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776431

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:04 UTC
The importance of education for national and individual development has
long been recognized by civic leaders and social scientists alike. But
whereas civic leaders are inclined to see education as primarily functional
in the production of skilled manpower to fill technical and administrative
positions in society, social scientists are more apt to stress the role of
education in “working to change the balance of different attitudes and
values in the population” (Clark 1962, p. 70). This latter function would
seem to be particularly important in schools in modernizing societies
where, as Anderson (1966, p. 70) notes, “children develop new concep-
tions of what kind of person they are. They adopt new rules for their
conduct and acquire loyalties to new ideas and new groups.’

1 Fieldwork for this study was made possible by a grant from the Foreign Area Fellow-
ship Program. Data processing and analysis were generously supported by grant GS-
1174 from the National Science Foundation. We are indebted to government officials
in Kaduna and Kano, Nigeria, for their cooperation in making the study possible and
to the many persons who helped on various aspects of the fieldwork, especially to Abdu
Ho, Moh. Aminu Doraye, Mahmoud Aliyu, and Moh. Uba Adam. Special thanks go
to Robert Thompson for research assistance, to Ann Paden for editorial assistance,

and to Profs. Remi Clignet, Allan Schnaiberg, John Kitsuse, and John Walton for
comments on earlier drafts.
The expectation that formal schooling leads to new orientations is
based in large part on the general theoretical argument that “men’s
environment, as expressed in the institutional patterns they adopt or
have introduced to them, shapes their experience, and through this their
perceptions, attitudes and values, in standardized ways which are mani-
fest from country to country, despite the countervailing randomizing
influence of traditional cultural patterns” (Inkeles 1960, p. 2).

In applying this general sociological proposition to the question of
Western education in traditional societies in Africa or elsewhere, it is
hypothesized. that formal schooling shapes experiences of youth and, in
turn, leads toward standardized changes in their value orientations in a
direction congruent with the dominant value emphasis of the educational
environment. More specifically, formal Western education is expected to
have a modernizing influence on perspectives, that is, to foster values
and beliefs such as independence from family and other traditional au-
thority, belief in science and in man’s ability to control his fate, and
orientation to the future (Inkeles 1966, 1969; Moore 1963, pp. 110-11;
Hanson 1964; Turner 1955; Frazier 1955a, 1955b).?

On the other hand, there are obviously limits to the influence of formal
schooling. In “traditionalistic” societies (Hoselitz 1961) which seek to
preserve their cultural heritage, education may have little or no effect in
changing an individual’s perspectives. Or education may have only super-
ficial and temporary effects; overt behavior may change, but basic beliefs
and values acquired during childhood and reinforced in the home and
community may continue to prevail. Moreover, even if value-orientation
differences are found between more and less educated individuals, the
differences may not be due to educational effects but, rather, to selective
recruitment or retention of individuals with different orientations at the
outset, or to the influence of alternative modernizing forces which may
be correlated with education, for example, urban experience, mass-media
exposure, voluntary association membership, and factory experience
(Inkeles 1966). Also, the impact of educational experience may be af-
fected by a number of other personal and social background factors, such
as ethnic affiliation, family socioeconomic status, religion, intelligence,
age, and sex.

These caveats call into question the theoretical expectation that for-
mal Western education has a modernizing effect on values and beliefs of
individuals. To what extent and in what way does formal schooling shape
the value orientations of individuals in nonindustrial, non-Western so-
ciety? Closely related are questions concerning the social backgrounds of
those who are more affected or less affected by education, the kinds of
value orientations that are most affected, and the aspects of the educa-
tional system that are most important in producing the changes—formal
organization, curriculum, or other aspects.

These are particularly critical questions in modernizing societies where
educational expansion competes with other development programs for
scarce resources. They are also important questions in social psychologi-
cal studies of modernization which are concerned with the nature and
determinants of individual change associated with socioeconomic devel-
opment. However, as Moore (1963, p. 111) points out, systematic empiri-
cal evidence regarding the effects of formal education on value orienta-
tions is generally lacking.*

The present study represents a preliminary investigation of these mat-
ters based on structured interview data from 591 young men in Kano
City, Nigeria. The research objectives are (1) to establish whether a
positive association exists between formal schooling and individual mo-
dernity that is independent of other modernizing forces and selectivity
factors, and, if an association exists, (2) to specify those personal and
social background characteristics of youth and those value orientations
which are most resistant and most vulnerable to modernizing influences
of schooling, and (8) to explore whether curriculum or organization
aspects of formal education systems are more important in producing the
observed association.
effectively discouraged. As a result, Hausaland has remained one of the
most traditional societies of Africa today, and its people take great pride
in their cultural heritage.®

Kano, Nigeria, the research site for the present investigation, is an
urban center located in the heart of Hausaland and consists of more than
a quarter of a million inhabitants. The urban area is divided into three
major sections: mud-walled Kano City (Birni), various migrant com-
munities of northern and southern Nigerian immigrants (Waje),® and the
former European quarter (Nassarawa). Kano City (with a population of
approximately 165,000) has a history dating back to the tenth century
and is the seat of Native Authority government offices, the central mar-
ket, and central mosque. It is comprised largely of Muslim Hausa and
Fulani residents, many from long-established families, and it reflects
much of the traditional character of Hausaland. The migrant and Euro-
pean sections are more modern by contrast and include areas of commerce
and light industry. Because of its traditional character, Kano City pro-
vides a critical cultural context in which to test the impact of education
on value orientations. If Western schooling exerts a clear modernizing
influence here, an even greater influence would be expected in less tradi-
tional settings.
Measurement Indexes

The independent variable, educational level, is measured by items asking
respondents about the number of years they attended primary and
secondary school. The information yields three broad categories: those
who have no formal education (52.8 percent), those who have attended
one to seven years of primary school (35.7 percent), and those who have
gone beyond primary school to at least one year of secondary school
(11.5 percent).

Development of an index of the dependent variable, modern value
orientation, follows procedures employed by Kahl (1968) in his measure-
ment of modernism. We began by examining previous literature in an
effort to identify major theoretical dimensions of modern or Western
values and beliefs that might be affected by schooling. From the writings
of Weber (1947), Parsons (1951), Becker (1957), and Inkeles (1966) in
particular come the concepts of “empiricism” or “belief in science,”
“secularism,” and “receptivity to change,” all of which capture the
notion of rationalism, while the dimensions of “trust,” “futurism,” ‘“in-
dependence from family,” and “mastery” stem largely from the work of
Kluckhohn and Strodtbeck (1961) and Kahl (1965).* The dimensions of
“openness to new ideas,” “women’s equality,” and “ethnic equality” are
suggested by various others (Smith and Inkeles 1966; Doob 1967; Han-
son 1964; O’Connell 1965; Peshkin and Cohen 1967).

Questionnaire items tapping these ten selected value orientations were
independently constructed or borrowed in direct or modified form from
questionnaire materials used by Inkeles, Kahl, and others.® The internal
consistency of items within each of the postulated dimensions was
analyzed separately by means of factor analysis, and items were elimi-
nated if their loadings on the principal axis of the unrotated matrix were
less than .30.!° Factor analysis of the remaining items was used as a basis
for developing factor weighted composite scores of each dimension.

The dimension scores themselves were then factor analyzed in order to
ascertain the extent to which they form a single syndrome of traditional
versus modern value orientations." Six of the original ten dimensions
were found to have loadings above .30 on the principal axis: independence

8 Kahl (1965, p. 671) combines Kluckhohn and Strodtbeck’s “doing” and “control
over nature’ dimensions into a single dimension labeled ‘‘mastery.”

® This was done prior to the development and publication of modernity measures by
these researchers.

10 The twenty-two items retained for the modernity measure and their respective
loadings on the principal axis of the unrotated matrix are listed in abbreviated form
in the Appendix.

1 A composite measure avoids the necessity of repeating the analysis for each value
dimension, and separate measures of each dimension enable investigation of the value
TABLE 1

LoADINGS OF Top VALUE-ORIENTATION
SCORES ON PRINCIPAL AXIS OF
FACTOR ANALYSIS

Loading Value Orientation

Independence from family
Ethnic equality
Empiricism

Mastery or efficacy
Receptivity to change
Future oriented

 

environment. The first two are largely controlled through sampling re-
strictions in the present research; all respondents resided in Kano City
(with over 80 percent saying they had spent most of their lives in Kano
or in other large urban areas), and only a handful had any factory ex-
perience.

Radio listening was chosen as an index of mass-media exposure because
it does not require literacy and thus is not confused with education. Three
categories of respondents were identified: those who listened to news on
the radio daily (35.4 percent), a few times each week (38.9 percent), and
rarely or never (25.7 percent).!? Voluntary association membership was

orientations which are more or less influenced by formal education. In other words,
the measurement procedures are geared to the present research purposes; alternative
measurements may be more appropriate for other analytical purposes.

12 Kuder-Richardson internal consistency reliability coefficients (Guilford 1965, pp.
458-60) were computed both for the twenty-two items (rz; = .88) and for the six di-
mensions (rz = .90) included in the measure. The inferred average interitem correla-
tion (suggested by Guilford 1965, p. 463, as an index of reliability independent of test
length) is .25, which is high by conventional standards (Morrison, Campbell, and
Wolins 1967). A separate factor analysis of the six dimensions produced a unitary
factor structure controlling 34 percent of the variance.

13 The lower two mass-media categories are combined in the subsequent analysis of
partials because of insufficient educational distribution among respondents who “listen
rarely or never.” Out of the 152 males in this category, only five had some secondary
education.
measured in terms of youth club membership because these were vir-
tually the only voluntary associations available to youth in Kano. Thirty
percent of the respondents indicated they were members.

The problem of measuring the degree of modernism of home environ-
ment is especially difficult in the present study. Parents or other family
members of the respondents were not personally interviewed, and direct
assessment of their orientations is impossible. Furthermore, strong norms
of deference toward elders and sensitive relations between children (espe-
cially firstborn) and their parents make it awkward for respondents to
answer questions about their parents.

Rather than rely on a single measure, several items are employed as
implicit and indirect indexes of parental modernity. The first of these is
concerned with whether a respondent’s father belongs to one of the
Islamic brotherhoods; a respondent whose father is “free,” or not in-
volved with either of the two major brotherhoods, is expected to be more
secularized with respect to the pervasive Muslim culture, that is, to come
from a more modern home environment. Data on father’s English liter-
acy, level of schooling, and occupation are also taken as indirect indexes
of the modernity of home environments.“ A respondent whose father is
literate in English, has had some formal Western schooling, or is em-
ployed in a more “modern” occupation—civil service, professional, other
white-collar, or skilled labor, as opposed to religious, trading, craft, or
farming—is expected to have a more modern home environment.

Finally, several personal background factors were identified as relevant
in testing and specifying the relationship between education and psycho-
logical modernity. Ethnic affiliation, socioeconomic status, and intelli-
gence are among the most obvious and important ones, aside from age,
sex, and religion, which are held constant through sampling. The first,
ethnic affiliation, is measured separately by father’s and mother’s ethnic
group, since interethnic parentage is found among almost one-fourth of
the respondents.

Social status is an extremely complex phenomenon in Hausa society
(Smith 1959, 1961), and we prefer to use a variety of status indexes rather
than rely on a single index or composite score. In addition to father’s
education, literacy, and occupational status, which are introduced above
as indirect indexes of parental modernity but which may also be seen as
socioeconomic indexes, social status is measured by respondent’s esti-
mates of father’s income and family prestige.

14 The father’s education index presumes confirmation of the hypothesis that level of
schooling is positively associated with psychological modernity. If confirmed, then it
is meaningful to investigate the independent determinancy of respondents’ schooling
by controlling for parental modernity as measured by father’s education. If the hy-

pothesis is false and level of schooling is not associated with modernity, no further
controlled analysis will be necessary.
with modern value orientations and that this relationship is not the result
of selectivity processes or of alternative modernizing forces and back-
ground factors.

Cross-tabulation of educational level with “high” and “low” individ-
ual modernity for respondents in the study is presented in table 2. The
evidence indicates a strong positive association between the two variables
at a statistically significant level. More than four out of five (83.8 per-
cent) of the respondents with some secondary education score in the
upper half of the modernization scale, while less than two out of five
(37.8 percent) of those with no formal education do so. The difference in
percentages is stronger between respondents with primary and those
with secondary education than between respondents with primary and
those with no education. In short, the prediction of a positive relation
Selectivity

A serious alternative explanation which may account for these findings
is that educational recruitment and retention selectively favor persons
with more modern outlooks. That is, those who are more modern in their
values and beliefs from the outset are more likely to begin and continue
schooling.

The only truly adequate way to test this alternative explanation
would be with panel data which would take a cohort of individuals as
preschoolers and trace their value-orientation changes during the ensuing
years. In the absence of such data, substitute methods must be employed
to gain indirect evidence in support of one interpretation or the other.

In the present study, for example, we will examine modernity per-
centages by number of years of schooling. If selectivity factors are re-
sponsible for the observed association, it is reasonable to expect that dif-
ferences in the percentage of ‘‘more modern’’ respondents would be most
pronounced at the beginning of primary or secondary school rather than
during primary or secondary school. This is because the major decisions
by youth, parents, and school officials regarding school entrance and
termination are made prior to beginning primary or secondary school;
once admitted, most students continue until the end of the course, espe-
cially students at the secondary level. The restricted number of second-
ary-school openings makes admittance extremely difficult, and the drop-
out rate is virtually nil.'*

On the other hand, if schooling fosters modern perspectives, as pre-
dicted, then we would expect evidence of a steady increment in the pro-
portion of “more modern’ respondents with each increasing year of
schooling, and there should be no unusually sharp percentage increases
at the beginning of the major educational levels.

Examination of the relevant evidence in table 3 reveals a rather steady
increase in the percentage of ‘more modern” respondents with increasing
Alternative Modernizing Forces

We have also noted the need to control for other commonly mentioned
modernizing forces in testing the association between formal schooling
and individual modernity. The relationships between educational level
and individual modernity, while partialing on mass-media exposure and
voluntary association membership, and the four parental modernity in-
dexes are presented in table 4. To facilitate reading the table, only per-
centages of “high”? modernity scores are reported.

Among the forty-two respondents who “listen to radio news daily,”
85.7 percent of those with some secondary education have modern value
orientations, compared with only 55.3 percent of those with primary
schooling and 46.6 percent of those who have not had any formal educa-
tion. Clearly, the relationship between level of education and individual
modernity persists among the respondents who have daily exposure to
radio news, and it also persists among those who have less than daily
17 Tt is necessary to combine the first through third and the fourth through fifth pri-
mary-school years in order to achieve large enough sample sizes to compute reliable
percentages. Primary schooling is normally seven years in length, although a handful
of students repeat grades and a few are able to skip the seventh year if they pass the
Common Entrance Examination for secondary school. Secondary-school courses
generally continue for five years. At the time of the present study, the seventeen-year-
old respondents in our sample were normally at the third or fourth year of secondary
school if they had begun school at age seven and had continued their education stead-
ily without interruption. However, many students start school late or fail their

entrance examinations for one or more years. This probably accounts for the smaller
numbers of respondents in our sample in the later years of secondary school.
American Journal of Sociology

exposure. Moreover, a positive association between education and indi-
vidual modernity is also found within both categories of respondents on
the index of voluntary association membership and within each of the
categories on the four parental modernity indexes. In the case of respon-
dents whose fathers are literate or are in modern occupations, the number
of respondents who have had no formal education is too small to compute
reliable percentages, but the differences in modernity percentages con-
tinue to appear between primary- and secondary-education levels.

In sum, the evidence indicates that the association of formal schooling
and modernization is largely independent of these alternative moderniz-
ing forces and cannot be readily explained or interpreted by any of them.
Also, it is clear that combining the items into a composite index would
Personal Background Factors

We have also suggested several other factors which may have a bearing
on the observed relationship. The variables of ethnic affiliation, social
status, and intelligence are viewed less as alternative modernizing forces
than as potential conditioning variables, that is, as factors which may
specify categories of youth that are more susceptible or more resistant to
educational influences.!®

The results of partialing on the ethnic, social status, and intelligence
measures are reported in table 5. The results of partialing on alternative
modernizing forces in table 4 may be reexamined concurrently, with an
eye to specifying conditions under which the association appears
strengthened or weakened.

The data in table 5 reveal a clear association between “high” moder-
nity and educational level for each of the subsamples defined by the per-
sonal background variables. For example, among respondents with
Fulani fathers, “high” modernity increases from 43.9 percent of those
with no education, to 68.9 percent of those with primary schooling, and
finally to 81.4 percent of those with secondary schooling. Although the
Fulani are much more likely to attend school and to hold modern value
orientations than respondents of other ethnic groups, the strong associa-
tion between these two variables cannot be explained by ethnic differ-
ences.

The same general pattern of results and conclusions is indicated for
Hausa respondents and for the various subsamples with respect to
mother’s ethnic affiliation, family economic status, subjective family
prestige, and measured “general intelligence.” For each category there
exists a substantial, monotonic increase in percentage of “high” moder-
nity by level of formal schooling. The pattern was also found in table 4
with respect to father’s English literacy, father’s education, and father’s
occupation.

By using the association between formal education and modernity for
the total sample as a standard of comparison, the results in table 5 may
be examined to see whether the association is substantially stronger or
weaker for the particular categories of respondents. In general, a pattern

18 Of course, it is also possible that one or another of these variables may help interpret
or explain the association, but we are introducing them as potential specification
variables. The terms “specify,” “interpret,” and “explain” are used in the sense
defined by Lazarsfeld (1955).
TABLE 5

PERCENTAGE “HIGH” INDIVIDUAL MODERNITY BY LEVEL OF EDUCATION,
CONTROLLING FOR PERSONAL BACKGROUND VARIABLES

 

 

Leven or WESTERN EpucaTIoN

 

  

Some Some No
PrrsonaL BACKGROUND VARIABLES Secondary Primary Education y*
Total sample..................5. 83.8 55.5 37.8 48
(68)t (211) (312) 7
Father’s ethnic group:
Fulani............0-6 00 ee eee ee 81.4 68.9 43.9 51
(43) (61) (57) oer
Hausa... 0.00... eee eee eee oer 52.0 37.1 41
(16) (123) (224) M
Mother’s ethnic group:
Fulani........0.0.0 00000 cess 79.5 61.5 39.1 52
(44) (65) (69) ae
Hausa..........60 060 c eee eee 90.9 54.0 38.4 43
(22) (124) (224) a
Father’s income:
High (£10/month or more)...... 89.1 50.4 37.2 54
(46) (117) (94) vee
Low (less than £10/month)...... ee 64.0 42.7 42
(18) (75) (157) oer
Subjective family prestige:
Very or fairly high............. 85.0 58.6 35.8 55
(40) (116) (123) s
Average or below.............. 82.1 51.6 39.4 -40
(28) (95) (188) oer
Measured “general intelligence”:
Higher. ..............--.0000- 84.2 62.8 43.4 61
(57) (118) (99) oer
Lower... 0.0.6 eee cece e eens see 46.9 35.2 32
(11) (98) (213) see

 

* All y significant (one-tailed test) at the .001 level.
t Numbers of respondents are in parentheses.

¢ Respondents with mothers and fathers belonging to other ethnic groups, e.g. Kanuri, are elimi-
nated for this partial analysis. There are sixty-seven respondents with fathers who are not Hausa or

Fulani and forty-three whose mothers are neither Hausa nor Fulani.
Value-Orientation Dimensions

We have also raised the question of whether certain value orientations
are more vulnerable or resistant to educational influence on the perspec-
tives of youth in Hausa society. At the outset, we identified ten dimen-
sions suggested in the literature as potentially influenced by formal
Western education. Six which were strongly associated in a common fac-
tor were combined and used as a summary measure of individual moder-
nity in the preceding analysis. But there is no reason to assume that these
six are associated to the same degree or in the same way with formal
education, nor is there reason to assume that the remaining dimensions
are not also associated with education.

Table 6 reports the association of education with each of the ten value
orientations ordered from top to bottom in terms of their loadings on the
principal axis of our original factor analysis of psychological modernity.
The distribution of scores on each dimension has been divided as closely
as possible to the median, and percentages in the table indicate propor-
tions of respondents at each educational level who score in the upper half
(or “more modern” side) of the distribution.

It will be noted that most, but not all, of the dimensions are clearly
and positively associated with formal education. In particular, inde-
pendence from family is very strongly associated; 85 percent of the
respondents with secondary education indicate independence, compared
with 41 percent of those with no education. Education is also strongly
associated with the dimensions of empiricism and futurism and, to a
moderate extent, with the dimensions of ethnic equality, mastery, open-
ness to new ideas and experiences, and interpersonal trust. On the other
hand, receptivity to change, secularism, and women’s equality are not
strongly associated with education, and there is even a reversal in the
percentages of secular orientations by level of schooling. In sum, there
Curriculum versus Social Organization

We have been using the phrase “formal Western education” in much of
the preceding discussion and analysis because both formal social or-
ganization characteristics and Western curriculum factors have been
suggested as responsible for modernizing the perspectives of young people
who attend school. Inkeles (1966, p. 147; 1969, p. 213) calls special

TABLE 6

PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS WITH HIGH SCORES ON TEN VALUE
ORIENTATIONS, BY LEVEL OF EDUCATION

 

 

Leven or Western Epucation

 

 
  
 
  
   

 

 
 
  

Some Some No Sra-
VaLuE-ORIENTATION Dimensions Secondary Primary Education Y NIFICANCE
Independence from family. we 85.3 58.3 41.0 47 ead
Ethnic equality 79.4 44.5 43.3 -26 aad
Empiricism. . 67.6 51.7 31.4 45 aie
Mastery or efi 69.1 52.1 43.9 26 +e
Futurism. ......... 64.7 51.7 35.3 37 il
Receptivity to change. 51.5 47.4 44.2 08 NS.
Secularism............. 65.2 41.7 51.8 01 NS.
Openness to ideas and experi-
QMCES.. 0.2. e eee eee eee 58.8 46.9 38.1 23 ee

Women’s equality . 57.4 49.8 44.9 .14 *

60.3 57.3 46.2 21 a

Interpersonal trust.
N (68) (211) (312)

 

* Significant at .05 level (one-tailed test).
** Significant at .01 level (one-tailed test).
*** Significant at .001 level (one-tailed test).
ernization of perspectives should also tend to result from formal educa-
tional systems with nonmodern, non-Western curriculums; on the other
hand, if curriculum effects are more important, then we would expect
differences in the modernization of perspectives in Western and non-
Western formal educational systems.

The Muslim Koranic schools in Kano are an example of such a non-
Western system. In these schools, the first four to six years normally
consist of learning to read and write Arabic script and memorizing con-
secutive passages of the Koran. After a student has gone through the
Koran in this fashion, he is “graduated” and starts again at the begin-
ning, this time receiving fuller instruction from the mallam (Koranic
teacher) on the meaning of passages and other religious knowledge.

Actually, Koranic schools vary considerably in level of organization,
ranging from a handful of students at the feet of a mallam to classroom
situations with students grouped according to level of instruction. In
general, however, the formal organizational characteristics of Koranic
schools are similar to institutionalized characteristics of other formal
educational systems; for example, they involve a “graded curriculum and
more or less orderly sequence of studies” (Moore 1963, p. 110), separation
from home, regular hours of instruction, continuous testing and evalua-
tion of individual performance, and objective and universal standards of
progress (see Tukur 1963 for details).

Of course, these characteristics are not handled in exactly the same
way as in Western schools, because of curriculum and cultural differ-
ences, but they are conceptually equivalent. If such organizational char-
acteristics serve as models “of rationality, of the importance of technical
competence, of the rule of objective standards of performance, and of
the principle of distributive justice reflected in the grading system”
(Inkeles 1966, p. 147) in Western schools, they should promote similar
value orientations in Koranic schools.

On the other hand, if curricular, rather than organizational, features of
educational systems are more important in shaping perspectives, the
effects of Koranic education with its nonmodern curriculum may be quite
different from the effects of Western education. We call the Koranic
school curriculums nonmodern rather than traditional because, as Tukur
(1963) stresses, they are not necessarily opposed to modern orientations,
especially in the first several years, which emphasize Arabic reading,
writing, and rote memorization. Thus, to the extent that curriculum
effects are important in producing modernity, little or no change in
modernity would be expected to result from Koranic education, but to
the extent that organizational effects are important, modernity should be
positively associated with level of Koranic education as with other formal
educational systems.
TABLE 8
TYPE OF SECONDARY SCHOOL ATTENDED AND INDIVIDUAL MODERNITY

 

 

InprvipvaL Mopernity

 

 

Type or Seconpary ScHooL High Low N Y
Secondary grammar school eer 96.7 3.3 30 -68*
Teacher-training “college”... .. . 79.2 20.8 24 cee
Other (craft and technical, clerical,

CC) 64.3 35.7 14

 

* Significant at .001 level (one-tailed test).

ish grammar schools; (2) teacher-training “colleges,” with curriculums
designed to produce primary-school teachers; and (3) other schools, in-
cluding craft and technical schools, clerical schools, and various Ministry
training schools in agriculture, hygiene, and veterinary medicine. The
social organization of these secondary schools is virtually identical, but
the curricular emphases range from classical academic education to
locally relevant applied training. Evidence of equally high rates of moder-
nity among respondents with different kinds of secondary-school experi-
ence would suggest the importance of formal organization effects, while
modernity differences would suggest curriculum or other effects (see
table 8).

The results in table 8 tend to reinforce the previous emphasis on the
DISCUSSION

The findings in this study clearly and consistently support the view that
Western education does, indeed, have a definite effect on value orienta-
tions of youth that is largely independent of the test factors mentioned
and is not specific to particular sample subpopulations. The results
also call attention to the importance of school-curriculum differences in
determining the nature of value-orientation change, and they suggest a
less important role for the formal organization of the school.

These findings are particularly relevant to the theoretical argument,
stated so well by Inkeles, that the institutions to which men are exposed
shape their experiences and, in turn, their values, beliefs, and perceptions,
despite differences in cultural background. This theoretical position is
certainly supported by the findings of the present study, but there is a
danger in assuming that institutions going by the same name have the
same effects. Formal educational institutions may have much in common,

20 Since the evidence in table 5 indicates that intelligence is associated with modernity
and since a major factor in selecting students for different types of secondary schools
ig examination results (which presumably reflect measured intelligence), intelligence
level is among the most likely background factors that may account for the observed
differences in modernity percentage by type of secondary schooling in table 8. How-
ever, when we examine just the secondary-school-educated respondents with high
intelligence, the association persists: high modernity is found among all twenty-six
(100 percent) of those with secondary grammar schooling, sixteen out of twenty-one
(76 percent) of those with teacher-training schooling, and six out of ten (60 percent)
of those with other types of secondary schooling (vy = .82, significant at .001 level).
Limitations of sample size reduce the reliability of these percentages and preclude
testing the influence of other background differences on the association between type
of schooling and modernity.
but they also can have much that is not held in common, particularly in
the curriculum area. And it may be in areas of diversity such as this that
the greatest influence is exerted on experiences of individuals and in turn
on their beliefs, values, and perceptions. It is tempting to view formal
educational influences as necessarily converging to produce a common
set of attitudinal characteristics, and there may in fact be such con-
vergences resulting from schooling in many areas of the world, but our
evidence suggests that convergence is not necessary, that differences in
perspectives can be fostered by different formal educational systems, and
that caution should be exercised in generalizing about the value-transi-
tion effects of unspecified formal educational systems.

With respect to Kano City, the evidence suggests that education has a
definite influence on value orientations and that education successfully
leads to modernization of perspectives in certain areas (e.g., independence
from family, empiricism, futurism) while it has little or irregular effect on
other perspectives (e.g., secularism, women’s equality, receptivity to
change). Reasons for these associations can readily be suggested on a post
hoc basis, but we do so only with full acknowledgment that the justifica-
tions are conjectural. Our main contention, stemming from the findings
presented above, is that independence, empiricism, and futurism are
probably among the dimensions most clearly embedded in the implicit
and explicit curricular content of Western schools, as well as in their
formal organization, as suggested by Inkeles, Moore, and others. Con-
versely, schools take care not to challenge religious beliefs; in fact,
religious instruction has been incorporated into the school curriculum by
Nigerian authorities. Thus, it is perhaps not surprising that religious
beliefs (including belief in women’s inferior status) are not clearly associ-
ated with educational experience in Kano.

The low association of educational level and receptivity to change may
be partially a function of the feeling among many of the less educated
respondents that changes (either traditional or modern) are needed to
improve their living conditions and future prospects, while many of the
primary- and secondary-educated respondents may be satisfied with their
hfe circumstances and may be opposed to change, especially change in a
traditional direction which would perhaps not be in their interest.

It cannot be claimed that all possible alternative determinants of indi-
vidual modernity have been tested in the present study, nor can the pos-
sibilities be disregarded that selectivity factors may account for some of
the association between education and modernity and that the associa-
tion may not hold for different samples or in different settings. But all
efforts to test these alternative interpretations and qualifications failed
APPENDIX
ITEMS AND PRINCIPAL AXIS LOADINGS BY VALUE ORIENTATION

 

 

Loadings Abbreviated Items*

1. Independence from Family

 

a ORE eEE EEE Should live near parents, even if means losing better place else-
where. (A/D)f

LTB. eee Is Cay to hire a relative, even if less qualified than a stranger.

BOE eee I (greatly /slightly /do not) prefer work that is close to home.

 

2, Ethnic Equality

 

LTB eee Boys should protect own tribe and let others look out for them-
selves. (A/D)
TMLee eee Sper pnd friendships with other tribes are risky or impossible.

Outsiders bring more (harm/good) to this country.
I (do not/slightly/greatly) prefer work with people of other tribes.

 

 

3. Empiricism

 

64.00 0.00008 (Prayer /medical care) is most important in recovery from illness.

61... ee. There (should not/should) be scientific study of such things as hu-
man birth and plant life.

60... ..00008 Certain diseases only Hausa practitioner can cure. (A/D)

 

4. Mastery or Efficacy

 

Man (should not/should) strive for more food and possessions, even
if he has enough to get by.

Man who plans has as many difficulties as man who does not. (A/D)

T (greatly /slightly /do not) prefer work that is easy.

A man’s success (is predetermined/depends upon ambition and
hard work).

 

 

 

  

5. Futurism
TB ccna Should dedicate self to (conserve customs/assure good future).
65.00.0000. Things of the (past/present/future) should be of greatest concern
to us.
.39.. I prefer to plan ahead on (few/most) matters.
38. I (do not/slightly/greatly) prefer work that promises future ad-

  

vancement.

 

* All items are stated here in the same direction from traditional to modern choices. Sixteen of the
items have been reversed from the way they are stated in the questionnaire for factor-analysis purposes.

t A/D refers to agree-disagree-type questions. All others are multiple-choice or polar choice.
APPENDIX—Continued

 

 

Loadings Abbreviated Items*

 

6. Receptivity to Change
Is never wise to change rapidly in government or economy. (A/D)
People are content with present way of life and do not want changes.
‘D

If you change things much, you usually make them worse. (A/D)
The amount of change in way of life should be (slower/faster).

 

7. Secularism

 

Should give alms to poor because (fear of God/compassionate).

Should follow (religious men and sacred books/own conscience).

(Need not be/should be) respectful of other religions.

A boy (cannot/can) be truly good without any religion.

oe is for (own religion only/good people of other religions
also).

 

8. Openness to Ideas and Experiences

 

Is all right for people to criticize sacred social matters. (A/D)
Is Poe to seek new and different experiences rather than familiar.

I (do not/slightly /greatly) prefer work that offers new experiences.
Persons should (always/sometimes/never) be allowed to express
minority ideas.

 

9. Women’s Equality

 

Girls (should not/should) have educational opportunity.
Women (cannot/can) be trusted as much as men.
Girls’ freedoms should be (not changed /increased).

 

 

10. Interpersonal Trust

 

 

69......008. (Most/few) people are deceptive and dishonest.

-64.......... If you trust and show respect, people (will not/will) treat you
fairly.

MBL eee Most people are honest through fear of being caught. (A/D)

REFERENCES

Ainsworth, Leonard H., and Mary D. Ainsworth. 1962a. “Acculturation in East
Africa. I. Political Awareness and Attitudes toward Authority.” Journal of Social
Psychology 57 (August) :391-99.

. 19620. “Acculturation in East Africa. III. Attitudes towards Parents, Teach-

ers, and Education.” Ibid., pp. 409-15.

. 1962c. ‘‘Acculturation in East Africa. IV. Summary and Discussion.” Ibid.,
pp. 417-32.

Anderson, C. Arnold. 1966. ‘“The Modernization of Education.” In Modernization,
edited by Myron Weiner. New York: Basic.

Armer, Michael. 1970. “Formal Education and Psychological Malaise in an African
Society.” Sociology of Education 43, no. 2 (Spring) : 143-58.

Becker, Howard. 1957. ‘Current Sacred-Secular Theory and Its Development.” In
Modern Sociological Theory, edited by Howard Becker and Alvin Boskoff. New
York: Dryden.

Busia, K. A. 1962. The Challenge of Africa. New York: Praeger.
Clark, Burton R. 1962. Educating the Expert Society. San Francisco: Chandler.

Dawson, J. L. M. 1967. “Traditional versus Western Attitudes in Africa: The Con-
struction, Validation and Application of a Measuring Device.” British Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology 6, No. 2:81-96.

Doob, Leonard W. 1960. Becoming More Civilized. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univer-
sity Press.

. 1967. “Scales for Assaying Psychological Modernization in Africa.’’ Public
Opinion Quarterly 31 (Fall) :414~-21.

Dreeben, Robert. 1968. On What Is Learned in School. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley.

Frazier, E. Franklin. 1955a. “Commentary” (to L. D. Turner’s article). In Africa
Today, edited by C. Grove Haines. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

. 1955b. “The Impact of Colonialism on African Social Forms and Personality.”
In Africa in the Modern World, edited by Calvin W. Stillman. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Guilford, J. P. 1965. Fundamental Statistics in Psychology and Education. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Hanson, J. W. 1964. “The Nation’s Educational Purpose.” In Nigerian Education,
edited by O. Ikejiani. Ikeja: Longmans of Nigeria.

Hoselitz, Bert F. 1961. ‘Tradition and Economic Growth.” In Tradition, Values, and
Socioeconomic Development. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.

Inkeles, Alex. 1960. “Industrial Man: The Relation of Status to Experience, Percep-
tion, and Value.” American Journal of Sociology 66, no. 1 (July):1-31.

. 1966. “The Modernization of Man.’”’ In Modernization: The Dynamics of

Growth. New York: Basic.

. 1969. “Making Men Modern.” American Journal of Sociology 75, no. 2
(September) : 208-25.

Jahoda, Gustav. 1961. ‘‘Aspects of Westernization: A Study of Adult-Class Students
in Ghana, I.” British Journal of Sociology 11, no. 3 (September) : 197-210.

. 1962. “Aspects of Westernization: A Study of Adult-Class Students in Ghana,
II.” Ibid. 18, no. 1 (March) : 43-56.

Kahl, Joseph A. 1965. “Some Measurements of Achievement Orientation.”’ American
Journal of Sociology 70, no. 6 (May): 669-81.

. 1968. The Measurement of Modernism: A Study of Values in Brazil and Mexico.
Austin: University of Texas Press.

Kluckhohn, Florence R., and Fred L. Strodtbeck. 1961. Variations in Value Orienta-
tions. Evanston, Ill.: Row, Peterson.

Lazarsfeld, Paul F. 1955. ‘Interpretation of Statistical Relations as a Research Oper-
ation.” In The Language of Social Research, edited by P. F. Lazarsfeld and M. Ro-
senberg. New York: Macmillan.

Lord, Edith. 1958. “The Impact of Education on Non-scientific Beliefs in Ethiopia.”
Journal of Social Psychology 47 (May) :339-53.

Moore, Wilbert E. 1963. Social Change. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Morrison, D. G., D. T. Campbell, and Leroy Wolins. 1967. ‘A roRTRAN-Iv Program
for Evaluating Internal Consistency and Single-Factoredness in Sets of Multilevel
Attitude Items, mimeographed. Evanston, Ill.: Vogelback Computing Center,
Northwestern University.

Nisbet, Robert A. 1969. Social Change and History: Aspects of the Western Theory of
Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

O'Connell, James. 1965. ‘The Concept of Modernization.” South Atlantic Quarterly
(Autumn), pp. 549-64.

Omari, T. Peter. 1960. “Changing Attitudes of Students in West African Society
toward Marriage and Family Relationships.” British Journal of Sociology 11, no. 3
(September) : 197-210.

Paden, John N. 1970. “Urban Pluralism, Integration, and Adaptation of Communal
Identity in Kano, Nigeria.” In From Tribe to Nation in Africa, edited by Ronald
Cohen and John Middleton. San Francisco: Chandler.
Parsons, Talcott. 1951. The Social System. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Peshkin, Alan, and Ronald Cohen. 1967. “The Values of Modernization.” Journal of
Developing Areas 2 (October) :7—22.

Powdermaker, Hortense. 1956. ‘Social Change through Imagery and Values of Teen-
age Africans in Northern Rhodesia.” American Anthropologist 57 :783-813.

Schwarz, Paul A. 1964. Development of Manpower Screening Tests for the Developing
Nations. Pittsburgh: American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences.

Smith, David H., and Alex Inkeles. 1966. ‘‘The OM Scale: A Comparative Socio-
psychological Measure of Individual Modernity.” Sociometry 29 (December) :353-
77.

Smith, M. G. 1959. “The Hausa System of Social Status.”’ Africa 29 (July) : 239-52.

. 1960. Government in Zazzau, 1850-1950. London: Oxford University Press.

. 1961. “Kebbi and Hausa Stratification.” British Journal of Sociology 12

(March) : 52-64.

. 1965. “The Hausa of Northern Nigeria.” In Peoples of Africa, edited by
James L. Gibbs, Jr. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Tukur, Bashiru. 1963. ‘““Koranic Schools in Northern Nigeria.’ West African Journal
of Education 7 (October) : 149-52.

Turner, Lorenzo D. 1955. ‘“‘The Impact of Western Education on the African’s Way
of Life.” In Africa Today, edited by C. Grove Haines. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
Press.

University of Wisconsin. 1963. ‘The Expansion of Teacher Education in Northern
Nigeria, 1961-1970,” unpublished. Madison: University of Wisconsin, for the
Agency for International Development, Department of State, Washington, D.C.,
under contract AID /afe-56.

Weber, Max. 1947. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York:
Oxford University Press.
