Legal Custody Arrangements and Children's Economic Welfare

Author(s): Judith A. Seltzer

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 96, No. 4 (Tan., 1991), pp. 895-929
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780735

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:59 UTC
This article investigates the effects of legal custody arrangements
on the amount of child support fathers pay after divorce, contrast-
ing the experiences of families in which parents share authority
over children through joint legal custody and those in which moth-
ers have sole legal custody. It argues that joint legal custody encour-
ages similarities between the way divorced fathers and fathers in
two-parent households invest in their children. The analysis uses
data from a representative sample of recent divorces, in which chil-
dren live with their mothers, to explore the relationship between
legal custody and legal child-support obligations (awards) and to
investigate the effects of the type of custody on child-support pay-
ments. Joint legal custody is associated with higher support awards,
but the association is explained by the higher incomes of fathers
with joint custody. Legal custody arrangements do not affect levels
of child-support payments when family characteristics and the
amount of child support awarded at divorce are taken into account.
Legal custody does, however, alter the process governing fathers’
contributions to child support. Parents’ incomes have a larger ef-
fect, and child-support awards a smaller one, on payments among
families with joint legal custody, suggesting that joint legal custody
may allow fathers greater discretion about contributions to child
support. By strengthening ties between divorced fathers and chil-
dren, joint legal custody may increase the correspondence between
parents’ and children’s socioeconomic status and result in greater
inequality among children of divorce.
are raised. Both the structure of families and the patterns of family inter-
action associated with family structure affect children’s opportunities.
Investigations of family effects on economic inequality usually address
three questions: Do children from various family structures differ in their
levels of socioeconomic welfare? To what extent are differences in levels
of welfare attributable to other factors that vary across family structures,
such as socialization practices and access to resources outside of the fam-
ily?” Finally, does family structure affect how much parents and children
resemble each other in their life chances and life-styles? The idea that
families differ in their ability to reproduce themselves has guided such
diverse sociological pursuits as status-attainment research, demographic
studies of fertility, and functional theories about the nuclear family. Re-
cently, high rates of divorce and remarriage have motivated researchers
to compare children from single- and two-parent families using the frame-
work outlined by these questions. Children’s repeated transitions be-
tween two-parent, single-parent, and parent-stepparent households com-
plicate the conceptual and methodological problems of studying the
consequences of family membership.

Families differ not only in their living arrangements but also in the
legal obligations that bind parents and children after divorce. Studies of
families usually focus on those who live together because living arrange-
ments reflect the physical setting and economic resources that directly
affect children’s welfare. The legal dimension of family relationships
may also affect children’s welfare. Within marriage, legal and physical
custody coincide. After divorce, children’s living arrangements (physical
custody) may not correspond to the allocation of parents’ legal authority
to make decisions about their children’s lives (e.g., decisions about health
care and schooling). Parents may have joint legal custody and therefore
have equal authority over their children even when only one parent lives
with the children. How parents divide their legal rights and responsibili-
ties for child care may alter the extent to which living arrangements
determine children’s access to economic resources. Children from families
in which parents share legal custody may be more involved with both of

and Human Development (HD-5876). The opinions expressed in the paper are my
own and do not necessarily reflect those of the funding agencies, the institute, or the
center. I am grateful to Robert Mare, Sara McLanahan, Nora Cate Schaeffer, and
the anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on earlier versions of this article. I also
appreciate Wendy Manning’s research assistance and Elizabeth Evanson’s editorial
advice. Requests for reprints should be sent to Judith A. Seltzer, Department of
Sociology, 1180 Observatory Drive, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
53706.

? See, e.g., Duncan and Duncan (1969), Jencks et al. (1979), Hetherington, Cox, and
Cox (1982), McLanahan (1985), McLanahan and Bumpass (1988), and Peterson and
Zill (1986).
their parents, regardless of where they live, than children in families in
which only one parent has legal custody.

In this article, I investigate the effects of custody on children’s eco-
nomic welfare after divorce by examining the relationship between alter-
native legal custody arrangements and the amount of child support fa-
thers pay. In particular, I examine the effects of joint legal custody versus
mother-only custody on child-support payments among families in which
children live with their mothers, the most common living arrangement
after divorce. By exploring a factor that may mediate the economic disad-
vantages of living with a single mother, I extend research on how family
structure affects children. My analysis builds on previous research by
examining whether custody differences in levels of child-support pay-
ments can be explained by differences in parents’ socioeconomic status
(SES) or in legal child-support awards. It also contributes to an under-
standing of the consequences of divorce by investigating how custody
arrangements alter the processes that govern parents’ investments in chil-
dren. These questions are important for social policy as well as for social
science. Although laws allowing joint custody of children after divorce
have become more common, we have little reliable information about
the consequences of joint custody. In this article, I use unique data to
explore the association between two outcomes highlighted in recent legis-
lative reforms: joint custody and child-support payments.

In the next section, I argue that adoption of joint-custody laws reflects
the traditional American value of equality of opportunity between fami-
lies, although it may have the unanticipated consequence of increasing
inequality among children whose parents are divorced. Then, I examine
the importance of custody and child support in understanding the effects
of family membership on children’s welfare and describe the data used
in this analysis. The analysis is presented in two parts: an investigation
of the relationship between legal custody and child-support awards at
the time of divorce and an investigation of the effects of custody on child-
support payments. I conclude with a discussion of the implications of the
research findings for understanding equality among American children.
single mothers suffer material disadvantages; they are more likely to
spend part of their formative years in poverty (Duncan 1988) or suffer a
dramatic decline in standard of living as compared with their predivorce,
two-parent household (Hoffman and Duncan 1988). In addition to the
loss of economic resources, children in single-mother households are less
closely supervised by both their absent fathers and their mothers, who
are struggling to maintain households on their own (Dornbusch et al.
1985; Hetherington et al. 1982; Steinberg 1987). The economic and social
costs of divorce affect children’s life chances. Compared with children
in two-parent households, children from divorced families who live with
single mothers are more likely to drop out of high school (McLanahan
1985), pose discipline problems in school (Hetherington, Cox, and Cox
1979), and engage in delinquent behavior (Matsueda and Heimer 1987).
Joint custody may ameliorate some of the disadvantages of living in a
single-mother household by diminishing the economic hardships of single
parenthood through increased child-support payments. Joint custody
may also increase adult supervision by encouraging fathers to spend more
time with their children. In its attempt to make children’s lives after
divorce as much like their lives before divorce as possible (Wallerstein
and Blakeslee 1989; Felner and Terre 1987), joint-custody legislation
embodies the American ideals of equality of opportunity for all children,
regardless of family background. Joint-custody laws “presume that chil-
dren are entitled to the joint care and custody of both parents, .. .
whether or not they are now or ever have been married” (Goldstein 1984,
p. 47). By increasing paternal involvement, joint-custody legislation may
reduce the effects of family structure on children and thereby increase
equality between children who experience divorce and those who do not.

Paradoxically, strengthening ties between fathers and children after
divorce may increase inequality for children in single-mother households
at the same time as it decreases the effects of family structure on children.
Among families who live together, fathers’ SES affects children’s values
(Alwin 1984; Kohn 1977; Rubin 1976), their health (Angel and Worobey
1988; Fuchs 1974), their progress in school (Sewell and Hauser 1975;
Gamoran and Mare 1989), and their access to extracurricular educational
opportunities (Heyns 1978; Medrich et al. 1983). Fathers who do not live
with their children have considerably less opportunity to influence their
children’s attitudes and behavior. By facilitating contact between nonres-
ident fathers and children, joint legal custody may strengthen the effects
of fathers on children. Whether this benefits the children depends on
the fathers’ characteristics.* Increased involvement with fathers who are
Joint Custody and Child-Support Payments

Effects on levels of support payments.—Advocates of joint custody
claim that by increasing fathers’ formal attachment to children through
legal recognition of paternal rights, joint custody will increase the amount
of child support that fathers pay. On the surface, these goals imply
hypotheses about custody differences in the levels of involvement and
child support contributed by nonresident fathers. The few investigations
to date of the effects of custody on child support test these hypotheses by

who are physically or emotionally abusive (Schulman and Pitt 1982; California Senate
1987).

5 Family background affects children’s welfare in a variety of ways. In particular,
growing up in a single-mother household dramatically increases the likelihood that
daughters will become single mothers themselves (McLanahan and Bumpass 1988)
and suffer the economic disadvantages associated with supporting children alone.
Whether increasing fathers’ involvement diminishes the intergenerational transmis-
sion of female heads of families is an empirical question. This article does not attempt
to assess the net effects on children’s life chances of increasing the opportunities for
paternal involvement after divorce.
examining differences in time spent with children (Wolchik, Braver, and
Sandler 1985) and in the amount of support and the regularity of pay-
ments provided by nonresident fathers (Pearson and Thoennes 1985,
1988). These studies generally find that fathers with joint custody spend
more time with children and contribute higher levels of support than
those without custody.®

Effects on the determinants of support payments.—While studies show
higher mean levels of child support among families with joint legal cus-
tody than those with mother-only custody, research has not investigated
a key assumption underlying legislative movement toward joint cus-
tody—that increased paternal participation enhances the effects of fa-
thers’ characteristics on the structure of children’s lives. Compared with
fathers in families with sole-mother custody, fathers with joint legal cus-
tody may have greater discretion about how to fulfill their responsibilities
to children. The latter may choose to spend more of their income on child
support or on other resources that affect children’s achievement (e.g.,
gifts, tuition payments, and trips to libraries), either because joint cus-
tody formally recognizes paternal responsibilities and good fathers pro-
vide for their children or because joint custody increases the informal
benefits of paternity (Weiss and Willis 1985). When fathers have lower
incomes, joint custody may allow them to pay less child support than
under other custody arrangements because they can more easily explain
their financial constraints to their children or their former wives. Al-
though acquiring joint legal custody does not by itself alter nonresident
parents’ responsibility to contribute to children’s support, either the char-
acteristics of parents who choose joint custody or the father’s status as
legal custodian may enable fathers to use greater discretion in fulfilling
their economic obligations to children. This argument implies that joint
custody conditions the effects of fathers’ characteristics on the amount
of child support children receive after divorce.

Increasing fathers’ discretion about how much child support to pay
may also strengthen the association between mothers’ income and the
amount of child support received. A mother’s ability to earn income or
the availability of a new spouse to supplement her income reduces the
amount of child support from fathers “needed” by children for survival.
Previous studies demonstrate that child-support awards (O’Neill 1985;
Teachman and Polonko 1989; Seltzer and Garfinkel 1990) and payments
(O’Neill 1985) depend, in part, on mothers’ socioeconomic characteris-
tics. Public opinion data also suggest that both parents’ financial re-
sources affect perceptions of how much child support fathers should pay
(Schaeffer 1990). Fathers with joint legal custody have more opportuni-
ties to observe their children’s needs and to learn about the standard of
living that the resident mother is able to provide for them. In addition,
mothers with higher incomes may be able to afford to forgo more child
support if the children’s father provides for them in other ways, such as
buying things for the children when he spends time with them. These
paternal contributions are more likely when fathers share legal custody.
Consequently, the effect of mothers’ income on the amount of support
received may be greater among families with joint legal custody than
among those in which mothers have sole custody.

Are custody and child support the result of common causes?—The
discussion thus far has focused on the causal relationships between cus-
tody and child-support payments. The relationship between custody and
child support, however, may also arise from their having a common
cause. Nonresident fathers with joint legal custody may pay more child
support than those without custody if both custody decisions and support
payments are the result of a third variable or set of variables. For
example, an increase in family’s SES increases the likelihood of joint
custody (Del Boca 1986; Koel et al. 1988; Seltzer 1990), and an increase
in father’s income increases child-support payments (Beller and Graham
1986; Cassetty 1978; Hill 1988). Fathers with higher educations may be
more involved in child care before divorce than fathers with less educa-
tion, given the positive association between education and egalitarian
gender-role attitudes (Cherlin and Walters 1981; Mason and Lu 1988).
The commitment of fathers with more education to continued involve-
ment with children and these fathers’ greater access to financial resources
may account for both the choice of joint custody and higher child-support
payments. Thus, there may be a positive association between joint legal
custody and child-support payments because both custody and support
depend on parents’ SES. Parents’ ability to cooperate with each other
may also account for a positive association between joint custody and
the amount of child support paid after divorce. Parents who want to
share child care may express this goal by choosing joint custody and
sharing child-support responsibilities through regular support payments.
This interpretation, then, suggests that joint custody and child-support
payments have no causal association; rather, they are the result of com-
mon predictors.
The Role of Child-Support Awards

Child-support awards constrain support payments by establishing a le-
gally enforceable lower limit to the amount of child support that nonresi-
dent parents must pay. The amount of support awarded (owed) is a
strong predictor of the amount of support paid among families with child-
support awards (Peterson and Nord 1987; Beller and Graham 1986). Few
families without awards exchange any child support, and when they do,
the dollar amount is less than among those who have awards (Roan
1989). Thus, a more complete understanding of the relationship between
custody and support payments requires information about the relation-
ship between custody and the amount of support awarded.

Custody and levels of child-support awards.—Parents decide about
custody and the level of child-support awards at the same time; divorce
laws and judicial interpretations also explicitly link custody and child-
support arrangements in divorce settlements (Mnookin and Kornhauser
1979; Wisconsin Statutes 1987, chap. 767.25). Not only are decisions
about custody and support awards made in the same negotiations, but
parents also exchange rights to custody and support as they bargain about
their settlements. Mothers claim that they trade rights to support for sole
legal custody of children (Arendell 1986; Weitzman 1985). If parents
exchange custody or rights to children and support, families with joint
legal custody are likely to have higher support awards than those in
which mothers have sole legal custody, all else being equal.

The causal relationship between parents’ decisions about custody ar-
rangements and support awards is ambiguous. Joint custody may deter-
mine the level of support awarded if joint legal custody encourages fa-
thers to agree to higher awards because their custodial responsibilities
require them to continue in the good-provider role.” Or, mothers may
seek higher levels of child support as a way of recognizing that both
parents will share the social and economic responsibilities of child rear-
ing. Alternatively, the level of support awarded may determine custody
choices if fathers with high awards seek joint legal custody as a way of
controlling how their child-support contributions are spent. Finally, both
custody and child-support awards may depend on parents’ predivorce
attitudes toward child care (e.g., when both parents value children and
view their responsibilities as lifelong) or on parents’ education and in-
come. As noted above, joint legal custody is more common among those
with higher SES, and the amount of child support awarded at divorce
depends on parents’ incomes and their ability to provide for children’s
material needs. Families with joint legal custody, therefore, may have
higher support awards because both custody and awards depend on the
same family characteristics. Regardless of the causal relationship between
custody and child-support awards, differences in payments by custody
type may instead be attributable to custody differences in levels of child
support awarded at divorce.

Effects of custody on compliance with support awards.—The impor-
tance of child-support awards in determining how much support fathers
pay is likely to depend on their legal custody arrangements. In particular,
the amounts awarded for child support may constrain payments less
when families have joint legal custody than when mothers have sole
custody. Awards may have less influence on payments if fathers with
joint custody have more discretion about how to participate in child care
by spending time with the children and providing material support. The
greater contact between fathers and children as well as between former
spouses that is associated with joint custody allows fathers more flexibil-
ity to respond to changes in their own and their former wives’ economic
circumstances. Fathers with joint custody may choose to pursue their
own self-interests or to benefit their children.* Finally, parents who share
legal custody may be more willing to renegotiate child-support arrange-
ments outside court than those who do not share custody, because the
former are likely to be more interested in cooperating in child rearing.°

Child-support awards are also less likely to constrain the support pay-
ments of fathers who have joint legal custody compared with those who
do not have custody if fathers with custody have higher awards than
they intend or are able to pay. Because child-support awards and custody
result from a negotiated settlement, fathers may promise to pay more
child support as a strategy to gain joint custody without regard to
whether they will fulfill this promise. Similarly, mothers may demand
higher support awards in exchange for giving fathers joint legal custody,
DATA

The analysis uses data from a representative sample of Wisconsin divorce
cases involving minor children. The data set, the Court Record Database
(CRD), includes detailed information about the legal aspects of divorce
for a sample of approximately 4,300 divorce and legal separation cases
involving children potentially eligible for child support. The data base
includes abstracts from the record of the initial court contact, parents’
financial records filed at the time of divorce, and records of payments
that nonresident parents make to the clerk of courts. The sample includes
cases regardless of whether the custody settlements had been stipulated
or legally contested. The divorce case or family is the unit of analysis.
The CRD sample design reflects the organization of the child-support
system in Wisconsin, which is administered at the county level. Within
counties, the sample frame for the CRD includes family-court cases in-
volving children eligible for support (i.e., cases with minor children who
have two living parents). This article uses data from five cross-sectional
samples of divorce cases that entered the court system between July 1980
and June 1985. The cases were sampled from 22 counties. '° This analysis
uses data from the first 12 months after the final divorce judgment (or
temporary order, if the case did not have a final judgment)."' (For a more
detailed discussion of sample design, see Garfinkel et al. [1988].) The
pooled cross-sectional sample includes 4,327 cases. From these, I ex-
cluded 42 cases (1% of the sample) because custody was not assigned or
there were errors in the child-support payment information. The analysis
uses data from 3,527 cases (82% of the remaining sample) in which moth-
ers had sole legal and physical custody or in which parents shared legal
custody with the mothers as the primary physical custodians.

Using data from a single state to investigate custody and child-support
practices has the advantage of limiting variation in the legal environment
affecting custody decisions. For the period represented by cases in the
CRD sample, Wisconsin law allowed joint custody when it was in the
best interest of the child (Wisconsin Statutes 1985: chap. 767.24). While
most other states also have joint-custody laws, there is wide variation in
the content of the laws and in their implementation (Freed and Walker
1987). The Wisconsin CRD improves on previous state-based samples by
including cases sampled throughout the state rather than restricted to
one or two counties (see, e.g., Weitzman 1985; Maccoby et al. 1988;
McLindon 1987; Koel et al. 1988).

On the other hand, a disadvantage of data from Wisconsin is the
inadequate representation of large urban areas. Because child-support
practices may depend on community size (Chambers 1979), the analysis
includes variables indicating the county in which a case was heard. Pre-
liminary analyses show very few significant differences in custody ar-
rangements or child-support awards and payments between Milwaukee
County, the state’s largest urban area, and smaller counties. Wisconsin
also has a much smaller population of blacks and Hispanics than the
United States as a whole. The data, therefore, are more appropriate for
generalizing to the U.S. white population’s custody and child-support
arrangements than to those of minority populations. However, a previous
analysis of divorce settlements in the Wisconsin CRD shows striking
similarity between these state data and data from the Current Population
Survey (CPS) for the entire United States on the limited information
that is available in the CPS (Seltzer and Garfinkel 1990). The unique
combination of detailed information about custody arrangements, child-
support awards, and payments allows a more thorough analysis of these
aspects of children’s lives after divorce than has been possible for the
nation as a whole. In addition, these data improve on those used in
previous studies of the economic consequences of legal custody because
the sample represents all divorces rather than a self-selected group of
families who contested custody or agreed to divorce mediation.
the courts assumed, until recently, that children would live with their legal custodian;
therefore there was no reason to obtain additional information about physical custody.
In addition, living arrangements and children’s visits with a nonresident parent are
usually the result of informal agreements that may fluctuate widely in the short term.
The difficulty of taking these fluctuations into account may mean that it is easier for
parents and courts to leave physical custody unspecified. However, Koel et al. (1988)
find that court documents for families with joint legal custody include more complete
information about how much time children will spend with each parent than do those
for sole legal custody.

'3 A more sophisticated treatment would identify the physical custodian on the basis
of a continuous indicator of the amount of time the child lives with each parent. This
would enable one to distinguish between families in which children spent all of their
time in the mother’s household from those in which children spent extended periods,
but less than six months a year, with the father. Identifying the physical custodian
by a dichotomy may result in more misclassifications among families with joint legal
custody than those in which mothers have sole legal custody, because the former are
probably more likely to arrange for children to live part, but less than half, of the
time with each parent. Despite this disadvantage, these data provide better informa-
tion about both legal and physical custody than is generally available.

'* The support variables are annualized for cases observed for fewer than 12 months.
Of those who owe support, 25% have less than 12 months of payment data.

'S Maintenance or alimony refers to payments that are made to help support the
mother; family support refers to payments for the mother and children; child support
is for children only. For recent divorce cases involving minor children, the distinctions
among these types of support are largely a matter of evaluating tax benefits for the
payer and recipient rather than issues related to parents’ involvement in child rearing.
Award and payment variables are measured in 1980 constant dollars.
income (1 if yes)* ............ceeeeeee eee .167 174 .166

(.373) (.380) (.372)
Number of months of payment data* 10.47 10.43 10.48
(2.99) (3.10) (2.97)
Unweighted N....c.cccccccscsesesesececseees 3,527 672 2,855

 

SourcE.—Wisconsin Court Record Database, cases that entered court 1980-85.

NortE.—Income and child-support variables are coded in constant dollars with 1980 as the base year.
Standard deviations are in parentheses.

* Statistics are calculated for the subset of cases with support awards. Unweighted N for all cases
with awards = 2,932; for joint legal custody = 576; for sole-mother custody = 2,356.
more reliable estimates of official child-support payments than are avail-
able from retrospective survey reports. Official court documents underes-
timate contributions to child support because they do not record pay-
ments or contributions the nonresident parent makes directly to the
children or to the resident parent or payments to third parties who pro-
vide the children with goods and services, such as school fees or rent
payments. Underestimates arise in two instances: when the courts ap-
prove parents’ decisions to have the nonresident parent make periodic
support payments privately and when nonresident parents make extra
payments in addition to the periodic support that they provide through
the courts. For this sample, only 2.4% of the cases with awards have
court-sanctioned private payment agreements (2.1% for cases in which
mothers have sole legal custody and 3.4% for cases with joint legal cus-
tody).' I exclude these cases from the analysis. Unfortunately, the CRD
does not include information about extra payments that nonresident par-
ents provide to support their children.’”

Table 1 shows that most divorcing parents in Wisconsin have support
awards; 84% of cases with either sole-mother custody or joint legal cus-
tody have some type of support award. The awards are not, however,
very large, averaging approximately $2,800 for the first year after di-
vorce. As is well known, payments are also low (Weitzman 1988). Resi-
dent mothers with support awards receive an average of $2,191 a year.'®
Table 1 also shows that child-support arrangements differ for the two
legal custody arrangements. Families with joint legal custody are more
likely to have support awards than those in which mothers have legal
Independent Variables: Family and Divorce Characteristics

The analysis considers the effects of SES and family composition on
custody, awards, and payments. Descriptive statistics for these character-
istics are presented in the section of table 1 labeled “Family characteris-
tics at divorce.” Socioeconomic status is measured by each parent’s an-
nual income at the time of the final judgment. By treating each parent’s
income separately rather than combining the incomes, the analysis takes
into account the individual economic resources that parents can use to
influence custody and support decisions.’? Fathers may use income to
acquire joint legal custody and to avoid child-support obligations (i.e.,
by lowering the amount of child support owed). Alternatively, fathers
who care about their children’s economic welfare may use their higher
incomes to support larger awards. Mothers may use their incomes to
acquire sole legal custody as a way of protecting their postdivorce auton-
omy. Mothers’ economic resources may increase their ability to acquire
larger support awards, although studies suggest that when mothers have
higher incomes they are awarded less child support, perhaps because
they are better able to support children as single parents (Seltzer and
Garfinkel 1990).

Approximately one-third of the cases in this sample had missing infor-
mation on either the mother’s or father’s income. These cases were as-
signed the mean sample income for mothers and fathers, respectively.
Cases with missing information on income are identified by dummy vari-
ables in the multivariate analyses reported below, and the discussion
considers explanations for mean differences in custody and child-support
arrangements for those with and without income data. In addition, a
reanalysis of the data for cases with income information for both parents
provides results that are quite similar to the results for the full sample
reported in tables 2 and 3 below. A few of the custody differences in the
determinants of child-support payments are not, however, statistically
significant for the smaller subsample of cases with income information.
Although it has the disadvantage of lacking income data for a substantial
minority of cases, the CRD includes more systematic information about
both parents’ financial resources, custody arrangements, child-support
awards, and payments than is available in other data sources.

Table 1 shows that families with joint legal custody have higher aver-
age incomes of both mothers and fathers than families in which mothers
have legal custody. The difference by custody type, however, is much
larger for father’s income than for mother’s income. Father’s annual
income at divorce is approximately $3,400 less in mother-custody families
than in joint-custody families, while the custody difference in mother’s
income is less than $200 a year.

The analysis also includes several measures of family characteristics:
the number of children age 18 or younger in the family, the age of the
eldest minor child, and the duration of the couple’s marriage. These
variables indicate parents’ involvement in child rearing and their invest-
ments in the predivorce family. Previous studies suggest that having
older children increases fathers’ chances of seeking custody (Weitzman
1985), perhaps because fathers and older children have a longer history
of sharing their lives. However, I find little difference by custody type
in the ages or number of children involved in the divorce case (table 1).”°

Aspects of the divorce process also affect child support and custody
outcomes. When both parents are represented by attorneys, the parties
may be somewhat more likely to seek joint custody. Divorce cases in
which only the mother is represented are more likely to be cases in which
the father has deserted the family than cases in which both parents have
legal representatives. In addition, parents who are concerned about
maintaining an equal division of joint investments, including investments
in children, are likely to seek legal advice as a way of insuring their rights
in a divorce settlement.

Finally, the analysis of child-support payments includes a variable
ANALYSIS PLAN

The conceptual model that informs this analysis is summarized in fig-
ure 1. I follow the convention of indicating causation by straight arrows
and correlation by curved arrows. The diagram does not summarize
hypotheses about custody differences in the effects of the independent
variables on payments. The figure shows that child-support payments
depend on family characteristics, legal custody arrangements, and child-
support awards. I present the analysis in two parts to take account of
the intervening process in which custody and support awards are estab-
lished. The first part investigates this association between joint legal
custody and the amount of child support awarded at divorce. I estimate
two equations for the effects of family and case characteristics on custody
and child-support awards. The model recognizes the joint determination
of custody and child-support decisions by allowing the disturbances for
the custody and support-award equations to be correlated. The analysis
of custody and child-support awards investigates whether families with
joint legal custody have higher awards than those with mother custody.
If so, custody differences in child-support awards may explain higher
support payments among families with joint custody. The second part of
the analysis examines the effects of joint legal custody on the amount of
child support paid among families with child-support awards. It develops
models of payments that take into account the hypothesis that the effects
of parents’ income, award amounts, and family structure may vary by
legal custody type.

Because custody is a dichotomous variable in this analysis, the custody
equation is estimated by a probit analysis (Aldrich and Nelson 1984).
Both of the child-support variables, amount of support awarded at di-
vorce and amount paid after divorce, are censored at the lower bound,
zero. The analysis uses Tobit analysis to evaluate the linear effects of the
independent variables on support practices while taking into account
the censored distributions on the dependent variables (Maddala 1983).
Parameter estimates from Tobit models can be interpreted like OLS re-
gression coefficients, the net change in the latent dependent variable
expected per unit change in the independent variable. Two-equation
models including Tobits are estimated in HOTZTRAN (Avery and Hotz
1985), and single-equation models are estimated in LIMDEP (Greene
1988) with maximum-likelihood procedures.
TABLE 2

ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECTS OF FAMILY AND CASE CHARACTERISTICS ON THE AMOUNT
OF SUPPORT OWED AND JOINT LEGAL CusToDy WHEN MOTHERS HAVE
PuysicaL CusTopy

 

 

DEPENDENT VARIABLES

 

Amount Joint
Owed Legal
(thousands Custody
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES of dollars) (1 if yes)
Father’s annual income (thousands
of dollars)........ .186* .139 x 1071*

 

bata we ann-2 men we anv
consistent with the patterns in table 1.?? When fathers have higher in-
comes, the probability of joint legal custody increases. Father’s income
also increases the amount of child support owed. Mother’s income does
not affect custody, perhaps because her income reflects two phenomena.
On the one hand, mothers with higher incomes may use their economic
resources to seek sole legal custody. On the other hand, mother’s income
may reflect an effect of education. Perhaps as a result of more egalitarian
gender-role attitudes (Mason and Lu 1988), mothers with higher educa-
tions may be more willing to involve fathers in postdivorce child rearing
through joint custody than mothers with less education. In accordance
with findings from previous research, mother’s higher income diminishes
the amount of her child-support award. Each $1,000 of mother’s annual
income decreases the amount of support awarded annually by nearly $80,
while each $1,000 of father’s income increases the award by about $190,
other things being equal. The negative association between mother’s in-
come and the amount of child support awarded may reflect parents’ and
judges’ belief that mothers with their own incomes can afford to support
their children by themselves or “need” less child support.

Cases without information on father’s income are more likely to have
awarded mothers sole legal custody than to have awarded joint legal
custody. Missing information on father’s income may be more common
in cases in which the father does not appear at the divorce hearing than
those in which both parents are present. When one parent does not ap-
pear, the other is more likely to receive legal custody of the children. In
cases of desertion, the children are already in the mother’s physical cus-
tody. For the same reasons, cases with missing information on father’s
income also have lower child-support awards.

When both parents have attorneys, child-support awards are higher.
The number of children in the family increases the amount of child sup-
port awarded but at a rate that diminishes the more children there are.
The number and age of children may not affect joint legal custody be-
cause the analysis controls for physical custody. Children’s ages are more
important predictors of physical custody than of legal custody (Seltzer
1990).

The results in table 2 show that SES affects legal custody type as well
as the amount of child support awarded at divorce. That a nonresident
father’s higher income increases the chance of joint legal custody as well
as raises child-support awards accounts for most of the positive associa-
tion between custody and child-support awards. The zero-order associa-
tion between legal custody and the amount of child support awarded is
.137. Once common predictors such as income are taken into account,
there is still a very small positive residual association between joint legal
custody and the amount of child support awarded (p = .024), but the
association is no longer statistically significant. These findings suggest
that families with joint legal custody receive higher support awards be-
cause the fathers in these families have higher incomes. Once differences
in income are taken into account, the difference in the amount of support
awarded to families in which mothers have sole legal custody and in
those in which parents share legal custody is not statistically significant.”
TABLE 3

Tosit ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECTS OF FAMILY AND CASE CHARACTERISTICS ON AMOUNT
OF SUPPORT PAID IN FirsT YEAR BY LEGAL CusTODY

 

 

Type oF LEGAL Custopy TEST OF
DIFFERENCE IN
INDEPENDENT VARIABLE Joint Mother COEFFICIENTS

 

Father’s annual income
(thousands of dollars) ... .377 X 1071* .184 x 107'* *

pane wo anrlh man we ann-2r
characteristics. Therefore, the results of the Tobit models of child-sup-
port payments are reported separately for each legal custody type in table
3. The table indicates the coefficients that differ across custody types at
a statistically significant level, that is, where the interaction coefficient
in the pooled model is at least twice its standard error (SE).

The amount of support awarded has a large positive effect on the
amount of support paid among families with both types of legal custody.
The magnitude of the coefficient for the effect of awards on payments
indicates that a $1,000 change in the amount of support awarded in-
creases payments by $400-—$530 a year. The effect of the amount of the
award reflects, in part, constraints imposed by the legal system. Child-
support awards also reflect an indirect effect of parents’ incomes (table
2). That the coefficients for the amount of support owed are much less
than 1 implies that compliance with support awards is much less than
perfect.

When the amount of child support that fathers owe is taken into ac-
count, parents’ incomes at divorce still affect the amount of support that
mothers receive in the first year after divorce. Fathers’ financial resources
affect their ability to pay, while mothers’ resources reflect children’s need
for support. Incomes have an independent effect on payments even after
I control for the amount of the child-support award because awards do
not correspond perfectly to either fathers’ ability and motivation to pay
or to children’s needs. In addition, income effects may reflect educational
differences in parents’ commitment to children and their preferences
about how to manage child-rearing responsibilities after divorce. For
example, father’s education may be positively associated with the desire
to remain involved with his children. Father’s income increases the
amount of support paid, while mother’s income decreases payments (ta-
ble 3). Among families with joint custody, a $1,000 increase in father’s
income raises payments by nearly $38 a year, when other factors are held
constant; the same increase in income for mothers decreases child-support
payments by $63. Within each custody type, an increase in mother’s
income reduces the amount of support she receives by nearly twice as
much as the rise in payments from a comparable increase in father’s
income, when other factors are held constant. This pattern is the opposite
of that in table 2 in which father’s income has a much larger effect than
mother’s income on the amount of child support awarded. When both
direct and indirect effects of incomes are taken into account, the data
show that father’s income increases payments slightly more than
mother’s income decreases them for both legal custody types. For families
with joint custody, the total effect on payments of father’s annual income
is to increase payments by $113 for every $1,000 of income (.186 [.405]
+ .038); the total effect of mother’s income is to decrease payments by
$94 per $1,000 of her income. For families in which mothers have sole
custody, the total effect of a $1,000 increase in father’s income raises
payments by $118, while a comparable increase in mother’s income de-
creases payments by $76 a year. That father’s income is a more important
predictor of child-support payments than is mother’s income suggests
that his ability to pay is more important than children’s needs for
support.

Another measure of the need for child support, number of children in
the family, increases the amount of support paid, but the increase is not
statistically significant.’* This finding contrasts with the effects of number
of children on the amount of support awarded (see table 2). The data
show that the number of children covered by a child-support award
affects payments indirectly but not directly.

The collection procedure affects the amount of child support paid.
Families in which child support is automatically withheld from the non-
resident father’s earnings pay more support than those in which fathers
pay the support themselves. Finally, the data suggest a small reduction
in payments toward the end of the first year after divorce. Fathers in
cases observed for the full 12-month period pay slightly less support than
those observed for part of the period.?> The decline in payments over
time is only statistically significant among families in which mothers have
sole legal custody.

These results show that child-support payments depend on the legal
constraints of a child-support award, parents’ resources, and children’s
needs. The most striking finding is that the direct effect of mother’s
income on payments is larger than the effect of father’s income when the
analysis controls for awards. However, once the effects of parents’ in-
comes on awards are taken into account, the total effect of father’s in-
come exceeds the total effect of mother’s income, regardless of custody
type. This suggests that father’s ability and motivation to provide sup-
port are more important in determining child-support payments than is
mother’s need for support, although mother’s income probably does not
Interactions between Custody and the Determinants of Payments

While the general pattern of effects of family and legal characteristics on
payments is similar across custody types, the magnitude of effects differs
considerably between families with joint legal custody and those with
sole-mother custody. Parents’ incomes have bigger effects on payments
among families with joint legal custody. The coefficients on parents’
incomes are approximately twice as large for cases with joint custody as
for those with mother custody. In contrast, the amount of child support
awarded affects payments more among those with sole-mother custody
than those with joint custody. These differences across legal custody
types are statistically significant. Fathers with joint legal custody appear
to use more discretion concerning how much money to invest in children
than fathers without custody. That the amount of child support awarded
has a stronger effect on payments among families with mother custody
also supports the view that fathers with joint legal custody are less con-
strained by the legal restrictions of child-support obligations.

These results imply that there is no important main effect of legal
custody arrangement on the amount of support paid. Families with sole-
mother custody and those with joint legal custody do not differ in the
mean amount of child support paid in the year after divorce, once other
factors are taken into account. The higher average payments that other
studies have found among families with joint legal custody may be attrib-
uted to the absence of adequate controls for socioeconomic differences
across custody types.

Custody differences in the effects of fathers’ and mothers’ incomes on
payments can be seen more clearly in a simulation. I predict the amount
of child support that fathers in each custody type will pay for families
with various combinations of father’s and mother’s incomes in table 4.
The simulation uses coefficients from the within-custody-type models
summarized in table 3. Income levels for parents are defined in the notes
to table 4. The table refers to “high,” “average,” and “low” incomes
of fathers and mothers compared with the incomes of other fathers and
mothers, respectively. The simulation uses a different standard to define
fathers’ and mothers’ income levels to take account of sex differences in
the distributions of income in this subsample. Other variables are evalu-
TABLE 4

SIMULATION OF ANNUAL CHILD-SUPPORT PAYMENTS BY CusTODY TYPE

 

 

TYPE OF LEGAL
CusTropy

 

-_ DIFFERENCE INCOME
Joint Mother IN PAYMENTS RatTIo
FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS ($) ($) (Joint — Mother) (Mother/Father)

All characteristics at sample

LLG ANS eetereeccenisesceretseeeneter 2,263 2,219 44 49
Father’s income high, mother’s

income high .......... pecan 2,514 2,328 186 40
Father’s income high, mother’s

income average ..............00eee 2,726 = 2,473 253 25
Father’s income high, mother’s

income low ............:ccseeeeeee 2,972 2,621 351 Al
Father’s income average,

mother’s income high ........... 2,044 2,078 — 34 78
Father's income average,

mother’s income low ............ 2,499 2,363 136 21
Father’s income low, mother’s

income high .............:::060000 1,905 1,998 —93 1.13
Father’s income low, mother’s

income average .............66606 2,118 2,137 -19 71
Father’s income low, mother’s

income low ............cceseeeeeeee 2,341 2,277 64 30

 

Note.—Parameters used in calculations come from within-group models summarized in table 3.
Sample is restricted to cases with support awards. Income data refer to incomes at the time of divorce.
Father’s income and mother’s income are evaluated at different levels. Other characteristics are held at
the means for the pooled sample. Income levels are defined as high = 1.5 SD above the sample mean
for cases with awards for fathers ($31,915), 1 SD above the sample mean for mothers ($12,790). Average
= sample mean ($16,501 for fathers, $8,096 for mothers). Low income = .5 SD below the mean for
fathers ($11,363), 1 SD below the mean for mothers ($3,402).
$1000's

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.8

A]
2.6 [|

2.4 ZF =,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2

 

 

 

Low

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ls Avera
2 ther’s Income
High

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.8
Low Average High Low Average High
Father’s Income
Joint Custody Mother Custody

Fic. 2.—Effects of parents’ incomes on child-support payments by custody
type.
the fathers have lower incomes, the custody difference in support pay-
ments diminishes and in some cases reverses, giving a slight advantage
to children in families with mother custody.

When both parents have average incomes, there is a very slight eco-
nomic advantage for children whose parents have joint legal custody
(table 4). Nonresident fathers with joint custody pay $44 more per year
in child support than do fathers in families with sole-mother custody.”*
The economic advantage to children of joint legal custody increases when
fathers have high incomes and when fathers’ incomes are high relative
to mothers’ incomes.

Children whose parents have joint legal custody appear to benefit more
from their fathers’ higher income than children in mother-custody fami-
lies. These data also show that the economic benefits to children of joint
legal custody depend on their mother’s income. In particular, when her
income is high relative to father’s income, children benefit more from
mother custody than from joint legal custody. The last column of table 4
shows the ratio of mother’s income to father’s at divorce. When mother’s
income is high relative to father’s, the joint-custody advantage reverses,
so that fathers with joint legal custody pay less child support on average
than those in families with mother custody. For example, when mother’s
income is higher than father’s income, fathers pay nearly $100 less child
support annually among families with joint custody than among those in
which mothers have custody ($1,905 vs. $1,998). As the ratio of mother’s
income to father’s declines, joint custody provides more financial benefits
to children. These findings suggest that inequality in parents’ resources
affects the consequences of legal custody decisions for child-support pay-
ments. When fathers have more economic resources relative to mothers,
fathers may use these resources to acquire rights to children through joint
legal custody. Once they have legal custody rights, joint custody may
encourage fathers to invest more in their children than fathers who are
not legal custodians. However, when mothers have high incomes relative
to fathers, joint legal custody is associated with lower child-support pay-
ments. That the economic benefits to children of joint custody depend
on inequality in parents’ resources suggests that mothers’ interests and
children’s interests do not always coincide.

These results also show that custody effects on child-support payments
are relatively small compared with the total amounts paid. Custody dif-
ferences in payments are very small compared with the costs of raising
children”? or with nonresident fathers’ incomes. Fathers with joint legal
custody who have high incomes and were married to women who had
low incomes at divorce pay $2,972 a year in regular child-support pay-
ments. This is only about 12% more than the average amount that fathers
without custody would pay under the same income conditions ($2,621, a
difference of $351). Thus, while joint legal custody may be in children’s
economic interest when fathers have high incomes, both absolutely and
relative to mothers, the benefit is worth less than $30 a month in regular
child-support payments. Nevertheless, because annual child-support
payments are so low, the financial benefits to joint custody may be equiv-
alent to more than one month’s worth of regular payments.

The results described thus far are consistent with the view that joint
legal custody facilitates fathers’ discretion about investments in child
care. Greater discretion results in inequality in child-support payments,
much of it attributable to variation among families in measured charac-
teristics, particularly parents’ incomes. Joint legal custody may also in-
crease inequality among children in unmeasured ways. Annual child-
support payments vary more widely among families with joint legal cus-
tody than among families in which mothers have sole legal custody, even
after differences in parents’ SES and child-support awards are taken into
account. A comparison of data in tables 1 and 3 shows that measured
characteristics reduce the variability in payments within custody types
but do not alter the ratio of variation between custody types. Table 3
shows that the standard error of estimate (co) for the joint custody equa-
tion is 2.63, or $2,630 of child support, compared with 1.78, or $1,780,
for families with mother custody. This ratio, 1.48, is approximately equal
to the ratio of the SDs in amount of support paid, 1.52, shown in columns
2 and 3 of table 1 (3.711/2.445). That the greater variability in payments
among families with joint custody persists within levels of parents’ in-
comes further supports the view that joint legal custody may encourage
fathers to make child-support contributions contingent on their own per-
sonal circumstances.
divorce than those with lower incomes, when mothers’ income and vari-
ous other family characteristics are taken into account. Families with
joint legal custody have higher average child-support awards than those
with mother custody, but income differences between families with dif-
ferent custody arrangements explain the higher support awards associ-
ated with joint legal custody.

The effects of custody on child-support payments are more complex.
Families with joint legal custody and those in which mothers have sole
legal custody do not differ in the level of support paid after divorce, once
other factors are taken into account. The legal custody arrangement does,
however, affect the determinants of child-support payments. Compared
to mother-custody families, when parents have joint legal custody, child-
support payments are more responsive to fathers’ and mothers’ incomes,
and payments are less responsive to the legal constraints of child-support
awards. My findings also show that even after differences in measured
characteristics are taken into account, child-support payments are more
variable among families with joint custody than among those with sole-

mother custody.
The greater variability in payments associated with both measured and

unmeasured characteristics supports the view that joint custody increases
parents’ discretion about how much child support to pay. However, the
greater variation in payments may also reflect greater heterogeneity
among families who adopt joint legal custody. Families with joint cus-
tody may adopt this arrangement because they prefer to cooperate in
child rearing after divorce or as a solution to conflict about which parent
should get sole custody of the children. Whether parents seek joint cus-
tody voluntarily or accept it as an unhappy compromise is an unmeasured
source of variation in child-support payments. Unfortunately, we have
no direct evidence about parents’ preferences concerning legal custody
and how these vary among families whose divorce settlements allocate
custody to both parents or to only one.

While these data show that children benefit economically from joint
legal custody when their fathers have high incomes, they also show that
the benefits are small. The data used in this analysis, however, may
underestimate custody differences in child-support payments because of-
ficial court records do not document such informal transfers as gifts and
payments to third parties (e.g., payments for dental care and school fees).
Fathers with joint legal custody are probably more likely to contribute
informally than those without custody. Similarly, when parents have
joint legal custody, children may be more likely to spend extended periods
of time in their father’s household even though they spend most of the
year with their mother. The court records of child-support payments,
therefore, are likely to underestimate the effects of joint legal custody
REFERENCES

Aldrich, John H., and Forrest D. Nelson. 1984. Linear Probability, Logit, and Probit
Models. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.

Alwin, Duane F. 1984. “Trends in Parental Socialization Values: Detroit, 1958—
1983.” American Journal of Sociology 90:359-82.

Angel, Ronald, and Jacqueline Lowe Worobey. 1988. “Single Motherhood and Chil-
dren’s Health.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 29:38-52.

Arendell, Terry. 1986. Mothers and Divorce: Legal, Economic, and Social Dilemmas.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Avery, Roger B., and V. Joseph Hotz. 1985. “HOTZTRAN User’s Manual.” Un-
published manuscript. Economic Research Center, NORC, Chicago.

Beller, Andrea H., and John W. Graham. 1986. “The Determinants of Child Support
Income.” Social Science Quarterly 67:353-64.

California Senate. Task Force on Family Equity. 1987. Final Report. Sacramento,
Calif., June.

Cassetty, Judith. 1978. Child Support and Public Policy: Securing Support from Ab-
sent Fathers. Lexington, Mass: Lexington.

Chambers, David L. 1979. Making Fathers Pay. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Cherlin, Andrew J., and Pamela Barnhouse Walters. 1981. “Trends in United States
Men’s and Women’s Sex-Role Attitudes.” American Sociological Review
46:453-60.

Del Boca, Daniela. 1986. “Children as Public Goods: An Economic Approach to
Child Support Payments in Relation to the Custody Decision.” Discussion Paper
820-86. University of Wisconsin—Madison, Institute for Research on Poverty.

Dornbusch, Sanford M., J. Merrill Carlsmith, Steven J. Bushwall, Philip L. Ritter,
Herbert Leiderman, Albert H. Hastorf, and Ruth T. Gross. 1985. “Single Parents,
Extended Households, and the Control of Adolescents.” Child Development
56:326-41.
Duncan, Beverly, and Otis Dudley Duncan. 1969. “Family Stability and Occupa-
tional Success.” Social Problems 16:273-85.

Duncan, Greg J. 1988. “The Economic Environment of Childhood.” Paper presented
at the conference “Poverty and Children,” Lawrence, Kans.

Espenshade, Thomas J. 1984. Investing in Children: New Estimates of Parental Ex-
penditures. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

Felner, Robert D., and Lisa Terre. 1987. “Child Custody Dispositions and Chil-
dren’s Adaptation Following Divorce.” Pp. 106-53 in Psychology and Child Cus-
tody Determinations: Knowledge, Roles, and Expertise, edited by Lois A. Weith-
orn. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Fineman, Martha. 1988. “Dominant Discourse, Professional Language, and Legal
Change in Child Custody Decisionmaking.” Harvard Law Review 101:727-74.
Freed, Doris Jonas, and Timothy B. Walker. 1987. “Family Law in the Fifty States.”

Family Law Quarterly 20:439-587.

Fuchs, Victor R. 1974. Who Shall Live? Health, Economics, and Social Choice. New
York: Basic.

Furstenberg, Frank F., Christine Winquist Nord, James L. Peterson, and Nicholas
Zill. 1983. “The Life Course of Children of Divorce.” American Sociological Re-
view 48:656-68.

Gamoran, Adam, and Robert D. Mare. 1989. “Secondary School Tracking and Edu-
cational Inequality: Compensation, Reinforcement, or Neutrality.” American Jour-
nal of Sociology 94:1146-95.

Garfinkel, Irwin. 1986. “Utilization and Effects of Immediate Income Withholding
and the Percentage-of-Income Standard.” Special Report 42, University of Wiscon-
sin—Madison, Institute for Research on Poverty.

. 1988. “Child Support Assurance: A New Tool for Achieving Social Security.”
Pp. 328-42 in Child Support: From Debt Collection to Social Policy, edited by
Alfred J. Kahn and Sheila B. Kamerman. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

Garfinkel, Irwin, Thomas J. Corbett, Maurice MacDonald, Sara McLanahan, Philip
K. Robins, Nora Cate Schaeffer, and Judith A. Seltzer. 1988. “Evaluation Design
for the Wisconsin Child Support Assurance Demonstration.” Report produced un-
der contract with the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services. Univer-
sity of Wisconsin—Madison, Institute for Research on Poverty.

Garfinkel, Irwin, and Elizabeth Uhr. 1984. “A New Approach to Child Support.”
The Public Interest 75:111—22.

Goldstein, Joseph. 1984. “In Whose Best Interest?” Pp. 47-55 in Joint Custody and
Shared Parenting, edited by Jay Folberg. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of National
Affairs, Association of Family and Conciliation Courts.

Greene, William H. 1988. LIMDEP: Version 5. New York: William H. Greene.

Hetherington, E. Mavis, Martha Cox, and Roger Cox. 1979. “Play and Social Interac-
tion in Children Following Divorce.” Journal of Social Issues 35:26-49.

. 1982. “Effects of Divorce on Parents and Children.” Pp. 233-88 in Nontra-
ditional Families, edited by M. E. Lamb. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Heyns, Barbara. 1978. Summer Learning and the Effects of Schooling. New York:
Academic Press.

Hill, Martha S. 1985. “Child Support: What Absent Fathers Do and Could Provide.”
Paper presented at the annual meetings of the Population Association of America,
Boston.

. 1988. “The Role of Economic Resources and Dual-Family Status in Child
Support Payments.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the Population
Association of America, New Orleans, April. Revised, May.

Hoffman, Saul D., and Greg J. Duncan. 1988. “What Are the Economic Conse-
quences of Divorce?” Demography 25:641—45.
Ilfeld, Frederic W., Jr., Holly Zingale Ilfeld, and John R. Alexander. 1984. “Does
Joint Custody Work? A First Look at Outcome Data on Relitigation.” Pp. 136-41
in Joint Custody and Shared Parenting, edited by Jay Folberg. Washington, D.C.:
Bureau of National Affairs, Association of Family and Conciliation Courts.

Jencks, Christopher, Susan Bartlett, Mary Corcoran, James Crouse, David Eagles-
field, Gregory Jackson, Kent McClelland, Peter Mueser, Michael Olneck, Joseph
Schwartz, Sherry Ward, and Jill Williams. 1979. Who Gets Ahead? Determinants
of Economic Success in America. New York: Basic.

Koel, Amy, Susan C. Clark, W. P. C. Phear, and Barbara B. Hauser. 1988. “A
Comparison of Joint and Sole Legal Custody Agreements.” Pp. 73-90 in Impact
of Divorce, Single Parenting, and Stepparenting on Children, edited by E. Mavis
Hetherington and Josephine D. Arasteh. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Kohn, Melvin L. 1977. Class and Conformity: A Study in Values, 2d ed. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Lazear, Edward P., and Robert T. Michael. 1988. Allocation of Income within the
Household. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Maccoby, Eleanor R., Charlene E. Depner, and Robert H. Mnookin. 1988. “Cus-
tody of Children Following Divorce.” Pp. 91-114 in Impact of Divorce, Single
Parenting, and Stepparenting on Children, edited by E. Mavis Hetherington and
Josephine D. Arasteh. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

MacDonald, Maurice. 1986. “Objectives, Procedures, and Sampling Results for
CHIPPS .” Unpublished manuscript. University of Wisconsin—Madison, Institute
for Research on Poverty.

Maddala, G. S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Mason, Karen Oppenheim, and Yu-hsia Lu. 1988. “Attitudes toward Women’s Fa-
milial Roles: Changes in the United States, 1977-1985.” Gender and Society
2:39-57.

Matsueda, Ross L., and Karen Heimer. 1987. “Race, Family Structure, and Delin-
quency.” American Sociological Review 52:826—40.

McDonald, John F., and Robert A. Moffitt. 1980. “The Uses of Tobit Analysis.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 62:318-21.

McLanahan, Sara. 1985. “Family Structure and the Reproduction of Poverty.” Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology 90:873-901.

. 1989. “The Two Faces of Divorce: Women’s and Children’s Interests.”
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association,
San Francisco.

McLanahan, Sara, and Larry Bumpass. 1988. “Intergenerational Consequences of
Family Disruption.” American Journal of Sociology 94:130-52.

McLindon, James B. 1987. “Separate but Unequal: The Economic Disaster of Di-
vorce for Women and Children.” Family Law Quarterly 21:351—409.

Medrich, Elliott A., Judith A. Roizen, Victor Rubin, and Stuart Buckley. 1983. The
Serious Business of Growing Up: A Study of Children’s Lives Outside of School.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Mnookin, Robert H., and Lewis Kornhauser. 1979. “Bargaining in the Shadow of
the Law.” Yale Law Journal 88:950-97.

Novinson, Steven L. 1983. “Post-divorce Visitation: Untying the Triangular Knot.”
University of Illinois Law Review 1983:121—200.

O'Neill, June. 1985. “Determinants of Child Support.” Unpublished report. Wash-
ington, D.C., Urban Institute.

Pearson, Jessica, and Nancy Thoennes. 1985. “Child Custody, Child Support
Arrangements and Child Support Payment Patterns.” Juvenile and Family Court
Journal 36:49-56.
. 1988. “Supporting Children after Divorce: The Influence of Custody on Sup-
port Levels and Payments.” Family Law Quarterly 22:319-39.

Peterson, James L., and Christine Winquist Nord. 1987. “The Regular Receipt
of Child Support: A Multistep Process.” Unpublished report prepared by Child
Trends, Inc. Washington, D.C., Office of Child Support Enforcement.

Peterson, James L., and Nicholas Zill. 1986. “Marital Disruption and Behavior Prob-
lems in Children.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 48:295—307.

Phear, W. Patrick C., James C. Beck, Barbara B. Hauser, Susan C. Clark, and Ruth
A. Whitney. 1984. “An Empirical Study of Custody Agreements: Joint versus Sole
Legal Custody.” Pp. 142-156 in Joint Custody and Shared Parenting, edited by
Jay Folberg. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of National Affairs, Association of Family
and Conciliation Courts.

Roan, Carol Lynn. 1989. “The Relationship between Child Support Awards and
Child Support Payments.” Master’s thesis. University of Wisconsin—Madison,
Department of Sociology.

Rubin, Lillian Breslow. 1976. Worlds of Pain: Life in the Working-Class Family. New
York: Basic.

Schaeffer, Nora Cate. 1990. “Principles of Justice in Judgments about Child Sup-
port.” Social Forces 69 (1): 157-79.

Schepard, Andrew. 1985. “Taking Children Seriously: Promoting Cooperative Cus-
tody after Divorce.” Texas Law Review 64:687—788.

Schulman, Joanne, and Valerie Pitt. 1982. “Second Thoughts on Joint Child Custody:
Analysis of Legislation and Its Implications for Women and Children.” Golden
Gate University Law Review 12:539-77.

Seltzer, Judith A. 1990. “Legal and Physical Custody in Recent Divorces.” Social
Science Quarterly 71 (2): 250-66.

Seltzer, Judith A., and Irwin Garfinkel. 1990. “Inequality in Divorce Settlements: An
Investigation of Property Settlements and Child Support Awards.” Social Science
Research 19:82~-111.

Seltzer, Judith A., Nora Cate Schaeffer, and Hong-Wen Charng. 1989. “Family
Ties after Divorce: The Relationship between Visiting and Paying Child Support.”
Journal of Marriage and the Family 51:1013-31.

Sewell, William H., and Robert M. Hauser. 1975. Education, Occupation, and Earn-
ings: Achievement in the Early Career. New York: Academic Press.

Stack, Carol B. 1976. “Who Owns the Child? Divorce and Child Custody Decisions
in Middle-Class Families.” Social Problems 23:505—-15.

Steinberg, Laurence. 1987. “Single Parents, Stepparents and the Susceptibility of
Adolescents to Antisocial Peer. Pressure.” Child Development 58:269-75.

Teachman, Jay D., and Karen Polonko. 1989. “Providing for the Children: Socioeco-
nomic Resources of Parents and Child Support in the United States.” Paper pre-
sented at the Institute for Research on Poverty Small Grants Conference, Madison,
Wis.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1989. “Child Support and Alimony: 1985.” Current
Population Reports, ser. P-23, no. 154. Suppl. report. Washington, D.C.: Govern-
ment Printing Office.

Wallerstein, Judith S., and Sandra Blakeslee. 1989. Second Chances: Men, Women,
and Children a Decade after Divorce. New York: Ticknor & Fields.

Weiss, Yoram, and Robert J. Willis. 1985. “Children as Collective Goods and Divorce
Settlements.” Journal of Labor Economics 3:268—92.

Weitzman, Lenore J. 1985. The Divorce Revolution: The Unexpected Social and
Economic Consequences for Women and Children in America. New York: Free

Press.
. 1988. “Child Support Myths and Reality.” Pp. 251-76 in Child Support:
From Debt Collection to Social Policy, edited by Alfred J. Kahn and Sheila B.
Kamerman. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

Wisconsin Statutes. 1985. Actions Affecting the Child. Chap. 767.24, 767.29. Madi-
son, Wis.

. 1987. Actions Affecting the Child. Chap. 767.25. Madison, Wis.

Wolchik, Sharlene A., Sanford L. Braver, and Irwin N. Sandler. 1985. “Maternal
versus Joint Custody: Children’s Postseparation Experiences and Adjustment.”
Journal of Clinical Child Psychology 14:5-10.
