Ecological Metaphors as Scientific Boundary Work: Innovation and Authority in Interwar
Sociology and Biology

Author(s): Emanuel Gaziano

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Tan., 1996), pp. 874-907
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782233

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:09 UTC
INTRODUCTION

The theme of the 1925 meeting of the American Sociological Society
(ASS) was “The City.” Robert E. Park began his presidential address,
“The Concept of Position in Sociology,” with reference to the Danish
plant ecologist Eugenius Warming. Warming’s observations, Park said,
“later became the point of departure for a series of investigations which
have since become familiar under the title ‘Ecology’ ” (1926, p. 1). The
concern of human ecology, Park asserted, is not simply “man, but the
community; not man’s relation to the earth which he inhabits, but his
relations to other men” (p. 2). While leading the session devoted to the
topic Roderick McKenzie, a former Park student, outlined the new ap-
proach in his landmark paper “The Scope of Human Ecology.” Sum-
ming up his excitement about the meeting in a letter to his wife, Park
wrote: “It seems that we have succeeded in making ecology popular. We
are almost the founders of a new science, McKenzie and myself. Every-
one, I learned from New York, is now talking about the ‘ecological’
aspect of everything” (Park Papers, Addenda, box 2, folder 4, January
2, 1926). This meeting of the ASS marked the formal introduction of
human ecology to the world of sociological knowledge.

The founding of a new science and its relations to extant sciences is
certainly an occasion for analysis within the sociology of science. Ac-
counts of human ecology and its historical, conceptual, and social connec-
tions with biological ecology have typically characterized the relationship
between the two as an unproblematic extension of insights about plant
and animal organization to humans. Based on archival sources and tex-
tual analysis, I argue here that the connection between these two sciences
during roughly the years 1921-41 was neither natural nor necessary but
was brought about through significant scientific innovation. Examining
this connection in detail illuminates an emergent process through which
new scientific knowledge is generated, new scientific communities are
formed, and individuals become scientists. These phenomena are inti-
mately bound together and mark a development of cultural relationships
arranged around the shifting boundaries between the characteristically
social and the characteristically natural in 20th-century science.

What was the nature of the “point of departure” Park spoke of in
1925? Instead of extending biological concepts to the study of humans
qua natural organisms, early human ecologists selectively appropriated
ideas from one context and applied them in an innovative fashion to a
different order of phenomena: the processes of social organization and
change. In other words, sociologists used biological concepts as tropes.
Beginning in 1866, the history of both ecologies consists of a mutual
influence through the transaction of concepts initially used as metaphors.
In each case, a metaphor established a new space for knowledge. This
history is examined in the first section of this article.

Conceptual exchanges via metaphor should not be contrasted with a
more authentic kind of scientific influence. From the point of view pro-
posed here, one could analyze figure and trope in quantum electrodynam-
ics as well as one could in ordinary language without thereby devaluing
or inflating the scientificity of a concept.? Furthermore, an analysis in
terms of metaphors in no way implies that ecological theory was not
actually ecological; biological analogies decisively reconfigured principles
of significance for understanding urban organization. Succession and in-
terdependence revealed formerly obscured aspects of urban life such as
immigration patterns, racial contact, and land use. To account for such
innovations, the second section describes the nature of metaphor transac-
tion in ecological language.

Park had a number of perspectives on urban phenomena at his dis-
posal, but, to understand why he chose ecology, we need to consider the
social context of scientific discourse. Employing Gieryn’s (1983, 1995)
notion of scientific boundary work, I argue in the third section of this
article that Park’s use of ecology entailed a concern for cognitive author-
ity. Such a concern is the ongoing task of any activity claiming the status
of science—in fact, some hold that “no practice has accomplished the
rejection of testimony and authority and [that]. . . no cultural practice
recognizable as such could do so” (Shapin 1994, p. xxv). The appeal of
ecology for sociological boundary work was that it conferred a credible
scientific identity upon human ecologists by expanding the notion of the
characteristically social to include what, up until then, had been thought
of as natural organization. A focus on boundaries then facilitates ex-
tending Abbott’s (1988) understanding of systematicity to an ordered
arrangement of sciences. Ecology’s biological identification was, in addi-
tion to indigenous modes of sociology, in deliberate opposition to other
models of science and allowed an expansion of disciplinary and subdis-
ciplinary boundaries. These expansions were structural transformations
that took place in sequential, historical time.

Borrowing the ecological metaphor from biology restructured historical
possibilities in terms of relatively malleable scientific and disciplinary
boundaries and expectations for future research and theory. These conse-
quences are examined in section 4.

This argument is based on both published and archival sources. Scien-
tific works produced by ecologists of the period were examined, especially
as they appeared in the American Journal of Sociology, then the organ of
the ASS, and Ecology, the journal of the Ecological Society of America.’
Archival evidence was investigated for relevant communication and
teaching materials including research notebooks, course notes, memoran-
dums, and personal and professional correspondence.

The analysis of this material is conducted as a historical sociology of
science.’ For the purposes of this examination, sciences may be thought
of either as what practitioners themselves considered scientific or, what
amounts to the same thing, as any analytic ordering of empirical data
claiming room within the culture space reserved for science. Either way,
both disciplines discussed herein are conceived of as scientific. In no case
could such an analysis adjudicate claims to scientificity, although it may
clarify what those claims are and the terms in which they have been
decided. In addition, since the point is to investigate particular configu-
rations of science and their transformations at a sufficient level of histori-
cal detail, we cannot presume to rank sciences in a preconceived hierar-
chy. Science is treated here as negotiated interaction observable in three
types of cultural phenomena: in those scientific texts that, in Geertz’s
words, we “strain . . . to read over the shoulders of those to whom they
properly belong” (1973, p. 452); in language that reveals the formal
qualities of conceptual transaction through metaphors; and in mentoring
practices that illuminate the intergenerational transmission of knowledge
and authority.
Much of the historiography on human ecology has been misled by the
similarity between these two essays.

The historical literature has generally portrayed human ecology’s gene-
sis as an unproblematic extension of the framework of plant and animal
ecology to a human subject matter (Hawley 1968a, 1984; Matthews 1977,
pp. 131-43). Raushenbush attributed the origin of human ecology to a
“cross-fertilization of the biological and sociological sciences” (1979, p.
163), while Micklin and Choldin recognized bioecology as the “ ‘mother’
science” of human ecology (1984, p. 17), and Theodorson characterized
human ecology as “an attempt to apply systematically the basic theoreti-
cal scheme of plant and animal ecology to the study of human communi-
ties” (1982, p. 3). In turn, influence has been attributed to a number of
biologists. Bulmer, for instance, asserted that Park “came under
[Jacques] Loeb’s influence and took up his biological ideas to apply in
the study of the city” (1984, p. 191). Although Park did cite Loeb in
connection with a point about communication in ant colonies (1915, pp.
598-99; Park, Burgess, and McKenzie [1925] 1967, pp. 29-30), Loeb
was not a stimulus in the development of human ecology, nor was he an
ecologist. Rather, he was noted for his work on reproduction without
fertilization, brain physiology, involuntary orientations in animals (tro-
pism), and the duration of life (Vew Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th ed.,
s.v. “Jacques Loeb”). Matthews notes that Park apparently discovered
ecology through a 1909 translation of Eugenius Warming’s Plantesam-
fund (1977, p. 138), and Raushenbush provides a more comprehensive
list of possible influences including Warming, William Morton Wheeler,
Charles Adams, the rural sociologist C. J. Galpin, and Ernst Haeckel
(1979, pp. 80, 163).

Historians of biological ecology, particularly Engel (1983), Mitman
(1992), and Worster (1985), have noted that pioneer ecologists taught at
the University of Chicago in both sociology and biology during the first
third of this century. Warder Allee, Victor Shelford, and Henry Cowles
provided foundations for animal and plant ecology, while on the other
side of the quadrangles Robert Park, Ernest Burgess, and Roderick
McKenzie developed human ecology as a subdiscipline of sociology. Whe-
ther the Chicago biologists influenced their colleagues in sociology, how-
ever, has not yet been determined. To ascertain such an influence entails
establishing whether the two groups communicated their ideas through
publications or more informal contacts sometime after 1915.5

The following overview indicates that the pioneers of plant and animal
ecology supplied sociologists with a suggestive metaphor for human orga-
nization. Ironically, the provenance of ecology was social thought. Begin-
ning in 1866, biologists began using the economy as a metaphor for the
natural environmental organization of plants and animals. During the
next half century, biologists refashioned ‘the economy of nature’ into
‘ecology’. Then, during the late 1910s, sociologists began employing the
concepts of ecology as metaphors for urban organization and change.
During this period, biologists made yet another foray into social scientific
ideas, this time emerging with the concept of society. The simultaneous
use of the ecology metaphor in sociology and the society metaphor in
biology created a perception of convergence in two otherwise distinct
fields of knowledge. To further solidify this perception, both fields called
themselves ecology.

The word Ocologie first appeared in Ernst Haeckel’s 1866 work Gener-
elle Morphologie der Organismen.° Haeckel, the leading German disciple
of Charles Darwin, included within the scope of Ocologie all that per-
tained to “der Wissenschaft von der Oconomie, von der Lebenweise,
von ausseren Lebenziehungen der Organismen zu einander” (quoted in
Worster 1985, p. 192).’ He derived the word from Oconomie and in-
tended it to refer to the management of the household as well as the
science of economics and the allocation of scarce resources. Biologists
ignored the word for several decades in favor of the older economy of
nature, but the term achieved its modern English spelling and came into
general usage at the 1893 International Botanical Congress.

During the 1890s, Eugenius Warming published his Plantesamfund,
which presented the “idea of successional development toward a climax
equilibrium” as central to the new science of plants (Worster 1985, p.
202). Other concepts included symbiosis and an emphasis on “coopera-
tion for the commonweal.” By 1896, Henry Cowles decided to apply
Warming’s model of succession and climax formation to the vegetation
growing along the shores of Lake Michigan. Cowles discovered that a
“keen observer, walking inland from the water’s edge, could trace a
pattern of ecological succession in space which paralleled the develop-
ment of vegetation in time” (Worster 1985, p. 207). Cowles went on to
have a great impact on the development of ecology as an influential
teacher at Chicago.
Frederic Clements, of the universities of Nebraska and Minnesota and
the Carnegie Institution, was another early ecologist. Like Cowles, Clem-
ents emphasized the dynamics of ecological succession, but he also
stressed the organismic character of plant groups. Clements characterized
each plant “society” as a single organism with an “anatomy” and a
division of functions, a “physiology.” His source for this conceptual
extension was not other biologists, however, but the evolutionary philoso-
phy of Herbert Spencer. Roscoe Pound, Clements’s early collaborator at
Nebraska, recalled “that he and Clements had read together and fre-
quently discussed Spencer’s Principles of Biology, ‘of which we had ex-
pected great things in the days when Comtian Spencerian positivism was
almost a religion for scientists’ ” (Worster 1985, p. 212). Clements also
went on to have a long career and a great impact on his ecologically
minded colleagues. At Harvard, William Morton Wheeler was also an
active proponent of Spencerian organismic theory. Significantly, Wheeler
was a student of the “social insects” and a leading authority on ants and
termites. From his observations, he surmised the central importance of
self-abnegation and interdependence in insect communities (Worster
1985, p. 320).

Wheeler provided substantial support for Warder Allee’s work on ani-
mal cooperation in the 1920s and 1930s. Allee relied on Wheeler’s obser-
vations that “social life evolved 24 different times in as many different
parts of the earth” (Allee Papers, box 1, folder 7, 1930). Allee had exhib-
ited a fascination with group behavior among animals since receiving his
doctorate under Victor Shelford in 1912 and had even referred to the
“mores” of ponds and streams (Engel 1983, p. 342, n.91). Of the ecolo-
gists at Chicago, Allee was the most interested in extending his thoughts
about animal organization to humans. Since Cowles’s work had slowed
after 1911, and Shelford had left for the University of Illinois in 1914,
Allee was also the most likely to have communicated his ideas about
animal organization to the sociologists; however, between 1912 and 1921,
he did not have the opportunity, having left Chicago for various teaching
assignments before returning again in 1921 (Schmidt 1957, p. 6).

In the meantime, Robert Park joined the faculty of the sociology de-
partment as a part-time lecturer in 1914. During his first seven years at
Chicago, Park’s contributions to sociology included the early version of
“The City” and the highly influential textbook coauthored with Burgess.
The latter work contains the first elucidation of human ecology as well
as numerous selections from the work of plant and animal ecologists.
The Introduction to the Science of Sociology (Park and Burgess 1921)
contains excerpts from William Wheeler’s Ants, Their Structure, Devel-
opment and Behavior (see pp. 167—70, 180-82), Eugenius Warming’s
Oecology of Plants (pp. 173-80), and Frederick Clements’s Plant Succes-
sion (pp. 526-28), and mentions the work of Charles Adams (pp. 218,
554) and Ernst Haeckel (p. 912). However, the textbook omits any refer-
ence to the work of Cowles, Shelford, or Allee. Regardless of the exact
reason Park and Burgess did not cite Chicago ecologists, it is clear that
their publications had little or no influence on early human ecology. In
fact, the earliest mention of Chicago ecologists in a work of sociology
seems to be Park’s 1939 article “Symbiosis and Socialization,” discussed
below.

In their textbook, Park and Burgess argued that social interaction
may be characterized by four interrelated processes: competition, conflict,
accommodation, and assimilation. Summarizing the relations, they wrote
that: “The community and the natural order within the limits of the
community . . . are an effect of competition. Social control and the
mutual subordination of individual members to the community have their
origin in conflict, assume definite organized forms in the process of ac-
commodation, and are consolidated and fixed in assimilation” (1921, p.
785). Park and Burgess developed human ecology by distinguishing be-
tween two types of competition: the struggle for existence in the natural
sphere and the struggle for livelihood in the social sphere. They wrote
that “the ecological conception of society is that of a society created by
competitive co-operation. . . . [While] Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations
was a description of society insofar as it is a product of economic competi-
tion” (p. 558).

Park and Burgess refined the distinction between natural and moral
orders in human organization by introducing two types of competition.
The first order entails the unwilled and symbiotic relations of nature,
whereas the second involves the conscious meaning and willed institu-
tions of society and culture. Historians have noted the roots of this dis-
tinction in the work of Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer (simplicity/
complexity, uniformity/differentiation), Ferdinand Ténnies (Gemein-
schaft/Gesellschaft), and Wilhelm Windelband (instrumentality/interpre-
tation) (Mathews 1977, pp. 131-34). But the overarching rubric of com-
petition also allowed sociologists to include both economic and ecological
forms of human organization within the purview of sociology. In other
words, human ecological organization was defined as the base of eco-
nomic competition, not as a type of animal organization. Ultimately, this
definition of human ecology accounts for the status of “ecology” as a
sociological metaphor rather than an extension of biological ideas to hu-
man phenomena.

Park further refined social organization into four types: ecological, eco-
nomic, political, and moral—“They may be said to form a pyramid”
({1936] 1982, p. 26). Gradually this scheme of human organization would
be implemented in sociological research, but between 1921 and 1924 this
idea of an ecological order and a moral order lay largely dormant. In
1921, Park reviewed two books produced by a third group of ecologists,
the human geographers, one by Jean Brunhes and the other by Ellsworth
Huntington and Sumner Cushing, but he did not mention his own notions
about human ecology (1921, pp. 785-86). Shortly thereafter, McKenzie
published his dissertation on the neighborhoods of Columbus, Ohio
(1921-22). This empirical study was conducted squarely within the pa-
rameters of human ecology (concerns with mobility and segregation), but
McKenzie relied exclusively on Park’s 1915 version of “The City” with
its emphasis on institutional urban analysis rather than an explicit ecolog-
ical analysis for theoretical support.

McKenzie’s (1924) “The Ecological Approach to the Study of the Hu-
man Community” inaugurated the period culminating in the 1925 meet-
ing of the ASS during which the entire theoretical apparatus of classical
human ecology was constructed. When asking for comments on his paper
from Park, McKenzie claimed that “there is nothing much in it save
possibly the point of view which is more or less novel” (Park Papers,
Addenda, box 2, folder 2, May 24, 1924). But McKenzie’s modesty was
misplaced, since he provided the first systematic presentation of this oth-
erwise underdeveloped “point of view.” “In the absence of any prece-
dent,” McKenzie defined human ecology as “a study of the spatial and
temporal relations of human beings as affected by the selective, distribu-
tive, and accommodative forces of the environment” (1924, p. 288).
Elaborating upon Park and Burgess’s original definition, McKenzie spec-
ified that the “spatial relationships of human beings are the products of
competition and selection” (p. 288). Following the publication of McKen-
zie’s article, two volumes (Park et al. 1967; Burgess 1926) were issued
containing Park’s revision of “The City,” his “The Urban Community
as a Spatial Pattern and a Moral Order,” Burgess’s “The Growth of the
City,” and McKenzie’s “The Scope of Human Ecology.”

If there had been a systematic appeal to, or application of, the ideas of
plant and animal ecologists, it would have occurred in these five papers.
Outside of two rather superfluous references to Clements in McKenzie’s
1924 paper, no such thing happened. A content analysis of empirical
studies and theoretical papers in human ecology published before 1931
supports this conclusion. The writings of Park, Burgess, and McKenzie
move further away from any concern with biological contributions, while
a purposive sample of 11 empirical studies reveals an almost total lack
of interest in biology.®
McKenzie published seven articles between 1926 and 1931, five of
which dealt with spatial distance, mobility, succession, and migration.’
Most relied on census data, automobile industry data, emigration statis-
tics, and so forth, but none borrowed from, made analogies with, or
referred to any biological ideas. The other two made brief references to
biology. McKenzie began his 1927 essay, “The Concept of Dominance
and World-Organization,” with a footnote attached to the title: “No
attempt has been made here to stress the biological analogy, but similari-
ties of structure seemed worthwhile pointing out” (1927, p. 28, n.1).
However, McKenzie was not referring to the ecological version of domi-
nance but one advanced by the physiologist Charles M. Child, who stud-
ied “dominance and subordination between integrated parts, cells, tis-
sues, organs” of single organisms (McKenzie 1927, p. 28). Although it
seems curious that McKenzie would look to a physiologist to supply an
idea that comes from the household and the family, he was appealing to
the organismic metaphor of society made popular by Comte. His last
article of this period, “Cultural and Racial Differences as Bases of Hu-
man Symbiosis,” seems more promising. McKenzie began, “Plants live
in symbiotic relations by virtue of differences in species. Human beings
effect similar sustenance relations within their own species by means of
division of labor” ([1931] 1968, p. 170), but, in the third sentence of the
paper, McKenzie reversed direction and rejected this analogy entirely
since “human division of labor . . . has but little relation to inherent
biological differences” (p. 170).

By 1929 the concern for utilizing biology disappeared almost com-
pletely. A review volume commissioned to take account of five years of
research at Chicago only mentioned human ecology twice and then not
in relation to biology. In “The City as a Social Laboratory,” Park wrote
that, in addition to the geographic and city planning points of view, there
also exists an economic perspective, which “assumes a new significance
when it is written from the ecological and regional point of view, and
when the city, with its market place, is conceived as the focal center of
an area of ever widening boundaries over which it is constantly extending
and consolidating its dominance and control” (1929, p. 15). By explicitly
associating economic with ecological phenomena, Park conflated the two
poles of his 1921 definition of competition. This preserved the basic integ-
rity of his scheme, since competition defined ecology, but it foreclosed
an appeal to biological ideas. The other reference to urban ecology was
by Burgess. He asserted that the first step in urban research was to
explore the “terra incognita of urban life, to determine and define its
regions, to trace the main directions of population movements, and to
discover . . . the processes of city growth and community formation”
(Burgess 1929, p. 137). This phase, he claimed, had been largely accom-
plished. The second step was to analyze and compare these processes
statistically. Taken together, he wrote, these studies “open up a new
field of social science research, namely that of human ecology” (p. 137).
Neither Park nor Burgess, then, seemed concerned with the relation
between their work and that of biological ecologists. In fact, they sounded
as if they were describing, respectively, the concerns of central place
theory and demography—not the struggle for community existence on
the biotic level.

An analysis of articles in Ecology from 1921 to 1931 shows that biolo-
gists were equally uninterested in the work of sociologists. Instead, their
discussions centered around the work of Ellsworth Huntington. These
works represent the output of a third group of ecologists who referred to
themselves as human geographers. In Principles of Human Geography
({1921] 1951) Huntington “explains how and why the industries and em-
ployments of peoples are largely controlled by conditions that are strictly
geographic” (Redway 1921, p. 228). Huntington’s ideas as expressed in
such texts as Civilization and Climate (1915) and The Character of Races
((1924] 1977) were a blend of environmental and racial determinism that
would have offended the scientific, if not the political, sensibilities of
virtually any sociologist of a Parkian bent. An article by Stanislaus Nova-
kovsky is representative of the pieces in Ecology: “We must conclude
that all of mankind’s customs and inclinations, its physical characteris-
tics, and the anthropological types of various nationalities, as well as the
very germs of religious belief, are due first of all, and above all. . . to
the law-abiding forces of nature” (19226, p. 181). The law-abiding forces
of nature include “the mean temperature month by month; the variability
of the weather from day to day, the frequency of storms; the relative
humidity” (Novakovsky 1922a, p. 275; see also Hoxmark 1925), altitude
(Shreve 1922, p. 269), and the four races: “Negroid, Mediterranean,
Alpine, and Negrito” (Taylor 1925, p. 454; see also Visher 1928). Almost
needless to say, these human geographers were not interested in the ideas
of sociological human ecology nor, apparently, in utilizing the ideas of
their colleagues in plant and animal ecology.

The only attempt at genuine “cross-fertilization” occurred in 1931
when Allee published “Co-operation among Animals” in the pages of
the AJS.!° Allee argued there that all social life has subsocial roots in the
twin principles of the struggle for existence and cooperation. The latter
principle Allee called “unconscious co-operation,” which arises as a
function of the survival of a group’s members who are dependent upon
one another for their existence. Examples include “the protective benefits
which are derived from [a] multiplicity of eyes that give warning of
danger as in bird flocks, or the multiplicity of claws and fangs” that aid
in defense (19316, p. 388). Elsewhere, Allee liked to give the example of
a school of fish absorbing a poison in its environment, which, while
it could kill any one of its members, could not hurt the school as a
protocooperative whole (see Worster 1985, p. 327). Allee’s sociological
readers may have appreciated his antimechanistic approach and may
have been intrigued with the idea of protocooperation, but no one re-
sponded to his article, nor did the Journal review his book on the same
topic, Animal Aggregations: A Study in General Sociology (1931a). It
should be noted that Allee did not cite any sociologists in his article, nor
did he attempt to link his ideas about cooperation with those of sociologi-
cal human ecologists, although several years later he would trace his
ideas through Adam Smith, Auguste Comte, Ludwig Feuerbach, and
Herbert Spencer, as well as Charles Darwin (Allee [1938] 1951, p. 9),
and cite a 1902 edition of Durkheim’s De la division du travail social
(p. 219). Allee traced a similar genealogy in Principles of Animal Ecology,
where he added J. S. Mill and Thomas Malthus (Allee et al. 1949, pp.
26-31).

Allee’s ideas about cooperation may have seemed somewhat sentimen-
tal to those who followed Park’s emphasis on competition and conflict,
but the antagonism between their ideas runs deeper. Park defined human
FIGURE AND TROPE IN THE LANGUAGE OF ECOLOGY

The metaphoric character of ecological concepts in sociology and biology
has been noted (Allee et al. 1949, p. 729; Bews 1935, p. 13; Hawley
1968a, p. 329; 1968), p. xii; Matthews 1977, p. 139; Mitman 1992, p.
92; Worster 1985, p. viii), but no one has directly addressed why this
might be the case or what made these concepts metaphors. Broadly, a
metaphor is a term used in a novel, one could say improper, context as
a tool of cognition. The mechanics of metaphors in ecological language
can be specified more precisely.

The patterning of scientific concepts may be considered from a formal-
ist view of language as a system of signs, the elements of which are
composed of an idea (the signified) fused to a sound pattern (the signifier)
(Saussure [1915] 1986, pp. 65-66). Both the arbitrariness of the connec-
tion between signifier and signified (pp. 67-69) as well as the linear
nature of literary semiotic systems make metaphors possible in the first
place. First, tropes take advantage of a sign’s inner plasticity by altering
or expanding its conceptual content without thereby changing the corre-
spondence between signifier and signified. Despite the fact that «ecology»
and «human ecology» are not literally equivalent, they are both repre-
sented by /ecology/.'!! When the conceptual content of a sign is altered
or expanded in this way, the practical necessity of the conventional con-
nection within the sign insures that original meanings are preserved,
otherwise metaphors would create wholly new signs and obstruct the
comparison of ideas they are meant to facilitate.

Linearity organizes signs into systems (Saussure [1915] 1986, pp. 69—-
70). Unlike visual or musical signals, which may occur simultaneously,
spoken or written signs either form a chain of elements in time and space
or else reside in memory. As a consequence, signs form two types of
relations among themselves: spatial or temporal syntagms and associa-
tions of similarity. Syntagmatic and associative relations form the respec-
tive dimensions in which metonymy and metaphor operate (Saussure
[1915] 1986, pp. 121-32; Jakobson 1956, pp. 74—75; 1960, p. 358). These
tropic devices establish the axiological equivalence between signs within
the two dimensions of language: each device can be used to propose that
a particular entity has properties equivalent to the main subject of a
figure.

In a sequence of signs, an element acquires its value because it stands
in dependent relation to signs that precede or follow it. Consequently,
one may employ metonymy by applying a sign from one context to an
adjacent context. This process describes the value of a concept within a
given theoretical framework or scientific theory and also partially ac-
counts for the realism or naturalness of such frameworks. Figure 1 repre-
sents the combination of concepts that compose the Parkian scheme of
social interaction by showing the concepts contiguous to ‘human ecol-
ogy’.!? Globally, organization is defined by the oppositions of natural
versus social, biotic versus cultural, plant and animal versus human,
and free versus controlled. In particular, human ecologists distinguished
between natural and social competition. Within the category of society,
Park further distinguished ecological, economic, political, and moral or-
ders, which divide a continuum anchored by the above named opposi-
tions. Syntagmatic relations also confer a positive content emphasized
along the horizontal axis. Social control arises from conflict and assumes
increasingly definite consolidation in assimilation and accommodation.
By the same token, ecology is composed of a distribution of units that
change their position on the structural base according to a set of forces
and patterned by a set of processes.

Associative relations, on the other hand, are not supported by contigu-
ity or sequence but rather by the indeterminately expansive “inner store-
house” of signs that constitute resources for actors. In this variety of
equivalence procedure, an actor proposes an analogy between the literal
subject (human social organization) and its metaphorical substitute (plant
and animal ecology). These similar signs form selection sets whose ele-
ments need not refer to their original context. Since the number and
variety of permutations by metaphor are indefinite in practice, table 1
lists only the most salient associations. For both human ecologists and
plant and animal ecologists, «competition» and «cooperation» formed the
primary similarity between signs; however, where Park emphasized the
former, Allee stressed the latter. Each sign also calls up further associa-
tions, represented vertically. The elements of each selection set form a
single domain, but these elements contrast across sets in such a way that,
while ‘economy’ and ‘ecology’ share the property of organized competi-
tion, their mutual comparison also forces related properties to stand in
opposition (see Eco 1984, p. 93).

A two-step process describes the way ‘ecology’ came to refer to urban
phenomena. First, its conceptual value was expanded to include new
ideas that seemed similar: Park included an ambiguous «humanity»
TABLE 1

ASSOCIATIVE RELATIONS OF ‘HUMAN ECOLOGY’

 

 

© «competitions ©

 

‘ecology’ «cooperation» ‘economy’
existence vs. livelihood
natural vs. social
simple vs. complex
undifferentiated vs. differentiated
communal vs. social
instrumental vs. interpretive
free vs. controlled
plants, animals vs. humans
cooperation vs. competition
adaptation, etc. vs. accommodation, etc.

 

within the conceptual domain of ‘ecological’ organization. This operation
reoriented extant signs within the system of ideas, and these alterations
then allowed Park to include the organization of institutions and other
social entities along with that of plants and animals. Second, ecology
was brought into new indexical relations with phenomena based on its
expanded conceptual value. Consequently the phenomenal reference of
‘human ecology’ came to include coffee shops and factories rather than
prairie dogs and pine trees.

Metaphors such as “human ecology” are indispensable tools of cogni-
tion in the development of scientific theory. Scientists perceive and orga-
nize phenomena through concepts. When these concepts are brought into
indexical relations with differences found in phenomena, the conceptual
organization invariably exhibits imprecision, inaccuracies, and irrele-
vancies. But, when different concepts index the so-called same phenom-
ena, they may reveal different qualities altogether: an ecological view
of the city entails a commitment to a supraindividual ontology that a
marketplace view does not. In these cases, criteria such as accuracy or
parsimony do not aid in the choice of perspective and do not become
salient until a definite perspective is adopted. At that point, better scien-
tific metaphors are relatively more accurate, precise, and relevant, and
they reveal the sorts of qualities in phenomena that the scientist is looking
for. The utility of a metaphor does not necessarily correspond to an
unproblematic truth content, however. As Kuhn puts it, there is “no
theory-independent way to reconstruct phrases like ‘really there’; the
notion of a match between the ontology of a theory and its ‘real’ counter-
part [is] . . . illusive in principle” (1970, p. 206).‘* Rather, a good meta-

3 This does not endorse an “anything goes” position. In a given community, the
correspondence between a sign and its empirical index becomes conventionalized and
phor “does not allow the work of interpretation to grind toa halt, but...
permits inspections which are diverse, complementary, and contradic-
tory” (Eco 1984, p. 120).

The cognitive functions of metaphors are illustrated by three models
exemplified in the history of ecology and represented in figure 2. Before
Haeckel coined Ocologie’, natural historians had referred to the ‘econ-
omy of nature’. This phrase is an example of an institutive catachresis
(fig. 2a), the use of a formally incorrect word to establish conceptual
space for new knowledge: nature is organized like an economy. This case
is similar to institutionalized catachresis (e.g., the “leg” of a table, the
“neck” of a bottle) except that it requires interpretive labor (Eco 1984, p.
101). Haeckel used ‘Oconomie’ as a metaphor by extending its «market»,
«division of labor», and «scarce resources» to the natural environment,
thereby yielding ‘Ocologie’ and crystallizing the latent proportion (the
letter x in fig. 2a), which had not existed before the ‘economy of nature’.
For successive generations of biologists, the economic metaphor was so
fruitful that ecology increasingly became a legitimately grounded biologi-
cal concept and pervasive point of view.

For Park, Burgess, and McKenzie, ecology became an ideal concept

practically necessary. In any case, phenomena have a notoriously refractory character:
as Sahlins quotes Durkheim, “The universe does not exist for people except as it is
thought. On the other hand, it need not exist in the way they think” (1981, p. 67).
to describe and theorize social organization and change because, in part,
it already contained «competition» (the letter z in fig. 2b) originally from
‘economy’. This model of metaphor emphasizes its capacity to transfer
properties from one figure to the next (Eco 1984, p. 93), and is one
sense in which human ecology describes a conceptual transaction. Here
‘ecology’ lost some of its property of naturalness in becoming a form of
social organization but regained explicitly economic features in the pro-
cess. Because of this exchange, some accused human ecology of being
merely thinly disguised economics (Hawley 19688, p. xv), but the original
economic conception had changed significantly with biological usage.
Through the three-term proportion (fig. 2c), the economic idea acquired
new theoretical features such as «spatial position» and «succession».

Conceptual transactions need not follow the path from so-called hard
to soft sciences. Biological ecologists such as Clements and Wheeler
adapted ‘society’ from the writings of Comte, Spencer, and Durkheim
just as the sociologists had adapted ‘ecology’ from them. A space for
these exchanges was created by philosophical positivism and by late 18th-
and 19th-century economic and population theorists. Both groups are
cited in the intellectual genealogies of Allee ((1938] 1951; Allee et al.
1949), and Park and Burgess (1921) fill their textbook with excerpts from
these writers.

Other metaphors were available to Park and his colleagues. Park could
have chosen to portray the city as an “organism” (see Levine 1995).
Through such a metaphor, he could have viewed the city as an entity
possessing an “anatomy” of interdependent “organs” and a set of
“physiological” functions that maintained the city’s “health”. This or-
ganism metaphor was a close competitor of ecology, and it occupied the
sociological imaginations of Park, Burgess, and McKenzie to such an
extent that it was sometimes possible to conflate aspects of both: “Every
community has something of the character of an organic unit. . . . It is,
to use Spencer’s phrase, a superorganism” (Park 1982, p. 21). Alterna-
tively, Park could have portrayed urban organization in terms of “social
forces”, that is, interests, sentiments, and attitudes (Park and Burgess
1921, pp. 435-503). Finally, Park could have emphasized other indige-
nous sociological concepts such as city culture, the city as marketplace,
or the city as a collection of institutions. To evaluate why Park and his
colleagues emphasized ecology over its competitors, however, we need
to consider the actual uses to which ecological language was put in dis-
course and practice. In other words, the efficacy and desirability of meta-
phor transaction hinges on the social context of the actors employing
such a procedure: Some structural innovations are more strategic than
others.
BOUNDARY WORK IN DISCIPLINES, SUBDISCIPLINES, AND
SCHOOLS

Two recent ideas are helpful in analyzing the social context of human
ecology. First, the concept of boundary work clarifies the nature of the
demarcation of one science from another, science from nonscience, and
competing modalities within a science. Boundary work operates through
the “attribution of selected characteristics to the institution of science
(i.e., to its practitioners, methods, stock of knowledge, values, and work
organization) for purposes of constructing a social boundary” (Gieryn
1983, p. 782). Conflict or negotiation over such boundaries highlights the
link between authority and the space bounded and marked science
(Gieryn 1995, p. 406). Second, we may extend this notion to a system of
scientific boundaries. Like professional development, the central feature
of scientific innovation is the relation of new areas of scientific activity
to extant ones (Abbott 1988, p. 18). In the case of human ecology, the
proper unit of analysis becomes the local structure of relations sur-
rounding the new area of inquiry: biology, reformism, sociological opera-
tionalism, and others. Although scientific authority and professional ju-
risdiction differ in significant ways, the relative exclusiveness of scientific
boundaries implies susceptibility to analysis in terms of a vacancy model
(Abbott 1988, pp. 86-87). This is to say that a science cannot expand
unless there is the space to do so and that this space describes a position
relative to other such spaces. We have seen how the ecological metaphor
carved out a new space for sociology, but it remains to specify its conse-
quent set of relations. Once established, human ecology’s authority neces-
sarily tended to exclude other sciences and enterprises from its domain.
Park’s boundary work operated on at least three levels. First, he
sought to locate sociology within the system of disciplines as a science
related-—but not swbordinate—to biology. The relation between the two
sciences rested upon an assumed continuity in subject matter and theory
formed by the cross-disciplinary bridge of human ecology. Second, Park
sought to differentiate sociology from social work and amelioration proj-
ects in the area of urban studies. He could do so by establishing the
scientific identity of sociology, whatever its specific source, in opposition
to the religious or civically motivated character of social work. And third,
Park’s association of sociology with biology via human ecology helped
define the Chicago school’s position within the discipline of sociology.
Park and his colleagues were engaged in a project whereby they de-
limited the scope of biological thinking. Human ecologists took the basic
ideas of concentration, centralization, segregation, invasion, and succes-
sion and conceptually subordinated them to competition, conflict, accom-
modation, and assimilation. Park captured their procedure in a letter to
McKenzie: “The changes that take place in an ecological organization are
not adaptive; they are accommodations. I think ‘adaptive’ should be con-
fined to those biological forces that are inherited. The vine accommodates
itself to the tree. Of course, the vine is also a product of adaptation, but
what is inherited is the ability to accommodate itself. That is the point
about the plant community; it is a product of accommodation and not adap-
tation, and it is therefore not biological in the strict sense of the word; it is
sociological. That is the justification for calling the thing a community.”
(Park Papers, Addenda, box 2, folder 2, June 14, 1924; emphasis added).
The most significant move of this delimiting project was Park’s expansion
of the social to include what had been thought of as natural. In 1939 Park
credited this expansion to Allee’s “general sociology”: “The effect of [Al-
lee’s] extension of the concept of society and the social to include every form
of association short of parasitism in which organisms of the same or differ-
ent species practice a natural economy seems to extend indefinitely the
number and the variety of social relationships and of social entities with
which a general sociology is concerned” ((1939] 1972, p. 130).

In other words, the ecological conception of the social suggests that soci-
ety is “coterminous with the active interaction of living organisms in what
Darwin described as ‘the web of life’ ” (Park 1972, p. 131). This was, how-
ever, a strategic revision of the history of ecological ideas since it was Park
himself who most effectively expanded the concept of the social a decade
before Allee began calling himself a general sociologist. Ultimately, and
regardless of origin, this expansion of the social warranted the dual identi-
fication of human ecology in terms of disciplinary boundaries: “Ecology is,
it seems, in the way of becoming a social, without ceasing to be a biological
science” (p. 130). It is for this reason that sociologists rarely referred to the
writings of plant and animal ecologists after 1921: they had subsumed any
socially significant biology within the sociological enterprise.

This boundary work operated by both erasing a barrier as well as
constructing one. An illustration of this process may be found in the
ASS’s devoting a session of its 1925 meeting to formally state the relation
of biology to sociology from a sociological point of view. The title of that
session, “Social Biology,” signaled the sociologists’ intention to both
identify with biology (social biology) and differentiate themselves from
biology (social biology). In his introduction, E. B. Reuter clarified the
relation between the two fields by strictly limiting the range of biology’s
concerns: “The object of biological study is germinal transmission which
insures species continuity, and selection by environmental factors of vari-
ant types resulting in a modification of the germinal constitution and, in
subsequent generations, in modified organic forms” (1926, p. 67). On
the other hand, the object of sociological study is “interaction, through
contact and communication, which insures the cultural continuity of the
group, and the accumulation, through invention and diffusion, of culture
facts resulting in a modification of the forms of interaction and, ulti-
mately, in the social nature of the communicating forms” (pp. 67-68).
The two sciences are therefore relatively independent, and “not mea-
sureable one in terms of the other” (Reuter 1926, p. 68).

In “The Biological and Sociological Processes,” E. H. Sutherland
refined this basic position. He began by noting that some biologists ar-
gued that, since biology is the “general science of life” while sociology
is only the “the science of a particular kind of life,” sociology is merely
a part of biology (1926, p. 70). He concluded by asserting their relative
autonomy. Sutherland argued that a social act is a joint act in which
other individuals participate and in which each individual appears in the
act of another; its essential characteristic is meaning. By contrast, “when
we speak of insect societies and of the social behavior of insects we
usually refer merely to their co-operative and adjustive behavior. It is
interaction, but there is no sufficient reason to call it social interaction”
(p. 73). Sociology, he continued, need only take biological processes into
account to a limited degree, and he concluded that “it has not been
clearly demonstrated that other biological relationships are important for
theoretical sociology” (p. 78). To emphasize the positive character of
social biology, the session closed with Harvey Zorbaugh’s “The Dweller in
Furnished Rooms” and Louis Wirth’s “Some Jewish Types of Personality.”

In 1925, Park wrote to McKenzie that their book, The City, will “announce
to the world that there is a new school of thought on urban sociology” (Park
Papers, Addenda, box 2, folder 2, January 17, 1925). Thus, Park also used
the new position of ecology on the map of science to distinguish sociology from
social work within urban studies. After 1915, Chicago sociologists had seem-
ingly moved away from an open affiliation with reformism and “practical
sociology” (Harvey 1986, p. 197), but as Breslau has shown, the scientific
status of human ecology provided an excellent means of appropriating the so-
cial survey as scientific sociology. Prior to Parkian ecology, theoretical and
practical sociology had been distinguished by their object of intervention (so-
cial organism vs. social problems), their epistemology (rationalism vs. empiri-
cism), and their methods (detached analysis vs. participant observation; see
Breslau 1990, pp. 425-47). Park was able to contain both enterprises within
the framework of ecology in a nested fashion by assigning the properties of
the social organism, rationalism, and detachment to the study of the ecological
constellation as a whole, while reserving social problems, empiricism, and
empathy for the study of the “natural” areas (e.g., the slum) and “natural”
types (the hobo) that formed the system’s parts (p. 433).'* Ecology provided
4 Ultimately, this is why assigning classical human ecology a qualitative or quantita-

tive character is so problematic: it was clearly both. This also accounts for the twin
offspring of human ecology: ethnographic urban sociology and population sociology.
ascientific basis for studying social problems such as delinquency and prostitu-
tion, while at the same time assigning a scientific status to ethnographic or
participant-observation methods. Similar to the disciplinary level, scientific
authority necessarily excluded less scientific competitors, in this case, the re-
formers. Park even contemplated denying the authority of competitors with
a definite scientific status. In a letter to Wirth, he railed at the “psychiatrist
who bases his diagnosis upon the behavior of the individual [ yet] seeks to effect
a cure by putting the individual in a favorable sociological environment.” If
so, he demanded, “what business has a medical man dealing with behavioral
problems . . . at all” (Park Papers, Addenda, box 2, folder 8, August 7, 1930.)

The boundaries and consequent content of sociology inevitably became
central to the intradisciplinary debate of the 1930s. This debate pitted the
proponents of the case study/life history methods of human ecology against
the proponents of operational definitions and statistical methods (Evans
1986/87, p. 119).5 At the heart of the debate was the scientific status of
sociology and its relation to other sciences. The operationalist George Lun-
dberg asserted that ethnographic methods were “a linguistic technique and
a logic which are as inadequate for the present scientific problems as the
mechanical tools of medieval man would be inadequate for the needs of our
industrial age” (quoted in Evans 1986/87, p. 121). The contrast between
biology and physics as models of science was explicit. Operationalists
championed the physical model and argued that statistics imparted the sci-
entific criteria of precise measurement, accurate recording, and indepen-
dent verification. Stuart Chapin minced no words: when “the sociologist
adopts the numerical symbol of description in the definition of his concepts
they will become more precise and he will approach the position of the phys-
icist” (quoted on p. 121). Ironically, by appealing to a connection with biol-
ogy rather than the authority of indigenous sociological concepts, the stan-
dard of scientificity that human ecology helped to establish had the
unintended consequence of undercutting or devaluing approaches to sociol-
ogy that were perceived as less scientific or nonscientific within the terms
of this debate. Consequently, fields such as sociolinguistics and methods
such as ethnography and life history increasingly became the province of
other social sciences where these comparisons were less salient, notably an-
thropology (see Murray 1986/87).

Within this atmosphere, Luther Bernard christened the “Chicago
school” in the same breath that he characterized their views as “some-
what metaphysical” (1930, p. 131, n.83). The name and the judgment
stuck, and the two go together: images of a coherent Chicago school
were fashioned by, and in opposition to, “other centers of sociology that
competed on both academic and professional grounds” (Janowitz 1966,
p. vii). The division over sociology’s status was apparent within the
Chicago department as well, where it was represented in the person of
William F. Ogburn, who wanted to know but one thing: “How do you
know it?” (see Laslett 1991, p. 513). He divided the whole world by
means of one principle: if this question could be answered in terms of
measurement, it was science; and if it could not, then it was something
else. Despite his firm insistence on a pristine, elite science and his facility
with statistics, Ogburn was not an inflexible operationalist. A. A. Brill
identified him as “the first sociologist to recognize the value of the Freud-
ian concepts in the teaching of sociology” (quoted in Duncan 1964, pp.
xxi-xxii), and A. L. Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn referred to Social
Change with Respect to Culture and Original Nature (1922) as “the first
major work by an American sociologist in which the anthropological
concept of culture was prominently employed” (quoted in Duncan 1964,
pp. xxi—xxii). Yet he deliberately adopted the scientist/junior scientist
mode of mentoring from the large-scale research model of the natural
sciences, and he carefully instructed his students how to separate science
from scholarship in their own research (Ogburn 1986/87, p. 268). The
division between science and nonscience in his life tended toward the
absolute. He taught that one should “be scientific as little as possible,
but on those occasions be as scientific as you can” (Ogburn Papers, box
46, folder 2, August 16, 1946). He even published his nonscientific articles
under his mother’s maiden name (Laslett 1991, p. 537, n.60). Ogburn
described a “schizophrenia” within himself that was emblematic of the
1930s debate. Ultimately, like Ogburn’s schizophrenia, it was not a con-
flict resolvable through argumentation because it was not only about the
most appropriate methods but also about the very identity of sociology.
If sociology were to be a science like physics, then the nondemographic
aspects of human ecology could not be sociology.
terms from biological discourse. Until the early 1930s, he also used three
means to control what the terms meant, what they referred.to, and how
they would be used. First, his powerful positions in the ASS, the Local
Community Research Committee, the Society for Social Research, and
the University of Chicago’s Department of Sociology helped encourage,
facilitate, and finance ecological research (Bulmer 1984). Second, he had
considerable influence over the publication of books, monographs, and
articles appearing in the Sociological Series and the American Journal of
Sociology, both published by the University of Chicago Press. Third,
and perhaps most important, Park influenced ecological discourse by
teaching future sociologists and closely supervising his students’ research.
Through each of these means, Park insured that the language of ecology
would become an integral part of sociological knowledge. Between Park’s
departure from Chicago and his death in 1944, however, he increasingly
lost control over ecological discourse, and, in turn, the intentions of other
actors and the possibilities structured by the language of ecology assumed
a newfound autonomy. Ecology’s new map of science helped shape the
terms of its dissolution.

Few sociologists have produced such an impression on their former
students as Park. From the time of his arrival at Chicago, he supervised
one-third of the 88 dissertations written for degrees granted between 1915
and 1937 (Park Papers, student lists, box 1, folder 6). The scope of his
influence in raw numbers is itself remarkable, but it is the quality of that
influence as a mentor that warrants closer examination. Park’s skills in
mentoring centered around his proficiency in shaping discourse by defin-
ing and using concepts. In this capacity, several of his former students
referred to him as the “master”—invoking both superiority as well as
the master/apprentice relationship of a guild system (Hughes et al. 1955,
p. 7). Mentoring in this kind of relationship draws a student into a circle
of authority by subjectively transforming that student into a scientist
who has mastery over a particular set of concepts and techniques and
who possesses a certain set of values. If successful, this mastery becomes
a habitual mode of existence, a second nature.

Park’s style in the classroom was integral to conveying the struggle
with ideas that was the hallmark of his effectiveness as a mentor. He
was neither dynamic nor polished, and “perhaps not a lecturer at all
by orthodox definition” (Matthews 1977, pp. 106—7). Edgar Thompson
recalled taking Park’s course, “The American Negro,” in 1924. He be-
gan by writing a dozen or so topics on the blackboard in the form of an
outline, and, during the first week, he went over it “as if one [were]
going over the table of contents of a new book” (Park Papers, Addenda,
box 7, folder 4, letter from Thompson to Winifred Raushenbush, Novem-
ber 11, 1966). Afterward, Park would begin again and go over the whole
thing, this time taking two or three weeks. Finally, he would begin yet
again and delve deeper into each topic for the rest of the quarter. Some-
times it did not seem to students as if he had any method at all. Jessie
Bernard remembered Park spending an entire class period musing about
an expression in Greek literature, “my brother, the ox” (Matthews Pa-
pers 1, letter from Bernard to Fred Matthews, December 8, 1964). Park’s
classes contrasted rather sharply with those of his colleague Edward
Sapir, whose lectures were seamless performances, like a symphony, as
Thompson put it. Due perhaps to Park’s open struggle with ideas, these
classes were the experiences through which students almost universally
reported absorbing him.

Park was a charismatic figure and a demanding teacher who inspired
as much fear of theoretical sloppiness as he did interest in sociology.
“Park did not hesitate to tell students before their peers that their ideas
were worthless” (Matthews 1977, p. 106). Once when Pauline Young
was a graduate student, she rushed into print with an article on occupa-
tional attitudes of a sectarian group of laborers, and she sent a copy to
Park, in her words, “hoping to please him with my ‘conceptual think-
ing.’ His reply put ashes into my mouth. ‘You have ruined meticulously
gathered data by couching them in concepts that sound like the grips
and passes of a secret society. Come to my office, I think I can teach you
something’ ” (Park Papers, Addenda, box 7, folder 4, “Dr. Robert Park
as a Teacher,” n.d., p. 2). Park was not necessarily pleasant (nor is
mentoring in general), but these were typically remembered as valuable
moments in becoming a sociologist. Young continued: “He started by
taking the concept competition apart. . . . I early grasped that a concept
is in reality a definition of a social situation in shorthand, an analysis of
a class or group of facts isolated from other classes on the basis of definite
classification systems” (p. 2).

Park’s most characteristic mentoring occurred during meetings such
as these with students in the large office he shared with Burgess. Edgar
Thompson described his style: “Dr. Park would question [a student]
about his background, his life, his experiences. He would probe and
probe and probe until finally some experience, never deemed important
perhaps until that day, would emerge, burn itself into the student’s con-
sciousness, and set him on fire. Its investigation became an excursion
into the self as well as into other selves” (Park Papers, Addenda, box 7,
folder 4, letter from Thompson to Raushenbush, November 13, 1966,
p. 2). Underlying the effectiveness of these sessions was Park’s widely
recognized insight into his students. Episodes such as these also highlight
the way mentoring effects a subjective transformation of the student.
This may impart an unpleasantness to mentoring that involves “putting
ashes” in a student’s mouth as well as setting him or her “on fire.” But
through these means mentoring practices simultaneously impart knowl-
edge and forge scientific identity and subjective commitment in the on-
going creation of what are commonly called teachable moments. Men-
toring processes, then, serve to reproduce scholars and scientists—not in
the sense of duplication but in the sense of cultivation.

When Park left Chicago in 1932 for Fisk University, he effectively lost
much of his institutional support (although not his capacity to publish),
as well as direct influence over graduate students. As he gradually lost
control over the universe of ecological discourse, three possibilities inher-
ent within the metaphor assumed a newfound autonomy: outright rejec-
tion, modification of its theoretical core, and transformation into a literal
figure. In 1938, Milla Alihan published a scathing critique that would
hasten the gradual dissolution of classical ecological theory. Using the
premise that human ecology formed a genuine extension from biology to
human social organization, Alihan argued that human ecologists failed
to logically delimit the concepts borrowed from biology (1938, p. 125),
that they underemphasized human volition in favor of environmental
determinants (p. 247), and that they consequently neglected the cultural
and moral order.

Following Alihan’s critique, sociologists developed human ecology in
essentially three ways, all of them ultimately fruitful. Writers such as
Edward Ullman simply rejected any connection with biology in favor of
a return to the work of rural sociologists, geographers, and economists.
In his early elucidation of the principles of central place theory, “A
Theory of Location for Cities,” he traced the roots of the theory to von
Thiinen’s 1826 Der isolierte Staat rather than to any ecologist (1941, p.
853). Shortly thereafter Eshref Shevsky, Marilyn Williams, and Wendell
Bell developed social area analysis, which heavily emphasized abstracted
social space (familialism, ethnicity, and social status) over contextual
ecological space in urban studies (see Orleans 1966).

Walter Firey’s “Sentiment and Symbolism as Ecological Variables”
constituted a second response in which he described “certain ecological
processes which apparently cannot be embraced in a strictly economic
analysis” ([1945] 1982, p. 129). However, as Suttles (1984, p. 283) has
pointed out, Firey’s main work, Land Use in Central Boston (1947),
“must be one of the most cited and least imitated books in sociology.”
Firey’s failure to make a large impression in the field may be traced to
two sources. His ideas were formulated in mere opposition to economic
analyses, and, more important, culture was, for Firey, “a subjective
phenomenon, indistinguishable from mass aggregate sentiments and
guided by shared, ultimate ends . . . [which] remain obscure, the senti-
ments unavailable to direct observation, and the theoretical projections
a retrospective generalization” (Suttles 1984, p. 286; see also Ortner
[1984, pp. 132-34] for a different cultural ecology in anthropology).

The third response was articulated in a 1941 symposium on “Levels
of Integration in Biological and Social Systems” sponsored by the Ecol-
ogy Club, which was led by Allee. “The general consensus of the papers
presented was that ‘the organism and the society are not merely ana-
logues’ but virtually the same phenomenon” (Worster 1985, p. 328).
Following such pronouncements, many expected increased collaboration
between sociologists and biologists, but a mere three years later Amos
Hawley felt a need to revive human ecology from “certain aberrant
intellectual tendencies,” chief among them, “the failure to maintain a
close working relationship between human ecology and general or bio-
ecology” ([1944] 1982, p. 105). Forty years later Hawley observed that
“a fruitful exchange of ideas” between biology and sociology “has not
occurred in any marked degree for reasons that are obscure” (1984, p.
3). But this third alteration in the use of ecology was fruitful: Hawley’s
overly pessimistic evaluation misses innovations such as Duncan’s struc-
tural equation models, which were inspired by the population biology of
Sewell Wright. This innovation hinged upon a literal identity via popula-
tion between the domains of biology and sociology made possible, in
part, by the earlier work of classical human ecologists.

In biology after 1931, a number of studies celebrated ecology’s connec-
tion to sociology (e.g., Bews 1935; see also Allee’s work through the rest
of his life). However, by the 1960s orthodox scientific thought in biologi-
cal ecology had become monopolized by thermodynamics and bioeconom-
ics, leaving little room for the idealizing and synthetic tendencies of
Allee’s “general sociology” (Worster 1985, p. 332). As an example of the
new attitude, in 1963 the British ecologist Fraser Darling wrote: “It
would be fantastic . . . to make the mistake now of so expanding the
scope of ecology that it would become all-embracing, so that the ecologist
would bog down in a morass of his own ignorance, and become the
supreme irritating busybody. That, I think, was feared by those who
years ago wished to exclude man from their studies and would not admit
human ecology. Neither do I; there is no human ecology—only ecol-
ogy. .. . This high scientific approach must be jealously guarded” ([1963]
1983, p. 403). His essay was somewhat ironically entitled “The Unity of
Ecology.”

In some sense, Darling was articulating obvious historical differences
in the use of human ecology. “Human ecology” meant two distinctly
different things to biologists and sociologists all along. For the biologi-
cally oriented, human ecology meant treating human communities as one
more animal community in the natural environment to be discussed, as
CONCLUSION

As a scientific innovation, the ecological metaphor of human organization
shifted boundaries on a number of maps. On a conceptual map, ecology
redrew the boundaries between the characteristically natural and social
and thereby opened up new areas for intellectual exploration. Aspects of
the classically ecological view of urban phenomena continue to be viable,
although contentious, within the present repertoire of social scientific
perspectives (cf. Cronon’s Nature’s Metropolis [1991] with Suttles’s The
Man-Made City [1990]) and even ascendant in some quarters. Within the
system of disciplines, ecology helped secure a coordinate position for
sociology in opposition to both unscientific, humanistic studies as well as
the physical sciences, while simultaneously encouraging a limited. align-
ment with medicine and biology. At the same time, sociology remained
distinct and grew massively in the 30 years following World War II.
Within sociology, human ecology promoted a standard of scientificity,
a theoretically informed attention to contextual social processes, which
continues to provide a loyal opposition and working alternative to generic
scientific method of the “variables paradigm” (Abbott 1992). Finally,
ecology enabled sociologists to appropriate space from nonscientific and
less-scientific competitors. These maps of science represented authority
in a number of interrelated domains.

We may conceive of these territories as nested one within another and
as analytically separable, but talk of the consequences of a conceptual
map is ultimately misleading, as talk about any social determinism would
be: the fabric of the social relationships described above is woven from
knowledge about the world, in this case human and animal organization,
just as that knowledge is generated through interaction among scientific
competitors, scientists and nonscientists, students and teachers, collabo-
rators, and so on. Or, to repatriate Lévi-Strauss, scientific concepts are
both “goods to think with” as well as good to think about people with
(cf. Leach 1974, pp. 31-32). This is neither mysterious nor opaque in
the documents. Reuter and Sutherland provided inclusion rules for sociol-
ogists in the same breath that they defined the bounds of sociological and
biological theory and subject matter. Park transmitted authority as he
taught Young how the concept of competition worked or as he recom-
mended terminology changes to McKenzie. If anything, the interwoven
nature of knowledge and social relationships is so seamless in practice
and discourse that we may be inclined to miss it.

Scientific innovation entails the revaluation of cultural cateogries—the
historical transformation of scientific culture as constituted. The genesis,
development, and dissolution of classical human ecology can be viewed
through three modes of such revaluation (see Sahlins 1985, pp. 136-56).
First, new relations among scientific concepts may be motivated by struc-
tural logics, as in a propagation of the implications of the ecological
metaphor through sociological theory. But implications cannot draw
themselves, which is another way of saying that structural transformation
is contingent upon the situated interests of agents (and vice versa). Sec-
ond, signs and the structural patterning devices such as metaphor and
metonymy used to manipulate them are strategically and differently
drawn upon in the course of interaction: “Inflections of meaning depend
on the actor’s experience of the sign as an interest” (Sahlins 1981, p. 68).
Hence the construction and maintenance of boundaries that marked both
alliances and barriers motivated by cognitive authority, including more
so-called material interests (see n. 10). In turn, teaching and research
were the practical sites of subjective cultivation, structural reproduction,
and further innovation. Finally, categories are revalued in the referential
process—indeed, this is what empirical science is about. The revaluation
of categories in confrontation with the phenomenal world is difficult to
account for in a historical study since the world exhibits differences that
are only relatively independent of our conceptions, yet this independence
cannot be preserved in the works to which we have access. We have a
fair understanding of the way scientific concepts provide principles for
empirical significance and selection, but thinking about the influence of
the phenomenal world on theory is tricky, especially if we must reject
mimetic, representation, or copy theories. A close examination of refer-
ential processes in science will be crucial to a fuller understanding of
innovation.

Human ecology, then, was brought about through a series of alter-
ations in language and discourse and enactments in practice designating
a certain territory for scientific exploration. In tandem with these histori-
cally contextual requirements for human ecology’s success, there always
also existed the necessity to demonstrate scientific authority at a collective
level through the construction and defense of local boundaries. However,
scientific enterprises do not reduce to rhetoric, posturing, and politics,
REFERENCES

Abbott, Andrew. 1988. The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert
Labor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. 1992. Of Time and Space: The Contemporary Relevance of the Chicago
School. Sorokin Lecture delivered to the Southern Sociological Society, New Or-
Jeans, LA, April 10.

Alihan, Milla Aissa. 1938. Social Ecology: A Critical Analysis. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Allee, W. C. 1931a. Animal Aggregations: A Study in General Sociology. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

. 19316. “Co-operation among Animals.” American Journal of Sociology 37:

386-98

. (1938) 1951. Cooperation among Animals, With Human Implications: A Re-

vised and Amplified Edition of the Social Life of Animals. New York: Henry

Schuman.

. Allee papers. Department of Special Collections, Regenstein Library, Univer-
sity of Chicago.

Allee, W. C., Alfred E. Emerson, Orlando Park, Thomas Park, and Karl P. Schmidt.
1949. Principles of Animal Ecology. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.

Bailey, W. B. 1912. “The Bird of Passage.” American Journal of Sociology 18:
391-97.

Bernard, L. L. 1930. “Schools of Sociology.” Southwestern Political and Social
Science Quarterly 11:117-34.

Bews, J. W. 1935. Human Ecology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Breslau, Daniel. 1990. “The Scientific Appropriation of Social Research: Robert
Park’s Human Ecology and American Sociology.” Theory and Society 19:417-
46.

Bulmer, Martin. 1984. The Chicago School of Sociology: Institutionalization, Diver-
sity, and the Rise of Sociological Research. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Burgess, Ernest W., ed. 1926. The City: Papers and Proceedings of the Twentieth
Annual Meeting of the American Sociological Society. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.

. 1929. “Studies of Institutions.” Pp. 113-38 in Chicago: An Experiment in
Social Science Research, edited by T. V. Smith and Leonard D. White. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Collier, James. 1905. “The Theory of Colonization.” American Journal of Sociology
11:252-65.

Croker, Robert A. 1991. Pioneer Ecologist: The Life and Works of Victor Ernest
Shelford, 1877-1968. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Cronon, William. 1991. Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Darling, F. Fraser. (1963) 1983. “The Unity of Ecology.” Pp. 400-403 in Origins
of Human Ecology, edited by G. L. Young. Stroudsburg, Penn.: Hutchinson
Ross.

Duncan, Otis Dudley. 1964. Introduction to William F. Ogburn on Culture and Social
Change. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Eco, Umberto. 1984. “Metaphor.” Pp. 87-129 in Semiotics and the Philosophy of
Language. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Engel, J. Ronald. 1983. Sacred Sands: The Struggle for Community in the Indiana
Dunes. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press.

Evans, Richard. 1986/87. “Sociological Journals and the ‘Decline’ of Chicago Sociol-
ogy: 1925-1945.” History of Sociology 6/7:109-30.

Firey, Walter. (1945) 1982. “Sentiment and Symbolism as Ecological Variables.”
Pp. 129-36 in Urban Patterns: Studies in Human Ecology, edited by George A.
Theodorson. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.

Gee, Wilson, and Dewees Runk. 1931. “Qualitative Selection in Cityward Migra-
tion.” American Journal of Sociology 37:254-65.

Geertz, Clifford. 1973. “Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight.” Pp. 412-53
in The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic.

Gieryn, Thomas F. 1983. “Boundary-work and the Demarcation of Science from
Non-science: Strains and Interests in Professional Ideologies of Scientists.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 48:781-95.

. 1995. “Boundaries of Science.” Pp. 393-443 in Handbook of Science and
Technology Studies, edited by Sheila Jasanoff, Gerald E. Markle, James C.
Petersen, and Trevor Pinch. New York: Sage.

Gillette, John M. 1911. “The Drift to the City in Relation to the Rural Problem.”
American Journal of Sociology 16:645-67.

Harvey, Lee. 1986. “The Myths of the Chicago School.” Quality and Quantity 20:
191-217.

Hawley, Amos (1944) 1982. “Ecology and Human Ecology.” Pp. 104-110 in Urban
Patterns: Studies in Human Ecology, edited by George A. Theodorson. University
Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.

. 19684. “Human Ecology.” Pp. 328-37 in International Encyclopedia of

the Social Sciences, vol. 4. Edited by D. L. Sills. New York: Macmillan & Free

Press.

, ed. 1968b. Roderick D. McKenzie on Human Ecology. Chicago: University

of Chicago Press.

. 1984. “Sociological Human Ecology: Past, Present, and Future.” Pp. 1-15
in Sociological Human Ecology: Contemporary Issues and Applications, edited by
Michael Micklin and Harvey M. Choldin. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Hoffer, C. R. 1931. “Understanding the Community.” American Journal of Sociology
36:616—24.

Holt, Arthur E. 1927. “The Ecological Approach to the Church.” American Journal
of Sociology 33:72-9.

Hoxmark, Guillermo. 1925. “The International Olympic Games as an Index to the
Influence of Climate on Human Energy.” Ecology 6:199-202.

Hughes, Everett Cherrington, Charles S. Johnson, Jitsuichi Masouka, Robert
Redfield, and Louis Wirth, eds. 1955. The Collected Papers of Robert Ezra Park,
vol. 3. Glencoe, IIl.: Free Press.

Huntington, Ellsworth. 1915. Civilzation and Climate. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.

. (1921) 1951. Principles of Human Geography, 6th ed. New York: Wiley.

. (1924) 1977. The Character of Races. New York: Anno.

Jackobson, Roman. 1956. “Two Aspects of Language and Two Types of Aphaisic
Disturbances.” Pp. 69-96 in Fundamentals of Language, by Roman Jakobson and

Morris Halle. The Hague: Mouton.

. 1960. “Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics.” Pp. 350-77 in Style in
Language, edited by Thomas A. Sebeok. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Janowitz, Morris. 1966. Introduction to W. I. Thomas On Social Organizations and
Social Personality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Keasbey, Lindley M. 1908. “Competition.” American Journal of Sociology 13:
649-60.

Kuhn, Thomas S. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2d ed. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Laslett, Barbara. 1991. “Biography as Historical Sociology: The Case of William
Fielding Ogburn.” Theory and Society 20:511-38.

Lasswell, Harold D. 1971. “The Cross-Disciplinary Manifold: The Chicago Proto-
type.” Pp. 416-28 in The Search for World Order: Students and Colleagues of
Quincy Wright, edited by Albert Lepawsky, Edward H. Buehrig, and Harold D.
Lasswell. New York: Appleton, Century, Crofts.

Leach, Edmund. 1974. Claude Lévi-Strauss. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lefever, D. Welty. 1926. “Measuring Geographic Concentration by the Standard
Deviational Ellipse.” American Journal of Sociology 36:88—94.

Levine, Donald N. 1995. “The Organism Metaphor in Sociology.” Social Research
62:239-66.

Lind, Andrew W. 1930. “Some Ecological Patterns of Community Disorganization
in Honolulu.” American Journal of Sociology 36:206-20.

Matthews, Fred H. 1977. Quest for an American Sociology: Robert E. Park and the
Chicago School. Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press.

. Matthews Papers. Department of Special Collections, Regenstein Library,
University of Chicago.

McKenzie, R. D. 1921-22. “The Neighborhood: A Study of Local Life in the City
of Columbus, Ohio.” American Journal of Sociology 27:145-68, 344-63, 486-509,
588-610, 780-99.

. 1924. “The Ecological Approach to the Study of the Human Community.”

American Journal of Sociology 30:287-301.

. (1926) 1982. “The Scope of Human Ecology.” Pp. 28-34 in Urban Patterns:

Studies in Human Ecology, edited by George A. Theodorson. University Park:

Pennsylvania State University Press.

. 1927. “The Concept of Dominance and World Organization.” American

Journal of Sociology 33:28—42.

. (1931) 1968. “Cultural and Racial Differences as Bases of Human Symbio-
sis.” Pp. 170-201 in Roderick D. McKenzie on Human Ecology, edited by Amos
H. Hawley. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Micklin, Michael, and Harvey M. Choldin, eds. 1984. Sociological Human Ecology:
Contemporary Issues and Applications. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Mitman, Gregg. 1992. The State of Nature: Ecology, Community, and American
Social Thought, 1900-1950. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Murray, Stephen O. 1986/87. “The Postmaturity of Sociolinguistics: Edward Sapir
and Personality Studies in the Chicago Department of Sociology.” History of Sociol-
ogy 6/7:75-107.

Novakovsky, Stanislaus. 1922a. “The Effect of Climate on the Efficiency of the
People of the Russian Far East.” Ecology 3:275-83.

. 1922b. “The Probable Effect of the Climate of the Russian Far East on
Human Life and Activity.” Ecology 3:181—201.

Ogburn, William Fielding. 1986/87. “How to Write a Dissertation.” History of Soci-
ology 6/7:267—70.
. Ogburn Papers. Department of Special Collections, Regenstein Library, Uni-
versity of Chicago.

Orleans, Peter. 1966. “Robert Park and Social Area Analysis: A Convergence of
Traditions in Urban Sociology.” Urban Affairs Quarterly 1:5-19.

Ortner, Sherry B. 1984. “Theory in Anthropology since the Sixties.” Comparative
Studies in Society and History 26:126—66.

Park, Robert E. 1915. “The City: Suggestions for the Investigation of Human Behav-
ior in the City Environment.” American Journal of Sociology 20:577-612.

. 1921. “Human Geography.” American Journal of Sociology 26:785-86.

. 1926. “The Concept of Position in Sociology.” Pp. 1-14 in The City: Papers

and Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Meeting of the American Sociological

Society, edited by E. W. Burgess. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. 1929. “The City as a Social Laboratory.” Pp. 1-19 in Chicago: An Experi-

ment in Social Science Research, edited by T. V. Smith and Leonard D. White.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. (1936) 1982. “Human Ecology.” Pp. 20-7 in Urban Patterns: Studies in

Human Ecology, edited by George A. Theodorson. University Park: Pennsylvania

State University Press.

. (1939) 1972. “Symbiosis and Socialization: A Frame of Reference for the

Study of Society.” Pp. 117-42 in The Crowd and the Public and Other Essays,

edited by Henry Elsner, Jr. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. Park Papers. Department of Special Collections, Regenstein Library, Univer-
sity of Chicago.

Park, Robert E., and Ernest W. Burgess. 1921. Introduction to the Science of Sociol-
ogy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Park, Robert E., Ernest W. Burgess, and Roderick D. McKenzie, eds. (1925) 1967.
The City: Suggestions for the Investigation of Human Behavior in the Urban Envi-
ronment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Raushenbush, Winifred. 1979. Robert E. Park: Biography of a Sociologist. Durham,
N.C.: Duke University Press.

Redway, J. W. 1921. “Human Ecology.” Ecology 2:228-29.

Reuter, E. B. 1926. “Sociology and Biology.” Pp. 67—69 in The Urban Community:
Selected Papers from the Proceedings of the American Sociological Society, edited
by E. W. Burgess. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sahlins, Marshall. 1981. Historical Metaphors and Mythical Realities: Structure in
the Early History of the Sandwich Island Kingdom. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.

. 1985. Islands of History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Saussure, Ferdinand de. (1915) 1986. Course in General Linguistics, translated by
Roy Harris. Edited by Charles Bally, Albert Sechehaye, and Albert Riedlinger. La
Salle, Ill.: Open Court.

Schmidt, Karl Patterson. 1957. “Warder Clyde Allee.” Pp. 3—40 in The National
Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoirs, vol. 30. New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press.

Shapin, Steven. 1994. A Social History of Truth: Civility and Science in Seventeenth-
Century England. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Short, James F., Jr., ed. 1971. The Social Fabric of the Metropolis: Contributions
of the Chicago School of Urban Sociology. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Shreve, Forrest. 1922. “Conditions Indirectly Affecting Vertical Distribution on De-
sert Mountains.” Ecology 3:269—74.

Sumner, William Graham. 1906. Folkways. Boston: Ginn.

Sutherland, E. H. 1926. “The Biological and Social Processes.” Pp. 70-78 in The
Urban Community: Selected Papers from the Proceedings of the American Sociologi-
cal Society, edited by E. W. Burgess. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Suttles, Gerald D. 1984. “The Cumulative Texture of Local Urban Culture.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 90:283—304.

. 1990. The Man-Made City: The Land-Use Confidence Game in Chicago.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Taylor, Griffith. 1925. “The Character of Races.” Ecology 6:453-57.

Theodorson, George A., ed. 1982. Urban Patterns: Studies in Human Ecology, 2d
ed. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.

Ullman, Edward. 1941. “A Theory of Location for Cities.” American Journal of
Sociology 46:853-64.

Visher, Stephen S. 1928. “Environment and Race.” Ecology 9:527-29.

Worster, Donald. 1985. Nature’s Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Zimmerman, Carle C. 1926-27. “The Migration to Towns and Cities .” American
Journal of Sociology 32:450-55; 33:105—9.

Zorbaugh, Harvey Warren. (1929) 1976. The Gold Coast and the Slum: A Sociological
Study of Chicago’s Near North Side. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
