Black Invisibility, the Press, and the Los Angeles Riot

Author(s): Paula B. Johnson, David O. Sears and John B. McConahay

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Jan., 1971), pp. 698-721
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776435

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:13 UTC
Ralph Ellison (1952, pp. 7-8), the black author, has eloquently described
man’s need for attention and his potential for violence when this need is
frustrated: “I am an invisible man . . . simply because people refuse to
see me. ... You ache with the need to convince yourself that you do
exist in the real world . . . and you strike out with your fists, you curse
and you swear to make them recognize you.” Eighteen years after Elli-
son’s portrayal of black invisibility, the Watts ghetto erupted into vio-
lence. In this paper, we wish to explore the nature of black invisibility in
Los Angeles and its relationship to the racial violence that rocked Los
Angeles and many other American cities during the 1960s.

By “black invisibility,” we mean a condition describing the perceptual
world of the white American. He is physically isolated from blacks, hence

1 This study was supported by National Science Foundation grants to author Sears.
It was conducted while Johnson and McConahay were USPHS predoctorai fellows
in social psychology at UCLA. A preliminary version was presented at the an-
nual meeting of the Western Psychological Association in Vancouver, B.C., June
1969. We wish to thank newspaper coders—Karen Stanley Ebeling, Sandra Lanto,
Don Mednick, and Albert Lauck—and UCLA librarians—Mrs. Frances V. Lovejoy
and Mrs. Frances E. Rose. Computing services were provided by the UCLA Health
Sciences Computing Facility under NIMH grant FR-3.
Black Invisibility

they are physically invisible to him, and his few physical contacts with
them are structured so that blacks are psychologically invisible to him as
well. Thus, blacks essentially do not exist in the subjective world of the
white American.

The importance of black invisibility in contributing to racial violence
is suggested by the salience of ‘‘attention-seeking”’ in blacks’ interpreta-
tions of the Watts insurrection. Martin Luther King reported that in the
days following the outburst, he was touring the riot area with Bayard
Rustin and Andrew Young when they encountered a group of black
youngsters shouting joyously, ‘‘We won! We won!” The three civil rights
leaders asked them, “‘How can you say you won when thirty-four Ne-
groes are dead, your community is destroyed, and whites are using the
riot as an excuse for inaction?” The response was shouted back immedi-
ately: ‘We won because we made them pay attention to us” (King 1967,
p. 112).

Survey data also emphasized the centrality of increased white aware-
ness of blacks in inducing optimism among blacks about the riot’s conse-
quences. Throughout the black community, the riot was interpreted as a
violent protest against white mistreatment and neglect (Sears and Tom-
linson 1968). Blacks perceiving “attention-seeking”’ as the purpose of the
riot were more optimistic about its outcome than those perceiving instru-
mental or cathartic purposes; similarly, those feeling the riot helped the
Negroes’ cause by calling attention to blacks were more optimistic than
those feeling the riot helped by changing white attitudes, ‘bringing eco-
nomic aid to the ghetto, or by having psychological impact upon black
people. Furthermore, “attention-seeking’”’ accounted for more of the
variance in optimism regarding riot aftereffects than any of the usual
indicators of social position or demographic location (Sears and McCona-
hay 1970), and even accounted for more variance than riot participation
itself (Sears and McConahay 1969).
percent white, and that the average white elementary or secondary school
pupil attends a school in which 97 percent of the teachers are white.

Los Angeles seems to be no exception. The opportunity for interracial
contact there was as slim as in any other northern or western city in the
years before the 1965 riot. Residential segregation has been at least as
thorough in Los Angeles. The best data come from Taeuber and Taeu-
ber’s (1965) index of residential segregation which—with a range of 0-
100—may be interpreted as the minimum percentage of nonwhites who
would have to change the block on which they live in order to produce an
unsegregated distribution. For Los Angeles, this percentage was 84.2 in
1940, 84.6 in 1950, and 81.8 in 1960, placing it generally around the
middle of the distribution for major northern cities—more segregated
than New York and Washington, but less than Chicago and Detroit.?
Studies of the degree of school segregation in Los Angeles make the same
poirit (Caughey and Caughey, 1966). Because schools are filled on a
neighborhood basis, and the neighborhoods are highly segregated, the
Los Angeles schools are as segregated as those of other major northern
cities.

Negroes have represented a substantial minority in the city of Los
Angeles since World War II, totaling 13.5 percent in the 1960 census. Yet
whites rarely come into contact with Negroes in their everyday lives.
A 1969 survey of whites in the northern San Fernando Valley, a middle-
class suburban area, found that 58 percent said they “are around Ne-
groes” at most once or twice a week. Indeed, 36 percent said they had no
contact at all with Negroes in an average week (Sears and Kinder 1970).
Of the whites interviewed after the riot—half of whom had deliberately
been drawn from the relatively few integrated areas of Los Angeles—only
13 percent said they had “frequent” contact with Negroes living within a
block or two of their homes, 14 percent said they had “frequent” contact
with Negroes in clubs, organizations, and informal groups, and 25 percent
said they had “frequent” contact with Negroes at work (Morris and
Jeffries 1970, pp. 480-601). Thus, it is apparent that few whites have any
regular, frequent contact with blacks. Their immediate social environ-
ments include a vastly smaller proportion of blacks than does the
metropolis as a whole.

The invisibility of the black community to whites is further empha-
sized by the fact that relatively few whites have ever even visited the
major black residential areas of Los Angeles. In the post-riot survey of
whites (see Morris and Jeffries 1970, pp. 480-601), only 23 percent
2 This no doubt overestimates the degree of integration in Los Angeles. The index is
computed for all nonwhites, rather than solely for Negroes, thus including large
numbers of Orientals in West Coast cities, but not elsewhere. Since Orientals are

somewhat more assimilated residentially than Negroes, the index is distorted down-
ward in these cases.
claimed to have ever shopped, worked, visited friends, or lived in Watts;
31 percent had never been to Watts, and 46 percent had only driven
through the area. Similarly, 54 percent had never been to Pacoima—a
small black area in the San Fernando Valley—and 54 percent had never
been to Leimert Park, a middle-class black area in south-central Los
Angeles. In short, it is clear that the average white man in Los Angeles
has only a trivial amount of personal experience with blacks. He lives ina
white world. Blacks, on the other hand, more often move back and forth
between the dominant white world and the black ghetto.? The poor in
general, and the blacks in particular, are moderately familiar with the
affluent areas of American cities, but are themselves invisible to the more
affluent and powerful in our society.

The psychological invisibility of black people takes over where physi-
cal isolation fails. The few interracial contacts that do occur usually place
the blacks in an inferior role—waitresses, nurse’s aides, and trash col-
lectors—to which whites are generally indifferent. But invisibility is not
by any means limited to blacks in low status positions. Jacobs (1967) has
sensitively described the ways in which whites communicate psychologi-
cal invisibility to blacks in even the best of public agencies. He argued
that the middle-class whites who staff and direct the bureaucracies in
school systems, welfare bureaus, police departments, housing agencies,
and hospitals make decisions in terms of what is most convenient for
their own needs or the needs of other middle-class whites to whom they
must answer, rather than the needs of the blacks they serve. For example,
the rules regarding the presence of a man in a household receiving Aid to
Families with Dependent Children consider the sensitivities of the visible
white taxpayer, not the needs of the invisible black child whom the pro-
gram is supposed to help.

3 By these same standards, however, the majority whites are not at all invisible to
blacks. Black contact with white residential areas was considerably more common
than white contact with black areas, as indicated by our post-riot survey of blacks.
Only 10 percent of the blacks interviewed had never been to Beverly Hills, and 23
percent had never been to Westwood, to mention two of the more exclusive white
areas of Los Angeles (of course, this contact of blacks with white areas was principally
the result of employment or casual driving, rather than residential mixing or visits
with friends). Black people also reported somewhat more personal contact with
whites than whites did with blacks. For example, 19 percent of the blacks reported
‘“frequent”’ contact with whites in their neighborhood, and 23 percent on the streets.
Almost half of the Negroes had had frequent contacts with whites at work, whether
with their employer or with a fellow worker. Similarly, whites are much more visible
to black schoolchildren than blacks to white children; for example, in the mid-1960s
the average black elementary schoolchild was in a school with 35 percent white
teachers, while white children attended schools with only 3 percent black teachers.
And 35 percent of the black first-graders were in schools more than 10 percent white,
while about 20 percent of the whites were in schools more than 10 percent black (see
Coleman 1966, p. 3). Harrington (1962) has emphasized the same imbalance in dis-
cussing the invisibility of the poor more generally.
Given that whites have very little direct personal knowledge of blacks,
the mass media could potentially fill an important gap, communicating
to whites the attitudes, feelings, life styles, and even the very existence of
black people. Indeed, it is apparent that, without the aid of the media,
most whites are likely to get very little information of any kind about
blacks.

This study investigates media attention to the black population, there-
fore, for two main reasons. First, media attention reflects the degree of
black visibility to whites in America at any given time, and thus is a
useful indicator of it. Second, media attention also partially governs black
visibility, by partially determining the amount of second-hand com-
munication whites receive about blacks.

The daily press was chosen as the primary data source, because (1) we
wished to trace black invisibility over a long historical period, and (2)
press coverage could be systematically and reliably measured at rela-
tively low cost, whereas other media could be investigated only with
considerably greater expense, and on the basis of much less complete
archives.

Our basic hypothesis was that historically the white majority in Los
Angeles had paid almost no attention to the black community, either in
the media or in everyday life. Our data collection was aimed at three
main issues: (1) to investigate press attention to blacks throughout most
of the history of Los Angeles; (2) to determine whether black invisibility,
as reflected in the press, was increasing or decreasing before the 1965
riot; and (3) to determine whether or not the riot actually contributed to
overcoming black invisibility.
Coding Press Coverage

References to Negroes in the two major Los Angeles metropolitan news-
papers were analyzed for the period 1892-1968. The sampling of news-
papers to be coded was most intensive during the period from 1964
through 1968, to obtain sensitive indicators of attention in the years sur-
rounding the riot. For the Los Angeles Times, two issues were randomly
selected from each year from 1892 to 1964, then one per month from
August 1964 through 1966. Each day’s issues during the Watts riot were
also included. For 1967 and 1968, ten papers were selected with no more
than one for each month.

The other newspaper analyzed was the Hearst chain’s Herald-Exam-
imer and its several predecessors—the Evening Express, the Evening
Herald, the Herald-Express, and the Examiner. Two issues were selected
for each period of five years from 1892 to 1930, and three for each five
years from 1931 to 1964. The month, week, and day were selected ran-
domly. Which one of the several predecessors was coded prior to the final
emergence of the Herald-Examiner was also chosen randomly. In addi-
tion, one newspaper from three of the last five months in 1964, and from
six months each of 1965, 1966, 1967, and 1968 were chosen. A total of 144
Times and 71 Herald-Examiners were ultimately coded.*

The coder first selected all those articles in a given newspaper that
referred to Negroes. An article was considered to refer to Negroes if it
contained racial words, referred to Negro persons, named a pictured
Negro, referred to laws and/or legislation dealing with racial matters, to
geographic units known to be predominantly Negro (e.g., Watts, Har-
lem, Nigeria) or a geographic location known to be in a predominantly
Negro area as determined by census tract data (e.g., 1600 W. 115th St.,
Los Angeles), to civil rights demonstrations, to riots in which Negroes

‘ The original plan was to take a constant sample from 1892 to 1963. Starting in 1964,
a larger sample was drawn to allow a more detailed analysis of the nature of coverage
leading up to and subsequent to the Los Angeles riot. As coding progressed, the time-
consuming nature of gathering the data became evident, making it necessary to trim
the sample. Early analyses showed a consistent low level of Negro space prior to the
1960s. For this reason, half of the original sample for 1936-50 and a quarter of the
1951-63 sample were not coded to enable more intensive analysis of the years sur-
rounding the Los Angeles riot. For the same reason, newspapers published in 1967
and 1968 were not content-coded.
were known to predominate, or pictured a race-related scene, such as a
riot scene.

Two measures of the volume of coverage were drawn from this coding.
One was simply the number of news items referring to Negroes per full
page of news in the newspaper. A news item, by our definition, could be
anything from one word to a five-page article, however. Because of this
great variability in the amount of space devoted to any single item, a
second measure was also used. This was the percentage of the total news
space that was devoted to Negroes. This was determined by measuring
each item referring to Negroes in square inches, and then measuring the
entire issue for total square inches of news space. In determining space
devoted to Negroes, only the amount of space that dealt with Negroes in
the article was used along with the headline space if the article was
more than 75 percent devoted to news about Negroes or if there were
racial words in the headline. Advertising was not included in the total
news space, and advertising with references to Negroes was not coded
(for data on Negroes in advertisements, see Kassarjian 1970).5 The sports
and comic sections of the newspapers were arbitrarily excluded from the
analysis as not constituting news space. Therefore, both measures reflect
coverage of Negroes relative to total news space, exclusive of advertising,
sports, and comics.

For the main part of the analyses, three coders were used. Coder 1
(C1) coded ninety-eight issues, coder 2 (C2) eighty-four, and coder 3
(C8) fifteen. To measure coding reliability, a subsample of fifteen news-
papers (with 204 articles referring to Negroes) was coded by both C1 and
C2, and two papers (with forty-four articles referring to Negroes) by
both C1 and C3. Intercoder reliability was assessed on (1) the number of
news items referring to Negroes found per issue, (2) the news space per
reference, and (3) whether or not the headline should be included as
referring to Negroes. On these latter two dimensions, intercoder reliabil-
ity was quite high. With respect to the measurement of space, r = .98
between Cl and C2, and r = .93 between Cl and C8; Cl and C2 agreed
in 93 percent of the cases on whether or not the headline met the criteria
for inclusion in Negro space, and 95 percent agreement held for Cl and
C3. Reliability was more mixed on number of news items found and
coded as referring to Negroes, but is probably satisfactory. In any case,
5 For the period 1932-68, total news space was computed by measuring the total
newspaper space—exclusive of comics, sports pages, and classified ads—then multi-
plying by the proportion that news linage represented for that year of display adver-
tising linage plus news linage combined (ie., excluding classified ad linage, office
and legal advertising, etc.). For these latter figures we wish to express thanks to the

Los Angeles Times. The amount of advertising prior to 1932 was estimated by count-
ing the pages of advertising in a random issue for each year.

6 Agreement on the number of news items found and coded as Negro was rather high
between C1 and C3 (each coded 89 percent of the total items that either found), but
Coding News Content

In addition to measuring the volume of press coverage as described above,
the coders assessed the content of news items. The coder first assigned
each item to one of 197 content categories. To simplify the data presenta-
tion, these were later grouped into four main groups with a total of ten
subcategories.

The first major category, Stereotypes, consisted of three subcategories.
“Antisocial” contained all crime and other antisocial actions by individ-
ual Negroes. “Sensational” consisted of all sensational news not in other
categories, such as accidents, natural catastrophes, and social conflicts
that were neither antisocial nor concerned with civil rights, such as a
Negro serving as a witness in court against a white man. “Entertain-
ment” included all references to black performers.

The second major category, Civil Rights, also included three subcate-
gories. ‘Positive Steps’ consisted of all items reporting actual or advo-
cated advances in Negro rights, and coverage of civil rights leaders and
groups. “Negative Steps” contained those items reporting opposition to
integration or civil rights, steps taken against Negro rights, and instances
of discrimination. The ‘““Ambivalent”’ category contained all coverage of
civil rights and political activity relevant to Negroes that neither pro-
moted nor blocked their welfare in terms of actions taken or suggested.
It also included nonviolent conflict over civil rights at the individual,
group, and governmental levels, such as “civil rights demonstrations”
and “poverty program criticized.”

The third main category is Interracial Violence. This contained all
coverage and follow-up of interracial riots, and other instances of inter-
racial violence, such as lynchings and killings of civil rights workers.

less between C1 and C2; while C2 coded 96 percent of the items that either found, C1
coded only 76 percent. Those items only found by C2 were mostly small parts of larger
articles. Thirty-three percent were less than one square inch in space (i.e., less than
four lines of an average column) and 72 percent were parts of larger articles. Hence the
discrepancies.do not seem serious in terms of the larger goals of the coding, in that
there were no gross oversights or disagreements as to what constituted a ‘“Negro”’
item. Also, these minor disagreements did not seem to affect the main dependent
variable, the percentage of news space devoted to Negroes, since the reliability for C1
and C2 on this measure was r = :95, including the missed articles. Two additional
coders (C4 and C5) were used to expand the Herald-Examiner sample for the number
of news items; Cl and C4 coded two of the same papers for a total of thirty-five
articles; C4 found 86 percent of the articles either found, and C1 found 80 percent of
the articles either found; Cl and C5 coded three of the same papers, for a total of
forty-one articles; C1 found 90 percent of the articles either coded and C5 found 80
percent.
PRE-RIOT VISIBILITY
Amount of Press Coverage

During the long period from 1892 to the Supreme Court’s school desegre-
gation case of 1954, there was almost no coverage of blacks in the Los
Angeles press. As shown in figure 1, less than 1 percent of the total news
space was normally devoted to blacks, except for a brief period early in
the century when considerable racial strife surrounded the imposition of
rigid Jim Crow regulations in the south. Aside from that, press coverage
of Negro news was uncommon in either the Los Angeles Times or the
Herald-Examiner, with coverage being remarkably similar in the two
papers. Even after the major growth of the local black community began
during World War II, news space devoted to Negroes showed no substan-
tial increase. Blacks must indeed have been largely invisible to whites in
Los Angeles during these many long years.’

Many observers believed that sympathy and attention to Negroes
were increasing in the 1950s and 1960s, due to the school desegregation
decision of 1954 and the increasing civil rights activism thereafter. Do the
data show that black visibility was rising before the riot of 1965? At first
glance it may appear that the data do show an increase in coverage; from
1893 to August 1965, both newspapers showed statistically significant
increases in the amount of news space devoted to Negroes, and the num-
ber of news items referring to them increased significantly in the Times,
but only slightly in the Herald-Examiner. Figures 1 and 2 give the data.®
7 The few earlier studies of press coverage of Negroes also report that it has been very
small relative to the size of the Negro population (cf. Simpson’s [1936] sampling of
four Philadelphia newspapers from 1908 to 1932, and Gist’s [1932] content analysis of
Negro news during the early 1930s). Carter (1957) reports that southern papers de-

voted less than 1 percent of their news space to desegregation news immediately after
the Supreme Court rulings were made.

8 The statistical significance of pre-riot increases in press coverage of Negroes from
1893 to 1965 is as follows: (1) percentage of space—Times: F = 40.40, 1/98 df,
P < .001; Herald-Examiner: F = 6.34, 1/23 df, P < .05; (2) news items per page—
Times: F = 4.08, 1/98 df, P < .05; Herald-Examiner: F = 0.32, 1/31 df, N.S. The
F-ratios are for the linear effects of coverage over years, by analysis of variance. All
significance tests are based upon five-year groupings until 1963, thus data from 1892
have been excluded.
20

a
aT

a
a

Negro News Items / Page
3

a
o

ny
a

1893.

-— LOS ANGELES TIMES
~~~ LOS ANGELES HERALD EXAMINER

 

 

Pa t es a a
Josie [else [4 “52 ‘65 PRE 6
‘03-07 23-27 ‘43-47 ‘64 ‘66
98-1902 ‘8-22 "38-42 ‘58-62 ‘@5POST

 

 

 

 

97 ‘13-17 "33-37 ‘53-57 ‘6SRIOT ‘68

YEAR

Fic. 2.—News items per page referring to Negroes
Angeles, press coverage of blacks significantly declined in both newspapers,
by both of our indices, from 1893 up to the riot. The fact that data from
the two newspapers are so similar adds considerably to the credibility of
this finding.®

® Correction for black population growth was made by dividing the dependent vari-
ables (news space and news items) by the percentage of Negroes in the city of Los
Angeles during each time period. The city figure was used because it contained most
of the local Negroes, and because the riot took place largely within the city. Since most
blacks live within the city limits, county proportions have always been lower, but
have increased at roughly the same rate. The national percentage of Negroes remained
roughly constant throughout the period of this study, at around 10 percent. The
statistical significance of this pre-riot decrease in press coverage of Negroes from 1893
to 1965, when corrected for Negro proportion of Los Angeles city residents, is as
follows: (1) percentage space—Times: F = 3.48, 1/98 df, P < .10; Herald-Examiner:
F = 12.99, 1/23 df, P < .005; (2) news items per page—Times: F = 42.18, 1/98 df,
P < 001; Herald-Examiner: F = 1.52, 1/31 df, N.S. This decrease is even more
striking when one considers that the present data have been corrected for advertising.
The proportion of newspaper space devoted to advertising has been increasing steadily
257

iy
3

Ss

Negro News Items / Page Corrected
a

&

—— LOS ANGELES TIMES
—-- LOS ANGELES HERALD EXAMINER

 

 

 

| ‘03-07
198-1902
1893-97

[ease |: 50 lissbre or
7 ‘43-41 ‘64 ‘66

 

 

‘e-22 38-42 ‘58-62 ‘e5POST
‘13-17 '33-37 ‘53-57 ‘65 RIOT ‘68
YEAR

Fig. 4.—News items per page referring to Negroes, corrected for proportion of

Negroes in Los Angeles.
American Journal of Sociology

newspaper. This remained, though not as strongly, even when press cov-
erage was corrected for the increase in the local Negro population.!®
Hence, after a half-century-long period of real invisibility—from the turn
of the century to the postwar period—press coverage of blacks appears to
have begun increasing, if very slightly, even before the riot.

Nevertheless, one should not imagine that this late upturn was simply
the culmination of a long linear increase in sympathy and attention to
Negroes. This was not the case at all. First, the gap between the number
of Negroes in Los Angeles and the press attention they received was ac-
tually widening with time, as already indicated. Second, press coverage
increased only in the last few months before the riot, not during the
previous decade of intensive civil rights activity. The civil rights decade
(1953-62) did not differ significantly (by é-test) from the postwar decade
(1943-52) in corrected news space or news items, whereas the last few
months before the riot (1964-65) showed slightly (but significantly) more
press attention than in the postwar period.

In short, the press had increasingly contributed to black invisibility
for more than a half century, failing to redress it even when civil rights
activism became commonplace across the country. Only in the last few
months before the riot did press coverage begin to increase, and even then
not very dramatically.
TABLE 1

CONTENT OF NEGRO NEws ITEMS FOR COMBINED
Los ANGELES NEWSPAPERS

 

 

 

   
  

 
 
    

(PERCENTAGES)
1954-65 1965-66
Categories 1892-1919 1920-39 1940-54 (Pre-riot) (Post-riot)
Stereotypic........... 43 52 29 21 17
Antisocial : 20 16 5 2 3
Sensational. . 15 9 0 2 3
Entertainment. 8 a7 24 17 11
Civil Rights... . 23 17 35 47 46
Positive steps : 6 1 4 17 18
Negative steps...... 3 1 2 7 9
Ambivalent or
neutral.......... 14 15 29 28 19
Interracial Violence... 13 1 4 6 19
Other.......... 21 30 32 26 18
Everyday Life. 9 3 7 5 8
International 4 6 9 16 9
Miscellaneous. ..... 8 21 16 5 6
Total number of
items.......... 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
(174y (158) (46) (538) (442)

 

_ Nore.—Percentages are based on the total number of items for both newspapers, weighting the
Times somewhat more heavily due to its larger sample.
Blacks’ Attitudes toward the Media

The bias of the white-owned press did not go unnoticed in the black
community. Table 3 presents data on the black sample’s evaluations of
the fairness of media coverage of the black community. Large minorities
of the black community felt the two major newspapers treated the Negro
community unfairly, and somewhat smaller numbers felt the same way
about the electronic media. In fact, the Times, then highly conservative,

TABLE 2

COMPARISON OF CONTENT OF NEGRO NEws ITEMS
IN Times AND Herald-Examiner

 

 

 

(PERCENTAGES)
1954-65 1965-66
1892-1919 1920-39 1940-54 (Pre-Riot) (Post-Riot)

Stereotypic:

Times..........555 44 52 17 19 17

Herald-Examiner.... 34 52 50 30 17
Civil Rights:

TEMES. cee cee ee 21 18 45 51 49

Herald-Examiner.... 33 14 19 35 38
Interracial Violence:

Times...........++ 15 1 3 5 19

Herald-Examiner.... 4 0 6 7 17
Other:

Times........0-005 20 29 35 25 15

Herald-Examiner.... 29 34 25 28 28
Amount of Press Coverage

Press attention, at least, apparently did not increase after the riot, sur-
prisingly enough. The 7-tests comparing the pre-riot 1964 and 1965
papers with the post-riot papers from 1965 through 1968 yielded no sig-
nificant differences for either the Times or the Herald-Examiner on any
of the four measures used above—the percentage of news space devoted
to Negroes, the number of news items referring to Negroes per page, or
either of these corrected for the percentage of Negroes in the city of
Los Angeles.

Instead, post-riot newspaper coverage, like pre-riot coverage, con-
tinued well below the proportion of blacks in the population, as shown in
figures 1-4. In fact, coverage was significantly below the population pro-
portion at all but two points; when confidence intervals are set up around
the census proportion of blacks in Los Angeles for every year from 1964
to 1968, black coverage in all but the 1965 post-riot J’mes and the 1967
Herald-Examiner was significantly (P < .05) below the population pro-
portion of Negroes. Thus, even after the riot, there was little evidence
Public Response of the White Community

The white community as a whole also failed to respond attentively and
sympathetically. The public statements of local white civic and govern-
ment officials immediately blamed the violence upon a rich variety of
deviant, hostile, and pathetic types—especially civil rights agitators,
criminals, and recent migrants from the South. The mayor wrote police
brutality charges off to “Communists, dupes, and demagogues.’”’ The
police chief, William Parker, pictured the rioting as “the result of a rebel-
lion of a gang of Negro hoodlums who had no real purpose except rebel-
lion and destruction” and blamed “malcontents who had dragged ghosts
here with reports about Bogalusa and Americus, which is not the situa-
tion here.”

This angry refusal to view the Negroes’ problems sympathetically was
also dominant in white public opinion at the “grass roots” level. Although
both whites (79 percent) and blacks (84 percent) agreed that the riot
made whites more aware of Negro problems, only 32 percent of the whites
felt it made them more sympathetic to those problems. A majority of
blacks (51 percent), on the other hand, expected whites to be more
CURRENT VISIBILITY

How does the situation now stand? Has press coverage of Negro news
increased reliably since 1893? Figures 1 and 2 indeed show increases both
in space devoted to Negroes and in the number of news items concerned
with them. In fact, the increase (i.e., the linear component of the analysis
of variance) is significant for the space index for both the Times (F =
103.65, 1/118 df, P < .001) and the Herald-Examiner (F = 12.40, 1/32
df, P < .005), and also for the number of news items per page in each
paper (F = 59.89, 1/118 df, P < .001 and F = 6.53, 1/51 df, P < .025,
respectively). This would seem to reflect a genuine reduction in the black
man’s invisibility in this century.

However, this increase in press attention has, at best, merely paralleled
the local Negro population growth; it does not represent more balanced
coverage of the races. Figure 3 shows that blacks consistently have re-
ceived only about 20 percent of the news space that would be expected
from the size of the local black population. It also shows that the increase
in press coverage from 1893 to 1968 merely compensated for the increase
in the size of the local black community, rather than revealing any
greater attention to the black community for its own sake. An analysis of
variance on the news space index, corrected for the proportion of Ne-
groes in Los Angeles, yielded no significant increase with time (i.e., no
significant linear trend) in either newspaper. Applying the same analysis
to our other index—the number of news items concerning Negroes—re-
veals a significant decrease in press attention to Negroes since 1893 in
both newspapers, as shown in figure 3 (Times: F = 22.15, 1/118 df,
P < .001; Herald-Examiner: F = 47.13, 1/51 df, P < .001). The two
newspapers again parallel each other on each index, adding substantial
credibility to these findings.

Despite this continued low level of attention, however, the content of
press references to blacks has changed dramatically. The era between the
world wars was the high-water mark of relatively stable and conflict-free
relegation of Negroes to a stereotyped lower-caste position. Highly re-
strictive Jim Crow practices were the unchallenged rule in the South, and
collective civil rights efforts were rare. Thus, the content of Negro press
coverage tended to support the status quo, rarely presenting efforts to
change it.

This is no longer true. Most notably, the proportion of news items de-
picting Negroes in stereotyped lower-caste roles has dropped dramati-
cally. From 1920 to 1939, a majority (52 percent) of Negro items fell in
the Antisocial, Sensational, and Entertainment categories. After the riot,
only 17 percent did, as shown in table 1.” In contrast, items describing
conflicts over the Negro’s lower-caste position have become dominant.
Negroes’ grievances with their status, and efforts to redress them, cate-
gorized as “Civil Rights” items, almost tripled from the interwar to
post-riot periods, from 17 percent to 46 percent. Inclusion of incidents of
interracial violence—the most extreme form of racial conflict—makes the
increase even more dramatic: from 18 percent to 65 percent.
Black Invisibility

the press coverage of blacks did change sharply, however, from emphasis
on unflattering stereotypes to concentration on racial conflict.

2. Black invisibility had not been diminishing substantially before the
Watts riot. Press coverage of blacks actually decreased from 1893 to 1965
relative to the number of Negroes in Los Angeles, except for the last few
months before the riot.

3. Blacks tended to regard the riot as an effort to overcome invisibil-
ity, by attracting whites’ sympathetic attention to their legitimate
grievances. However, black visibility did not increase after the riot—at
least not as measured by press coverage of the black population. And
press content did not reveal a significant increase of emphasis on black
grievances following the riot. The trend set in motion in the 1950s—to
increase the coverage of racial conflict—continued, but the press tended
to reflect the interpretation of the riot expressed by white public officials
and white public opinion. Local officials responded to the riot primarily
as a threat to the public safety, rather than as a symptom of serious
problems demanding attention. The white public felt the riot would re-
sult in less sympathetic treatment of the black community.

The most compelling single finding of the content analysis is that press
coverage of blacks has been so slight throughout the entire twentieth
century. The Kerner Commission’s observation that “our nation is mov-
ing toward two societies, one black, one white—separate and unequal”
(Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders [1968,
p. 1]) perhaps somewhat overdramatizes the more sobering truth, that
black and white America have always been separate and that nothing
about that is really changing at all. The black ghettos have unswervingly
insulated whites from physical and social contact with blacks, and the
preoccupation of the white press with white news has prevented whites
from gaining even symbolic and vicarious knowledge of blacks. More-
over, the rise in civil rights litigation, in Negro political activism, in black
militancy, and even the riots have not increased per capita press coverage
of blacks in Los Angeles. If anything, the gap is widening between the
size of the black population and the attention given it by whites.

There are a number of important implications of this continuing pat-
tern of black invisibility, particularly considering content changes in the
‘fmage”’ of the black population presented to whites. Four seem particu-
larly important to us.

First, black invisibility has badly confused whites’ understanding of
racism. Everyone understands individual acts of bigotry and legalized
segregation, as traditionally practiced in the south, and almost all north-
ern whites oppose them quite comfortably (Sears and Kinder 1970;
Sheatsley 1966). Yet this sins-of-commission model only confuses whites’
understanding of northern sins-of-omission. Northern whites cannot see
“white racism” in their own attitudes and behavior, because for the most
part their actions do not even remotely resemble their image of the crude
red-neck racism of the overt southern bigot. Thus, they simply reject the
notion that they contribute to racism (e.g., one recent poll found that
only 31 percent of a national white sample agreed with the Kerner Com-
mission in blaming “white racism’’ for racial conflicts [CBS News 1968]).

Racial oppression now comes more often from the indifference and in-
attention of apparently polite and well-meaning whites than from naked
bigotry. Blacks as persons, and their grievances, are too easily put out of
mind. Preoccupied with their own interests, even the most liberal of
whites have been easily distracted from the faint signals emanating from
the isolated ghetto.

Similarly, the press has not been anti-black in recent times as much as
it has been more concerned with whites. It is an institution controlled by
white society for the convenience and needs of whites, and thus often to
the exclusion of blacks. By helping to perpetuate black invisibility, how-
ever, it both embodies institutional racism and fails to combat the white
public’s ignorance about it (Carmichael and Hamilton 1967).

A second implication is more ominous. There is some suggestive evi-
dence that black invisibility has actually facilitated the exploitation of
black people by whites. Experimental studies have consistently shown
that the tendency to harm, exploit, or take advantage of others is reduced
by greater information about them, or by greater physical and psycho-
logical proximity to them (Lewicki 1969; Milgram 1965, pp. 243-62).
Even when a subject perceives the target person as very different from
himself (as is obviously the case for most white people viewing blacks in
our society), greater knowledge about the target person reduces exploita-
tion of him (Lewicki 1969). Certainly, retribution against villains can be
openly countenanced by all. Beyond that, it may be that inhumanity
depends upon the invisibility of the victim.

Third, there has been much speculation about improvements in blacks’
self-images arising from the riots. And, indeed, the riots did represent a
level of collective retaliation against an oppressive social system that was
unparalleled in the history of the American Negro. Yet much earlier im-
provements in the image of the black man are unmistakable in the
changes in press coverage of the Negro through this century. Around the
turn of the century, the Negro was pictured as impulsively and inef-
fectually criminal, and when not criminal, given to great silliness and
bizarre habits. Between the wars, the Negro as an entertainer became
more prominent, but still not in high-status roles. Press coverage of black
entertainers mainly promoted uncomplimentary stereotypes of Negroes
acting as-tap dancers or in such roles as Rochester and Amos and Andy.
Black Invisibility

After World War II, however, the social activist began to receive much
increased attention.

One can speculate that this change, which long antedated either the
riots or the rise of black militancy as it is known today, began the dif-
ficult process of changing the public image of the black man among both
whites and blacks. This may be one reason why blacks in their thirties
and forties today differ surprisingly little in militancy and politicization
from their younger brethren (Campbell and Schuman 1968, pp. 1-67;
Sears 1969; Sears and McConahay 1970, pp. 413-79). Perhaps the re-
socialization of the previously apolitical black population to more activist
norms has been proceeding longer than commonly recognized. Improve-
ments in “black identity” today may reflect the modest publicity about
the integrationist labors of the 1940s and 1950s, as well as the riots and
militancy of the 1960s.

However, this change in media content bears with it the potential for
badly frightening a white population that is quite naive and inexperi-
enced about blacks (Sears and Kinder 1970). Press attention to the black
community today is primarily devoted to its conflicts with the broader
society, with its unhappiness with the status quo, and with its efforts to
overturn it. Thus, in earlier days whites must have rested more com-
fortably with their ignorance of the black world, assuming that blacks
really preferred the status quo. Today the conflict is much more appar-
ent, even if the white majority continues to try to protect itself from it by
indifference and inattention. And the violence of the riots has served as
the justification for further inattention and inaction, and for added re-
pression. Indeed, the riots gave body to whites’ fears of a rebellious black
population, just as Negro crime had earlier in the century. There are
many signs that black invisibility is once again becoming a serious prob-
lem, now that the mass riots seem to be receding into the past. Racial
isolation is not markedly decreasing. Our data indicate that the in-
creased visibility in media news coverage induced by the riots was only
a temporary phenomenon. Further, increased attention to ecology, wom-
en, and other new causes, however legitimate, helps to again shunt the
blacks into the back pages of newspapers and the minds of white Ameri-
ca. With the reemergence of black invisibility as a serious and chronic
problem in American race relations, blacks’ needs, and even their de-
mands, may again be heard only indistinctly throughout most of white
America.

Thus, finally, what changes in press coverage might help race rela-
tions? The obvious suggestion is that simply increasing coverage would
help overcome black invisibility, and thus improve race relations. How-
ever, this would not necessarily have the desired result in itself. Increases
in the volume of press coverage must also be accompanied with a change
REFERENCES

Bryant, I. B., Jr. 1935. “(News Items about Negroes in White Urban and Rural
Newspapers.” Journal of Negro Education 4 (April) : 169-78.

Campbell, Angus, and Howard Schuman. 1968. “Racial Attitudes in Fifteen American
Cities.” In Supplemental Studies for the National Advisory Commission on Civil
Disorders. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Carter, H., III. 1968. “Comment.” In The Black American and the Press, edited by
Jack Lyle. Los Angeles: Ritchie Press.

Carter, R. E., Jr. 1957. ‘‘Segregation and the News: A Regional Content Study.”
Journalism Quarterly 34 (Winter) :3-18.

Caughey, John W., and La Ree Caughey. 1966. School Segregation on Our Doorstep:
The Los Angeles Story. Los Angeles: Quail Books.

CBS News. 1968. White and Negro Attitudes towards Race Related Issues and Activities.
Princeton, N.J.: Opinion Research Corp.

Coleman, James S., et al. 1966. Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Ellison, Ralph. 1952. Invisible Man. New York: Random House.

Gist, N. P. 1932. ‘The Negro in the Daily Press.’’ Social Forces 10 (March) :405-411.

Harrington, Michael. 1962. The Other America: Poverty in the United States. New
York: Macmillan.

Jacobs, Paul. 1967. Prelude to Riot. New York: Random House.

Kassarjian, Harold H. 1970. ‘‘The Negro and American Advertising: An Historical
Analysis.”’ Paper presented to Western Psychological Association Convention in
Los Angeles.

18 We have not necessarily assumed that the press is “‘racist”-—in the sense that it
deliberately suppresses news about blacks—or that the press is any more responsible
for black invisibility than the rest of the white population. Indeed, the lack of coverage
of blacks could simply be due to the lack of “newsworthy” black news. As David
Seidman has pointed out to us, powerless people in general (black or white) are con-
ventionally regarded as not. very “newsworthy,” but that should not itself be taken as
an indication of a racial bias in the press. What is needed, perhaps, is an examination
of the class bias in the press as well as the racial bias. In any event, our main interest
here has been in documenting the fact and extent of black invisil ility, and in examin-
ing its consequences, rather than in trying to determine its causes.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. 1967. Where Do We Go from Here? Chaos or Community?
Boston: Beacon.

Lewicki, R. 1969. ‘“‘The Effects of Cooperative and Exploitative Relationships on
Subsequent Interpersonal Relations.’’ Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University.

Milgram, 8. 1965. ‘Some Conditions of Obedience and Disobedience to Authority.”
In Current Studies in Social Psychology, edited by I. D. Steiner and M. Fishbein.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Morris, R. T., and V. Jeffries. 1970. “The White Reaction Study.” In The Los Angeles
Riots: A Socio-Psychological Study, edited by Nathan E. Cohen. New York:
Praeger.

Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders. 1968. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Sears, D. O. 1969. ‘Black Attitudes Toward the Political System in the Aftermath
of the Watts Insurrection.” Midwest Journal of Political Science 13 (November):
515-544.

Sears, D. O., and D. R. Kinder. 1970. “The Good Life, ‘White Racism,’ and the Los
Angeles Voter.” Paper presented to Western Psychological Association convention,
Los Angeles.

Sears, D. O., and J. B. McConahay. 1969. ‘Participation in the Los Angeles Riot.”
Social Problems 17 (Summer) : 3-20.

. 1970. “The Politics of Discontent: Blocked Mechanisms of Grievance Redress
and the Psychology of the New Urban Black Man.” The Los Angeles Riots: A
Socio-Psychological Study, edited by Nathan E. Cohen. New York: Praeger.

Sears, D. O., and T. M. Tomlinson. 1968. “Riot Ideology in Los Angeles: A Study of
Negro Attitudes.” Social Science Quarterly 49 (June) :485-503.

Sheatsley, P. B. 1966. “White Attitudes toward the Negro.” Daedalus 95 (Winter):
217-238.

Simpson, George E. 1936. The Negro in the Philadelphia Press. Philadelphia: Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press.

Taeuber, Karl E., and Alma F. Taeuber. 1965. Negroes in Cities. Chicago: Aldine.

Tomlinson, T. M. 1968. ‘““The Development of a Riot Ideology among Urban Ne-
groes.” American Behavioral Scientist 2 (March-April) : 27-31.

Tomlinson, T. M., and D. L. TenHouten. 1970. ‘Methodology: Negro Reaction
Study.” In The Los Angeles Riots: A Socio-Psychological Study, edited by Nathan
E. Cohen. New York: Praeger.
