Social Structure from Multiple Networks. I. Blockmodels of Roles and Positions
Author(s): Harrison C. White, Scott A. Boorman and Ronald L. Breiger

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 81, No. 4 (Jan., 1976), pp. 730-780
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2777596

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:23 UTC
1 Support from the National Science Foundation under grant GS-2689 is gratefully
acknowledged. In addition to Phipps Arabie, Gregory H. Heil, Paul R. Levitt, and
Francois Lorrain (who have coauthored related papers with us), Paul Bernard and
Joseph E. Schwartz had substantial, specific impact on the work. The generosity of
Belver C. Griffith, Nicholas C. Mullins, and S. Frank Sampson in supplying and
interpreting data is deeply appreciated, as were A. P. M. Coxon’s detailed comments
on earlier drafts. The editorial advice of Carolyn J. Mullins led to notable improve-
ments in the exposition. Thanks are due the Mathematical Social Science Board for
supporting two small conferences on models of role networks, at which early versions
of this work were discussed. Access to computer facilities was kindly given by the
Cambridge Project and its director, Dr. Douwe Yntema, The senior author wrote a
draft of this paper while holding a Guggenheim Fellowship.

2Network metaphors date back at least to Simmel (1950, 1955; first published in
1908) and the so-called formal school of German sociologists. Simmel emphasized the
ubiquity of social networks based on “the actual similarity of [individuals’] talents,
inclinations, activities, and so on” (1955, p. 128) and which cross-cut the categorical
attributes of persons. Von Wiese, strongly influenced by Simmel, stressed the multi-
plicity of types of social ties and the analytic desirability of reducing network
structures. If the “constantly flowing stream of interhuman activity” were halted in
its course for one moment, von Wiese (1941, pp. 29-30) suggested, we would observe
precincts of economics (Boorman 1975; Marschak and Radner 1972;
Schelling 1971; see also Leijonhufvud 1968). Sociologists’ and anthro-
pologists’ attempts to develop the metaphor into operational concepts have
taken two directions. One has emphasized the paths or “threads” in a
single network: the manner in which long chains of contact wind their
way through large social systems (Milgram 1967; Pool and Kochen 1958;
Rapoport 1963; Coleman 1964; Hunter and Shotland 1974; White
1970a, 1970b; Lee 1969; Granovetter 1973, 1974). The second has em-
phasized the “knittedness” of interconnections within a network and the
overlaps between multiple (many-stranded) types of networks for a
given population (typically small; see Theoretical Background section,
below). Our operational concepts follow the second tradition but are
consistent with the first.

After demonstrating the utility of these concepts as applied to five case
studies, we redefine the classic concepts of role and position so that they
apply to concrete, observable interactions, ordered by a new framework.
We take as given the incidence of each of several distinct types of tie
across all pairs in a population (see for example figs. 1 and 3 below).
Ties of each given type are treated as a separate entity (a matrix). Each
is a separate network to be contrasted with other such networks, rather
than merged with them to form a complex bond between each pair of
actors. This analytic segregation of network types is basic to our frame-
work. From it, aggregation emerges as a concept with dual aspects:
actors are partitioned into structurally equivalent sets within each net-
work; simultaneously, though, networks are mapped into a set of images
that can be specifically interpreted for specific populations. The resulting
“blockmodel” is a view of social structure obtained directly from aggrega-
tion of the relational data without imposing any a priori categories or
attributes for actors. Our fundamental argument is that the enormous
variety of concrete social structures is reflected in the variety of possible
blockmodels; furthermore, blockmodels provide tools for ordering this
diversity.

The essential phenomenon portrayed in network imagery, we argue, is
the absence of connections between named individuals. The logical sym-
metry between ties that are “present” and ties that are “absent” (i.e.,
all others) has encouraged proponents of graph theory to overlook the

“an apparently impenetrable network of lines between men. There is not only a line
connecting A with B, and B with C, etc., but C is directly connected with A, and,
moreover, A, B, and C are enclosed within a circle. Not only is there ove line con-
necting A with B, and not only one circle in which they are both enclosed, but there
are many connecting lines. . . . A static analysis of the sphere of the interhuman
will . . . consist in the dismemberment and reconstruction of this system of relations.
Outside this network, above and below it, there can be nothing that is social, unless
we leave the plane of empirical observation.”
American Journal of Sociology

social asymmetry that exists between social action and its complement
(Harary, Norman, and Cartwright 1965; cf. Simmel 1950, pp. 311-16)?

This paper and its forthcoming companion, Part II, present no models of
processes over time; there are neither predictions of other behavior nor
explications of a stochastic process of tie formation and dissolution that
would sustain an observed blockmodel. In this paper the arguments for
a blockmodel as a picture of social structure are specific to the context of,
and the data available for, each case study. Yet blockmodels provide a
natural framework for discussing various types of structural change:
numerous changes in individual ties can still be consistent with an un-
changed structural pattern; changes in the “circulation” of actors among
the structurally equivalent sets can still reflect the same structural pattern
for a given network, and changes in network patterns can occur and yet
leave sets of actors unchanged.

The next section of this paper examines the broad theoretical under-
pinnings of our research. The second major section presents definitions and
the methods of analysis. The third section exhibits analyses based on five
case studies. The fourth section provides an interpretation of “role” and
“position.”
to organic solidarity (Durkheim), from traditional to means-rational orien-
tation (Weber), or from ascribed to achieved status (Linton). In our
view, the major problem with postclassical social theory has been that
its concepts remain wedded to categorical imagery. All sociologists’ dis-
course rests on primitive terms—‘“status,” “role,” “group,” “social control,”
“interaction,” and “society” do not begin to exhaust the list—which require
an aggregation principle in that their referents are aggregates of persons,
collectivities, interrelated “positions,” or “generalized actors.” However,
sociologists have been largely content to aggregate in only two ways:
either by positing categorical aggregates (e.g., “functional subsystems,”
“classes’””) whose relation to concrete social structure has been tenuous; or
by cross-tabulating individuals according to their attributes (e.g., lower-
middle-class white Protestants who live in inner city areas and vote
Democrat). Both methods have “often led to the neglect of social struc-
ture and of the relations among individuals” (Coleman 1958).5 In con-
trast to the standard wisdom, there is a growing list of empirical findings
regarding the effect (and frequency) of “accidents” and “luck” in the
actual functioning of societies: the transmission of useful information
among scientists (Menzel 1962), the attainment of general economic
success (Jencks et al. 1972), and the location of desirable jobs (Grano-
vetter 1974; see also Boorman 1975). These findings force us to ask
whether the stuff of social action is, in fact, waiting to be discovered in
the network of interstices that exist outside the normative constructs and
the attribute breakdowns of our everyday categories.
fication of concrete entities by their attributes. Second, to describe social
structure, we must aggregate these regularities in a fashion consistent with
their inherent nature as networks.

The cultural and social-psychological meanings of actual ties are largely
bypassed in the development. We focus instead on interpreting the pat-
terns among types of tie found in blockmodels. Our sole assumption here
is that all ties of a given observed type share a common signification
(whatever their content may be). From these patterns, we develop
below (and in Part II) operational concepts of role and position.”

In our view “position,” in the concrete sense of office in a formal
organization or membership on a committee, is a concept quite independent
from “role.” The blockmodels of this paper can be said to identify posi-
tions, but only in an elementary sense. In Part II we extend the analysis
to encompass multiple egos and, thence, role structures; we hope also
that this extension can describe, in the language of Mitchell (1969, pp. 45—
49), the existence and interrelations of “institutions.”

At best, blockmodels can make only a partial contribution to the analy-
sis of formal organizations as structures of offices. The network metaphor
is unavoidable in developing models of formal organization, even of the
simplest kind (Williamson 1970, chap. 2). However, fundamentally new
developments of the metaphor are needed, such as that proposed by
Friedell (1967) and that implied by the argument of Cohen and March
(1974).

Analyzing systems of formal organizations will require still further
developments of network imagery, and these cannot be divorced from
models of elites and the ways in which they may control large social
systems through the structure of network access. Recent work on director
interlocks (e.g., Levine 1972) and on advisory systems (Mullins 1972),
as well as formally analogous models of interlocks in dual individual-posi-
tion systems (Breiger 19745; Bonacich 1972), may point in the right
direction.

One practical reason for the caution of Mitchell and Barnes in using
network concepts was the lack of satisfactory methods for aggregating
networks among individuals. A related reason was the paucity of research
on networks among nodes that represented collectivities and organizations.
There are few systematic analyses of networks among such nodes (but see
Fortes 1945, Mayer 1960, and Savage and Deutsch 1960); however,
engineering and operations research have huge descriptive and normative

7 Our stress on relationships among patterns suggested to one of our referees an analogy
to Lévi-Strauss’s work on “meaning.” He thereby credited us with too much and too
little. We use that term without the rich ethnographic insight of Lévi-Strauss; however,
we do discuss the falsifiability of an ideal-type pattern and (White 19745) its null
expectation. In our view, the delineation of concrete social structure should be
analytically divorced from symbolic and cultural analysis.
literatures on flows within networks (see Ford and Fulkerson 1962) that
may prove suggestive (see White 1973) .8

Both Mitchell and Barnes emphasized “anchored” networks (networks
seen from the perspective of a particular member), because they wanted to
show how network concepts illuminate the manipulative activities of con-
crete persons in real situations. Their conceptual approach differs from
our observer viewpoint in this paper and the multiple-ego viewpoint of
Part II. In particular, they merged different types of tie and inferred
a complex, overall quality from the multiplex bond between the anchor
person and each of his contacts.” In contrast, we argue for the value
(from the observer’s viewpoint) of treating the network based on each
analytically separable type of tie as a separate entity. Furthermore,
Mitchell and Barnes paid more attention to the different facets of meaning
measured for each type of tie; they also stressed the importance of rich
observation by a participant observer as, for example, in Kapferer’s work
(1972).1° In contrast, we argue, following Durkheim, that a theory should
be developed only in terms of the overall structure that is the context for
particular transactions. We cite as evidence Boorman’s (1975) model of
job information exchange, noting that his results regarding stability and
optimality were obtained from postulates of a very simple, overall network
structure.

Mitchell and Barnes treated sociometry, especially balance theory,
with some disdain.’ Although many powerful analyses of data have used
a variety of sociometric concepts (see, e.g., the excellent survey articles
by Glanzer and Glaser [1959, 1961]), many of the data are from experi-
mental “groups” and other populations aggregated within a sociological
vacuum. Moreover, with the crucial exception of the analyses by Davis,
Holland, and Leinhardt (see Part II), balance theorists have had little
Contrasts with Sociometry

Sociometry’s most common goal for a single type of tie was the identifica-
tion of cliques (or similar configurations) of tightly clustered individuals;
a secondary goal was chains of connectivity. The clique concept embodies
the root idea of aggregation by relations rather than by attributes that is
indispensable to blockmodels. Sociometry’s other major goal (most not-
able in balance theory) has been to interpret the interpenetration, or over-
lap, among different types of tie.

We now draw five contrasts between sociometry and blockmodels. The
first two are prompted by the restrictive nature of the clique concept.
First, persons not in cliques are usually disregarded (i.e., treated as out-
side the effective sociometric system). In contrast, blockmodeling requires
searching for a complete partition, such that sets of persons can be struc-
turally important regardless of whether the sets resemble cliques. Second,
even when (as in MacRae 1960) cliques are defined as we define struc-
turally equivalent sets (i-e., by similarity in ties to third parties rather than
by choices of one another), the clique imagery is retained and is often
allowed to limit the interpretation. In blockmodels, on the other hand,
partitioning of individuals is only one side of a dual problem; the other
is to interpret the pattern formed on the one or more networks by the
partition.1*

The third contrast is in use of spatial imagery. Most sociometry deals
with only one type of tie, sometimes an overall type constructed from
separate kinds of data. Several investigators (e.g., Laumann and Pappi
1973) eschew the crudity of clique description, preferring instead to view
the population as embedded in some abstract space (usually Euclidean).
Even ordinal measures of similarity between pairs can be converted into
quantitative measures of location and distance through some variant of
multidimensional scaling (Shepard 1962; Kruskal 1964a, 19646; McFar-
land and Brown 1973; Arabie and Boorman 1973; Shepard 1974). Cliques,
as well as many other sociometric concepts (e.g., connectivity), can then
be expressed in terms of locations and distances within the space. In con-
trast, blockmodels assume no such spatial embedding. Presumably each
network, each distinct quality of tie, requires its own space, whereas
blockmodels are able to sidestep this matter. Perhaps a more basic ques-
tion, though, is whether avy spatial representation is suitable for a net-
work, since the essential feature of social networks may well be the sharp
breaks in patterns—the “holes” in the networks.'*

The fourth contrast concerns boundaries. Sociometry usually takes as
given some split between the population studied and the rest of the world
(ie., it assumes a clearcut enclave). However, Barnes emphasized the
artificiality of this presupposition and urged instead a distinction be-
tween the finite “reach” of network effects and the notion of a sharp
boundary around a particular set of people (1972, p. 16). In two of the
case studies below (the biomedical and the Firth-Sterling), we argue that
blockmodels apply to networks among people who are embedded in a
larger world and who thus comprise an “open” population.

The fifth contrast involves a basic methodological issue. Moreno’s
original emphasis on concrete diagrams of ties among individuals was
sound. As sociometric analysis “advanced,” though, it became more and
more wedded to approximations by indices (of which spatial embeddings
and triad inventories [Holland and Leinhardt 1976] are among the most
sophisticated). Balance theory initially signaled a reversal of this trend;
however, as soon as it became clear that no real data sets were “balanced”
in the classical sense, researchers began an unrewarding search for indices
of the degree of deviation from classical balance (see, e.g., Flament 1963).
We argue, instead, that sociological analysis needs explicit models of the
structures in observed populations, no¢ measures or statistical indices of
deviations from some convenient ideal structure. Blockmodels were de-
veloped to meet this need.
> a RR |
|

x x XXX XX X Xx\
|

x xX |

x |

|

\

xx |

 

AND THON OD
represent “unawareness of man or his work,” distinguishing pairs of indi-
viduals who reciprocate “unawareness” (the right-hand matrix) from
pairs in which only one individual indicated an “unawareness” tie (the
middle matrix). Only an arbitrarily chosen subset of 28 members of the
full sample (NV = 107) is included.

Blockmodeling begins with weakening and extending the algebraic con-
cept of “structurally equivalent” actors in a network (Lorrain and
White 1971). A self-consistent search procedure is used to partition a
population into sets of structurally equivalent actors—blocks. In each
data matrix, we rearrange the row and column of each individual, so that
the members of a block are grouped together. We also use the term block
for a rectangular submatrix in which ties of the given type from members
of one block to members of another block are reported. (The context
will specify which of the two meanings is intended.) Attention is focused
particularly on blocks which have no, or very few, instances of ties:
these are termed zeroblocks.

Look ahead to figure 3, in which the 28 persons in figure 1 have been
partitioned into four blocks. (For example, the first block has five mem-
bers: individuals numbered 9, 26, 23, 4, 1.) The rows and columns for
individuals have been rearranged so that each of the three matrices can
be seen as 16 blocks displaying ties from one of the four sets (blocks) of
individuals to another. For example, in each matrix of figure 3 the upper
left block reports any ties among the first five individuals; adjoining it on
the right is the block reporting any ties from these five to the second set
| block] of six individuals; and so on. There are eight zeroblocks in the left
matrix, five in the middle one, and four in the right-hand one. The pattern
of zeroblocks in this figure is interpreted in the next section, where case
studies are discussed.

A blockmodel is a hypothesis about a set of data matrices: it specifies
for each matrix which blocks will be zeroblocks when some common parti-
tion of the population is imposed on all the matrices (as in fig. 3). A
blockmodel consists of a square binary matrix, called an image, for each
type of tie. Each image has a row and a corresponding column for each
block (in fig. 3, the top panel of three 4 x 4 matrices shows an image for
each type of tie). The ordering of blocks within the blocked matrices is
arbitrary, as is the ordering of members within a block.

Five ideas are basic to blockmodels. First, structural equivalence re-
quires that members of the population be partitioned into distinct sets,
each treated homogeneously not only in its internal relations but also in
its relations to each other such set. Second, the primary indicator of a
relation between sets is not the occurrence but the absence of ties between
individuals in the sets. Third, many different types of tie are needed to
portray the social structure of a population. Fourth, the nature of a type
Bonds and Segregation

Suppose the networks for a given population satisfy a particular block-
model hypothesis. When these matrices are rearranged and partitioned
accordingly, those blocks which are not zeroblocks are usually not com-
pletely filled with ties. They have a speckled appearance because choices
from members of the row block to members of the column block are
interspersed with blanks showing no ties. There are several reasons for
this situation. First, if the data are sociometric responses, then the num-
ber of responses per person is usually limited to an arbitrary number
that is normally insufficient to yield solid blocks of entries. If an observer
infers ties (instead of asking the subjects about them), he will be unable
to monitor all possible pair interactions continuously; thus he may miss
brief occasional contacts that are, in fact, enough to maintain a tie (if not
to originate it). At any given time, chance fluctuations (who has been
talking to whom, etc.) may determine which particular ties are coded as
present.

Second, aside from limitations in data collection, the persons being
studied may not be motivated to report all their ties. At some times, they
may even wish to conceal some ties from others, or even from themselves—
hence also from any investigator. The act of revealing a tie—one’s asym-
metric contribution to a pair connection—is a tactical decision in an on-
going situation.1*

Third, there is no need for a person to maintain every tie to all indi-
viduals who belong to his own or another block, even though the num-
ber of ties between (or within) these blocks may be considerable. Maintain-
ing a tie requires time and energy; in addition, it makes a claim on an-
other person’s attention. Blockmodeling requires that ties of a given type
from any person in one block to any person in another be equivalent in
structural significance; however, not everyone need choose to mobilize
all such ties all the time (White 1974c).

Finally, the population need not be a natural group in mutual face-

15 This theme is further developed in Schelling (1960), That self-censorship actually
occurs is further suggested by the Firth-Sterling Corporation data analyzed below.
to-face contact, all of whose members are automatically acquainted with
one another. It may be a contact network in which a particular person may
never even have heard of half the others, as in figure 1. Blockmodels are
wholly applicable to such cases.

The blockmodel hypothesized for a set of matrices is an interrelated set
of inferences from those data to an aggregated pattern of ties among cer-
tain sets of persons. The memberships of these sets (the blocks) are influ-
enced by each other through the incidence of ties of every type across the
whole population. Bonds is the term’ assigned to those blocks which are
not zeroblocks, even though many or most of the entries are blanks.

Sociometric stars and other concepts that try to capture individuals’
popularity have no direct analogue in blockmodels.17 Segregation of
choices, as between boys and girls in grammar school classrooms (Bjer-
stedt 1956), has often been noticed in sociometric analyses. This phe-
nomenon can be described by zeroblocks in a blockmodel, but has ap-
parently been investigated only for a priori categories of persons, such
as male and female. With reference to less extreme forms of segregation,
think of zeroblocks (such as those in the mutual contact matrix of fig.
3) as marking the boundaries of choices by subgroups. Because individual
popularity depends on the size and composition of the group or unit
under consideration, it may be argued that this class of sociometric con-
cepts depends logically on blockmodels (or some closely related apparatus)
for delimiting the boundaries of such units. Within the top left block of
the figure 3 mutual contact matrix, for example, it is apparent that the
first individual (#9) is most popular (he is chosen by each of his block-
mates) while the second individual (#26) receives fewer choices. This
fact is masked, however, in the unpermuted data of figure 1, which shows
individual #26 receiving more choices overall than individual #9.
only four possibilities for any pair of individuals on a given type of tie:
reciprocal, null, or one-way (two possibilities). In contrast, blockmodels
permit 16 images on two blocks; these are shown, and fixed labels as-
signed, in figure 2. In sociometry, three of the four possibilities are struc-
turally distinct; in blockmodeling, 10 of the 16 images are distinct (see
fig. 2).

In the blockmodels for five of our case studies, images E and V (and F
and W) occurred frequently and are substantively important. V can cap-
ture, in a crude 2 X 2 pattern, the structure of a hierarchy as usually
idealized: ties of deference extended within each block to one’s immediate
superiors are also observed from the lower to the higher blocks in the
hierarchy. In contrast, image Y can be seen as aggregate deference ac-
corded only by persons in the lower block only to persons in the higher
block. Call EZ the “hangers-on” pattern. It suggests differential standing,
but in a different way. Here the second block is not internally coherent but
is part of an overall deference structure. The image suggests a distinc-
tion between the center and the periphery.

Images P and N represent pure reflexivity and pure symmetry, respec-
tively. Sociometric balance theory may be expressed by these two images:
positive binding within each of two cliques (reflexivity—-P) and hostility
between the two cliques (symmetry—V). Element C singles out one
clique from the remaining isolated individuals. If the type of tie repre-
sented here has negative connotations, then either C or D shows a con-
centration of hostility within a subset.

Images H and T are patterns for perceptions held by members of both
blocks: all ties from both blocks go to one block. Images S and G show
people split into a passive block on the one hand and an active block that
does not discriminate between itself and the passives in ties of the type
under study. The usual forced-choice procedures for gathering sociometric
data would preclude discovery of patterns S and G.
must require that if any one of the refined blocks being combined into a
coarse block is a bond, the coarse block must also be a bond. Often two
blocks are not sufficient to capture even the gross patterns in a block-
model for a case study.'”

Observe that each bond in the C,F pair of images for two blocks is
also a bond in the Z,F pair: even when the number of blocks is the same,
one blockmodel may be a refined (i.e., more demanding) version of
another. In principle, one can construct an inclusion lattice”? of block-
models, on a given number of types of tie, beginning with those on two
blocks and then extending the lattice to three and more blocks. In prac-
tice, the possible blockmodels are far too numerous for this to be useful.
For example, there are 104 single images with three blocks, which are
distinct under permutation of blocks.

Formally, the pair of images C,F is simply a more demanding version of
V,F, but (as will become apparent) the social structures described have
quite different qualities. Blockmodels provide a framework for making
substantive judgments and interpretations; they supply a set of formal
answers. However, the solution must be proposed, as well as validated, on
substantive grounds.
1 1

Fic. 2—The 16 possible 2 X 2 binary matrices. Grouped into 10 rows, one for
each set that is equivalent under permutation of the two blocks. The letter labels used
here and in the text are applied only to these matrices (never to designate other
images or to data matrices).
termed crystallizers: they resemble sociometric stars in importance, not be-
cause of the number of choices they receive but because of their strategic,
“structural” position in the overall matrix following from the hypothesized
model. Other persons are allowed multiple, alternative assignments by the
BLOCKER algorithm; these are termed floaters. They are somewhat anal-
ogous to the sociometric isolate, who receives few or no choices.”+

The number of different blockmodel hypotheses, even with just two or
three blocks and just two types of tie, is so large that some other ap-
proach is desirable for initial exploration. Breiger has developed a hier-
archical clustering algorithm that partitions men into possible blocks and
then finds a blockmodel by inspecting the data matrices rearranged ac-
cording to the partition.” It is called concor; its formal behavior is
analyzed in Breiger et al. (1975); some mathematical properties are de-
scribed in Schwartz (1974).

The difference between the two algorithms is as follows. concor pro-
duces from raw data an assignment of individuals to blocks, and thence
suggests a blockmodel hypothesis. BLOCKER demands a blockmodel hy-
pothesis and derives from it any assignment of men to blocks that satisfies
the hypothesis for the given set of data matrices. Matrix entries in any
numerical form can be direct input to concor, whereas each tie must be
coded as either 0 or 1 before BLocKER can be used. Substantive judgment
is required in both: in concor, on when to stop the further splitting of
blocks; in BLocKER, on what blockmodels constitute appropriate hypotheses.

BLOCKER searches for pure zeroblocks; an assignment is rejected for a
blockmodel hypothesis if even one tie thereby appears in any zeroblock.
CONCOR partitions the population in a way that may be intuitively char-
acterized as yielding sharp contrasts in densities of ties between different
blocks. The image suggested by concor can be refined by varying the
cutoff level of tie density below which a block is coded as a zeroblock.
FIVE CASE STUDIES

This section reports five case studies on which we tested blockmodels.
Four concern adults in work situations; only one (the Firth-Sterling Cor-
poration management) included all of the population’s relevant authority
figures. Two are panel studies using at least four time periods. Four of
the populations are primarily face-to-face groups of fewer than 20 mem-
bers, and one is a subsample from a larger sample (NV = 107). Four are
exposed to normal turnover in members. All five include systematic data on
individual attributes. All the populations are twentieth-century and Ameri-
can. This section concludes by illustrating the use of blockmodels with
overtime data for two of the studies.

For four of our case studies (all but the biomedical research network),
detailed independent analyses are presented in the original studies of the
interactions. These discussions have informed our search for blockmodel
hypotheses used as input to BLOCKER and are also used to validate some
of our findings. We cite here five general findings from the case studies
which illustrate this validation of the blockmodels and also additional
insights obtained. (1) coNcor, a mechanical search algorithm not depen-
dent on our perceptions of the “meaning” of the data, produces a partition
of individuals into blocks which is equivalent at the three- or four-block
level of refinement to the identification of major groupings in the original
study of the interactions, in all four cases for which such comparisons
may be made (see results reported below and in Breiger et al. 1975). This
strong finding suggests the validity of our approach to network aggrega-
tion. (2) Even though many of our hypotheses which are tested by
BLOCKER are informed by our reading of the original studies, blockmodels
constructed across several different types of social relation in each study
are valuable in portraying the overall social structure. (3) BLOCKER parti-
tions for coarse (two- and three-block) models agree with the partitions
independently derived by concor. (4) In each case study, we suggest
additional interpretation (based on a finer partition of individuals into
blocks and/or a consideration of the patterns of relations brought out in
the blockmodel) which goes beyond the analyses of the original accounts.
(5) The case of the biomedical research network, for which a detailed
analysis of the interactions among the population’s members does not exist,
A Biomedical Research Network

Data.—Griffith et al. (1973) identified 173 scientists studying the neural
control of hunger and thirst. Of these, 107 responded to Griffith’s question-
naire. In more than half the possible instances (as fig. 1 shows) one
respondent was unaware of another, as can be expected in an open popula-
tion.

Blockmodel_—In order to apply BLOCKER to these data, each entry
in the matrices must be coded in binary form. Only a reciprocated choice

n “mutual contact” was regarded as strong enough by itself to prevent a
zeroblock; thus symmetric choices on mutual contact were coded “xX”
and the rest coded “blank.” “Unaware of” is not like other, substantive,
types of tie, so unreciprocated choices on it were treated as a distinct type
of tie, with reciprocated choices constituting a third type. A blockmodel
hypothesis, stated in the top panel of figure 3, for these three types of tie
was developed by systematically exploring intuitively plausible block-
models. At the left in figure 3 is the partition—the unique assignment
(defined in Appendix A)—of men to blocks that BLOCKER yields when the
data are tested against the hypothesis. The bottom panel shows the data
matrices with rows and columns blocked in conformity with this partition:
inspection shows the blockmodel is confirmed.

Interpretation—Interpret the blockmodel in status terms. (Blocks are
ordered from high to low status.) On symmetric “mutual contact,” the
bottom two blocks are connected neither internally nor to one another, and
the bottom block has no connections with any block, including itself. The
bottom block belongs to the population only in the cultural sense that it
has no asymmetric unawareness of the block that is obviously the leading
set of researchers. No block has asymmetric unawareness ties to the top
block; yet that block has asymmetric unawareness entries to each of the
others; we might call this a snob effect.

Further tests——-CcoNcor was applied (not shown here) to the data
matrices for “mutual contact” and “unaware.” Its first split of the 28
men yielded a partition similar to BLOCKER’s: the first two groups in the
latter became one group, and the last two a second, except for two inter-
changes. After two more splits, the partition was

(1 4.9 23 2 10 26) (2419 12 14) (67 28 11 15 13 16)
(18 22 3 5 8 17 20 21 25 27). [1]

The extreme blocks are close to those of figure 3; the middle two are

more mixed. For all three types of tie, we constructed a blockmodel from
the concor partition by defining a zeroblock as any block with less than a
specified fraction of the average density of entries for the given type of tie.
For any cutoff fraction between 1/10 and 1/2, the resulting blockmodel
was very close to that of figure 3.

Each of two additional arbitrarily chosen sets of 28 persons (not over-
lapping with each other or with the first) was then blockmodeled in exactly
the same way, again using concor. The two resulting blockmodels were
close to each other and to the blockmodel in figure 3. Although the full
sample of 107 had not yet been simultaneously partitioned (see Breiger
1976), we inferred that in the larger study both the blockmodel pattern
and the block memberships would correspond with the results reported
for these subsamples. Everyone in the network knows the top dogs (block
a), but although these top dogs collaborate with some researchers in lower
strata, they appear to remain ignorant of most lesser mortals. Members
of block 5 appear to be very active researchers, aware of one another.
Unlike those in the bottom block, members of the third block (c) are not
just on the sidelines; they frequently see at least some researchers in
higher blocks. Clearly, the complete interconnectedness of a face-to-face
group or other community is not necessary for the coherence of this social
structure. Neither these blocks nor (more importantly) the global pattern
of relations over the network would emerge from counts of individual
“popularity” or from conventional clique analysis.
negative relations a distinct name. In all of our case studies we use “Like”
and “Antagonism” for positive and negative affect, respectively.

Blockmodeling —concor was applied to all eight matrices of figure 4.2%
This algorithm is not explicitly concerned with locating zeroblocks; data
of all three choice rankings are processed by it. After two splits the parti-
tion into three blocks was

(10596411 8) (12 12 14157 16) (13 3 17 18). [2]

This partition was then imposed on the eight data matrices (the results
are shown in fig. 4). We assumed that in a population of 18 persons, only
the top two choices were strong enough to invalidate a zeroblock (establish
a bond), so each block which contained no entry greater than 1 was
Social Structure from Multiple Networks. I

represented as a zeroblock. The resulting blockmodel is shown in the top
panel of figure 4.

To apply BLockER, which requires binary input data, values of 2 and 3
were coded as 1, the rest as 0. When the blockmodel shown in figure 4 was
tested on the data using BLOCKER, the unique assignment found was exactly
that derived from concor! Direct inspection of figure 4 confirms this find-
ing (note that third choices, coded as 1, should be ignored).

In the image for esteem, the three blocks are ordered in a complete
linear hierarchy, which is certainly plausible in a monastery. The bottom
block has a bond to itself and to each of the higher blocks on every kind
of positive relation; yet it also has reciprocated bonds with both of the
other blocks on all four negative relations. Liking bonds are universal
with one exception: the second block does not match its esteem bond for
the first with a liking bond. The two top blocks exchange no positive
sanction (“praise” in fig. 4); however, the first block, top on esteem,
concedes influence to the second.

Refinements and interpretations —If we return to the CONCoR approach
and raise the cutoff density for zeroblocks to half the average density,
the resulting blockmodel is
(Recall that this image fits the data with 2’s and 3’s coded 1 and all other
entries 0.) Name the blocks from top to bottom and from left to right
a, b, c, d, e. In brief, within the old top block, @ is now a hanger-on to 5;
within the old second block, d defers to the core block c. It was c, but not
d, that esteemed the initial top block, and then it only esteemed the core
(4). Moreover, it was the hanger-on, a, who conceded influence to the
initial second block, but only to its core, c. (The old bottom block of
losers remains the same; it [e] esteemed only the hangers-on [a] of the
old top block.)

The other images in the refined blockmodel can be read from the data
matrices in figure 4. All four positive images confirm the hangers-on and
deference structures within the former blocks. There are three more
liking bonds than esteem bonds, but except for this fact and the special
asymmetry in esteem and influence among the top blocks (already men-
tioned), the four positive images are almost identical. The refinement of
negative bonds is simpler: in each of the four negative images there are
reciprocal bonds between 5 and the bottom three blocks (c, d, e) but
almost none to b’s hangers-on (a). And the loser, e, though receiving many
or all types of negative bonds from the other four blocks and reciprocating
to both a and 8, sends no negative bond to d; however, e sends all four
types of negative bond to @’s masters (c).

Comparison with Sampson’s analysis.—Both the blockmodels for three
blocks and that for five blocks can be compared with Sampson’s own
analysis. Sampson (1969, p. 370) posited a definite clique structure for
the monastery at time T4, on the basis of sociometric graphs (drawn
from the data shown in fig. 4), his own observation, and his interpretation
of events and personal attributes. His Young Turks are led by monks 2,
Social Structure from Multiple Networks. I

1, and 12 (in descending order of leadership), with 14, 15, 7, and 16 as
followers. His Loyal Opposition is led by 4, with 5 a popular member, 6
and 11 as members, and 9 less fully attached. He saw three Outcasts: 3,
17, and 18. The other three monks (10, 8, and 13) wavered between the
two cliques, which he described as being in intense conflict.

Both concor and BLOCKER agreed on the split into three blocks (shown
in fig. 4). Sampson’s Loyal Opposition is wholly contained in the first
block; the Young Turks are exactly the men in the second block; the
Outcasts are wholly contained in the third block. Sampson’s Waverers 8
and 10 are in the Loyal Opposition block, whereas Waverer 13 is in the
Outcast block.

Our refined five-block blockmodel splits the Young Turks exactly as did
Sampson, with 1, 2, and 12 as leaders; however, the first two blocks split
the Loyal Opposition differently, as well as enlarging it. Monk 5 is changed
from Sampson’s “socio-emotional leader” (p. 360) to membership in the
Loyal Opposition’s hangers-on block. Sampson earlier observed (p. 322,
n. 32): “His [monk 5’s] circumspect aloofness from interpersonal conflicts
served to preserve his relatively high ranking on most measures through-
out the study, but as a consequence, his influence on others was more
that of a detached role model than a framer of opinion or action.” And
Waverer 8 is in the leading block (%) of the Loyal Opposition according
to the blockmodel.

The pattern of relations given in figure 4’s blockmodel—the eight images
on three blocks—accords with Sampson’s basic contention of a fight be-
tween the Loyal Opposition and the Young Turks. The blockmodel reports
strong ambivalence within the Young Turks—simultaneous positive and
negative bonds of many types—but none within the enlarged Loyal Opposi-
tion; all of these reports accord with the detailed statements in Sampson’s
analysis. The blockmodel makes three further important assertions: the
Young Turks are conceded top position in a linear hierarchy of the three
blocks on influence, while the enlarged Loyal Opposition is conceded top
spot in a hierarchy on esteem. Third, the bottom block has but one internal
type of bond which is negative; it also receives Like bonds from above,
as well as the negative bonds that its members return in kind: this implies
that the bottom block is a meaningful social unit in a sense different from
that of Sampson’s “‘pseudo-group.”

Bits of evidence in Sampson’s detailed textual account support these
further assertions; for example, monk 13 nominates, and is the only man
to vote for, 3 as chairman of an important meeting (p. 354).24 Our
American Journal of Sociology

assertions contradict some of Sampson’s summary statements, but this
fact per se is not as important as the fact that blockmodeling has per-
mitted us to move beyond the picture Sampson drew—beyond the kinds
of inferences that are technically feasible from sociometric diagrams. The
blockmodel on five blocks necessarily differs from Sampson’s conclusions;
it analyzes units finer than his factions but ignores the distinctive behavior
of individuals that he emphasized. Until the matrices for earlier time
periods are taken up below, the main support for the refined blockmodel
is the consistency across images of the pattern within each faction.

One week after the period to which these data refer, an explosion started.
The Superior and the Novice Master, together with the handful of senior
monks (none of them included in the sociometric population of the 18
monks in training), decided in their regular review process to expel monks
2, 3, 17, and 18. The reasons given by the senior staff were, for the latter
three, that they were “too immature” and had “personality problems,”
while monk 2 was considered “too independent, questioning and arrogant”
(Sampson 1969, p. 373). Only monks 1, 2, and 3 of the 18 had been to
college and were candidates to be full clerical monks; they were older and
restless even under the drastically reduced discipline their seniors had insti-
tuted a year earlier, before their arrival and that of monks 10 through 18.

Almost at once, monk 1 voluntarily departed. Then, within a week, monks
16, 15, 14, and 7 left, in that order. A few days later, 13 and 8 left, also
voluntarily. A month later still, monk 10 left. Of the six remaining from
the 18, note that four had been there in the old days before the change of
discipline, and five were in the Loyal Opposition. A puzzle in both Samp-
son’s picture and the blockmodel is why monk 12 remained. Otherwise the
blocks found in building the refined blockmodel from pure sociometric data
fit the initial departures perfectly: monk 1 followed his blockmate im-
mediately, and the next wave of four was precisely the block asserted to
be their subsidiary; only after them did monk 13 leave, and he preceded
the two from the Loyal Opposition.
Social Structure from Multiple Networks. I

R-D) is itself a classic. A production section that wired switchboard banks
in a Western Electric plant was transferred to a separate room; for a year
men shared this room with an observer who, with other researchers, re-
peatedly interviewed the 14 men, monitored official records, and so forth.

The observers reported their judgment of the incidence of five types
of tie? (shown in the matrices of fig. 5). Two are the familiar Like and
Antagonism, but three others report context-specific types: ‘““Games” is the
designation for a kind of affectionate horseplay (including “pinging” the
upper arm); “Help” (with production tasks) is our name for a second
type; “Windows” reports chronic quarrels over opening windows. The
observers saw these as stable interaction patterns established when the
section had settled down. In all types but Help, each tie is reciprocated. A
man need not “send” any ties of a given type. When applying BLOCKER,
each tie reported as present was coded “1.”

In addition to two inspectors (called hereafter I1 and 13, after Homans),
there were nine wiremen (numbered from W1 to W9 by position in the
room from front to back) and three soldermen (S1, $2, S4). Layout was
fixed: W1-W3 were assisted by the solderman at the front of the room,
S1; W4-W6 by S2; and W7-W9 by S4; I! and I3 shared inspection of
banks from the middle team.

Interpreting all the kinds of evidence, R-D, followed by Homans, con-
cluded that the social structure was based on two cliques, located mainly
in the front and the back of the room, respectively. They listed the mem-
bers in the front as W1, W3, W4, S1, and I1, and those in the back
as W7, W8, W9, and S4; but they also saw nuances within each group
and discussed other individuals as fringe members. At other places in their
accounts, they emphasized that individuals have differential standing or
prestige in the informal social structure. To us, their account strongly
suggested a hangers-on pattern within each clique as well as strata cutting
across the cliques.

Developing a blockmodel.—Games ties were described as friendly, and
for both them and Like ties the hangers-on pattern (the EZ element within
the clique) seems appropriate. But Games ties were much more numerous
than Like ties, so it seemed likely there should be more men in a core
group on Games than in a core group on Like. Like and Games between
them thus should differentiate each clique into three blocks. Antagonism
was concentrated on, and within, the set of men whom both R-D and
Homans judged to be, at best, marginal to the cliques, and who would
appear in the bottom blocks of the two cliques. These three types of tie
suggested a blockmodel for six blocks on Like, Games, and Antagonism;
it was not clear what pattern to expect on Help or on Windows, except
that the latter should be concentrated in the back of the room. This ap-
proach suggests not only the images but also the memberships of at least
the higher blocks.

The initial blockmodel was adjusted by inspection of the actual choices;
it is shown in the top panel of figure 5 as the first three images. The data,
also shown in figure 5, fit this blockmodel: BLocKER indeed yields the
unique assignment shown (see Appendix A). Two important points should
(W4 S1 W3 WI Il) (W2 WS I3)
(Ws W9 W7 S4) (W6 $2), [5]

again perfect conformation to boundaries in the full six-block blockmodel!
CONCOR first distinguished between the cliques and then, within each set
positively bound together, distinguished strata. A blockmodel on these four
blocks can be aggregated from the one on six blocks in figure 5 by taking
the logical union of the first two rows and the first two columns, and then
doing likewise for the fourth and fifth rows and columns.

One can also emphasize the differentiation into strata as the overriding
feature, rather than the split between cliques. Suppose we combine the
first and fourth blocks of figure 5, the second and fifth, and the third and
sixth. When unions of the corresponding rows and columns are computed,
the five images become

L G A A Ww
1 10 111 0 0 1 1 11 111
100 111 0 0 11 0 111
0 0 0 1 10 111 1161 1 11

When this blockmodel was applied by BLOCKER to the five data matrices,
we obtained a single solution: the top block is the union of the first and
fourth blocks of figure 5, and so forth.

The analyses of the Bank Wiring Room in R-D and in Homans are the
basis for the blockmodel and so can hardly be cited as independent evi-
dence.
Test based on reasons for work stoppage.—In the original report,
Roethlisberger and Dickson (1939, pp. 428-32) stated that the bank
wiring department allowed the nine wiremen to claim allowances for un-
usual work stoppages “beyond their control.” Wiremen frequently claimed
more time allowances than were necessary (contrary to the intent of the
wage-incentive scheme) because they were willing to trade some loss of
income for some gain in security (expressed as uniformity in output
curves). Each time a wireman claimed a time allowance, he was supposed
to give the reason for the delay. R-D coded 12 classes of reasons and
then cross-tabulated the claims by reason and wireman. Generalized at-
titudes need have little relation to specific position in a particular popula-
tion, but context-specific attitudes such as these reasons should be affected
by one’s position and should, hence, resemble those of others in equivalent
positions.

In this cross-tabulation, each wireman has a column and each reason a
row. We used concor to split the wiremen on the basis of their respective
columns of counts.2” The result is

(W1 W2 W3 W4 WS) (W6 W7 W8 W9). [6]
It is at once apparent that the split is precisely that between the blocks
of the front clique and those of the back (see [4] or [5]). In particular,
the marginal members W2, W5, and W6, whom Homans did not place, are
each grouped with the wiremen from the appropriate upper blocks.

In only two of our case studies did the population have specific job
assignments, and only the Bank Wiring Room also had fixed locations.
Let us return to the six-block partition given in figure 5. We already know
that joint membership in a block follows neither from having the same one
of the three jobs nor from having different jobs. Sayles (1958, a mono-
graph on industrial work groups) criticized the earlier literature for giving
too much independent importance to dynamics in small groups as such;
the keys to social structure and process, he argued, were kinds of job and
the flow of work imposed among jobs. At first sight, it seems that our
analysis provides a counterexample; however, close examination shows
that the split between cliques is as important a determinant of the six
blocks as is the division among strata, and the cliques clearly emerge from
the layout of the room. Similarly, for all types of tie except Antagonism,
the pattern of bonds between blocks depends on the clique split as much
as on strata.
Social Structure from Multiple Networks. I

style house, expenses paid. They were subject to observation and required
to supply many self-reports, including a complete rank ordering of the
other 16 by “favorableness of feeling” during each of the 16 weeks of
the experiment. Newcomb reported only measures of association for the
rank orderings (which contributed only indirectly to his account of the
social-psychological dynamics). Here we take polar types of tie (Like and
Antagonism), abstracted from the rank order for the last week of the
second experiment, and suggest a blockmodel for three blocks. The indi-
vidual-level data were described by Newcomb’s associate, Nordlie (1958),
who developed an independent interpretation that is more explicit than
Newcomb’s. Individuals are numbered as in Nordlie’s Appendix A, as are
ranks (from 1 for most favorable to 16 for least; no ties permitted). (The
parallel first, experiment will be discussed in Part II.)

Developing a blockmodel_—In a population of this size, the top two
ranks were believed to represent strong friendship choices; the bottom two,
strong antagonism. There is a scapegoat in this group (man 10), who
received one of the bottom three choices of each of the other 16 persons.
For application of BLocKER, the top two choices were coded as Like ties;
the bottom three, as Antagonism ties. There seemed to be a top group
that disdained the others, so the V,F blockmodel (for two blocks) was
hypothesized. The result was a split of men into blocks for which Like and
Antagonism satisfy the blockmodel; men 13, 9, 17, 1, 8, 6, and 4 were in
the top block. This is the only split that yields a solution, and it stipulates
two floaters (men 2 and 5) who can be placed separately or together in
either block (see also Appendix A).

An obvious refinement is a split of the bottom block into (1) losers
and (2) a stratum not internally antagonistic and ambivalently oriented
to the top block of seven: the blockmodel is
for that type of tie).28 With the top two ranks defined as Like choices
and the bottom three as Antagonism, for any cutoff density below one-fifth
the average density on that type of tie, the resulting blockmodel is the
same as the one presented above. When the cutoff density is raised fur-
ther, the first bonds to disappear are the bottom block’s positive bond to
itself and its negative bond to the second block.

Comparison of the blockmodel with Nordlie’s interpretation —Nordlie’s
(1958, pp. 67-77) study of “sugbrouping” yields an assignment of men to
“clusters” for week 15 that is entirely consistent with our blockmodel.
For each pair of men, Nordlie computed the rank correlation coefficient
of the choices sent by each to the 15 others, excluding themselves. This
matrix of “intra-pair agreement” was then clustered as described by
Nordlie (1958, pp. 70-71) to produce subgroups of nonoverlapping mem-
bership and a residue of men assigned to no cluster. Nordlie discovers
five subgroups for week 15 of the second experiment: (1, 5, 6, 8, 13), (2,
4,17), (7, 11, 12), (3, 14), (15, 16). Men 9 and 10 are not assigned.
Each of the five subgroups is contained within a single block of our
three-block blockmodel, if the two floaters (men 2 and 5) are allowed
either of their assignments.

Nordlie does not distinguish Like and Antagonism, and he does not
go on to examine and interpret concrete patterns of ties among his
clusters. The blockmodel above suggests a combination of balance theory
(in some form) with hierarchy as the forces at work.
man of elite social and business standing brought into the ailing company
a few years earlier).

Developing a blockmodel—With such ties, there were no precedents
for hypothesizing a blockmodel. concor was applied to the data matrices
for all eight detailed types of relation (the seven reported by White
[1961, p. 192], with choices on the fifth type—Respect for Knowledge and
Respect for Decisions—separated into two matrices). The partition into
three blocks found?® was

(119 13) (24678115) (5 10 12 14 3 16). [7]

Since each choice had been carefully considered by the respondents,
the cutoff density chosen for zeroblocks was zero (i.e., a single choice
in a block prevented its being coded as a zeroblock). The top panel of
figure 6 reports our blockmodel on three images: Similar Business Policy,
Personal Friendship, and Uncomfortableness. The blockmodel was ob-
tained by imposing the above partition onto the matrices for these rela-
tions. The bottom panel shows the resulting blocked matrices. (Obviously—
an implication of the zero cutoff density—this partitioning matches that
produced by BLocKER for this blockmodel.)

Included in both the Policy and Uncomfortableness matrices of choices
are guesses about the question “who .. . might single you out... ?”
(for each relation). Guesses were requested in order to increase the
scope of choices, especially on uncomfortableness. Indeed, 19 of the
27 guesses coincided with direct choices, while few were reciprocated (an
indication that these were surrogate choices rather than realistic percep-
tions of others’ choices). Every guess that did not coincide with a choice
fell into one of the 10 bonds shown in the images; none fell into any of
the eight zeroblocks.

Interpretation—We now turn to a substantive examination of the
blockmodel, considering first the division of men into blocks. The partition
is neither into departments nor into formal ranks. When CoNCoR was ap-
plied twice more (to split the two big blocks), then men 4 and 15 were
separated out within the left-hand block; and men 3, 16, and 5 were split
from the rest of the right-hand block (see [7]). These five blocks, ordered
as in the permutation shown above, correspond exactly to the grouping of
managers by their attitudes to R&D (inferred from their questionnaire
responses, interviews, and actions in specific conflicts over R&D [White
1960, 1961]). Indeed, the permutation classifies managers by degree of
hardheadedness toward R&D. The Executive Vice-President (12), the
Treasurer (14), and the Director of Abrasives Production (10) were
utterly skeptical. The Personnel Manager (16) and the two R&D man-
agers concerned with alloys (3 and 5)—-the more routine side of produc-
tion, in which only routine development was carried on—were close seconds.
All three Sales Managers, plus the overall coordinator of R&D (1) and
the man (2) who ran the most speculative research project, were most
optimistic and favorable to R&D. The President’s Trouble Shooter (15,
in charge of expediting some new products) and manager 4 (a respected
engineer with several inventions that he was trying to produce by a job
shop operation) were favorable but not optimistic about results. In the
middle were the President (11), the Vice President for Production (9),
and the Accountant (13), in the observer’s opinion the most realistic
persons of the entire group; all three were acutely aware both of the
poor record of Firth-Sterling’s R&D and of the crucial importance (for
the company’s image and borrowing capacity) of having an R&D program.

The blockmodel on the three main blocks with the three specific images
makes equal sense. In figure 6 the block of 11, 9, and 13 is put on top,
consonant with its obvious preeminence in the eyes of all. It exchanges
policy bonds with the Sales block (the middle block in the partition [7])
and receives a policy bond from the hardheaded block; in addition, each
block has a policy bond to itself. On Personal Friendship, the top block
Blockmodels also make sense out of data describing social structure over
time. The possibilities are numerous. Blocks can be stable over time, with
the blockmodel changing. On the other hand, a blockmodel may be stable,
with the blocks’ memberships changing as roles and positions rotate among
individuals (of course, we would need independent confirmation of such
changes). Or there can be complete stability, at least for the coarse parti-
tions into blocks together with associated blockmodel images. Successive
observations of choices existed for two of the cases analyzed above, the
monastery and the fraternity. The results are quite similar.

The fraternity data—The stability of both the blockmodel and the
blocks, after the first few weeks of maneuvering, is the main result for the
fraternity. We imposed the three-block partition found for the final week
on the data for each earlier week. We also computed the density of the
top two choices in each block for each week (number of choices divided
by number of cells in which choices could occur); we then computed the
density for the bottom three choices. Figure 7 shows the results of this
procedure for selected weeks: 0, 3, 5, 8, 13, 15. The development seems
clear. In the initial week, the blocks show little variation in density; thus,
there is little justification for asserting that the three blocks exist as distinct
structural entities. By the third week, though, a pattern is clearly discern-
ible; the top two blocks clearly show no internal antagonism, and the
third is clearly at the bottom of a three-part hierarchy. Then, by at least
the fifth week, not only the final blocks but also the final blockmodel have
emerged with remarkable clarity. Thereafter the stability is marked. Now
if either BLOCKER or CONCoR is applied to the data for an intermediate
week, much the same blocks and blockmodel are found, whereas neither a
clear blockmodel nor clear blocks emerged from their application to data
for the first two weeks.

This conclusion has little interest if men are simply repeating the same
choices week after week; the argument in our section on methods was that
men should be expected to change their choices over time, but within the
confines of blocks that contain bonds. For example, take choices made
by the top block. In week 0, these seven men made 14 Like choices (top
two ranks); eight were of different persons from those whom each chose
in the final week. Of these eight choices, five created bonds not predicted
in the coarse V,F model (that is, the bonds were from the top block to the
other block of 10 men); three added to the existing bond. By chance, one
would expect an outcome like this: 10/17 in the forbidden block and
7/17 in the block allowed according to the Like image.

In order to complete this example, we repeated the comparison with
week 15 for each week in turn. Define a change for week i to be a choice
in week i that is not matched by a choice in week 15. We then summed
changes for weeks 0-4 and compared them with changes summed for the
10 weeks 5-15.5° Data for the first five weeks show as many changes of
individual Like choices (38) as were made in the last 10. In the first five
weeks, 60% of the changes fall in the zeroblock—exactly the chance ex-
pectation—but in the last 10 only 34% of the (relatively fewer) changes
are in the zeroblock of the week 15 model. When parallel counts were made
for Antagonism choices (the bottom three ranks), a similar picture
emerged: 45% of the early weeks’ choices differed from those of week 15,
compared with 22% for the late weeks. For the early weeks, exactly the
chance expectation (40%) fell in the zeroblock in the F image, while only
14% of the (relatively infrequent) changes in late weeks lay in this for-
bidden block. There is some indication, then, that individuals’ choices
continue changing even after a blockmodel has stabilized; in addition, after
week 4, the changes—both for positive and for negative ties—conform
much better to the final blockmodel.*1

The monastery data—Sampson claimed that, during the period to
which his data refer, groupings emerged within the monastery and polariza-
tion developed among them; blockmodeling does not show such clear-cut
changes over time. At period T1, before the new cohort of novices arrived,
monks 4, 5, and 6 were the core men, with 9 and 8 more peripheral; 7 was
isolated, but immediately became friendly with monk 16 in the new group.
By T2, according to Sampson’s observation, monks 1 and 2 stood out as
the most respected in the whole group of 18. Then incidents multiplied as
traditional discipline surfaced (even though in much milder form): for
example, some new novices were shocked when shown the waxed whip for
the Order’s traditional mortifications. About period T3, monk 2, without
explicit disapproval from the officials, instigated meetings of the novices
to discuss their routine. In the formal vote for chairman of the meeting,
he received 11 votes while monk 1 received three (only monk 4 was not
present).

Our analysis of change is confounded by the fact that the sociometric
data used here are retrospective from T4. Thus the data for periods T2
through T4 show only moderate changes. Even when the refined partition
into five blocks is imposed upon the earlier data matrices, the counts in
blocks are quite uniform across time periods. The sums of weighted
choices, by block, for Like are shown in the top panel of figure 8.
consistent decline in Like between the top two blocks (roughly, Sampson’s
Loyal Opposition) and the middle two (the Young Turks); however,
the buildup of liking within the bottom block (which Sampson dismissed
as the Outcasts) is equally striking. So also is the increasing focus of
liking ties within the Loyal Opposition (largely from ties withdrawn from
the other blocks) upon their leaders.

The parallel sums for Antagonism are shown in the bottom panel of
figure 8. Again, the five blocks are discernible at the earlier periods. The
only notable pattern changes are the concentration of antagonism from
the leaders we identify in the Loyal Opposition upon the Young Turks’
leaders (these Loyal Opposition leaders, in turn, are increasingly disliked
by followers within the Young Turks).

Much the same changes over time are seen in the other three positive
types of tie and in the negative types. Even the refined partition into
five blocks yields sharp discrimination in the two earlier periods. Sampson
gave careful instructions for the retrospective choices, reminding each
respondent of a salient event marking that period. But it is impossible to
validate them as faithful representations of perceptions at T2 and T3.

We noted in the section on methods that constraints on data collection,
random fluctuation in social relations, and the differential maintenance and
concealment of ties over time give rise in a natural way to “speckled”
blocks (bonds) that are only partly filled with choices. Our model allows
for changes in the novices’ ties over time, but our hypothesis was that
such changes would generally confine themselves to bonds and would not
affect zeroblocks (as defined by the blockmodel for period T4). If choices
for T2 and T3 are really just surrogates for T4, they should fall within
the bonds specified by the blockmodel of T4; the same outcome should
also hold if they are truly for a different period but the same blockmodel is
hypothesized. According to the ‘“top-two, bottom-two” cutoffs used in
applying BLOCKER, among the 25 blocks in each image, about half are
zeroblocks. Of the 131 choices on the four positive types of tie at T3, a
third (43 choices) do not coincide with some choice at T4. Of these 43,
11 created bonds within zeroblocks. For negative types of tie, the cor-
responding figures are: 128 choices, 48 T3 discrepancies from T4, and 7
entries falling at T3 into blocks which are zeroblocks at T4. To put this
another way, of the 2,183 entries that are zero in the eight data matrices
for T4, the majority (59%) are in zeroblocks; however, of the cells that
are zero at T4 but not at T3, four-fifths (80%) are confined at T3 to
blocks that are bonds in the T4 blockmodel. If T2 is compared to T4, the
figures for positive ties are: 130 choices, 62 discrepancies; 20 of the
latter appear in zeroblocks of the T4 blockmodel. For negative ties the
figures are 121, 69, and 17, respectively.

The implications seem simple and agree in general with the Newcomb
IMPLICATIONS: CONCRETE SOCIAL STRUCTURE

Sociologists have long been tortured by their inability to specify clearly
the meaning of two fundamental terms, “role” and “position” (see the
excellent brief review by Catton [1964, pp. 936-43]). All agree that no
cogent theory of social structure can dispense with the concepts these
terms try to capture (one reason Mitchell [1969] is so soft-spoken about
networks is that they seem conceptually remote from role and position).
Part of the trouble, we submit, is the lack of generally applicable opera-
tionalizations: no matter how cogent the prose discussion of role and
position (or cognate terms), the sense of insight fades as the writer (or
his reader) tries to apply them to various concrete social structures.®”

We now suggest that the purposely neutral terms employed until now
—hblock and blockmodel—provide operational definitions for the substan-
tive concepts of role and position. We then suggest a way to interpret
concrete social structures in these terms. We require three primitive terms:
Blockmodels as Roles among Positions

A blockmodel is a hypothesis, a representation proposed for the social
structure that exists in the population’s claims. Three terms can be used
to describe a blockmodel:

(4) position—each of the sets into which the population is partitioned
is a position. The technical term “block” is a synonym for this substan-
tive concept.33

(5) bond—a nonzero entry from one position to another in the image

for a toft.
(6) image—the report, in the form of a binary matrix, of the bonds

on a given toft among all positions.

By its definition, a blockmodel is a simultaneous graph homomorphism
in mathematical terms (Heil and White 1974). Mapping the population
into positions requires mapping each data graph matrix simultaneously
onto the corresponding image. By the definition of a homomorphic map-
ping, there is no bond from one position to another if and only if there
is no claim from any member of the first position to any member of the
other position. Thus, in the terms used earlier, each image is fully specified
from its zeroblocks when the persons in a data matrix are partitioned into
positions.
American Journal of Sociology

The theoretical content of a blockmodel hypothesis, then, is a trans-
formation of individual claims into a statement of social bonds (i.e., ties
within and among positions). Reflexivity (the existence of “self-choices”
or unity entries on the diagonal of a matrix) now emerges as a major
substantive question about each position, rather than (as in sociometry)
a mere technicality of presentation for a claims matrix. We argue (and
further elaborate in Part II) that a bond has truly social content—is
“received” by the target position as well as “sent” by the row position—
whether or not there is a reciprocal bond on that toft from the target to
the sender position.

Not only have we left open the actual semantic content of the claims
on a toft; we have also not specified the general nature of tofts. One or
more of the tofts might refer to rights, another to duties, another to con-
tracts, another to evaluations, and so on through the long list of general
natures proposed in various analyses of roles (once again, legal applica-
tions are obvious). It seems to us worthwhile to define position and role
within as abstract and flexible a cultural framework as possible, so that
the cultural content of the social structure becomes a question for empirical
research rather than a matter of definition. Sustained analysis of social
structure, we reiterate, requires keeping the two sides of the analysis as
distinct as possible.

Our next definition is abstract in cultural terms but specific to the
population and its positions in the blockmodel:

(7) role set—a pair of vectors for all blockmodel images: one the
ordered set of rows for that position, the other the columns for that po-
sition.34

Thus a role set is simply a statement of bonds sent and bonds received,
by a position, on all the tofts. Observe that a position’s bond (or lack of
one) to itself on each toft is part of its role set. There is no need to report
the role set for each position as a pair of vectors because the set of images
for the blockmodel is a complete inventory of the role sets for all positions.
Where the first toft has connotations of deference, and the second of
domination, one interprets the first position as the superior of the second.
Or, one could begin with no knowledge of the imputed quality of the tofts
but with attribute data for the individual members: for example, the fact
that members of the second position shared higher standing in various
other contexts and populations. Then one would infer that the second
toft had the quality of deference and the first connoted domination.

As we have seen in the case studies, one must usually work with a wide
variety of clues as to possible standings of positions and qualities of tofts.
As more case studies are analyzed, we can hope that regularities will
emerge, clarifying what sort of array is to be found in what context.
“Context” must include what tofts one can and does elicit as data.

An array can take many forms, as the case studies show. The linear
hierarchy or partial order is only one class of possibilities, though an
important one. The array may indicate hierarchy though all bonds are
reciprocated: see, for example, the Bank Wiring Room blockmodel on
like and antagonism, which is a refinement of an E,F blockmodel, not a
V,W one. And the hierarchical array suggested for Newcomb’s fraternity
is a refinement of a blockmodel with both symmetric and asymmetric
bonds, namely, V,F.
American Journal of Sociology

Classic balance theory suggests the P,N array as the concrete social
structure seen by an observer. Here there is no question of hierarchy;
instead, we have the familiar idea of rigid polarization into two opposing
parties.

If one finds the blockmodel C,D on a pair of tofts, it suggests that there
is no array (no overall social structure on that population); the population
falls into two unrelated cliques, each of which responds only on its “own”
toft. On the other hand, the blockmodel X,Y suggests a highly integrated
structure; for example, let X mean “seeks as husbands” and Y mean “seeks
as wife,” and partition the population by sex.

There are 57 distinct pairs of images on two positions; but we do not
speculate about the significance of each one. The case studies illustrate
how the investigator is usually led toward discriminating more than two
positions in his blockmodel hypothesis. Taxonomies of multiposition block-
models,?* and taxonomies of tofts, must be evolved as the empirical base
is widened; in addition, careful attention must be given to the many rele-
vant conceptual analyses in the literature.87 Some developments along
these lines will be a byproduct of Part II.
structures, a more complex level of overall integration that need not
accompany regularities of the concrete sort described here.

The approaches we have described are applicable to open network
populations (e.g., a contact network composed of biomedical researchers)
as well as to the small, closed groups that are the traditional preserve of
sociometric investigators. Blockmodel applications to a third class of popu-
lations—those comprising groups as varied as informal associations and
corporate boards of directors—are reported elsewhere (Breiger et al.
1975) .38 This broad applicability results from the ability of blockmodels to
address the problematic issue of locating the boundaries of social interac-
tion. In our view, large, loosely bounded, “open” populations are particu-
larly interesting subjects for blockmodeling. We suggested that our sample
of 28 scientists (from Griffith’s 107 respondents) reflected the structural
pattern evident in the larger population. This claim deserves serious
scrutiny: if it is upheld in future work, network analysis can be generalized
to the study of populations far larger than those studied by earlier network
techniques.

Even if evolutionary or discontinuous changes of structure can be identi-
fied and congruence with. personal and cultural perceptions established,
models of structure are not sufficient unto themselves. Eventually one
must be able to show how concrete social processes and individual manipu-
lations shape and are shaped by structure. A natural next step, then, is to
identify how flows of information and other transactions relate to images
and their change. One fundamental problem here is that many social
settings may admit not just a single equilibrium outcome, but multiple
alternative equilibria, with which particular equilibrium is reached depend-
ing in part on accidents of early interaction (compare the earlier comments
on the Newcomb fraternity data; compare also Simon’s [1957] model of
Homans’s theory of small groups). In turn, the interesting questions may
bear on what external forces may cause a social structure to pass from
one equilibrium configuration to another. A number of quite distinct tradi-
tions of model building seem to be converging on this same set of problems,
including Schelling’s work on “tipping” phenomena (1971) as well as
models of the genetic evolution of social behavior (Boorman and Levitt
1973; Boorman 1974).

There is an important limitation in the viewpoint urged thus far. As we
stated in the very first paragraph, connectivity properties in networks
receive only tangential attention. The contrast between weak and strong
ties should be a major factor in connectivity analyses for large populations
(Rapoport and Horvath 1961; Granovetter 1973; Boorman 1975). Block-
models as developed thus far deal chiefly with strong ties, whether in
open-network populations or in small enclaves. It may be harder to find
nontrivial blockmodels for weak ties (e.g., sociometric choices in casual or
temporary groups such as those used in social psychological experiments) 3°

Connectivity has also been a major concern in sociometric studies of
closed populations. Overlaps among cliques often have been used (e.g.,
Coleman 1961; Young and Larson 1965) to indicate structure (although
there is no agreed-upon or powerful way to model overlaps). Blockmodels
impose a partition of a population into disjoint blocks or positions (except
for floaters—see Appendix A). Clique overlap is captured only by the
device of cross-cutting partitions (as in the Bank Wiring Room). We focus
instead on modeling overlaps between independent networks and on ag-
gregating multiple networks while retaining their network character (the
incidence of “holes” as zeroblocks). The practical tradeoff is between
developing statistical measures of clique overlap (e.g., Alba 1973) on the
one hand, and on the other hand interpreting aggregate patterns across
multiple networks. New techniques may provide new vistas. Of particular
promise is a new nonhierarchical clustering model now in the process of
development by Arabie and Shepard (Arabie and Shepard 1973; Shepard
1974). The idea underlying this model is one of allowing arbitrarily given
proximity data to define their own lattice of overlapping clusters in a
natural and unconstrained way.

Finally, we need to enlarge the base of case studies. We particularly
need data from which we can learn how new recruits to a population
merge with, or change, the structure reflected in a blockmodel. In the
terminology introduced earlier, when will a new recruit become a “crystal-
lizer,” and when a “floater”? When will his initial ties of various types
relegate him to a block that is marginal to the structure? Is the Z pattern,
on specified tofts, the normal context for indoctrination or socialization
into an open network population? Is the V,F array (on positive- and
negative-affect ties, respectively) characteristic of clustering and deference
within stable small, closed groups? Only with a broader empirical base
can general regularities be sought.
APPENDIX A
Floaters and Crystallizers

In each case study reported in this paper, BLOCKER yields a unique assign-
ment of men to blocks, subject to two limitations. First, an assignment is
termed unique even though one or more men can each be in two or more
blocks, for the given unique assignment of the rest of the population; how-
ever, these “floaters” must be specified. The extreme example is a man
with no ties of any type, who can therefore be in any block simply because
he is irrelevant; it would be misleading to create a different overall assign-
ment for each of his possible locations. Second, the minimum number of
men any block can contain must be specified; otherwise, for example, a
vacuous solution with no men in some block would have to be counted.
The acronym for this parameter, MIN, is used hereafter to designate the
minimum block size thought appropriate for a given population and
blockmodel. For convenience, the two specifications are reported together
here for each case study:
where the top row is the left set of reasons, etc. The wiremen in the back
clique usually cited reasons from the second set; the wiremen from the
front, almost never. These reasons, 7, 8, 9, 11, associated with the wiremen
W6, W7, W8, W9, include “Waiting for Solderman” and “Waiting for
Inspector,” but not “Waiting for Trucker.” Roethlisberger and Dickson
(1939) noted that the “waiting” class of reasons is highly subjective and
“includes reasons which placed the biame for delays upon people instead
of upon things” (p. 431). This maximal taking advantage of discretion,
coupled with resentment at equals and superiors (soldermen and inspec-
tors, not truckers), fits in with the tendency to fight over windows within
the back clique (see fig. 5) and conforms with R-D’s finding that the
back clique “resented any show of superiority more than the others did
because they were in the most subordinate position” (p. 523). Reason 9
is somewhat a technicality, as wireman W9 was assigned to making repairs
(p. 432). Reason 11 is not discussed in the source (see p. 432).

If the back clique’s reasons tended to fall into an imputed “resent-
ment” category, the front clique’s reasons indicated “playing the game”
or perhaps a “craftsman’s ethic.” In roughly one-fifth of all instances of
time allowances for the front clique, its members gave no reason at all,
while the comparable figure for the back clique was 8%. Mostly, the rea-
sons of the front clique are objective, as R-D define that term (e.g., cable
reversals were detected by inspectors’ tests). However, they label ‘“defec-
tive wire” and “defective solder” as subjective reasons. It may be argued
that these reasons are different from those in the “waiting” class (reasons
6, 7, 8) in that they represent a “professional” judgment.
Arabie, P., and R. N. Shepard. 1973. “Representation of Similarities as Additive
Combinations of Discrete, Overlapping Properties.” Paper read at Mathematical
Psychology Meetings, Montreal, August 1973.

Barnes, J. A. 1972. “Social Networks.” Addison-Wesley Module Publications 26.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Bjerstedt, A. 1956. Interpretations of Sociometric Choice Status. Lund: Gleerup.

Boissevain, J. 1973. Preface to Network Analysis: Studies in Human Interaction, edited
by J. Boissevain and J. C. Mitchell. The Hague: Mouton.

Bonacich, P. 1972. “Techniques for Analyzing Overlapping Memberships.” Pp. 176-85 in
Sociological Methodology 1972, edited by Herbert L. Costner. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Boorman, S. A. 1974. “Island Models for Takeover by a Social Trait Facing a
Frequency-dependent Selection Barrier in a Mendelian Population.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, USA 71 (11): 2103-7.

. 1975. “A Combinatorial Optimization Model for Transmission of Job In-
formation through Contact Networks.” Bell Journal of Economics 6 (Spring):
216-49.

Boorman, S. A., and P. R. Levitt. 1973. “A Frequency-dependent Natural Selection
Model for the Evolution of Social Cooperation Networks.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA 70 (1): 187-89.

Boorman, S. A., and H. C. White. 1976. “Social Structure from Multiple Networks.
II. Role Structures.” American Journal of Sociology, in press.

Breiger, R. L. 1974a. “Blockmodel Analysis of Elite Structures.” Paper presented at
the M.S.S.B. Conference on Elites, Harvard University, October 1974.

. 1974b. “The Duality of Persons and Groups.” Social Forces 53 (December):

181-90.

. 1976. “Career Attributes and Network Structure: A Blockmodel Study of a
Biomedical Research Specialty.” American Sociological Review, vol. 41 (February),
in press.

Breiger, R. L., S. A. Boorman, and P. Arabie. 1975. “An Algorithm for Clustering
Relational Data with Applications to Social Network Analysis and Comparison with
Multidimensional Scaling.” Journal of Mathematical Psychology 12 (August):
328-83.

Catton, W. R., Jr. 1964. “The Development of Sociological Thought.” Pp. 912-50 in
Handbook of Modern Sociology, edited by Robert E. L. Faris. Chicago: Rand
McNally.

Cohen, M. D., and J. G. March. 1974. Leadership and Ambiguity: The American
College President. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Coleman, J. S. 1958. “Relational Analysis: The Study of Social Organizations with
Survey Methods.” Human Organization 17 (Winter): 28-36.

. 1961. The Adolescent Society. New York: Free Press.

. 1964. Introduction to Mathematical Sociology. New York: Free Press.

Davis, J. A. 1970, “Clustering and Hierarchy in Interpersonal Relations: Testing Two
Graph Theoretical Models on 742 Sociograms.” American Sociological Review 35
(October): 843-52.

Ekeh, P. 1974. Social Exchange Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Flament, C. 1963. Applications of Graph Theory to Group Structure. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Ford, E. B. 1955. “Rapid Evolution and the Conditions Which Make It Possible.”
Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 20: 230-38.

Ford, L. R., Jr., and D. R. Fulkerson. 1962. Flows in Networks. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.

Fortes, M. 1945. The Dynamics of Clanship among the Tallensi. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Friedell, M. F. 1967. “Organizations as Semilattices.” American Sociological Review
32 (February): 46-54,

Glanzer, M., and R. Glaser. 1959. “Techniques for the Study of Group Structure and
Behavior: I. Analysis of Structure.” Psychological Bulletin 56 (September): 317-32.

. 1961. “Techniques for the Study of Group Structure and Behavior: II. Em-
pirical Studies of the Effects of Structure in Small Groups.” Psychological Bulletin
58 (January): 1-27.

Granovetter, M. S. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociology
68 (May): 1360-80.

. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

Green, H. A. J. 1964. Aggregation in Economic Analysis. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.

Griffith, B. C., V. L. Maier, and A. J. Miller. 1973. “Describing Communication
Networks through the Use of Matrix-based Measures.” Mimeographed. Philadelphia:
Drexel University, Graduate School of Library Science.

Groeneveld, L. P. 1974. “Bureaucracy and the Organization of Science: A Structural
Analysis of the National Science Foundation.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Sociology, University of Indiana.

Gross, N., W. S. Mason, and A. W. McEachern. 1958, Explorations in Role Analysis.
New York: Wiley.

Harary, F., R. Norman, and D. Cartwright. 1965. Structural Models: An Introduction
to the Theory of Directed Graphs. New York: Wiley.

Heil, G. H., and H. C. White. 1974. “An Algorithm for Constructing Homomorphisms
of Multiple Graphs.” Unpublished paper, Department of Sociology, Harvard Uni-
versity.

Hilton, P. J., and S. Wylie. 1960. Homology Theory: An Introduction to Algebraic
Topology. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Holland, P. W., and S. Leinhardt. 1973. “The Structural Implications of Measurement
Error in Sociometry.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 3 (January): 1-27.

. 1976. “Local Structure in Social Networks.” In Sociological Methodology 1976,
edited by David R. Heise. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, in press.

Homans, G. C. 1950. The Human Group. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

Hunter, J. E., and R. L, Shotland. 1974, “Treating Data Collected by the ‘Small World’
Method as a Markov Process.” Social Forces 52 (March): 321-32.

Jencks, C., et al. 1972. Inequality: A Reassessment of the Effect of Family and
Schooling in America. New York: Harper & Row.

Kapferer, B. 1972. Strategy and Transaction in an African Factory. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.

Kruskal, J. B. 1964a. “Multidimensional Scaling by Optimizing Goodness of Fit to a
Nonmetric Hypothesis.” Psychometrika 29 (March): 1-28.

. 1964b. “Nonmetric Multidimensional Scaling: A Numerical Method.” Psy-
chometrika 29 (June): 115-59.

Larsen, O. N., and W. R. Catton, Jr. 1962. Concept and Sociology. New York: Harper
& Row.

Laumann, E. O., and F. U. Pappi. 1973. “New Directions in the Study of Community
Elites.” American Sociological Review 38 (April): 212-30.

Lee, N. Howell. 1969. The Search for an Abortionist. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Leijonhufvud, A. 1968. On Keynesian Economics and the Economics of Keynes: A
Study in Monetary Theory. London: Oxford University Press.

Levine, J. H. 1972. “The Sphere of Influence.” American Sociological Review 37
(February): 14-27.

Levins, R. 1968. Evolution in Changing Environments. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.

Lorrain, F. P., and H. C. White. 1971. “Structural Equivalence of Individuals in
Social Networks.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1 (January): 49-80.

McFarland, D. D., and D. J. Brown. 1973. “Social Distance as a Metric: A Systematic
Introduction to Smallest Space Analysis.” Pp. 213-53 in Bonds of Pluralism: The
Form and Substance of Urban Social Networks, edited by Edward O. Laumann.
New York: Wiley.

McQuitty, L. L., and J. A. Clark. 1968. “Clusters from Iterative Intercolumnar Cor-
relational Analysis.” Educational and Psychological Measurement 28 (Summer):
211-38.

MacRae, D. 1960. “Direct Factor Analysis of Sociometric Data.” Sociometry 23
(December): 360-71.

Marschak, J., and R. Radner. 1972. Economic Theory of Teams. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press.

Mayer, A. C. 1960. Caste and Kinship in Central India: A Village and Its Region.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Mayr, E. 1963. Animal Species and Evolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

Menzel, H. 1962. “Planned and Unplanned Scientific Communication.” Pp. 417-41 in
The Sociology of Science, edited by Bernard Barber and Walter Hirsch. New York:
Free Press.

Merton, R. K. 1959. Social Theory and Social Structure. 2d ed. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Milgram, S. 1967. “The Small World Problem.” Psychology Today 1 (May): 61-67.

Mitchell, J. C., ed. 1969. Social Networks and Urban Situations. Manchester: Man-
chester University Press, for Institute of Social Research, Zambia.

Mullins, N. C. 1972. “The Structure of an Elite: The Public Advisory Structure of
the Public Health Service.” Science Studies 2 (January): 3-29.

Nadel, S. F. 1957. The Theory of Social Structure. London: Cohen & West.

Newcomb, T. M. 1961. The Acquaintance Process. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.

Nordlie, P. G. 1958. “A Longitudinal Study of Interpersonal Attraction in a Natural
Group Setting.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan.

Pool, I. de S., and M. Kochen. 1958. Unpublished manuscript on contact networks.
Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Rapoport, A. 1963. “Mathematical Models of Social Interaction.” Pp. 493-579 in
Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, Vol. II, edited by R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush,
and E. Galanter. New York: Wiley.

Rapoport, A., and J. W. Horvath. 1961. “A Study of a Large Sociogram.” Behavioral
Science 6 (October): 280-85.

Roethlisberger, F. J., and W. J. Dickson. 1939. Management and the Worker. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Sampson, S. F. 1969. “Crisis in a Cloister.” Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell University.

Savage, I. R., and K. A. Deutsch. 1960. “A Statistical Model of the Gross Analysis of
Transaction Flows.” Econometrica 28 (July): 551-72.

Sayles, L. R. 1958. Behavior of Industrial Work Groups. New York: Wiley.

Schaller, G. B. 1972. The Serengeti Lion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Schelling, T. C. 1960. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

. 1971. “Dynamic Models of Segregation.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology
1 (July): 143-86.

Schwartz, J. E. 1974. “An Examination of Iterative Blocking Algorithms for
Sociometry.” Unpublished paper, Department of Sociology, Harvard University.

Shepard, R. N. 1962. “The Analysis of Proximities: Multidimensional Scaling with an
Unknown Distance Function.” Psychometrika 27 (1): 125-40; 27 (2): 219-46.

. 1974, “Representation of Structure in Similarity Data: Problems and Pros-
pects.” Psychometrika 39 (December): 373-421.

Simmel, G. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Translated and edited by Kurt H.
Wolff. New York: Free Press.

. 1955. Conflict and the Web of Group-A ffiliations. Translated by Kurt H.
Wolff and Reinhardt Bendix. New York: Free Press.

Simon, H. A. 1957. Models of Man. New York: Wiley.
American Journal of Sociology

Struhsaker, T. T. 1967. “Social Structure among Vervet Monkeys (Cercopithecus
aethiops).” Behaviour 29 (1): 83-121.

Suppes, P. 1960. Axiomatic Set Theory. New York: Van Nostrand,

Szasz, G. 1963. Introduction to Lattice Theory. New York: Academic Press.

White, H. C. 1960. “Management Conflict over Research and Development: A Case
Study.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Sociology, Princeton University.

. 1961. “Management Conflict and Sociometric Structure.” American Journal of

Sociology 67 (September): 185-99.

. 1963. An Anatomy of Kinship. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

. 1970a. Chains of Opportunity. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

. 1970b. “Search Parameters for the Small World Problem.” Social Forces 49

(December): 259-64.

1973. “Everyday Life in Stochastic Networks.” Sociological Inquiry 43

(Spring): 43-49.

. 1974a. “Models for Interrelated Roles from Multiple Networks in Small

Populations.” Pp, 52-102 in Proceedings of the Conference on the Application of

Undergraduate Mathematics in the Engineering, Life, Managerial and Social Sciences,

edited by P. J. Knopp and G. H. Meyer. Atlanta: Georgia Institute of Technology.

. 19746, “Null Probabilities for Blockmodels of Social Networks.” Unpublished
paper, Department of Sociology, Harvard University.

Wiese, L. von. 1941. Sociology. Edited and annotated by F. H. Mueller. New York:
Oskar Priest.

Williamson, O. E. 1970. Corporate Control and Business Behavior. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Wilson, E. O. 1971. The Insect Societies. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Young, R. C., and O. F. Larson. 1965. “A New Approach to Community Structure.”
American Sociological Review 30 (December): 926-34.

Zelditch, M., Jr. 1968. “Status, Social.” International Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences 13:250-56.

Znaniecki, F. 1940. The Social Role of the Man of Knowledge. New York: Columbia
University Press.
