Replacing Members with Managers? Mutualism among Membership and Nonmembership
Advocacy Organizations in the United States

Author(s): Edward T. Walker, John D. McCarthy and Frank Baumgartner

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 116, No. 4 (January 2011), pp. 1284-1337
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/655753

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:58 UTC
Associations with a professional staff but no members (nonmem-
bership advocacy organizations, or NMAOs) are the subject of lively
debate. Many argue that their proliferation has allowed an expan-
sion of advocacy without an accompanying growth in civic en-
gagement. This article asks if there has been significant recent
growth of NMAOs and if those organizations have displaced mem-
bership advocacy organizations (MAOs). The authors find no evi-
dence for a proportional increase of NMAOs since the 1960s. Fur-
ther, among all organizations in three populations—peace, women’s
issues, and human rights—NMAOs have not displaced MAOs. In
particular, the authors find that MAO density shapes NMAO found-
ing, as membership groups provide a base for professional advocacy.
These findings challenge the notion that U.S. civic life has undergone
a systemic transformation away from organizational forms that pro-
mote civic engagement.
advocacy, by many indicators, appeared to be quickening during the long
decade of the 1960s, it appeared that civic engagement was not keeping
pace. The first approximation to a solution to the puzzle implicated the
growth of professional advocacy organizations, or those led by experts
who mobilized support through a variety of new channels, but mostly
did not enlist member participation through dense local groups (McCarthy
and Zald 1973). So, while surveys of individual participation and records
of membership in voluntary associations do not reflect a strong suprt in
civic engagement after the 1960s, there was, no doubt, an efflorescence
of new citizen advocacy groups; these were more systematically docu-
mented, first, by political scientist Jack Walker (1983, 1991) and then more
thickly corroborated by a number of subsequent researchers. Some schol-
ars of interest groups continued to misread that rapid growth of advocacy
groups as an indicator of increasing citizen engagement, however: “In
fact, a participation revolution has occurred in the country as large num-
bers of citizens have become active in ever-increasing number of protest
groups, citizens’ organizations and special interest groups” (Loomis and
Cigler 1995, p. 10).

In the late 1990s, two well-known Harvard scholars, Theda Skocpol
and Robert Putnam, sparked what has become an expanding debate about
the decline of civic engagement in the United States: Skocpol from the
perspective of trends in voluntary associations and Putnam from the per-
spective of trends in individual civic engagement. Both pointed to the
profusion of professional advocacy organizations with no members or with
members who are very weakly connected to organizational leadership,
two types of groups they saw as deeply implicated in the stagnation, if
not decline, of civic engagement.

Yet there is no systematic assessment of this central premise in this
widely accepted portrait of the expansion and role of nonmembership
advocacy organizations in arguments for the transformation of civic en-
gagement in the United States in recent decades. In this article we fill
this void by presenting systematic evidence, drawn from the Encyclopedia
of Associations, about the founding and density of citizen advocacy or-
ganizations during the past four decades in order to assess (1) whether
the rate of founding of memberless advocacy organizations has increased

Hogan, Erik W. Johnson, Howard Kimeldorf, Calvin Morrill, Hans Noel, Jason Owen-
Smith, Silvia Pedraza, Fabio Rojas, Vincent Roscigno, Sarah Soule, Jackie Smith,
Patricia Strach, Kiyo Tsutsui, Bert Useem, and Mayer Zald. The usual disclaimers
apply. Portions of the work reported here were supported by National Science Foun-
dation grant SES-0111443, with Bryan D. Jones. The lead author acknowledges the
support of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Neither the NSF nor the RWJF
bears responsibility for the analysis reported. Direct correspondence to: Edward T.
Walker, University of Vermont, 31 South Prospect Street, Burlington, Vermont 05405.
E-mail: Edward.Walker@uvm.edu
GROWTH IN THE ADVOCACY GROUP SECTOR

We focus our attention in this article on what we have been calling ad-
vocacy organizations or groups. In so doing, we follow the synthetic lead
of Kenneth Andrews and Bob Edwards (2004), who recently completed
a systematic review of three quite separate but parallel literatures on
interest groups, social movement organizations, and nonprofit organiza-
tions. They make a convincing argument that “overall, there is substantial
common ground in conceptual definitions” among these literatures, lead-
ing them to define advocacy organizations as those “that make public
interest claims either promoting or resisting social change that, if imple-
mented, would conflict with the social, cultural, political or economic
interests or values of other constituencies or groups” (p. 485).

Jack Walker’s (1983, 1991) early and still widely influential attempt to
map the extent of and the changes in the interest group sector in Wash-
ington, D.C., estimated that advocacy groups—or what he called citizens’
groups—made up approximately 20% of associations in 1980; the rest
were primarily trade associations and professional associations. He further
concluded, by analyzing the founding dates of the 564 organizations he
surveyed, that there had been a rapid burst of new citizens’ groups during
the 1960s and 1970s.’ Walker included only groups with members in his
study, although he did include organizations whose members were other
organizations.

Walker’s data were later reanalyzed by Baumgartner and Leech (1998,
p. 11) who found a 180% increase in citizens’ groups between 1960 and
1985 of 180% compared to a 47% increase in trade associations and a
65% increase in professional associations. These authors went on to il-
lustrate the similarity of these trends to those seen among equivalent
subgroups of associations listed in the Encyclopedia of Associations, a
publication whose estimates avoid the bias created by omitting certain
nonsurviving organizations (i.e., left censoring). These more systematic
efforts to document the explosion of advocacy groups in the closing de-
cades of the 20th century were consistent with more anecdotal approaches,
generating a wide consensus that such an “explosion” had taken place.

Subsequently, an expanding scholarly dialogue has documented the
increasing prevalence and political influence of advocacy “associations
without members” in the closing decades of the 20th century (Gray and
Lowery 1996; Weir and Ganz 1997, p. 156; Skocpol 1999a, 1999b, 2003,
2004a, 20046; Edwards and Foley 2002, p. 101; Skocpol, Cobb, and Klof-
stad 2005; Eikenberry 2007; Strolovitch 2007; Minkoff, Aisenbrey, and
Agnone 2008), from international nongovernmental organizations (Boli
and Thomas 1997; Keck and Sikkink 1998) to think tanks and policy-
planning organizations (Peschek 1987; McGann 1992; Rich 2004) to Wash-
ington advocacy organizations concerned with postmaterial issues (Berry
1999). These groups have become a prominent force in American society
and politics and have undoubtedly increased in number among the pop-
ulation of organizations engaged in voicing the concerns of citizens in
public affairs (Skocpol 1999a, 1999b, 2003, 2004a, 2004b). As Skocpol
(2004a, p. A6) puts it, “voluntary groups founded in the 1970s and ’80s
adopted new forms of organization. Some—such as public law groups,
think tanks, foundations, and political action committees—are not ac-
tually membership groups at all. And many others are staff-centered as-
sociations that have few, if any, chapters and recruit most supporters
individually via the mail or media messages.”

From one side, the recent dialogue has emphasized that NMAOs rep-
resent a relatively novel form of organization and that their proportion
in the “cause-oriented” organizational field has increased dramatically
since the 1970s (Skocpol 2003, p. 163). Minkoff et al. (2008, p. 527) point
out that the new advocacy environment is often seen, in much recent
scholarship, as having a problem of “voice without variety.” The theo-
retical suggestion here is that “significant resource and political constraints

. . tend to promote a great deal of similarity—or, isomorphism—among
organizations and. . . a higher level of structuration in the organizational
field and very little diversity in organizing models” (p. 527). In this process,
professional advocates are believed to have displaced the central role of
traditional membership organizations.’ Underlying this discussion is the
notion that this novel form of mobilization has troubling representational
consequences, since these groups are only loosely connected to the public.
Membership organizations, by contrast, have traditionally provided a cru-
cial link between members of the public and the Washington policy pro-
cess, while also providing opportunities for citizens to engage directly
with one another in local settings; their decline and reorganization have
been tied to increasing inequalities in both participation and represen-
tation (Skocpol 2004b). The decline of traditional membership organi-
zations and their replacement by professional advocates are therefore
related to the decline in civic capacity. But is such replacement taking
place?

Robert Putnam (1995, 2000) approached the puzzle from a different
direction, first exhaustively identifying trends that show the decline of
individual citizen engagement during the last decades of the 20th century.
From another side, he has explored a diverse array of explanations of the
decline he documents, almost all of them at the individual level of analysis,
paying somewhat less attention to what sociologists and political scientists
have increasingly come to know as the availability of “opportunities to
participate” that advocacy organizations can provide. We argue that ad-
vocacy organizations could play a crucial role in accounting for changing
levels of civic engagement: to the extent that advocacy organizations pro-
vide fewer opportunities to participate, then the changing demography
of organizational forms may be an important element in explaining de-
clines in civic engagement. In Bowling Alone (2000), Putnam’s account
of the decline of civic engagement, he endorses a version of the replace-
ment hypothesis to the puzzle of apparently increasing numbers of ad-
vocacy organizations occurring at the same time that levels of civic en-
gagement are declining. Indeed, he attributes these changes to the
considerable growth of “tertiary” organizations in which “‘membership’
is essentially an honorific rhetorical device for fundraising” (p. 156). A
replacement argument is consistent with Putnam’s, in that he emphasizes
the emergence of memberless advocacy organizations, although he cer-
tainly does not directly advance many general claims about the changing
demography of advocacy organizational forms. Nevertheless, in concert
with Skocpol’s influential argument, more or less explicit empirical claims
about memberless organizations in the evolution of the advocacy orga-
nizational sector in recent decades have pervaded much of the discussion
about civic engagement in the United States (e.g., Gray and Lowery 1996;
Edwards and Foley 2002, p. 101; Andrews and Edwards 2004, p. 488;
Eikenberry 2007; Strolovitch 2007; Minkoff et al. 2008) and in transna-
tional advocacy (Smith 2005), and the changing context of membership
organizations is also well documented (e.g., Shaiko 1999; Bosso 2003;
Sampson et al. 2005; Sobieraj 2006; Howard and Gilbert 2008). Marshall
Ganz, for instance, has gone so far as to refer to nonmembership orga-
nizations as “bodyless heads” (according to Skocpol [2003, p. 163)).

While analysts of civic engagement and political participation have
argued that the memberless organizational form is relatively novel, an-
alysts of social movements and advocacy organizations have recognized
that staff-dominated groups have long played an active role in advocacy,
from policy institutes founded by former movement leaders (Meyer and
Whittier 1994, p. 288) to legal defense funds (Tauber 1998) to national
networks that train cadres for grassroots community organizations (Del-
gado 1986; Warren 2001). Similarly, Minkoff et al. (2008) find that more
than one-third of the advocacy field consists of nonmembership groups:
about one in four is a centralized nonmembership organization (such as
the Center for Responsive Politics); an additional 10% are nonmembership
networks with chapters (such as the AIDS Action Council). Political sci-
entists have also long recognized the importance of diverse organizational
forms, particularly nonmembership “institutions,” in government advo-
cacy (Salisbury 1984; Lowery and Gray 1998). So memberless advocacy
organizations, this research implies, are neither a novel organizational
form nor one that necessarily plays a proportionally larger role among
modern advocacy organizations. Instead of replacing membership orga-
nizations, then, nonmembership advocacy organizations (VMAOs) may
instead play a complementary role in advocacy, if not also in the direct
mobilization of citizen engagement.

Our research asks two questions about memberless advocacy organi-
zations. First, despite the increasing attention paid to nonmembership
advocacy organizations in studies of civic engagement and the voluntary
sector, there has yet to be a systematic examination of whether these
organizations are, in fact, an increasing portion of the advocacy associ-
ational community. Does systematic evidence support this claim? It seems
more than appropriate, then, to consider whether NMAOs have grown
as a proportion of the organizational population of advocacy groups active
in public affairs. Second, in line with the contending perspectives outlined
above, we also test the argument that NMAOs have been replacing mem-
bership organizations. Are such associations a competing organizational
form, effectively squeezing out traditional membership groups, or are they
complementary, developing alongside membership groups, interacting
with them and emerging from similar environmental contexts?

In the present analysis, we examine the growth of the memberless
organizational form both in the broader field of advocacy associations
and, more specifically, in organizations active in three of the most prom-
inent and contested issue arenas in the United States during the last 40
years: peace issues, women’s issues, and human rights issues. We explain
the logic and method of our selection of these three populations for analysis
in later discussion. We employ data gathered from the complete public
affairs section of the Encyclopedia of Associations over the period 1965-
97. This time period captures the key years of changing civic organization
in the United States, as documented by a variety of observers (Walker
1991; Berry 1997; Weir and Ganz 1997; Skocpol 1999a), although it omits
the very recent years in which the expansion of Internet and communi-
cations technologies have further lowered the costs of collective action
(Howard 2006). As the public affairs section of the Encyclopedia is a
relatively comprehensive catalogue of national advocacy organizations in
these three issue arenas, it is an appropriate source of data on both mem-
bership and staff-only associations; for a full description of this data source
and the extent to which it can be taken as representative of national
advocacy organizations in the United States, we direct readers to the
appendix.

We begin by reviewing claims about the expansion and proportional
representation of nonmembership advocacy associations since the 1960s.
We then propose a strategy for assessing our claim that the density of
each kind of association may actually enhance rather than inhibit the rate
of founding of the other. Next, we describe the data sources and specific
variables we bring to bear in understanding the macro-organizational
dynamics (Minkoff 2002) of membership organizations and NMAOs in
these three advocacy organization populations. In turn, we analyze the
patterns of founding of memberless organizations using data on the den-
sity of organizations in each issue sector, along with controls for govern-
ment attention to the issue in question, the resource environment, and
media attention. We conclude by discussing the broader implications of
this study for research on civic engagement and voluntary associations.
cates of a movement’s cause who would prefer to abstain from direct
engagement (McCarthy and Zald 1977). Indeed, as we maintain here,
there is good reason to believe that membership and nonmembership
organizations play complementary rather than competitive roles, just as
service providers—such as movement-related cultural groups, educational
institutions, and publishing houses—tend to undergird the regular activ-
ism of the primary organizations active in social movements (Della Porta
and Diani 1999, p. 146).

The common image in scholarly discourse of memberless associations
is of a group that relies almost entirely on direct mail, telemarketing, and
advocacy advertising in order to provoke a distant constituency into writ-
ing a check to the organization or, perhaps more significantly, contacting
their representatives to support the group’s issue positions. These orga-
nizations are thought to be heavily focused on national politics—many
of the largest such groups have headquarters in Washington, D.C.—and
to mobilize individuals in their local communities mainly in order to make
them a force in national-level politics through grassroots lobbying. Mem-
berless organizations, relying as they do on paid staff members, are pur-
ported to have grown in political significance in response to the changing
patterns of professional and elite political participation (Skocpol 1999a,
2003). Because many such organizations have only a “paper” constituency,
their advocacy efforts are, at times, accused of lacking authenticity or
even of being “Astroturf” (i.e., a “fake” grassroots organization in which
participants either are fictional or were apparently misled into partici-
pating; Loomis and Cigler 1995). Some, such as David Horowitz’s (now
defunct) Center for the Study of Popular Culture, are little more than
unanchored organizational names useful in the attribution of quotes in
media reports. Jack Walker (1991) noted that many organizations active
in the Washington advocacy community were, in fact, mobilized almost
entirely through the efforts of elite-led organizational structures rather
than arising spontaneously from popular demands. Wealthy patrons could
fund advocacy organizations, and these groups might or might not later
develop strong membership bases. Grant Jordan and William Maloney
(1997) have even noted the degree to which organizational leaders may
often launch lobbying efforts and media-savvy protest campaigns for the
sole purpose of generating more check writing and anxiety from suppor-
tive members of the public, effectively turning the relation between lob-
bying activity and social mobilization on its head. So the links between
the public and those organizations purporting to speak for them have
been shown to follow many patterns, and scholars have—both implicitly
and explicitly—raised normative questions about the rise of “associations
without members.” In fact, however, we know little about whether these
groups complement or, instead, compete with traditional member-based
organizations.

On the basis of a 1985 survey, Frank Baumgartner and Jack Walker
showed that large proportions of Americans are financial contributors to
various associations without considering themselves to be “members.”
They compared survey results from the traditional question wording
about membership in interest groups (see Verba and Nie 1972) to a more
encompassing question that also asked, “Are you an active member, a
non-active member, or have you given money only?” Inclusion of “con-
tributors” more than doubled the total number of group affiliations beyond
including only members (Baumgartner and Walker 1988, p. 921).4 Of
course, contributors were especially common among some types of or-
ganizations, such as charities; however, “issue” groups more than doubled,
and even church groups had substantial increases when this broader def-
inition of citizen linkage to the associational universe was used. By the
1980s, it was clear that a broad range of forms of organizational affiliation
were possible, from traditional membership to looser forms of affiliation
through financial contributions, and of course these trends have certainly
increased in the decades since this study. All of this motivates the current
study. Organizational leaders seeking to build connections with their po-
tential constituents through e-mail, Twitter, and Facebook connections
certainly do so with the expectation that these connections will reinforce
rather than replace their other connections.

Although certainly not an “Astroturf” organization in any sense of the
term, the prototype of this organizational form in dominant accounts of
memberless advocacy is the Children’s Defense Fund (see Skocpol 1999b,
2003, pp. 199-200). The CDF began in 1973 as a nonprofit organization
engaged in advocacy on a variety of issues related to the health, education,
and socialization of children, especially poor and/or minority children.
The organization’s founder and president is Marion Wright Edelman,
who first went to Washington as part of the legal counsel for Martin
Luther King’s 1968 Poor People’s Campaign.’ Edelman had prior ex-
perience working in perhaps the most important nonmembership orga-
nization of the Civil Rights movement, the NAACP Legal Defense and
Educational Fund (on the fund, see Jenkins and Eckert [1986]; Tauber
[1998]). Since 1973, the CDF has engaged in research on the needs of
children, program evaluation, lobbying campaigns on behalf of children’s
issues, and the creation of coalitions between community organizations
and state and local governments. The organization is driven by the efforts
of paid staff and heavily focused on Washington lobbying and claims
numerous legislative and budgetary victories on behalf of children in the
over 30 years since its inception.’ The CDF is perhaps the prototypical
example of what we refer to as a Washington advocate organization.’

Interestingly, the case of the CDF helps to illustrate the ambivalent
relationship between nonmembership groups and membership organi-
zations. On the one hand, groups that focus on inside lobbying and rely
more heavily on professional staff may be more likely to find financial
support from outside institutions (Jenkins and Halcli 1999) and thereby
encourage newcomers to adopt such structures for instrumental purposes.
At the same time, however, these two types can be conceptualized as two
organizational repertoires (Clemens 1998; McCarthy and Walker 2004) or
models that can be adapted to work toward similar social change goals;
the division of labor between these two organizational forms may instead
be quite productive and complementary.

We examine the relationship between membership- and nonmember-
ship-based advocacy groups in the entire population of organizations ac-
tive in public affairs, as well as in the particular issue domains of women’s
issues, human rights, and peace. We selected these three issues for analysis
because they constitute three of the most prominently represented ad-
vocacy organizational populations included in our data source, and, more
important, they represent three of the most significant social movement
fields in the late 20th century; advocacy organizations in these fields have,
respectively, pressed for equal opportunity laws and challenged gender
discrimination (Mansbridge 1986), called attention to abuses of power and
crimes against humanity across the globe (Keck and Sikkink 1998), and
changed the terms of the policy debates over wars in Vietnam (McAdam
and Su 2002), nuclear policy (Meyer 1990), and the Cold War (Edwards
and Marullo 1995).

On the basis of the previous discussion, then, our primary hypothesis
is that despite the numeric increase in NMAOs in recent decades, there
has been relative stability in the proportion of such organizations in the
field of public affairs associations. More explicitly:

HypoTuHEsis la.—NMAOs have grown in number between 1965 and
1997 but have not significantly increased in proportional density through-
out the field of public affairs associations.

HyporTuHEsis 1b.—NMAOs have grown in number between 1965 and
MEMBERSHIP STRUCTURES: COMPETITION OR MUTUALISM?

We do not intend to develop here a full-blown theoretical account of how
issue entrepreneurs select and re-form elements of organizational structure
as they craft new organizations (in particular whether or not they choose
to enlist constituent members). Instead, we aim to call attention to the
direct and indirect cooperative ties between several types of memberless
associations and those with members in order to buttress our expectation
that NMAOs have been emerging side-by-side with membership orga-
nizations in a process of mutual cooperation rather than competition. Once
we have done so, we will sketch out an approach to assessing our ex-
pectations based on ecological approaches to organizations, especially in
regard to the role of cross-densities between interacting organizational
populations.

Most accounts of the expansion of memberless associations depend
primarily on single organizational cases and anecdotes (McCarthy and
Zald 1973; Skocpol 19996, 2003) and often depict what we call Washington
advocates, such as the CDF. However, not all nonmembership organi-
zations, even within advocacy organizational populations, engage in
Washington-oriented lobbying. Many are not focused primarily on direct
advocacy but assist in the formation of membership organizations in local
communities; the reformed Industrial Areas Foundation would be one
example (Warren 2001). Still others are funds and foundations that support
both service and advocacy within a given issue domain providing services
directly to membership advocacy groups.* Given the diverse and often
tight interorganizational links that exist among NMAOs and traditional
associations, how might we understand the relationship between these
two forms? Drawing on work of previous scholars, we investigate how
the rates of founding of membership and memberless advocacy organi-
zations within competitive issue arenas affect one another.

The structures that advocacy organizations adopt should be subject to
significant interorganizational pressures. In particular, we emphasize the
role of interorganizational legitimation and competition in structuring
advocacy organizational populations, following the lead of organizational
ecologists. Scholars have argued that the evolving density of an organi-
zational population often follows an inverted-U-shaped curve because of
the existence of density dependence; that is, the fluctuation of the total
number of active organizations in the population at a given moment
(density) is often critical in shaping the subsequent rates of patterns of
founding and mortality in that population (Hannan and Freeman 1989;
Hannan and Carroll 1992). This being the case, legitimation processes are
crucial to the development of organizational fields, in that the early de-
velopment of an organizational field tends to be characterized by increas-
ing legitimacy alongside higher population density, as newcomers build
on the resources and cultural acceptance already cultivated by existing
organizations. Once this legitimacy is widespread, an organizational field
can be said to be institutionalized, in which its structures and practices
become, to some extent, “taken for granted” (Meyer and Rowan 1977).
However, institutionalization does not imply limitless growth of the or-
ganizational field since there is a finite supply of resources (financial,
moral, and human) available to the entire field; therefore, once the or-
ganizational field is well established, interorganizational competitive pres-
sures become more influential in shaping field dynamics, especially pat-
terns of founding and mortality (Hannan and Freeman 1989; Hannan
and Carroll 1992).

For our purposes, we call special attention to the pressures that or-
ganizational populations exert on other, related populations, through what
are referred to as cross-effects between populations (see also Barnett and
Carroll 1987; Hannan and Freeman 1987; Baum and Oliver 1991; Rao
and Nielsen 1992; Brittain 1994; Minkoff 1994). Assessing cross-density
effects allows analysts to test whether the density of one population of
organizations may shape the founding and/or disbanding rates of a sec-
ondary organizational population. If one tends to find positive cross-
effects—that is, increases in density in one population lead to increases
in founding (or decreases in disbanding) in the second population—one
may infer a mutualistic link between them; however, negative cross-effects
suggest that the link is characterized mainly by competition (Minkoff 1994,
p. 946). Minkoff, for example, finds a competitive “displacement effect”
in which advocacy organizations expanded dramatically, thereby limiting
the founding of new service organizations. Similarly, Hannan and Free-
man (1989) find that the increasing density of craft unions depressed the
founding rate of industrial unions and that higher densities of industrial
unions, conversely, reduced the rate of founding of those engaged in craft
organizations, thereby suggesting a competitive association. Carroll and
Wade (1991), however, find a mutualistic relationship between urban and
rural microbreweries.

A key theoretical issue in understanding these macro-organizational
dynamics regards mutual cooperation and division of labor within diverse
organizational populations (Minkoff 1995, 1997; Olzak and Ryo 2007;
Soule and King 2008). As Levitsky (2007) points out, while organizational
theorists have recognized the potential for organizational populations to
have either competitive or cooperative interorganizational relations, schol-
ars of social movements and advocacy have often overlooked the mutual
support that diverse organizations provide to one another, focusing instead
on how organizations compete over such scarce resources as funding,
constituent support and effort, and public attention. There is considerable
evidence that advocacy populations benefit by taking a multipronged
approach that coordinates professional advocacy—whether through legal
tactics, media strategies, lobbying, or other “insider” means—with
member-driven grassroots mobilization (Levitsky 2007; see also Mc-
Farland 1984). Thus, even if organizations compete over resources and
broader public support, the structural relationship between these two
organizational forms appears likely to result in a productive division of
labor that helps strengthen associations’ aggregate capacity for effective
action within their issue domain.’

In our case, the examination of cross-effects allows us to consider
whether the relationship between membership and nonmembership or-
ganizations is either competitive or mutualistic in nature. To the extent
that we find positive cross-effects between populations of membership and
nonmembership organizations, then, it is reasonable to conclude that
NMAOs are not displacing membership organizations but facilitating their
emergence. And, as organizational analysts have suggested, mutualism in
organizational populations helps to create organizational community and
a productive division of labor among groups (Barnett and Carroll 1987).
The hypotheses, then, that are at the center of this analysis state our
expectation of a mutually supportive relationship. The first of these is the
replacement hypothesis described earlier.

HyportuHEsis 2a.—The founding of membership organizations will be
positively influenced by the density of NMAOs in the population, both in
the broader field of public affairs associations and among peace, women’s,
and human rights associations.

HyportuHeEsis 2b.—The founding of NMAOs will be positively influenced
DATA SOURCES AND MEASURES

In order to assess our claims regarding the cross-effects of density that
shape associational founding events, we employ data aggregated from the
public affairs section of the Encyclopedia of Associations. While the En-
cyclopedia was not developed with the purpose in mind of serving as a
resource for the dynamic study of associational populations, the directory
is remarkably consistent over time and captures well the national orga-
nizational populations in question (Baumgartner 2005). The data file that
we employ for our analyses includes all organizations listed under the
heading of public affairs organizations, relying on data collected about
such organizations from all editions of the Encyclopedia since the pub-
lication of the fifth edition in 1968, up to and including the fortieth edition,
published in 2003. The public affairs section of the Encyclopedia includes
information about only one out of the 16 organizational sectors into which
the directory is organized, but it includes the largest proportion of cause-
oriented advocacy organizations and social movement organizations.”° Be-
yond our three issue domains of primary interest, the public affairs data
also include a sizable number of listings for organizations active in making
basic ideological claims (e.g., conservative, liberal, libertarian; 12.6% of
organization-edition listings), those expressing concerns about a specific
nation or geographic area (13.5%), and those concerned about a specific
racial/ethnic group (3.3%). In order to carry out the most conservative
statistical analyses of the founding patterns of these organizations, we
rely only on a restricted temporal portion of the data, including only 1965-
97. We begin in 1965 because doing so allows us to capture the population
of organizations founded just prior to the printing of the fifth edition (and
just prior to the “explosion” of group founding events identified by other
analysts) and end in 1997 because organizations often do not appear in
the directory until, on average, approximately six years after their found-
ing (Johnson and McCarthy 2004)."’ Thus, we do not analyze data on
founding events from the most recent years of the Encyclopedia since
doing so would likely have led us, inadvertently, to overlook some or-
ganizations that have only recently been founded and were not yet listed
in the annual volumes.

From this data source we derive our measures of organizational found-
ing and density for the entire field and within the three advocacy issue
areas we study: peace, women’s issues, and human rights. We focus on
these three issue areas because of their prominence in American politics
and society in the closing decades of the 20th century.”’ In order to de-
termine the issue area to which an organization within public affairs
belonged, we used the keyword area assigned to the organization in the
directory. Peace organizations include those that were listed under any
of the following keywords: antidraft or draft, conscientious objectors,
disarmament, nuclear war and weapons, peace, war resistance, or youth
against war. Women’s organizations include the keywords woman/
women, women’s rights, feminist/feminism, reproductive rights/freedoms,
and sexual harassment. Human rights organizations included the key-
words human rights, amnesty, capital punishment, political prisoners, and
refugees. As such, our categorization includes all keywords that could
reasonably be considered to be associated with each of these issue domains.

In addition to grouping organizations into advocacy issue populations,
the present data source also includes information about the organizational
structures of each group included from each edition of the Encyclopedia.
Organizations were classified into five categories: individual membership,
organizational membership, mixed individual-organizational member-
ship, nonmembership, and don’t know. Our category of interest, non-
membership organizations, includes all groups in which the Encyclopedia
entry fails to reference a member base and whose entry also contains a
descriptor such as foundation, institute, center, committee, fund, cam-
paign, program, project, conference, department, task force, or mission.'*
Additional analyses (not presented) illustrate that certain organizations
that have names including these descriptors are, in fact, membership
organizations and are coded as such; groups falling in this category include
the Citizens’ Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms and the
Freedom to Read Foundation. Individual membership organizations are
those that could be clearly identified as composed of individuals; cases
were coded as such if the organization referenced individual members in
its statement regarding their membership dues or if the name of the or-
ganization made clear that it was composed of individuals (including
words such as “citizens,” “professionals,” “practitioners,” and the like).
Organizational membership groups include, for example, groups of cor-
porations, hospitals, universities, or other individual membership orga-
nizations. Groups of individuals from other organizations (e.g., groups of
executive directors of women’s nonprofits) were not considered organi-
zational membership groups unless the represented organization itself is
a member. Finally, those groups that met the criteria for both individual
and organizational membership are placed into the separate category of
groups that have a hybrid individual-organizational membership. Those
remaining organizations that could not be classified were coded don’t
know in each organization-edition and are excluded for the purposes of
the following analyses. Although we present the distribution of all four
membership types in figure 1 below, our statistical analyses group these
membership structures into one of two categories: membership and non-
membership. Finally, we include data from the Encyclopedia regarding
whether each organization engages in government advocacy in our de-
scriptive analyses below.” Although all organizations in our data advocate
for the public or political recognition of a particular issue, only certain
organizations engage in formal attempts to advocate their issue before
government.

In order to arrive at yearly estimates of the founding of organizations
within each population, we used a series of unique identifiers allowing
us to aggregate the data into histories for each organization. A team of
research assistants sorted cases across Encyclopedia editions by name and
location in order to match repeating organizations. Next, each organi-
zation was assigned its own unique identifier. Consistent with standard
practice in organizational analysis, groups that merged were coded such
that the merged organization was treated as the survival of the largest
of the merged pair, and the smaller organization was classified as an
organizational death. After these identifiers were assigned to each unique
organization, we aggregated the data into summaries of each organiza-
tion’s history.

The summary data for each organization use the modal value of the
organization’s attributes over the years of observation for the purposes
of analysis. For a group’s membership structure, issue area, and engage-
ment in government advocacy, each organizational case was assigned the
modal value of that variable across all of the Encyclopedia years in which
the organization appeared. While this methodology underestimates the
degree of organizational change in the population, using the modal values
suits the primary purpose of our analysis in that it captures each orga-
nization’s primary structures and activities throughout its life span. Fur-
ther, since our main goal is to capture the means by which external pres-
sures shape the organizational structures that advocacy organizations
adopt and maintain and because over 96% of the organizations in our
data retain an identical structure with regard to the membership/non-
membership distinction that interests us throughout their entire life span,
this strategy seems reasonable (cf. Minkoff 1999, p. 1681).’°
As for the identification of the founding date, we rely on the modal
value reported by the Encyclopedia across organization-editions. Al-
though it is extremely rare for the founding date entries of an organization
to be reported inconsistently across years, we rely on the modal value in
order to reduce any error associated with conflicting listings. As well,
certain cases lack a founding year, often in the earliest years of their
existence, perhaps as a strategy to minimize the potential costs to their
legitimacy of being recognized as a young organization. Following from
the finding of Johnson and McCarthy (2004) that organizations, on av-
erage, take about six years from the time of founding until they first appear
in the directory, we impute a founding date to all missing cases, using
the first year of their appearance in the directory minus six. This impu-
tation was made for 11.5% of cases, a large proportion of which were
organizations first seen in the 2003 edition (28% of the imputed cases).

Using this comprehensive organization-level data file that aggregates
organizational data across all years of the Encyclopedia (N = 4,832), we
tabulated counts of the number of organizations active in each issue area
according to their membership structure and focus on government ad-
vocacy. As well, we calculated the density of each of these organizational
populations by converting each organization into a series of dummy var-
iables for yearly presence that tracked their life span from their founding
year until either their last appearance in the Encyclopedia or right-
censoring and then aggregating these values into annual density estimates
for each respective population.

Time-series data structure and measures.—In order to estimate the
cross-density effects on rates of founding of memberless associations, we
constructed a time-series data file of annual counts of founding events
from 1965 to 1997 (NV = 33). As we describe below, our first set of de-
pendent measures is made up of annual measures of the following: the
founding of all public affairs organizations, nonmembership public affairs
organizations, and the founding of nonmembership public affairs asso-
ciations that engage in advocacy (see table 2 below). We then carry out
analyses that predict and compare the founding of nonmembership and
membership organizations within each of the three advocacy populations
under consideration, estimating both the standard and cross-effects of
density for each organizational form in order to test hypotheses 2a and
2b.

In calculating parameter estimates of the factors most influential in
shaping the organizational founding, we rely on a number of data sources
RESULTS
Descriptive Statistics

We began by calling attention to the fact that the NMAOs are not a novel
organizational form. First, in order to assess the claim that such profes-
sional-only organizations have displaced membership organizations in the
associational population, we present a 100% stacked area chart of the
proportional density of each organizational structure across all organi-
zations engaged in public affairs, using counts of organizations from each
edition of the Encyclopedia of Organizations.’° These results are presented

in figure 1.
As McAdam and Scott argue, “An important indicator of institutional
change . . . involves changes over time in the relative numbers of or-

ganizations exhibiting a given form” (2005, p. 24; emphasis added). While
we know that the population of nonmembership organizations has ex-
panded in number, it is important first to consider the relative proportions
of each organizational form in the population. Figure 1 shows that when
considered relative to the other organizational forms present in the pop-
ulation of public affairs associations, the proportions of each type have
remained relatively constant (in support of hypothesis 1a).’’ In fact, the
year in which we find the highest proportion of nonmembership orga-
jenpiaipuro
jeuonjeziuebion
Jeuojeziue6i0 pue jenpiAipur

diyssaquiawuon @

 

%0T

%OE

%0b

%0S

%09

%O0L

%08

%06

%00T

dABaA Aad SUOIeZIUCBAO JO %
nizations in the population is 1968, not during the years of the “advocacy
explosion” of the late 1970s and early 1980s. Figure 1 illustrates that the
relative proportions of each organizational structure remain remarkably
constant over the period in question, with membership organizations (of
all types) constituting between 59% and 69% of the organizational pop-
ulation. We therefore find strong evidence that nonmembership organi-
zations have not displaced membership organizations in the population
of public affairs organizations (in line with hypothesis 1a).'*

Secondarily, these data illustrate that nonmembership organizations
have been a consistent, sizable presence in public affairs throughout the
past half century. The descriptive statistics in table 1 present even further
evidence of this fact. First, the figures in table 1 demonstrate that across
the entire time series we examine (1965-97), NMAOs represented 33.4%
of all organizations founded in an average year (39.4/117.8). These findings
accord with those of two studies (both of organizations as of the year
2000): Strolovitch (2007, p. 54) found that approximately 37.8% of ad-
vocacy groups had a nonmembership structure, and Minkoff et al. (2008,
p. 545) found that 36.4% of groups were NMAOs. Although, when com-
pared to the density proportions reported in figure 1 and described above,
this would appear to suggest that they have a longer life span, additional
analyses (not presented) show that nonmembership groups have a slightly
shorter life span than individual membership groups.” Interestingly, ad-
ditional descriptive statistics (not shown) illustrate that the NMAO or-
ganizational population is not overwhelmingly dominated by those groups
that engage in formal efforts at governmental advocacy, since only 51.3%
of all NMAOs founded in a given year were active in efforts to influence
government. Thus, Washington advocates constitute only a portion of the
NMAO population, as we describe later.

Table 1 also shows that with respect to the density of organizations
within each issue arena, peace has the highest mean annual density (about
121 organizations), which is greater than women’s (about 99 organiza-
TABLE 1
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 
 

 

 

  

   
 
 

Mean SD Median Min Max
Dependent measures (founding events):
Total public affairs:
All organizations ............... 117.8 63.1 114 31 270
Nonmembership organizations 39.4 23.0 40 13 100
Nonmembership advocacy organi-
zations .............. 20.2 15.1 17 4 68
Membership organizations:
Peace .............00005 5.1 5.9 3 0 25
Women’s ..... 4.7 3.8 3 0 12
Human rights . 24 24 2 0 9
Nonmembership organizations
Peace .. 2.3 3.1 2 Oo 13
Women’s 2.2 24 1 Oo 10
Human rights . 14 1.2 1 0 4
Independent measures (¢ —
Organizational density:
All public affairs organizations .............. 1,936.1 669.5 2,172 779 2,799
Peace .. 120.8 49.4 104 58 197
Women’s = 98.5 43.1 116 17 147
Human rights ................0.c ce ceeeee eee ee 56.1 26.9 73 15 87
Government attentio
Total hearings (three-year moving
average) ... . 1,567.0 350.2 1,720 871 2,011
Peace hearings . 5.4 3.7 4 1 15
Women’s hearings 5.6 4.8 5 Oo 20
Human rights hearings .. 9.7 6.7 11 Oo 21
Resource environment:
Federal transfer funds (1997 dollars, bil-
lions) .. 63.0 65.8 47 2 223

 

Aggregate disposable income (1997 dollars,
millions) ..............0000cceeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 4,225.1
Media attention:
Peace articles ....
Women’s articles o
Human rights articles ...............0..000005

 

9.7
1.6

 

 

1,032.7 4,124 2,460 5,926

8.2 7 2 31
LS 1 0 7
2.0 2 0 8

 

NotTEe.—The above estimates summarize annual values for the years 1965-97 for
all dependent measures and the years 1964-96 for all independent measures (V = 33).
0

N Non-membership Orgs.
So oO Oo So Oo o
oO in +t “ N a

oO
NN

08

L66T S66T E66T T66T 686T Z86T S86T E8ET T86T GZ6T ZZ6T SZ6T EZL6T TZ6T 696T Z96T S96T

r O

 

0z

 

AUSudg SS3|JaqUd,| — —
Aylsuaq diySiaquUdy,| ——

 

Oo
t+

 

oS
wo

 

oO
co

oot

OzT

 

 

 

 

OvT

 

"sBiQ diysusquiow N
N Non-membership Orgs.

os

09

S66T CO6T 686T 986T E86T O86T ZLZ6T PL6T TZL6T 896T S96T

 

 

Aylsuaq Ssaoquiay|—= —
Aysuad diysiaquay] ———

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0

0z

°
vt

2
Oo

°°
oO

oot

oct

*sBio diysusquiow N
S66T C66T 686T 986T

E86T O86T LL6T LET TLET 896T S96T

 

o
a

 

Alsuaq ssapaquay = —
Ayisuag diyssaquiay

in
dd

 

o
N

 

N Non-membership Orgs.

in
N

 

0€

SE

 

 

oT

oO o
oO N
*s619 diysusquioW N

oO
vt

os

09
tions in the population, whereas the secondary y-axis displays the count
of nonmembership organizations. Strikingly, these figures show that the
patterns of organizational density in each of these three fields are nearly
identical for both membership and nonmembership organizations, thereby
providing support for hypotheses 1b, 1c, and 1d.

Figure 5 shows the founding patterns of organizations in peace,
women’s, and human rights issues, as well as comparable figures for the
entire field of public affairs organizations. For this figure, the right-hand
axis is scaled for the entire field of public affairs organizations (this in-
cludes all three of these advocacy populations as well as all other orga-
nizations in the broader field), and the left-hand axis indexes organiza-
tional founding within the three issue domains. Figure 5 illustrates the
patterns of organizational founding that shape, in part, the density counts
displayed in figures 2-4. Most prominently, this figure indicates that the
advocacy explosion of the late 1970s and early 1980s (Walker 1991; Berry
1997) was not confined to general organizations engaged in public affairs
since all three advocacy populations in question saw significant growth
during that period. Women’s organizations grew steadily in the era sur-
rounding the Roe decision and expanded again in the early 1980s; the
founding of peace groups skyrocketed just before and after the inaugu-
ration of Ronald Reagan; human rights organizational growth followed
after the implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Po-
litical Rights by the United Nations in 1976.

As well, we see that all three populations follow a somewhat similar
founding pattern when compared to the overall population of public af-
fairs organizations: steady growth as the total organizational field expands
in the late 1970s, then a peak period followed by a decline or plateau in
density. Such an inverted-U-shaped curve has been found in a diverse
array of organizational populations, from labor unions (e.g., Hannan and
Freeman 1987), to microbreweries (Carroll and Swaminathan 2000), to
low-powered FM radio stations (Greve, Pozner, and Rao 2006). We there-
fore find descriptive evidence that a process of density-dependent legiti-
mation is at work in all three of these populations, as well as in the
broader population of public affairs associations. However, the timing of
the transition from expansion to contraction varies in each issue area:
around 1987 for peace, 1993 for human rights, and 1989 for women’s
issues (although the decline in women’s organizations is the most subtle).
The degree of contraction appears to be greatest in the peace movement,
which saw a 39% decrease in population density between 1989 and 1998.
Following the end of the Cold War, the movement also faced a period of
sharp increases in organizational mortality (Edwards and Marullo 1995).
300

N Total Public
Affairs Organizations
3

250
50
0

a = =

 

 

   

 

 

 

—- Human Rights
—— Women's
Organizations

x Peace

All

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

40

1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997

8 8 2 2 % °
suoneziuebic Ases0apy
enss| N

35
30
Analysis

Our goal in the subsequent analyses is a modest one. Our analyses provide
the opportunity to assess the accuracy of our theoretical expectations about
the cross-density effects of membership and nonmembership groups on
their respective founding rates. We begin by presenting results from a
series of regression analyses of the founding of all organizations engaged
in public affairs from 1965 to 1997. Most important, we seek to examine
what differences might exist in the factors that shape the founding of
these two organizational populations. In order to do this, we carry out a
series of generalized linear models (GLM) that specify a Poisson distri-
bution and Newey-West heteroscedasticity- and autocorrelation-consis-
tent variance estimates. A Poisson distribution is appropriate for these
dependent measures, which are event counts that are not overdispersed.

The coefficients presented in table 2 illustrate the strikingly consistent
dynamics of how organizational populations shape the founding of public
affairs associations, regardless of the type of association under consider-
ation. Here we find support for the notion that the early stages of growth
in the associational population under study are supported by the legiti-
mation of the field, whereas in later years the dynamics of interorgani-
zational competition become more prevalent (Hannan and Freeman 1989;
Hannan and Carroll 1992). These findings provide further support for
hypothesis 1a in that both populations follow a nearly identical founding
pattern. As well, comparing the density coefficients in columns 2 and 3
of table 2, it is clear that this pattern does not vary in any significant way
on the basis of whether or not an NMAO engages in government advocacy,
likely because—like membership associations—many such groups do not
engage in formal government advocacy. This suggests that nonmember-
ship and membership organizations serve complementary functions rather
than representing contending associational forms. The only noteworthy
difference between these three founding analyses is that the presence of
government resources does not support the founding of memberless ad-
vocacy organizations, but their presence does significantly increase the
founding rate for the entire public affairs population. Mean disposable
income, surprisingly, has a significant negative effect on all three public
affairs founding patterns, as disposable income rose steadily throughout
the late 1960s as well as the 1990s; during both periods the founding of
public affairs organizations was relatively low, and we understand these
effects to be largely period based.

Having demonstrated that little difference exists in the factors that
shape membership and NMAOs in the total field of public affairs orga-
nizations, we now consider the particular dynamics associated with each
of the three domains in question: peace, women’s, and human rights.
Table 3 presents the results from GLM regression analyses of membership
and NMAO founding within each of the latter organizational populations.
For each of these models, we regress the founding measures on their issue-
specific measures of organizational density, government attention, and
media coverage, as well as the two measures of the resource environment.

First and foremost, the results in table 3 provide strong evidence in
favor of the argument that membership organizations and NMAOs are
shaped by similar external factors, most predominantly those of organi-
zational density. As in the case of public affairs associations in general,
all three associational fields—peace, women’s, and human rights orga-
nizations—show strong effects of positive density dependence for both
organizational forms.

More important for our purposes, we find, with one minor exception,
that NMAOs have not displaced membership organizations (thereby pro-
viding support for hypothesis 2a). For peace and human rights organi-
zations, in fact, we find that NMAO density actually helps to increase
the founding of membership organizations. It is only in the case of
‘100’ S d xx

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 Sd xx

‘SO Sd x

OV Sd.

“SOJRUINSI IDUPLIVA ]U9}SISUOD-UOTe[ALIOIOjNe pue -AJDT]SBPIIS019}9Y, yso-AOMIN Suisn poeye[no[ej— ALON
ee ee ee ee ee CE eee nesses nurses sees suoneAlasqQ
TL6b— soer— 6LTL— +9'9b— LV eL— 9g bs— + pooyyayt] 30]
abbO'e— ose — 066'T oIL— ae 879" S— ax TOP L— * yueysuoy)

00° Tso" — zor'— see CPT — z10"— ETO rt ssesessesssescnss saprre oytoads-plary
suonuaye vIpayAy

000° 100°— x 100°— +100°— 000° 100°— “1+ (SaRT]OP 4661) ewWOoUT a,qesodsIp aeSa133y

600°— 000° 700° 100° ak ZO" — £00°— (sxe][Op £661) Spung Joysue. [e1apa,y
‘JUSULUOIIAUS 9DINOSIY

#9b0'— L£0° 400° O10" 870" — see 9 LT — “'* suneay oytoads-ppaty
‘UOTJUIJE JUIUIUTIAOL)

x767'86— ZIT'26 tes IT 291 61— $87'eT— OSLOZ ts Aysuap OVIAN 2ybeds-ppary

seb ZS'8S $66 Lb— LLL 6— gge— xS86TE 998bI- (spaapuny) Aysuap OVINN 2yPeds-ppary
:Ayisuap [euorjeztursi0 drysisquiawiu0N,

61s's— x€68S9— — xaxO8OTI— x0 T6°6— *868'6— eax 88° TZ— Aysuap drysioquiour sytads-ppary

£eo'l— CIV TS see TEST sek T 1707 £409 ae Shy Se (spaapuny) Aysuap diyssaquiaw sytoads-pjaty
:Aqisuap [euoryeziuesio0 dryssaquiayyl

suOneZIUeZIQ) =SOVINN suoneztuesi¢Q SOVINN. suoneZIUesIC) SOVINN
diyssaquioyay drys1aquiayay diyssaquioyay
SLHOTY NVWAY S,.NAINOM govad

 

 

NOLLNALLY VIG, ONV ‘SAOUNOSAY ‘NOLLNGALLY LNAWNYAAO)
‘ALISNA(, IVNOLLYZINVOYO NO SNOILYZINVOUCO dIHSXAMWAJ GNV dIHSYATNAWNON JO ONIGNNOY AHL JO NOISSaAOAY IAT) NOSSIOg

© ATaVL
women’s organizations that we find slight evidence of a competitive re-
placement effect in the negative and slightly significant (P < .10) coeffi-
cient for women’s NMAO density; we attribute this finding to the exclu-
sion of women from many professions, especially prior to 1978. For
instance, women’s exclusion from the legal profession in the mid-20th
century is well documented (Abel 1986; Hagan et al. 1991)—women rep-
resented 2.8% of all lawyers in 1970, compared to more than 10% by the
mid-1980s (Curran 1986, p. 25)—and may have posed a barrier to en-
gagement in legal advocacy NMAOs. Similarly, women’s exclusion from
public office—consider, for instance, that the number of women in Con-
gress more than doubled between 1969 and 1981 (Center for American
Women and Politics 2010)—may have made the NMAO form less ap-
pealing to women’s issue advocates, since this type of professional ad-
vocacy is more likely to rely on elite ties, and a lack of women in elected
office is associated with less attention to women’s issues (Thomas 1991).
Despite divergence prior to 1978, we find that after that point, women’s
membership and nonmembership organizations move largely in tandem.”

However, how does the density of membership organizations influence
the founding of NMAOs? Although different from our assessment of the
replacement hypothesis (in which membership organizations are displaced
by the growth of NMAOs), the results here show that membership or-
ganizational density has strong positive effects on the founding of non-
membership organizations in all three fields (supporting hypothesis 2b).
Indeed, in all three cases, the founding of NMAOs was influenced more
by the density of membership organizations than by the density of other
NMAOs. As we describe later, this particular finding fits well with evi-
dence from public affairs associations engaged in a number of issues, from
community organizing to women’s advocacy. Most of all, what stands out
here is the finding that membership organizations provide a strong foun-
dation on which NMAOs build.

We find few significant effects of the other control measures in the
analyses, although certain findings are worthy of further attention. First,
government hearings related to the concerns of a given advocacy field
occasionally decrease the founding of new organizations; we find this
pattern among peace NMAOs and human rights membership organiza-
tions. We take this as preliminary evidence that government action dis-
courages those who would found new organizations from taking action
in the very short term. Second, we find relatively little influence of our
resource measures, since neither transfer funds nor greater disposable
income shaped founding patterns in most cases. Federal transfer funds
increased dramatically the end of the Cold War, which helps to explain
the negative effect of transfer dollars on the founding of peace membership
organizations. Similarly, much of the advocacy on women’s issues took
place during a period of relatively flat growth in disposable incomes.
Finally, media attention to an issue has, in general, little effect on founding
events, although less media attention is associated with significantly more
women’s NMAOs founded in the following year. We expect that this
finding derives from the increased media attention to women’s issues that
such NMAOs often generate; attention to women’s issues was lower prior
to the expansion of this field.

Overall, then, our findings indicate that nonmembership and member-
based organizations are, by and large, mutually supportive rather than
competitive. In addition, these findings are consistent even when controls
for the political, resource, and media environments are entered into the
model.
often help to conduct research, provide institutional linkages to policy
makers, and help membership organizations get their message out in the
media.” More directly, we discuss here five examples of the types of tight
and supportive links that characterize this macro-organizational division
of labor. In particular, we focus on organizational activities common
among nonmembership organizations that appear to have as their main
purpose the goal of enhancing the fortunes of membership-based groups
within the same field. For representative examples of the membership
and NMAO organizations that constitute our data, see appendix table
Al.

Recall that we earlier identified Washington advocates as the most
widely recognized type of nonmembership organization. We now briefly
explore the wide diversity among NMAOs beyond Washington advocates,
calling attention to the diversity of activities, goals, and organizational
linkages among NMAOs active in public affairs. In discussing this var-
iation, we note the often complementary role of nonmembership orga-
nizations to organizations that engage members more directly in orga-
nizational activity.

One of the most central organizations in modern antipoverty organizing,
interestingly, is an association without members. The Industrial Areas
Foundation (IAF) was founded by Saul Alinsky in 1939, following from
the community organizing efforts of the Back of the Yards neighborhood
of Chicago (Reitzes and Reitzes 1987; Horwitt 1989). Although the or-
ganization was founded as an institutionally based grassroots community
organization, the IAF restructured in the mid-1970s to be a national net-
work of affiliated interfaith community groups engaged in efforts to pro-
vide voice to low- and moderate-income regions of the country (Warren
2001). As such, the main task of the IAF is to assist in the creation and
maintenance of local community organizations, which in turn voice the
concerns of those communities on issues such as job opportunities, school
quality, health, housing, and urban blight (Osterman 2002). We refer to
the IAF, and similar organizations such as PICO (previously the Pacific
Institute for Community Organization, now called People Improving
Communities through Organizing) and the Center for Third World Or-
ganizing, as belonging to the membership organization network type; as
such, although they are staff-driven organizations, their primary purpose
is supporting face-to-face civic engagement and community organizing.
Importantly, there is evidence to suggest that NMAOs of this type may
be more effective in building civic infrastructure than federated mem-
bership organizations (Minkoff et al. 2008, p. 542).”*

Similarly, the Center for Community Change, established in 1968, is
an NMAO that works to strengthen and build the voice of low-income
community advocates. Its mission is to amplify the voice of local com-
munity organizations (especially in national-level policy debates); bring
together community organizations across race, issue, and location; and
“build the social movements of tomorrow” by organizing leadership de-
velopment conferences.” Like the IAF, this network supports and com-
plements the activities of grassroots membership organizations.

Beyond Washington advocates and membership organization networks,
a third type includes think tanks, policy planning organizations, and other
research organizations that seek to shape public discourse and policy
making within an issue area (Peschek 1987; Rich 2004). Our shorthand
for this type of NMAO is policy planning organization. These organiza-
tions span the political spectrum, and many have come to play a quite
significant role in the creation and implementation of public policy since
the early 1970s. Perhaps the most prominent of these organizations are
the conservative Heritage Foundation and American Enterprise Institute,
the libertarian Cato Institute, and the centrist Brookings Institution. Al-
though these organizations have staked claims in support of a somewhat
diverse array of political ideologies, a number of analysts have associated
their appearance with a broader rightward turn in American politics
(Himmelstein 1990). For example, the Family Research Council, an off-
shoot of Focus on the Family that was headed by former Reagan adviser
Gary Bauer, was influential in shaping congressional dialogue regarding
trade policy with China and other countries perceived to be active in
restricting the religious freedoms of Christians (Martin 1999). Although
organizations that devote time and effort to informing, educating, and
communicating with members may, at times, preclude successful advocacy
on fast-moving matters of policy creation and reform, there is a productive
division of labor between policy planning organizations and grassroots
membership organizations. Grassroots associations often lack policy ex-
pertise, but policy planning groups may lack the authenticity of local
citizens’ organizations.’
Quite distinct from such professional organizations engaged in elite
policy dialogue are those that avoid direct government advocacy in favor
of indirect social advocacy and engage only in service provision to a
constituency, which we refer to as service providers. One example of such
a group is the American Woman’s Economic Development Corporation,
which was founded in 1976 as an educational organization that provides
training and technical assistance to women seeking to own a business.
Similarly, a variety of service-providing NMAOs provide nonprofit legal
services; an example of this is the Center for Constitutional Rights, which
provides legal services to poor and minority communities and assists in
legal battles related to human and civil rights. As such, this organization
walks the line between advocacy and service provision (on this issue, see
Minkoff [1994]). Such professional social service agencies have benefited
from the increased government reliance on organizations in the voluntary
sector to provide community programs in place of government (Heclo
1978; Skocpol et al. 2005); importantly, many such programs rely on grass-
roots support for their survival despite their staff-driven nature.

Some of the most crucial NMAOs active in advocacy are what we refer
to as ancillary organizations: those groups that engage directly in pro-
viding the informational, legal, educational, lobbying, and/or constituent-
based support often necessary to support the activism of a small number
of movement organizations. Perhaps the quintessential example of such
an organization is the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund. An-
other such NMAO is an organization referred to as the People’s Project
(Fisher 2006), which employs staff to carry out paid canvassing campaigns
to build the membership and donor bases of organizations such as the
Sierra Club, the Public Interest Research Groups, and Save the Children.
Again, the tie between membership groups and professional advocates is
apparent.

Foundations are a final type of NMAO; these support social movement
and interest group activism through grants and in-kind contributions (see
Walker 1991; Prewitt 2006). While known for their support of more mod-
erate and professional types of movement organizations (Jenkins and Hal-
cli 1999), foundations often play a strong role in advocacy populations
by providing resources to other organizations and by publicizing the policy
victories of the groups to which they are sympathetic. Foundation funding
is also associated with increases in longevity for the membership orga-
nizations they support, although relying on any one source of income too
heavily is often a liability for the recipient group (Cress and Snow 1996).
AN ADDITIONAL NOTE ON CHANGE WITHIN MEMBERSHIP AND
NONMEMBERSHIP ASSOCIATIONS

At the outset of our discussion above, we noted that our analysis would
be limited primarily to the interorganizational dynamics of the two or-
ganizational forms in question and that we would not systematically eval-
uate the notion that membership organizations themselves have changed
from federated organizations that provide members with thick network
ties, social capital, and political skills to those that represent distant cen-
tralized offices that rely on membership lists and mass-distributed “action
alerts.” A key implication of the arguments of Skocpol (2003) is that
regardless of the increasing prevalence and significance of NMAOs, mem-
bership organizations themselves have undergone a significant transfor-
mation away from meaningful member participation in their own right.
As such, the line between “member” and “supporter” is increasingly blurry
(Bosso 2003). It may also be the case that nonmember associations have
undergone significant change in this direction, relying more heavily on
technologically driven grassroots lobbying techniques such as mass e-mail
mobilization rather than more direct activities of their staff (such as direct
legislative lobbying, legal advocacy, community-based fund-raising, and
the like).

Although not central to our study—our data do not allow for a rigorous
evaluation of these claims—one approach to indirectly approximating
whether such a change has, in fact, taken place is to examine structural
changes in the organizational chapter structure within each type. We do
so by estimating whether associations report having any regional, state,
or local chapters (for a similar analysis using founding rather than density
data from the 1995 edition of the Encyclopedia, see McCarthy [2005, pp.
203-6]). To the extent that organizations today are less likely to have
chapters—regardless of whether they have members in those chapters or
instead populate their chapters with staff only, as in organizations such
as Earthjustice Legal Defense Fund—this provides some indirect indi-
cation as to whether associations have transformed in the direction of
increasing centralized “management.” Our measure of associational lo-
cation tracks the proportional density of organizations residing in Wash-
ington, D.C.

The findings presented in figure 6 illustrate that among membership
associations, there has not been a dramatic increase in organizations with
headquarters in the nation’s capital, with a slight but steady decline since
the mid-1980s. And, despite expectations of a decline in federated orga-
nizations, we see a dramatic increase in the proportional density of or-
ganizations with any chapters; for example, while in 1974 only around
21% of membership organizations had any regional, state, or local-level
a ws Ss Ss ws w ws “ “ “ w
© © © 6 © 6 © e © © ©
eS & $ e SC SF SF YP LY Ww
: \ %0
%S
%OT

 

 

suaydeys sey ‘diyssequay|-UON tm
suaqdeyd sey ‘diysiequicy! = %ST

"D'a ‘uozBuysem ‘diyssaquay|-UON om
“O'q ‘uojburysem ‘diysuaquiay ——

 

 

 

 

   

%0T

 

 

 

%SZ

 

%0E

 

BdAL UIYIM SUO!eZIUeBIO JO %

%SE

 

%0v

 

 

 

%Sb
chapters, by 1998 that figure had increased to over 40%. This squares
with Shaiko’s (1999, p. 11) finding that a key growth strategy for mature
advocacy organizations in the 1980s and 1990s was to establish new chap-
ters or branch offices. An important additional finding shows that the
number of membership associations based in Washington, D.C., increased
between 1968 and 1986 but declined between 1986 and 1998.”° In sum,
then, this evidence suggests that there has not been a significant turn
toward centralized Washington advocacy among membership organiza-
tions active in public affairs.”’

Have NMAOs, for their part, seen a decline in chapters and an increase
in their likelihood of opening operations in Washington? As figure 6 also
illustrates, the 1968-86 period also saw a significant increase in Wash-
ington offices for NMAOs and a much steeper one than for membership
groups, as nearly 43% of such associations were located within the Belt-
way by the late 1980s; this figure declined and then maintained a plateau
at around 33% thereafter. A comparatively far smaller proportion of
NMAOs have regional, state, or local chapters, but the proportion that
do increased gradually, nearly doubling, between the late 1960s and the
late 1990s. Thus, while NMAOs are quite a bit more likely to be located
in Washington, they are also more likely today to have chapters than they
were in the 1970s. Importantly, those NMAOs that have chapters, evi-
dence suggests, are especially adept at supporting the civic infrastructure
needed to mobilize participants (Minkoff et al. 2008).
mainly by stability in the relative proportions of the membership and
nonmembership organizations that it comprises. More directly, we find
little evidence to support the position that membership organizations are
being displaced by a highly professionalized set of institutional advocates;
we instead find evidence of a mutually supportive relationship.

What our analyses show, most significantly, is that membership orga-
nizations did not decline alongside the increasing number of professional
staff-only associations engaged in public affairs; instead, both of these
populations grew dramatically during the major period of interest group
growth in the late 1970s and early 1980s. And, rather than displacing
membership groups, these two populations grew at a roughly proportional
rate. Our statistical analyses illustrate this finding even further by showing
that the density of memberless associations had a positive and significant
influence on the founding of membership organizations among peace and
human rights organizations; conversely, the density of membership or-
ganizations also had a positive and significant influence on the founding
of NMAOs in all three fields under examination.

An important implication of these findings is that the post-1960s era
has involved a consistent division of labor between member-driven and
professional advocacy, both among advocacy organizations as a whole
and within particular issue domains on the left of the political spectrum.
Modern advocacy organizations, then, appear to face a number of en-
vironmental pressures that help to channel sets of organizations into these
consistent complementary roles, in that (1) media and political environ-
ments require both evidence of popular support and expert knowledge,
(2) issues tend to be incredibly complex and require professional knowl-
edge in order to make sense of them (Lippmann 1966; Brint 1996), and
(3) effective issue advocacy both requires audience acceptance on the
pragmatic grounds of being able to provide useful information (cf. Hall
and Deardorff 2006) and at the same time has the moral legitimacy of
accurately representing citizens’ views in a pluralist democracy.” While
the environments within which organizations are embedded have evolved
in the direction of increasing complexity and greater requirements for
transparency, the requirement that advocates both mobilize mass partic-
ipation and utilize the specialized expertise of professionals remains in
place, even if the means of doing so have changed significantly with the
development of new information and communications technologies.

Regarding the question of whether citizen advocacy has expanded with-
out an accompanying expansion of civic engagement, our findings suggest
that even though the replacement hypothesis did not find support, it
remains plausible—as we suggested earlier—that the meaning of “mem-
bership” has evolved in those organizations that have members. A limi-
tation of our analysis is that it effectively brackets the question of change
in the qualitative meaning of “membership” in those organizations that
claim them. Analysts have claimed that the supply side of participatory
opportunities for individual engagement has decreased because the newly
founded organizations of the “interest group explosion” (Walker 1991;
Berry 1997) do less to engage their members in face-to-face activity, op-
erating instead as “centralized and professionally led organizations focused
on policy lobbying and public education” (Skocpol 19998, p. 68). Even
though figure 6 suggests that membership organizations are more likely
to have chapters today, membership organizations founded in more recent
decades are likely to spawn fewer local chapters than older organizations
(McCarthy 2005); moreover, groups that have regional, state, or local
chapters may no longer be as effective in producing the thick face-to-face
ties that older federated organizations once did (Skocpol 2003). Thus,
while our research indicates that the decline of civic engagement and
growth of professional advocacy do not appear to be outcomes of the
growth of NMAOs, it remains possible—even likely—that “membership”
does not carry quite the same meaning it once did. However, we also
find evidence that NMAOs often provide significant support for civic
engagement and appear to enhance rather than detract from civic infra-
structure. Future research should investigate the extent to which staff-
driven organizations support civic engagement, whether through incen-
tivizing public participation or assisting membership organizations. In
addition, we encourage researchers to explore which types of interactions
are most common among these two organizational types, such that the
emergence of this macro-organizational division of labor in public ad-
vocacy can be understood in fuller detail.

We believe that our findings also have implications for scholars inter-
ested in the changing means by which organizations connect “people to
politics” (Weir and Ganz 1997; Skocpol 2003; Walker 2009; Andrews et
al. 2010). Weir and Ganz (1997), for instance, have argued that the chang-
ing structure of civic organization in American society in the closing de-
cades of the 20th century has meant quite different things for organizations
on the political right and left, since organizations on the right have been
more effective at building on the existing networks and infrastructures
of religious, recreational, and social ties, whereas progressive organizations
have focused more heavily on single-issue advocacy through lobbying and
legal tactics (see also Fisher 2006). Although they believe that progressive
organizations such as the Industrial Areas Foundation, described earlier,
represent an exception, Weir and Ganz contend that even groups like
these “have not been able to connect local organizing activities to broader
political or policy goals” (p. 162). While our data and findings cannot
speak directly to the comparative effectiveness of organizations on the
right and left in influencing policy, an implication of this study is that
the relatively constant presence of nonmembership associations in the
advocacy field may not be quite the culprit of recent changes in civic
capacity that they have been made out to be. Despite the expectation that
organizations on the left of the political spectrum have been more heavily
affected by the rise of professional advocacy, we have provided evidence
that in three left-leaning organizational populations, there has been little
proportional increase in this staff-driven organizational form.

It is important to note, as we earlier mentioned, that associations with-
out members are often created in order to support the activities of mem-
bership organizations and build civic engagement; this argument is sup-
ported by our finding that nearly half of all NMAOs do not engage in
formal government advocacy and therefore do not fit the profile of a
Washington advocate organization. Further, at no point during our time
series did we find that more than 50% of all NMAOs were located in
Washington, D.C. The legal defense funds, educational programs, lob-
bying organizations, and project committees that constitute a sizable por-
tion of the population of NMAOs are, in fact, often created in order to
provide the technical and professional services that membership orga-
nizations need in order to advocate their cause within political, media,
legal, and other institutions. Many nonmembership organizations, such
as the restructured Industrial Areas Foundation (Warren 2001; Osterman
2002) and the National Congress of Neighborhood Women, lack “mem-
bers” but are devoted to assisting the start-up and maintenance of grass-
roots community organizations. As well, the growth of membership or-
ganizations appears to create an increased demand for the services and
support that staff-only institutes, centers, and funds often provide to ac-
tivist groups. However, we also find the curvilinear effect of interorgan-
izational competition present in all of our models (in both the standard
and cross-density models), suggesting that once each population reaches
its carrying capacity, both membership organizations and professional
advocates compete over the same resources and support in the environ-
ment (on this dynamic, see Singh and Lumsden [1990]). An important
footnote to our analyses, then, is that the mutualism that exists between
these two organizational forms entails both the benefits of mutual legit-
imation and the costs of sharing scarce resources within a population of
advocacy groups.
APPENDIX

Data Sources and Measures
Encyclopedia of Associations

Our data are drawn from the Encyclopedia of Associations, a directory
of associations published on a regular basis by Thomson/Gale (previously
Gale Research) since 1956. The data used in this paper were extracted
from the public affairs section of the Encyclopedia.”® Our analyses here
focus on all groups included in the public affairs section as a whole as
well as those in three particular organizational fields that are almost fully
contained within the public affairs section: peace, women’s, and human
rights advocacy groups. Some potentially interesting advocacy organi-
zational fields, such as those associated with the environment or civil
rights, are much less fully contained within the public affairs section, so
we do not analyze them here.

There are, of course, important concerns regarding bias of inclusion
and comprehensiveness of inclusion in the Encyclopedia, and our data
are only as complete as the source from which they are drawn. It is difficult
to assess the completeness of coverage of a directory such as the Ency-
clopedia, which has consistently sought to include a record for every
national-level association in America. Of course it cannot be complete.
But how complete is it, and what is the nature of any bias of inclusion?
This question has been assessed in a systematic manner for the case of
labor unions included in the Encyclopedia on the basis of information
available because all unions are required to register with the U.S. De-
partment of Labor. Martin, Baumgartner, and McCarthy (2006, pp. 771-
72) found that 76% of the unions registered with the Labor Department
were listed in the Encyclopedia and that coverage for unions above 5,000
and 10,000 members was 91% and 95%, respectively. Similarly, financial
heft was a significant predictor of inclusion: 89% of those with annual
receipts greater than $1 million were covered, compared to 51% of those
with less than that amount. Geographical location (e.g., being based in
the nation’s capital) was not a significant correlate of coverage (p. 776).
This is the only systematic comparison of the Encyclopedia coverage with
a known population list of which we are aware, and it suggests that the
compilers of the directory have done a very good job of locating large,
substantial organizations active at the national level but that coverage of
smaller, newer, or less substantial groups may be considerably lower. We
suspect that this pattern is replicated across other categories of national
associations (see also Minkoff 1995, p.132).
Questions may also be raised about the criteria for inclusion used by
the Encyclopedia of Associations (especially with regard to the member-
ship/nonmembership distinction) and whether its staff diligently, and con-
sistently, worked to update entries through the years of its publication
used in this research. We have read the introductory explanations for
almost every annual volume of the Encyclopedia seeking answers to these
questions. Two observations concerning that series of accounts are rele-
vant to the current research. First, the early volumes aimed to be inclusive
of “non-profit American organizations of national scope” (Ruffner et al.
1964, p. 7) and, by 1973, aimed explicitly to include nonmembership
groups (Fisk 1973, p. 7); by 1978, and subsequently, the editors indicated
that “for-profit and non-membership groups are included if their names
or activities suggest that they are voluntary nonprofit organizations” (Pair
1978, pp. viii-ix). To the extent that the criteria for inclusion evolved
during the period of our analyses, they made it increasingly likely that
nonmembership groups were included in the Encyclopedia; however, this
tendency would be expected to enhance any trend showing the increasing
density of nonmembership groups included, rendering our test of the re-
placement hypothesis a conservative one.

Second, explanations of procedures described in each annual edition
strongly suggest that Encyclopedia staff have actively updated entries
and aggressively sought new organizations to be included even during its
early years. By 1976, the editors “estimate that more than ninety percent
of the previously listed organizations have made one or more changes in
their listings for this edition” (Fisk 1976, p. viii). And, by 1981, the editors
claim “that more than ninety percent of the previously listed organizations
have made one or more changes in their listings for this edition... . This
is about the same rate of change found in recent past editions... . 910
new entries, prepared from questionnaires completed by the organizations
or from secondary sources, have been added to this edition” (Akey 1981,
p. vii). And in 1996, the editors state that their objective “for each edition
of [the Encyclopedia] is complete verification or updating of existing en-
tries and the identification and description of new or previously unlisted
organizations. This intensive effort includes several revision form mailings
and direct contact by correspondence and telephone with non-responding
groups. Groups constantly form, disband, relocate, or refocus their efforts,
and the editors estimate that for this edition more than 500 associations
have been added and 90 percent of the respondents reported some change
to their description” (Jaszczack 1996, p. ix). These several explanations
point to relative consistency in procedures over the period of our research.
The Encyclopedia added a parallel online version (Associations Unlimited)
well after 1997, the last year of our present analyses.

We have two rationales for using only the associations listed in the
public affairs section of the print Encyclopedia for these analyses. The
first is theoretical and the second purely practical. To begin with, the
associations included in the public affairs section are, in general, much
more germane to our current focus on national advocacy organizations
than those included in any other section of the Encyclopedia. To be sure,
many advocacy organizations are to be found in other sections, such as
cultural organizations, educational organizations, religious organizations,
and social welfare organizations. But the vast majority of advocacy or-
ganizations appear to be concentrated in the public affairs section.

Second, more practically, the data we use were generated as part of a
larger project carried out by the second and third authors.” It relies on
information that was extracted concerning many aspects of the organi-
zational structure of each group on a nearly annual basis, including the
nature of membership, but only for the public affairs section. Generating
that level of detail annually for this section proved to be incredibly labor
intensive, and as a result, it proved infeasible, because of a lack of re-
sources, to continue to do this for additional sections. As a result, however,
for all the organizations listed in the public affairs section for the years
we examine here, we have reliable estimates of membership type on an
annual basis, providing the basis for the current analyses.

Since the detailed analyses that follow focus on three advocacy asso-
ciational fields—peace, women’s, and human rights—one might ask
whether we can provide assurance that the national advocacy associations
included in the Encyclopedia for these three fields are contained mainly
in the public affairs section through the years. To address this question
we first did a search of the 1995 digital record of the Encyclopedia (Gale
Research 1995) using the keywords we used in generating our three ad-
vocacy associational fields for the present analyses.*’ This electronic record
of the 1995 edition of the Encyclopedia allowed us, then, to determine
what proportion of listed associations were located in the public affairs
section in 1995, a crude indicator of the year-to-year inclusiveness of
groups. For peace groups, more than 99% of the groups were included
in the section; for human rights groups, more than 71% of the groups
were included;” for women, a little more than 52% of the groups were
included in the section. This initial assessment suggested that inclusion
rates were acceptable for the peace and human rights advocacy fields but
that we needed to look more deeply into which women’s groups were
excluded from the public affairs section and to assess the appropriateness
of groups included and their comparability to populations of women’s
advocacy groups used in previous analyses of the field.

Those women’s associations not included in the public affairs section,
as captured by our string of keywords, are concentrated primarily in the
sections of social welfare organizations (27), religious organizations (18),
educational organizations (17), cultural organizations (11), and health and
medical organizations (10). However, almost all of the associations (95 out
of 98) captured by the keyword “feminism” are included in the public
affairs section as are all of those captured by the keyword “reproductive
rights.” These patterns suggest that the majority of the associations that
Minkoff, in her several analyses of women’s associations, termed “ad-
vocacy organizations” are included in the public affairs section of the
Encyclopedia. As well, and importantly, Minkoff’s (1995, p. 59) basic data
set includes 141 pure women’s advocacy groups having existed sometime
during her 1955-85 time series as well as 74 women’s advocacy/service
groups, whereas the data we analyze here show that a total of 248 women’s
groups (included in the public affairs section) existed at some point during
our 1964-96 time series, with 119 of them showing evidence of efforts to
influence government. This correspondence strongly suggests that re-
stricting our analysis of women’s advocacy groups to only those included
in the public affairs section of the Encyclopedia does not, in any significant
way, undermine their inclusiveness.

Finally, its should be noted that, in spite of the serious concerns we
have addressed about the source’s comprehensiveness and potential bi-
ases, the Encyclopedia of Associations is widely recognized as the most
inclusive census of national nonprofit associations. As a result, it has been
used widely by researchers of various segments as well as the entire na-
tional nonprofit organizational landscape, and much of what we know
about that landscape depends on the source. We have compiled a list of
more than 150 refereed journal articles that utilize information drawn
Control Variables

The following discussion describes the measurement of the independent
variables employed in the analyses presented in tables 1-3. Our measure
of government attention also comes from the Policy Agendas Project (pol-
icyagendas.org) and uses annual estimates of the number of total con-
gressional hearings on the issue in question. We constructed four measures
of government activity. The first is a measure of overall government ac-
tivity, which takes the three-year moving average of the total number of
congressional hearings. We use three-year moving averages because non-
election years have significantly higher numbers of hearings than election
years. The remaining three measures indicate the volume of congressional
hearings related to each specific social issue domain: peace, women’s, and
human rights issues. Using the descriptions provided by the Congressional
Information Service/Annual: Abstracts of Congressional Publications and
Legislative History Citations, coders read the full text of the description
of each hearing, sorting them into the issue areas of the Policy Agendas
Project.** Using the issue areas, we created yearly counts of hearings
related to each issue domain.* Congressional hearings are a useful in-
dicator of government attention since they have a relatively low threshold;
thousands of hearings are held on hundreds of topics each year, and
hearings correspond generally with other possible indicators such as bill
introductions, laws, and presidential attention (see Jones and Baumgart-
ner 2005).

The resource environment may also have significant influences on the
structure and focus of an advocacy organization (Staggenborg 1988); we
therefore include two lagged measures of the external resource environ-
ment as controls in our analyses. First, we include an inflation-adjusted
measure of federal transfer funds to states and localities, as provided by
the Office of Management and Budget. As the grants that the U.S. federal
government provides to these lower levels of government are one of the
central sources of public-sector support to many associations (Minkoff
1995), increased levels of federal support to localities should be associated
with an increased rate of organizational founding. Second, we also include
an inflation-adjusted indicator of the mean disposable income of US.
residents, as reported by the Federal Reserve Bank and provided by the
Statistical Abstract of the United States. We include this control mainly
because of the criticism directed at nonmembership organizations for be-
ing highly dependent on check-writing conscience constituents and be-
cause evidence suggests that increased levels of disposable income may
heighten individuals’ level of donation to nonprofits (Havens, O’ Herlihy,
and Schervish 2006).*”
Finally, we rely on a fourth data source in order to estimate the degree
of public attention to the cause in question. Analyses have shown that
media coverage is shaped by associational structure (Jacobs and Glass
2002). We measure public attention to each issue by creating annual counts
of the number of New York Times stories devoted, respectively, to peace,
women’s issues, or human rights. Although the Zimes would perhaps be
less appropriate if we were examining local-level social movement or-
ganizations, it serves well as an indicator of the national attention devoted
to a given issue domain. The data we employ come from the Policy
Agendas Project, which includes a random sampling of the Times index
for each year from 1946 to 2003; we employ data on all years of interest
in our time series. For the present analyses, we created yearly counts of
the number of sampled Times articles that fit into each of the three areas
we examine.**
REFERENCES

Abel, Richard L. 1986. “The Transformation of the American Legal Profession.” Law
and Society Review 20:7-17.

Akey, Denise S., ed. 1981. Encyclopedia of Associations, 16th ed. Detroit: Gale.

Andrews, Kenneth T., and Bob Edwards. 2004. “Advocacy Organizations in the U.S.
Political Process.” Annual Review of Sociology 30:479-506.

Andrews, Kenneth T., Marshall Ganz, Matthew Baggetta, Hahrie Han, and Chaeyoon
Lim. 2010. “Leadership, Membership, and Voice: Civic Associations That Work.”
American Journal of Sociology 115:1191-1242.

Archibald, Matthew. 2007. “An Organizational Ecology of National Self-Help/Mutual-
Aid Organizations.” Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 36:598-621.

Barnett, William P., and Glenn R. Carroll. 1987. “Competition and Mutualism among
Early Telephone Companies.” Administrative Science Quarterly 32:400-421.

Baum, Joel A. C., and Christine Oliver. 1991. “Institutional Linkages and Organiza-
tional Mortality.” Administrative Science Quarterly 36:187-218.

Baumgartner, Frank R. 2005. “The Growth and Diversity of U.S. Associations, 1956—
2004: Analyzing Trends Using the Encyclopedia of Associations.” Unpublished man-
uscript. Pennsylvania State University, Department of Political Science.

Baumgartner, Frank R., and Beth L. Leech. 1998. Basic Interests. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.

Baumgartner, Frank R., and Jack L. Walker Jr. 1988. “Survey Research and Mem-
bership in Voluntary Associations.” American Journal of Political Science 32:908—
28.

Berry, Jeffrey M. 1997. The Interest Group Society, 2d ed. New York: Longman.

. 1999. The New Liberalism. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Boli, John, and George M. Thomas. 1997. “World Culture in the World Polity: A
Century of International Non-governmental Organization.” American Sociological
Review 62:171-90.

Bosso, Christopher J. 2003. “Rethinking the Concept of Membership in Nature Ad-
vocacy Organizations.” Policy Studies Journal 31:397-412.

Brint, Steven. 1996. In an Age of Experts: The Changing Role of Professionals in Politics
and Public Life. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Brittain, Jack. 1994. “Density-Independent Selection and Community Evolution.” Pp.
355-78 in Evolutionary Dynamics of Organizations, edited by J. A. C. Baum and
J. V. Singh. New York: Oxford University Press.

Brulle, Robert, Liesel Turner, Jason Carmichael, and J. Craig Jenkins. 2007. “Mea-
suring Social Movement Organization Populations: A Comprehensive Census of U.S.
Environmental Movement Organizations.” Mobilization 12:255-70.

Carroll, Glenn R., and Anand Swaminathan. 2000. “Why the Microbrewery Move-
ment? Organizational Dynamics of Resource Partitioning in the U.S. Brewing In-
dustry.” American Journal of Sociology 106:715-62.

Carroll, Glenn R., and James Wade. 1991. “Density Dependence in the Organizational
Evolution of the American Brewing Industry across Different Levels.” Social Science
Research 20:271-302.

Center for American Women and Politics. 2010. “Women in the U.S. Congress.” http://
www.cawp.rutgers.edu/fast_facts/levels_of_office/documents/cong.pdf.

Clemens, Elisabeth S. 1998. “Organizational Form as Frame: Collective Identity and
Political Strategy in the American Labor Movement.” Pp. 205-26 in Comparative
Perspectives on Social Movements, edited by Doug McAdam, John D. McCarthy,
and Mayer N. Zald. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Cress, Daniel M., and David A. Snow. 1996. “Mobilization at the Margins: Resources,
Benefactors, and the Viability of Homeless Social Movement Organizations.” Amer-
ican Sociological Review 61:1089-1109.
Curran, Barbara A. 1986. “American Lawyers in the 1980s: A Profession in Transition.”
Law and Society Review 20:19-52.

Delgado, Gary. 1986. Organizing the Movement. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Della Porta, Donatella, and Mario Diani. 1999. Social Movements: An Introduction.
Malden, Mass.: Blackwell.

Dorfman, Marcia T. 1973. “Insurance Information Sources.” Journal of Risk and In-
surance 40:263-66.

Edwards, Bob, and Michael Foley. 2002. “Social Movement Organizations beyond the
Beltway: Understanding the Diversity of One Social Movement Industry.” Mobili-
zation: An International Quarterly 8:87-107.

Edwards, Bob, and Sam Marullo. 1995. “Organizational Mortality in a Declining Social
Movement: The Demise of Peace Movement Organizations in the End of the Cold
War Era.” American Sociological Review 60:908-27.

Eikenberry, Angela M. 2007. “Philanthropy, Voluntary Association, and Governance
beyond the State: Giving Circles and Challenges for Democracy.” Administration
and Society 39:857-82.

Fisher, Dana. 2006. Activism, Inc. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Fisk, Margaret, ed. 1973. Encyclopedia of Associations, 8th ed. Detroit: Gale.

. 1976. Encyclopedia of Associations, 10th ed. Detroit: Gale.

Freeman, Jo. 1973. “Origins of the Women’s Liberation Movement.” American Journal
of Sociology 78:792-811.

Gale Research. 1995. Encyclopedia of Associations: National Organizations of the U.S.
Machine-readable data file (CD-ROM). Detroit: Gale Research.

Gray, Virginia, and David Lowery. 1996. “A Niche Theory of Interest Representation.”
Journal of Politics 58:91-111.

Greve, Henrich R., Jo-Ellen Pozner, and Hayagreeva Rao. 2006. “Vox Populi: Resource
Partitioning, Organizational Proliferation, and the Cultural Impact of the Insurgent
Microradio Movement.” American Journal of Sociology 112:802-37.

Hagan, John, Marjorie Zatz, Bruce Arnold, and Fiona Kay. 1991. “Cultural Capital,
Gender, and the Structural Transformation of Legal Practice.” Law and Society
Review 25:239-62.

Hall, Richard L., and Alan V. Deardorff. 2006. “Lobbying as Legislative Subsidy.”
American Political Science Review 100:69-84.

Hannan, Michael, and Glenn R. Carroll. 1992. Dynamics of Organizational Popula-
tions. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hannan, Michael, and John Freeman. 1987. “The Ecology of Organizational Founding:
American Labor Unions, 1836-1985.” American Journal of Sociology 92:910-43.

. 1989. Organizational Ecology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Havens, John J., Mary A. O’Herlihy, and Paul G. Schervish. 2006. “Charitable Giving:
How Much, by Whom, to What, and How?” Pp. 542-67 in The Non-profit Sector:
A Research Handbook, edited by W. W. Powell and R. Steinberg. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press.

Heclo, Hugh. 1978. “Issue Networks and the Executive Establishment.” Pp. 87-124
in The New American Political System, edited by A. King. Washington, D.C.: Amer-
ican Enterprise Institute.

Himmelstein, Jerome. 1990. To the Right. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.

Horwitt, Sanford D. 1989. Let Them Call Me Rebel. New York: Knopf.

Howard, Marc M., and Leah Gilbert. 2008. “A Cross-National Comparison of the
Internal Effects of Participation in Voluntary Organizations.” Political Studies 56:
12-32.

Howard, Philip N. 2006. New Media Campaigns and the Managed Citizen. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Jacobs, Ronald N., and Daniel J. Glass. 2002. “Media Publicity and the Voluntary
Sector: The Case of Nonprofit Organizations in New York City.” Voluntas 13:235-
52.

Jaszezak, Sandra, ed. 1996. Encyclopedia of Associations, 31st ed. Detroit: Gale.

Jenkins, J. Craig, and Craig M. Eckert. 1986. “Channeling Black Insurgency: Elite
Patronage and Professional Social Movement Organizations in the Development of
the Black Movement.” American Sociological Review 51:812-29.

Jenkins, J. Craig, and Abigail Halcli. 1999. “Grassrooting the System? The Develop-
ment of Social Movement Philanthropy, 1953-1990.” Pp. 227-56 in Philanthropic
Foundations, edited by E. C. Lagemann. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Johnson, Erik, and John D. McCarthy. 2004. “The Sequencing of Transnational and
National Social Movement Mobilization: The Organizational Mobilization of the
Global and U.S. Environmental Movements.” Pp. 71-93 in Tvansnational Protest
and Global Activism, edited by Donatella Della Porta and S. Tarrow. Lanham, Md.:
Rowman & Littlefield.

Jones, Bryan D., and Frank R. Baumgartner. 2005. The Politics of Attention. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Jordan, Grant, and William A. Maloney. 1997. The Protest Business? Mobilizing Cam-
paign Groups. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Keck, Margaret E., and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998. Activists beyond Borders. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press.

Levitsky, Sandra R. 2007. “Niche Activism: Constructing a Unified Movement Identity
in a Heterogeneous Organizational Field.” Mobilization 12:271-86.

Lippmann, Walter. 1966. Public Opinion. New York: Free Press.

Loomis, Burdett A., and Allan J. Cigler. 1995. “Introduction: The Changing Nature
of Interest Group Politics.” Pp. 1-32 in Interest Group Politics, 4th ed., edited by
Allan J. Cigler and Burdett A. Loomis. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly
Press.

Lowery, David, and Virginia Gray. 1998. “The Dominance of Institutions in Interest
Representation: A Test of Seven Explanations.” American Journal of Political Sci-
ence 42:231-55.

Mansbridge, Jane J. 1986. Why We Lost the ERA. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Martin, Andrew W., Frank R. Baumgartner, and John D. McCarthy. 2006. “Measuring
Association Populations Using the Encyclopedia of Associations: Evidence from the
Field of Labor Unions.” Social Science Research 35:771-78.

Martin, William. 1999. “The Christian Right and American Foreign Policy.” Foreign
Policy 114:66-80.

McAdam, Doug, and W. Richard Scott. 2005. “Organizations and Movements.” Pp.
4—40 in Social Movements and Organization Theory, edited by Gerald F. Davis,
Doug McAdam, W. Richard Scott, and Mayer N. Zald. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

McAdam, Doug, and Yang Su. 2002. “The War at Home: Antiwar Protests and Con-
gressional Voting, 1965 to 1973.” American Sociological Review 67:696—721.

McCarthy, John D. 2005. “Persistence and Change among Nationally Federated Social
Movement Organizations.” Pp. 193-225 in Social Movements and Organization The-
ory, edited by Gerald F. Davis, Doug McAdam, W. Richard Scott, and Mayer N.
Zald. New York: Cambridge University Press.

McCarthy, John D., and Edward T. Walker. 2004. “Alternative Organizational Rep-
ertoires of Poor People’s Social Movement Organizations.” Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Quarterly 33:97S-119S.

McCarthy, John D., and Mayer N. Zald. 1973. The Trend of Social Movements in
America. Morristown, N.J.: General Learning Press.

. 1977. “Resource Mobilization and Social Movements: A Partial Theory.” Amer-

ican Journal of Sociology 82:1212-41.
McFarland, Andrew S. 1984. Common Cause. Chatham, N.J.: Chatham House.

McGann, James G. 1992. “Academics to Ideologues: A Brief History of the Public
Policy Research Industry.” PS: Political Science and Politics 25:733-40.

Meyer, David S. 1990. A Winter of Discontent: The Nuclear Freeze and American
Politics. New York: Praeger.

Meyer, David S., and Nancy Whittier. 1994. “Social Movement Spillover.” Social Prob-
lems 41:277-98.

Meyer, John W., and Brian Rowan. 1977. “Institutionalized Organizations: Formal
Structure as Myth and Ceremony.” American Journal of Sociology 83:340-63.

Minkoff, Debra C. 1994. “From Service Provision to Institutional Advocacy: The
Shifting Legitimacy of Organizational Forms.” Social Forces 72:943-69.

. 1995. Organizing for Equality. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.

. 1997. “The Sequencing of Social Movements.” American Sociological Review

62:779-99.

. 1999. “Bending with the Wind: Strategic Change and Adaptation by Women’s

and Racial Minority Organizations.” American Journal of Sociology 104:1666-1703.

. 2002. “Macro-organizational Analysis.” Pp. 260-85 in Methods of Social Move-
ment Research, edited by B. Klandermans and Suzanne Staggenborg. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.

Minkoff, Debra C., Silke Aisenbrey, and Jon Agnone. 2008. “Organizational Diversity
in the U.S. Advocacy Sector.” Social Problems 55:525-48.

Olzak, Susan, and Emily Ryo. 2007. “Organizational Diversity, Vitality and Outcomes
in the Civil Rights Movement.” Social Forces 85:1561-92.

Osterman, Paul. 2002. Gathering Power: The Future of Progressive Politics in America.
Boston: Beacon.

Pair, Mary Wilson, ed. 1978. Encyclopedia of Associations, 12th ed. Detroit: Gale.

Peschek, Joseph G. 1987. Policy-Planning Organizations. Philadelphia: Temple Uni-
versity Press.

Prewitt, Kenneth. 2006. “Foundations.” Pp. 355-77 in The Nonprofit Sector: A Research
Handbook, 2d ed. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Putnam, Robert D. 1995. “Bowling Alone: America’s Declining Social Capital.” Journal
of Democracy 6:65-78.

. 2000. Bowling Alone. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Rao, Hayagreeva, and Eric Nielsen. 1992. “An Ecology of Agency Arrangements:
Mortality of Savings and Loan Associations, 1960-1987.” Administrative Science
Quarterly 37:448-70.

Reitzes, Donald C., and Dietrich C. Reitzes. 1987. The Alinsky Legacy. Greenwich,
Conn.: JAIL

Rich, Andrew. 2004. Think Tanks, Public Policy, and the Politics of Expertise. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Ruffner, Frederick G., et al., eds. 1964. Encyclopedia of Associations, 4th ed. Detroit:
Gale.

Salisbury, Robert H. 1984. “Interest Representation: The Dominance of Institutions.”
American Political Science Review 78:64-76.

Sampson, Robert J., Doug McAdam, Heather MacIndoe, and Simon Weffer. 2005.
“Civil Society Reconsidered: The Durable Nature and Community Structure of
Collective Civic Action.” American Journal of Sociology 111:673-714.

Shaiko, Ronald G. 1999. Voices and Echoes for the Environment: Public Interest
Representation in the 1990s and Beyond. New York: Columbia University Press.
Singh, Jitendra V., and Charles J. Lumsden. 1990. “Theory and Research in Organi-

zational Ecology.” Annual Review of Sociology 16:161-95.

Skocpol, Theda. 1999a. “Advocates without Members: The Recent Transformation of

American Civic Life.” Pp. 461-509 in Civic Engagement in American Democracy,
edited by Theda Skocpol and Morris P. Fiorina. Washington, D.C.: Brookings In-
stitution Press.
. 1999b. “Associations without Members.” American Prospect (July/August): 66-

 

73.

 

. 2003. Diminished Democracy. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

. 2004a. “The Narrowing of Civic Life.” American Prospect (June): AS—A7.

. 2004b. “Voice and Inequality: The Transformation of American Civic De-
mocracy.” Perspectives on Politics 2:3-18.

Skocpol, Theda, Rachel V. Cobb, and Casey A. Klofstad. 2005. “Disconnection and
Reorganization: The Transformation of Civic Life in Late-Twentieth-Century Amer-
ica.” Studies in American Political Development 19:137-56.

Smith, Jackie. 2005. “Globalization and Transnational Social Movement Organiza-
tions.” Pp. 226-48 in Social Movements and Organization Theory, edited by Gerald
Davis, Doug McAdam, W. Richard Scott, and Mayer N. Zald. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Sobieraj, Sarah. 2006. “The Implications of Transitions in the Voluntary Sector for
Civic Engagement: A Case Study of Association Mobilization around the 2000 Pres-
idential Campaign.” Sociological Inquiry 76:52-80.

Soule, Sarah A., and Brayden G. King. 2008. “Competition and Resource Partitioning
in Three Social Movement Industries.” American Journal of Sociology 113:1568—
1610.

Southern Poverty Law Center. 2008. “Morris Dees Biography.” http://www.splcenter
.org/center/history/dees.jsp.

Staggenborg, Suzanne. 1988. “The Consequences of Professionalization and Formal-
ization in the Pro-choice Movement.” American Sociological Review 53:585-605.
Strolovitch, Dara. 2007. Affirmative Advocacy: Race, Class, and Gender in Interest

Group Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Suchman, Mark C. 1995. “Managing Legitimacy: Strategic and Institutional Ap-
proaches.” Academy of Management Review 20:571-610.

Tauber, Steven C. 1998. “On Behalf of the Condemned? The Impact of the NAACP
Legal Defense Fund on Capital Punishment Decision Making in the U.S. Courts of
Appeals.” Political Research Quarterly 51:191-219.

Taylor, Verta. 1989. “Social Movement Continuity: The Women’s Movement in Abey-
ance.” American Sociological Review 54:761-75.

Thomas, Sue. 1991. “The Impact of Women on State Legislative Policies.” Journal of
Politics 53:958-76.

Verba, Sidney, and Norman H. Nie. 1972. Participation in America. New York: Harper
& Row.

Walker, Edward T. 2009. “Privatizing Participation: Civic Change and the Organi-
zational Dynamics of Grassroots Lobbying Firms.” American Sociological Review
74:83-105.

Walker, Jack. 1983. “The Origins and Maintenance of Interest Groups in America.”
American Political Science Review 77:390-406.

. 1991. Mobilizing Interest Groups in America. Ann Arbor: University of Mich-
igan Press.

Warren, Mark R. 2001. Dry Bones Rattling. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Weir, Margaret, and Marshall Ganz. 1997. “Reconnecting People and Politics.” Pp.
149-71 in The New Majority: Toward a Popular Progressive Politics, edited by
Stanley B. Greenberg and Theda Skocpol. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
