Pictures at an Exhibition: Conflicting Pressures in Museums and the Display of Art
Author(s): Victoria D. Alexander

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Tan., 1996), pp. 797-839
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782231

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:06 UTC
Organizations face pressures from their environments. When exter-
nal pressures conflict with each other or with internal desires, orga-
nizational personnel face dilemmas. This article examines conflict-
ing pressures in a setting where they are particularly salient: art
museums. Various stakeholders, notably external funders and mu-
seum curators, press for specific organizational outputs—that is,
particular types of exhibitions. This research examines the format
and content of exhibitions from large American museums to gauge
the effect of funding. The research demonstrates that funders’ im-
portance increased between 1960 and 1986. Funder tastes are trans-
lated into exhibitions; however, museum managers use several
strategies to retain their autonomy and legitimacy.
where the process is very vivid, in art museums. Art museums face an
uncertain budget every year and must work constantly to raise funds.
Museums rely on large, external donors. Further, museum exhibitions
are sponsored directly by various funders, notably individual philanthro-
pists, foundations, corporations, and government agencies. Thus, there
is a very clear connection between external force (funder) and organiza-
tional output (exhibition). Both resource dependency and institutional
theories predict that these external funders will have a say in what muse-
ums exhibit. Museum curators who set up exhibitions also have a direct
effect on these museum outputs, thereby channeling, deflecting, or medi-
ating the external effect. In this article, I address two main questions:
(1) What is the size and direction of external funders’ influence on exhibi-
tions? (2) How do curators manage the conflict between responsiveness
to funders’ wishes and their own normative views about what is desirable
and proper in museum exhibitions?

More specifically, I want to know how different types of funders spon-
sor various formats and contents of exhibitions and whether funding
patterns change what goes on view in museums. In general, I expect that
funders’ choices of the exhibitions they sponsor will correspond to their
funding goals, which I infer from the research literature on the cultural
sponsorship of each funder type. I also expect that curators will try to
maintain the ability to mount the prestigious, scholarly exhibitions they
prefer.

To examine these questions, I created a data set of 4,026 exhibitions
from large American art museums from 1960 to 1986. There are four
independent variables that indicate whether an exhibition was supported
by an individual, a corporation, a government agency, or a foundation.
Exhibitions can be sponsored by more than one funder type. Exhibitions
not supported by any of these funder types are termed “internally
funded” and serve as the reference category. Dependent variables in-
clude measures of the format and content of exhibitions, indicating
whether exhibitions are popular, accessible, and/or scholarly and what
styles of art they contain. I first examine the association of funder and
exhibition types at the level of individual exhibitions and then examine
changes in the exhibition pool as a whole before and after a shift in the
types of funding available to museums. The data in the analysis speak
directly to the environment-output link and sidestep the curator’s role.
Thus, they are strong indicators of the impact of environmental pressures
on organizational outputs. I will infer the curator’s role from output
results, from anecdotal evidence in interviews I have conducted, and
from qualitative information in museums’ annual reports.

I hope to refine our theoretical and empirical understanding of conflict-
ing pressures on organizations, as well as demonstrate the usefulness of
EXTERNAL INFLUENCE ON MUSEUMS

Central to my argument is the idea that all philanthropists have goals or
objectives that focus their giving. If government agencies, corporations,
foundations, and elite individuals do not have the same goals, perhaps
different sources of giving will encourage different types of art. In other
words, the goals of external parties may structure the type of art exhib-
ited. This argument is easily recast from an organizational perspective
as resource dependency (Pfeffer and Salancik 1978).? Museums mount
exhibitions, all of which cost money. Museums are highly dependent on
concentrated sources of funds for exhibitions. In order to maintain such
funding, resource dependency predicts, museums conform to the de-
mands of those who supply resources—for example, they mount shows
that conform to funder preferences.

Both resource dependency and institutional theories also predict that
managers will react to external pressures in an attempt to maintain auton-
omy and control (Pfeffer and Salancik 1978; Oliver 1991). Further, insti-
tutional theorists argue that organizations make decisions based on legiti-
macy as well as tangible resource flows (Powell and DiMaggio 1991;
Meyer and Scott 1992). Museums are highly symbolic organizations and
their resources depend on their reputations (Balfe 1987); consequently,
institutional theory and resource dependency theory come together to
clarify environmental influences on art museums and museums’ re-
sponses.

I explore the question of how the funding environment affects the
presentation of art in two ways. First, I explore how funders are linked
to the format of art exhibitions, the specific methods by which art is
packaged in exhibitions. Retrospectives and surveys are traditional for-
mats of art exhibitions; blockbusters, traveling exhibitions, and theme
shows are examples of nontraditional formats. Second, I examine fund-
ers’ association with the artistic content of shows, the artistic styles of
artworks in an exhibition. “Fine art” from the western canon of high
art comprises traditional-content subjects; noncanonical works, such as
works from the commercial or decorative arts, are more accessible and
nontraditional exhibition subjects.

It is important to note that whatever influence funders have on mu-
seum exhibitions is more probabilistic than causal (see Lieberson 1985).
Funders do not force a museum to mount any particular type of exhibi-
tion. Rather, a museum has a portfolio of exhibition types that it is
willing to mount. Similarly, funders have an implicit portfolio of shows
they are willing to fund. When a museum accepts external funding, the
result is an increase in the number of exhibitions where the portfolios
overlap. Funding increases the odds of certain ranges of exhibitions. As
Becker (1982, p. 92) states, “Available resources make some things possi-
ble, some things easy, and others harder; every pattern of availability
reflects the workings of some kind of social organization and becomes
part of the pattern of constraints and possibilities that shapes the art
produced.” This image of exhibitions multiplying in the overlap of port-
folios is a funding effects hypothesis. It suggests that funder preferences
translate directly into exhibitions. The mechanism of the funding effect
works at the level of the exhibition pool (funders disproportionally sup-
port particular types of exhibitions, increasing the prevalence of those
types), rather than at the exhibition level (funders do not force museums
to change individual exhibitions).
Wealthy Individuals

Individual art patrons are connoisseurs. They often love the art they
sponsor and have a good deal of knowledge about it (Balfe 1993a;
Robinson 1987). Further, traditional patrons are uninterested in at-
tracting broad audiences to museums, and such wealthy philanthropists
prefer smaller, narrower exhibitions, both for the safety of the objects
they may have personally lent to the museum, and because they are
interested in gaining status as connoisseurs of rare or esoteric works
(Odendahl 1990; see also Weber 1946; Bourdieu 1984). In terms of the
main exhibition variables, I expect that individuals will tend to fund
scholarly exhibitions, given their knowledge of art. But as their target
audience is a small, elite group (Balfe 1993), individual funders are not
likely to fund either popular exhibitions or accessible exhibitions.

Elite philanthropists are not entirely selfless as benefactors of the arts.
As Odendahl (1990) argues, elite individuals tend to favor philanthropy
that is beneficial especially to the upper classes. Further, the monetary
value of tax incentives and the market value of art play an important
role in the philanthropic decisions of wealthy collectors (Odendahl 1987);
Moulin 1987), or they are motivated by other personal goals (Dauber
1993). Along these lines, then, another goal of elite collectors is having
their collections exhibited in museums so museums can conserve, ap-
praise, store, market, or otherwise help them with the care of their art
objects.
Government

To characterize the goals of government agencies, I will discuss the two
major players in the government arena: the National Endowment for the
Arts (NEA) and state arts councils. The NEA is guided by the principles
(in its charter) of making art available to more people and helping muse-
ums better serve the citizens of the United States. The arts panels that
distribute the NEA monies are made up of arts professionals, who may
have more art-historical concerns. Thus, there is a tension in the NEA
between sponsoring broad, popular exhibitions and narrow, scholarly
exhibitions (Galligan 1993). The NEA must balance these demands. And
as DiMaggio (1991b) argues, state arts councils are not that different
from the NEA. Both types of government agency have to meet similar
political imperatives. An essential goal of both is self-perpetuation. To
achieve this, they need to maintain their prestige and to garner support-
ers. Support must come from two quarters: from art worlds and from
the political arena. Art supporters, whose future grants are at stake, may
be more active than populist supporters; on the other hand, if arts fund-
ing looks like a boondoggle for elites, government agencies are liable to
come under political attack. Consequently, a judicious mix of scholarly
and popular exhibitions is called for, in order for the government to
retain both art and political supporters (see DiMaggio 1991b, pp. 229-—
30). Thus, I expect that government agencies will tend to fund popular
exhibitions, scholarly exhibitions, and accessible exhibitions.

Further, government agencies are the only funders among the four
types profiled that are explicitly interested in expanding audiences beyond
the traditional middle and upper classes that currently consume much
art (DiMaggio and Useem 1978). Education and outreach are a part of
Foundations

Foundations are the forgotten funders in studies of arts support (DiMag-
gio 1986c, p. 113). DiMaggio (1986c) reports that foundations tend to
be conservative in their funding patterns. Foundations tend to support
well-established organizations that are in the foundations’ own communi-
ties. Large, visible foundations are important exceptions to this pattern,
but as DiMaggio demonstrates, the few large, active, and innovative
foundations are not representative of most foundations (although the ex-
ceptional, large, visible foundations may be particularly important sup-
porters of the large, visible museums I study). DiMaggio’s work suggests
that foundations do not place much emphasis on audiences. This would
lead to the hypothesis that foundations tend not to fund popular or acces-
sible exhibitions. Odendahl (1987a) points out that founding families re-
tain control over most foundations, including many large ones. Conse-
quently, foundations may have giving preferences similar to those of elite
individuals. There is little information about the preferences of founda-
tions for art scholarship, however, so I would only tentatively suggest
that foundations tend to fund scholarly exhibitions.
Increasing Conflict

The philanthropy of elite individuals has been associated with American
art museums since the end of the 19th century, when museums became
institutionalized (DiMaggio 1982a, 19826). In contrast, corporations did
not begin to provide significant funds for the arts until the sixties (Porter
1981; Gingrich 1969). The NEA was established in 1965, and state arts
councils followed shortly thereafter, as federal block grants encouraged
their formation. All states had arts councils by 1967 (DiMaggio 1991},
p. 218). Since the mid-1960s, then, federal and state government agencies
and corporations, along with foundations, have increasingly funded mu-
seums (DiMaggio 1986a). These new funders are called “institutional
funders,” to distinguish them from individual philanthropists (DiMaggio
1986a; Crane 1987, pp. 5—9).°

Curators have had plenty of time to become used to the influence of
individual patrons, whose interests overlap with their own (Zolberg
1986). Indeed, individual funding of museums was institutionalized be-
fore the curatorial profession solidified. But the goals of the institutional
funders are not the same as those of traditional museum sponsors. More-
over, the goals of corporate and government funders conflict with norma-
tively defined goals of museum curators. Since the preferences and biases
of the institutional funders conflict with the visions already institutional-
ized in museums, new funding creates problems for museum personnel.
Table 1 summarizes the orientation of the funders and curators, as pre-
sented in the literature.
1977; Oliver 1991). Further, because they operate in an institutional envi-
ronment, museum managers must maintain the legitimacy of their muse-
ums. Indeed, to the extent that external demands conflict with curators’
ideas of what grants them legitimacy, they may actively resist these de-
mands. Research on many nonprofit organizations suggests that legiti-
macy considerations are the key to whether managers try to deflect envi-
ronmental demands (Alexander 1996a). Museum curators operate in a
normative context where their views of art and scholarship will shape
their behavior. Along these lines, one would hypothesize that museum
curators will endeavor to maintain the organization’s legitimacy as they
mount exhibitions. I test this possibility by examining the exhibition pool
to determine whether it changes.

I have proposed a model of environmental pressures that suggests that
shifts in funding will change the overall mix of exhibitions as funders
disproportionally sponsor exhibitions they prefer. This model implies that
museums passively accept external resources by mounting more exhibi-
tions of the type that funders prefer. It suggests that as museums become
more reliant on external funders, the exhibition pool will include more
exhibitions that reflect the tastes of the funders.

This is an environmental effects hypothesis. However, museum cura-
tors may endeavor to retain both autonomy and legitimacy through two
strategies: buffering and resource shifting. By “buffering,” I mean a
process by which organizations protect their most crucial functions by
allowing changes in more peripheral areas. Museum curators may be
more interested in the actual content of exhibitions (the artistic styles of
the artworks themselves) than in the format in which those exhibitions
are mounted (the packaging of the works, as in a traveling show). Consis-
tent with Thompson’s (1967) idea of buffering the technical core, we
might expect that the format of exhibitions will change more than the
content of exhibitions. In other words, if museum curators use buffering
as a strategy, the exhibition pool will change more in format than in
content as museums become more reliant on external funders.

By “resource shifting,” I mean a process by which organizations use
discretionary funds to keep the internal balance of activities as closely
aligned to the ideal balance as possible. Museums may have latitude in
mounting exhibitions paid for internally. It is possible that they rely on
external funders to sponsor exhibitions of the sort that both curators and
funders prefer. Relying on funders this way will shift the mix of externally
funded exhibitions. But museums may compensate by mounting more of
excluded types of exhibitions and paying for them with museum funds.
Thus, the mix of internally funded exhibitions may shift in the opposite
direction, with the net result that there is no change in the overall mix of
exhibitions. Museum curators suggest this is true: “‘Our more scholarly
projects do tend to get funded internally,’ admits Diana Duncan of the
Smithsonian. ‘If something is not a sexy project, the inside tracks are
much more important. But lack of corporate sponsorship doesn’t mean
we don’t do those things’” (Glennon 1988, p. 42). In other words, muse-
ums would like to mount certain types of exhibitions—a mix of popular,
scholarly, and accessible. They endeavor to “sell” some of them to fund-
ers and mount the rest with internal funds. Over time, they may have
found more exhibitions amenable to external funders but may not have
changed the mix of exhibitions they actually mount. If curators can shift
resources in this way, we would expect that as museums become more
reliant on external funders, the exhibition pool will not change.
exhibitions, I consulted annual reports of museums in the Thomas J.
Watson Library at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City,
and then in the Ryerson and Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of
Chicago. Rather than choose a sample of museums, I attempted to gather
data on every museum in the universe. Six museums fell out of the sample
when information on them was not available in either of these central
archives. Although I collected data on all exhibitions from the annual
reports available in the archives (6,337 exhibitions from 30 museums), I
limited the quantitative data set to museums for which I found annual
reports for at least 10 of the 14 time points.* Appendix A lists museums
included in the sample.

I began the analysis with 1960—five years before the advent of federal
funding and about five years before the time that corporations began to
sponsor the arts—and I collected data for even-numbered years from
1960 to 1986, creating 14 time points for each museum. This time frame
begins before major changes in funding and covers the entire period of
the move toward museums’ reliance on institutional funders. The start
date was set before the advent of institutional funding to provide a base-
line for comparison with the changes that occur with the addition of new
types of funders. The data stop before the recent controversy over arts
funding that began with the 1989 Mapplethorpe exhibition (Dubin 1992).°

I chose to study only large museums. Large museums form a conceptu-
ally distinct population, since they play a gatekeeping role in the visual
arts sector that small museums do not (Crane 1987, chap. 7). I have
also chosen to focus on museum exhibitions rather than other aspects of
museums influenced by patronage—for example, acquisitions and pro-
grams. There are several important advantages in focusing on exhibi-
tions. Most of the public, and many critics and art scholars, experience
art through exhibitions; consequently, exhibitions may be more important
than acquisitions for defining art. Further, exhibitions are under more
direct control of museum personnel than are acquisitions, allowing for a
broader understanding of curatorial intention and how it might be influ-
Coding

I developed a coding scheme for exhibitions that tapped various measures
of exhibition format and content. I coded each exhibition mounted by
sample museums by its format, the source of the artwork the museum
used in the exhibition, and the art-historical style of the art in the exhibi-
tion. I was able to identify major funders, and I coded whether the
exhibition was externally funded and by which types of funder (corpo-
rate, government, foundation, individual). See appendix B for a sum-
mary of the aspects of exhibitions coded.

I developed the coding scheme using techniques recommended by con-
tent analysis researchers (e.g., Holsti 1969; Namenwirth and Weber
1987). I used a set coding scheme that was designed to test hypotheses
about the effect of funding on a range of exhibition characteristics. I
pretested my coding scheme on a sample of exhibitions not included in
the final analysis. In this pretest, I looked for potential areas of ambiguity
and for categories that might have been overlooked in the initial scheme.
From this pretest, I developed a set of coding rules that solidified coding
categories. As I coded exhibitions, I kept a coding journal that allowed
me to resolve ambiguities in the same direction each time.'°

I coded exhibitions on three different measures of format: layout, trav-
eling status, and type. The category I called “layout” classified exhibi-
tions into standard formats such as a retrospectives, small group exhibi-
tions, and surveys of stylistic development. Other layouts include the
accessible exhibition format called the theme show, shows that are ori-
ented toward children, and those that are a jumble of styles with no
art-historical organization. I coded exhibitions as to their traveling status;
traveling exhibitions appeared in and/or were arranged by other muse-
ums. Traveling shows reach a larger number of viewers than shows that
appear in just one city. The variable I called “type” categorized the
source of the artworks in the exhibition. The majority of exhibitions were
coded as “loan exhibitions.” These are exhibitions where pieces come
from a variety of sources, such as the collections of patrons or other
museums (and, perhaps, the museum’s own collection). A second type
of show is the “blockbuster,” a loan exhibition that meets several addi-
tional criteria. Blockbuster exhibitions are large-scale, mass-appeal exhi-
bitions, designed to attract broad audiences. Blockbusters are defined in
terms of reaching a large public, and are indicated for the coding by
three factors: (1) the use of advance ticketing, for instance, by indepen-
dent ticket agencies, (2) high attendance figures, and (3) mentions in the
annual report of long lines of people waiting to get into the exhibition.!!
Other types of exhibitions include shows drawing from a museum’s own
collection, a patron’s collection, or an artist’s collection. Exhibitions were
coded as coming from these collections when the collection was the sole
source of exhibited works (or the source of the vast majority of them). If
a patron provides only a few works, with other sources providing addi-
tional works, the exhibition is a loan show. “Patron” usually means an
individual patron, but occasionally it indicates a corporation or founda-
tion. Each exhibition is coded for each format variable; consequently,
format measures in the analysis are not mutually exclusive. For instance,
some, but not all, blockbusters travel.

I based the coding of exhibition contents on canonical divisions stan-
dard in art history. I have become knowledgeable about artistic styles
by taking six courses in art history at Princeton and Stanford universities,
attending museums and studio art classes, and reading. The coding
scheme divided exhibitions into 21 “style” categories, although some
exhibitions are defined by the media of their contents (e.g., photography)
without further reference to actual style. The final analysis rests on 14
categories: (1) modern art—from postimpressionism at the turn of the
century to minimalism and conceptual art in the 1960s and 1970s; (2)
European art, medieval through 19th century—from the early Middle
Ages (about 600 A.D.) to impressionism in the late 19th century; (3) classi-
cal art—art and artifacts up to about 600 a.pD. from Europe, the ancient
Near East, and Egypt; (4) postmodern and contemporary—including
such styles as contemporary figurative painting, pattern painting, photo-
realism, and pop art (see below); (5) American old masters—early Ameri-
can portraiture, 19th-century realists, and early to mid-twentieth-century
realists; (6) American ethnic—a category reserved for shows that were
explicitly described in the annual report as containing works by minority
artists (shows that include minority artists where the museum did not
make an issue of the artists’ race or ethnicity are coded under their
artistic style); (7) Asian art—art from all parts of Asia except modern or
postmodern styles or so-called primitive art; (8) photography—all styles
of photography (but not photojournalism, which is coded under commer-
cial art); (9) craft, costume, decorative, and folk art—examples include
quilts, inaugural ball gowns, eighteenth-century English furniture, and
Paul Revere silver; (10) commercial art—such items as advertisements,
posters, products, prototypes, and commercial design; (11) mixed styles—
art that spans more than one of the above categories; (12) local artists—a
category reserved for shows that are explicitly described as including
local or regional professional artists; (13) child- or community-oriented
art—art that is specifically geared toward children or art made by chil-
dren, art that takes into account specific community issues, or art that
is created by nonprofessional community members; (14) other styles—
including art from several styles (primitive art, architecture, film, South
American, Mexican, and African art—i.e., art from these regions that
is not otherwise primitive, modern, or postmodern), exhibitions with
unidentifiable contents (such as the show Oom Pah Pah at the Metropoli-
tan Museum that was not further elaborated), and, finally, exhibitions
placed in a residual subcategory as “other” styles. Since this residual
category is what is left over after coding for the traditional canon, for
postmodern and contemporary art, and for non-Western art (all of which
are styles that are established in contemporary or traditional art history
literature), it encompasses those styles that are not in any sense part of
art history.

Exhibitions of living artists proved to be the most difficult to code.
Here, I relied on lists of artists working in two modern and four postmod-
ern styles (Crane 1987, app. C, pp. 153-57), but the job was difficult
because of the still-fluid definition of postmodern and modern styles and
the large number of contemporary artists exhibiting who were not on
Crane’s list and were unknown to me. I coded living artists as “modern”
or “postmodern,” if I was able to, based on personal knowledge, Crane’s
list, or the exhibition description.’ I coded living artists whose styles I
could not determine as “contemporary,” along with group exhibitions
of living artists embodying both modern and postmodern styles. In the
final analysis, I folded the categories “postmodern” and “contempo-
rary” into one category indicating the newest thrust of artwork produced
mainly by artists who were still living and painting when the exhibition
was mounted.

I also coded the funders of exhibitions. Four dummy variables, one
for each funder type, indicate whether or not the exhibition was funded
by an individual, corporation, government agency, or foundation. Exhi-
bitions were often funded by more than one type of external funder.
Exhibitions with no major external funding are indicated by a pattern
of 0,0,0,0 for the four funding variables. It is important to note that
museums do not report small donations, which may help support an
exhibition; consequently, my data concern major funding only. In other
words, my data set is biased toward the effects of munificent and visible
donors. While it would be useful to know the effects of minor funders
(who likely are middle-class individuals and small, local businesses and
foundations, not wealthy elites or large, national corporations and foun-
dations), organizational research suggests that museums would also be
more heavily influenced by the major funders the research design cap-
tures.
which organized paintings by their subject matter instead of the more
traditional categories such as the artist or chronology of the work. Several
styles of exhibition indicate accessible contents. Although there are more
accessible and less accessible artists within each style category, I assume
that American old masters, crafts and costumes, commercial art, local
artists, and child- or community-oriented art are more accessible style
categories than the rest.

Scholarly exhibitions are shows resting on solid art-historical merit and
research. A show can be designed in a way for scholars to learn more
about the art in the show. A survey, which shows the development of a
style or series of styles, and a retrospective, which shows the development
of a single artist’s oeuvre, are art-historically based formats for exhibi-
tions. In terms of content, scholarly shows are indicated by the traditional
canon: the lineage of art usually covered in introductory art history
courses (e.g., Janson 1986), which is now called “the history of Western
art.” It is composed of three style categories: classical art, European art
(medieval through the 19th century), and modern art. Postmodern art, a
conglomeration of styles that draw on, react against, or play with the
conventions of modern art, also indicates art-historical contents.

The data also address three additional concerns of funders. To test
whether individuals tend to sponsor their own artworks, I coded the
source of art for exhibitions. The variable “patron collection” indicates
that all or virtually all of the art in a given exhibition came from the
collection of the individual or corporation that sponsored the exhibition.
This variable indicates the format of exhibitions, since the content of a
patron collection could be scholarly or accessible. Two content variables
address hypotheses about government funding of living artists and art of
interest to nontraditional audiences. Sponsorship of American ethnic art
demonstrates an interest in nontraditional audiences. Contemporary art-
ists and most of the postmodern artists were living at the time their art
was shown, so for the purposes of this analysis, living artists are indicated
by the combined style category for postmodern and contemporary art.

The four independent variables for the analysis are the funder vari-
ables. Externally funded exhibitions receive support from one or a combi-
nation of individual, corporate, government, or foundation donors. Exhi-
bitions termed “internally funded” have been paid for by the museum’s
operating budget, earned income, an auxiliary entity such as the Ladies’
Council, or small donations not directly acknowledged as exhibition sup-
port. “Internally funded” is the excluded funding variable. Dummy vari-
ables indicating the museum in which the exhibition appeared provide a
rough control for various museum effects such as the size of the museum’s
endowment, skill at fund-raising, and the focus of the museum’s col-
lection.
In the analysis, I first investigate whether funders are indeed associated
with particular formats or contents of exhibitions. This will provide a
baseline for understanding a second phase of the analysis, the change in
the entire exhibition pool and the possible influence of funders on the
pool of exhibitions as a whole. To learn about this level, I compare the
exhibition pool before and after institutional funders increasingly enter
the museum arena.

All variables in the analysis are dummy variables. Dependent variables
indicate either format (the five format variables are “blockbuster,”
“traveling exhibition,” “theme show,” “art-historical exhibition,” and
“patron collection”) or content (the 14 content variables—coded “0” or
“1”_were created from the 14 categories of the style variable). A logistic
regression equation was estimated, using the maximum likelihood tech-
nique, for each of the 19 dependent variables. Independent variables are
the four funder dummy variables; thus, the regressions test for associa-
tions between the type of funder and each dependent variable. The four
types of funders are not mutually exclusive (i.e., exhibitions can be spon-
sored by more than one funder). The omitted category is exhibitions that
were not funded by any of the four external funders. In other words, the
comparison group for the B coefficients is composed of exhibitions not
funded by the given funder, including those exhibitions that are funded
internally. The logistic regressions control for the overlap in funding but
do not demonstrate the existence of coalitions among funder types. Using
cross-tabulations, I check for significant overlap in funder types for each
exhibition variable. This is important, since the NEA funds exhibitions
on a matching basis, so there may be an important overlap in government
and other types of funding (though the matching funds can come from
internal or quasi-internal funds as well as from other major donors).

Museum dummies are included as controls,* but not reported, as an
analysis of museum differences is beyond the scope of this article; I dis-
cuss this issue at length elsewhere (Alexander 1996b, 1996c). A second
series of 19 logistic regressions were estimated to determine changes in
the exhibition pool, using a dummy variable to indicate time period and
controlling for museum.
type of funding and the content of art exhibitions, and (3) indications in
the exhibition pool of museum autonomy. When in the late 1960s and
1970s funding became increasingly available (DiMaggio 1986b; Crane
1987) and museums expanded (Blau 1989), museums increasingly relied
on external funders, especially the new institutional funders, to support
the exhibitions they mounted. This trend is graphically confirmed by my
data in figure 1. The average number of exhibitions per museum spon-
sored by corporations, government, and foundations was level until
around 1972, after which the average number increased steadily. Individ-
ual funding, stable before 1972, rose only slightly by the end of the study.

Table 2 classifies descriptive statistics for the exhibitions by the type of
funder. This table provides some detail for understanding the statistical
analysis, but note that this is not the table from which the logistic regres-
sions were run (the table does not include the cross-tabulation by museum
variables; this would require 15 tables). An interesting point about table
2 is that each funder type sponsors at least some of each exhibition format
and content (with the exception of American ethnic exhibitions, which
were not supported by foundations in my sample, and child- or commu-
nity-oriented shows, which were not supported by individuals). But that
said, it is more important to recognize the patterns of each funder, as
analyzed below.

Table 3 presents a correlation matrix of the four funding variables. It
is interesting that they are not highly correlated, although there is a
notable negative correlation between each of the institutional funders and
the individual philanthropists.'* This suggests that the new institutional
funders have funding goals quite distinct from those of the traditional
funders of museums. In addition, I cross-tabulated format and content
variables by number of funders (table not shown). Two variables had
notably high degrees of overlapping funding: 40% of blockbusters had
multiple funders, as did 14% of traveling exhibitions. I report on the
coalitions of funders for these variables below.
409),

9861 786L 8Z6l vL6l OL6L 9961 Z96L
O86! 9261 aL6l
L
varsuyae alpousNUl are Sa[qeLeA JU9]U0D +
“aAtsnoxa

Ayrenqnur are (paziodar jou) suonqiyxe pepuny jo A103ayv9 ay} pue a[qeirea sty} os ‘sadA} rapuny inoy oy) Aq papuny jou suoNIqryxa 0} siajar ,.papuny ATTeUIEzUT,, 4

“QAISNJOXa ATTeNynul jou are sayqeizeA adAy Japuny pur eulogy y

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

   

  

  

 

 

  

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

920'r Tare TI soe 682 zoe es vee “+ ad&y sapuny Aq [e301
119 10S 8z sz Sb se eee emetneettee He gardqs rao
ere soe c z ¢ 0 * payuetio AyuNuIUIOS JO PyIyD
102 O8T Z 6 9 L crrteererssreees Sastre [BOOT
zOv v0e Al 02 62 sg srreeeeeeeeseeseeess SOTAIS PAXTTAL
vel oot s 9 er 4 corseessesseescees TeTQ ISTO,
Lie osz 8 ZI oz to vrs SOF pure ‘@aTyerovap ‘ouNysoo WyeID
782 627 II 82 02 Z + AydesrZ0j0yg
cee vl dt or a 6e corre URISY
es ey 0 g v v 7 cette “ o1uyje UB LeU
lve 78T zr or 1Z se ceteeeess * sia{seul pjo uBILIEWy
zor OOT 9 ty aT 91 “+ yeroduiaju0d pue usapounjsog
Ly Te £ 9 s 6 sreteeesteeeeesses ot TeoIsse[
Ory Tee oe Iv oe Or cversreerereers Ainguaa yy61—eaetpat ‘ueadomg
96S ver Sz 62 ve 99 ue “"* UapOyAL
$:Juewuog
ore sr 6. 8 97 697 verte * worsaT[09 s,uoneg
gs7'T v6 18 LT 16 OL “) WOTIQIYXe TROHOysTY-31y
bre 692 I Sz Lt ot siteeieseeeiseeeeeseeecereeeeeesteees MOUS aUOTL,
as lz ST £7 sz $ * WORIqIYXe Joysnqyo[g.
09 ose es ral TOT ss 7 * woRIqIyxe Surpaaery,
JeULIOg
(TROL) 4aganny suonepunoy queutuseAor suonei0di0;) syenplarpuy
N ATIVNUGLNE
“ON xQTYOSNOdS SNOILIGIHXY JO “ON

 

 

98-0961 ‘SNOILLIGIHXY WOasAyL ‘AaaNN J JO AMAL AM VIVG FAILAMOsSAg

@ ATaVL
Table 4 shows results of logistic regressions with traveling, block-
buster, theme, art-historical, and patron collection exhibitions as the de-
pendent variables. The table demonstrates that corporate and govern-
ment entities disproportionally sponsor both traveling exhibitions and
blockbuster exhibitions. The results support the hypothesis that both
government and corporations fund more popular exhibitions than other
funders. Foundations, which were expected to fund fewer popular exhibi-
tions, actually funded more of them. This suggests that the large, visible
foundations DiMaggio (1986c) spoke about are important for museum
funding, at least concerning the sponsorship of popular exhibitions.

Both blockbuster and traveling exhibitions are funded by more than
one type of funder. Government and corporations together sponsor 33.3%
of blockbuster exhibitions, while 9.9% of traveling exhibitions share both
corporate and government funding. Just about a quarter of blockbusters
are supported by a combination of corporation and foundation dollars
(though only 5% of traveling shows are supported by this combination
of funders). Similarly, just over a quarter of blockbusters are supported
by government agencies and foundations (and just over 5% of traveling
exhibitions are thus supported). No combination of institutional and indi-
vidual funders together sponsored more than 3.5% of either traveling or
blockbuster exhibitions. In general, then, institutional funding is associ-
ated with popular exhibitions, indicating a broadening of audiences for
exhibitions.

Table 4 also demonstrates that corporations sponsor more exhibitions
of accessible art, as indicated by their sponsorship of theme shows. Indi-
viduals fund fewer accessible exhibitions than other funders, as expected.
Government and foundations have no statistical relationship to accessible
exhibitions. Art-historical exhibitions are disproportionally favored by
government and foundation donors; both sponsor more of these formats.
Corporations are not associated positively or negatively with this format.
Individuals, however, sponsor fewer shows that are organized along art-
historical lines.

In addition, table 4 supports the prediction that individuals sponsor
a great deal of exhibitions that are composed of their own collections.
“100° > d xx+
‘TO > d xx
‘SO >dx

“qreN} ay} Jo aduasaid ay} soyeorpuT ,.1,, AOYM ‘saquuwA T‘O are saTqeiTeA TTY 4
“JapuNy JO Sa11082}e9 Inoj ay} Jo Aue Aq papuny jou suonIqryxe

ST ASB STY} UT A10Z9}89 pazTuo ayy, “aArsnyoxe Ajyenqnw jou are pur saqeuea 1‘O are ,,UOTPpUNo},, pur ,,USUIUIAAG,, ,,“UOIJeIOIOD,, ,,‘TENPIAIPUT,, SA|QULIA IY], »

“SUOT}IqIYXA 9Z0'p = A “SUNasnur afdures 10J sayqeizeA AuawNp Zurpnypout Aq (peziodas jou) s}dajya WNasnur oJ [oI}UOD suoT}eENnbY— "ALON

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

(SLT'Y) 624’) (9Ts’) (ose’) (s61")

sso #€8L" xxx 006° 2 — el" sexe SOLS sores WOR DaT[OI WALO S,WOTeg
(184°T) (2st) (set) (o9T") (prt)

ser’ ween TLL sexe PUT ee" — sexx BOL0— TT CONIQIYXe TRIHOYsTY-HY
(916°2) (282°) (bye) (v6r’) (992°)

6zS'b 60° — 18¢"— sex $80'T weexObQ teres “* moys aay
(e919) (OTr’) (sze") (e9¢") (vos")

Lov" 678" se 799" T sexx €0LT 968° — veers" TOTIYXS 19}SNG4IO] F,
(920°2) (212) (est) (s9T’) (z9T’)

9rL9 xevb" ex 99T'T see £€0°T ero “ UOTIIqIyXe ZueAerL,
yuejysu0d uonepunog quauiusea0n uore10di0Z) yenprarpuy ql¥WIOd

eaaNny

 

 

(suorssarZay I19S1Z0']) SNOILIGIHXY JO LVWAO] AHL NO ONIGNAY 40 adA], AO SLOTIAT

v ATaVL
Content of Art Exhibitions

In addition to patterned associations with the format of exhibitions,
funder type is associated with particular kinds of content. This section
addresses the predicted corporate desires for accessible art, government
preferences for accessible, scholarly, and ethnic art, as well as for shows
of living artists, and individual patrons’ desire to fund scholarly but not
accessible exhibitions.

Table 5 explores the association of funding and content. In this table,
style of exhibition is divided into 14 dummy variables, each of which
serves as a dependent variable in a model with four funder types serving
as independent variables (controlling for museum). Scholarly contents
are indicated by the traditional canonical styles, the first three styles in
the table: modern, medieval through 19th-century European art, and
classical art. The table demonstrates that, as suggested, corporations
fund disproportionally fewer of the canonical.styles (they are especially
unlikely to sponsor modern art) and that individuals and government
fund more canonical styles, with individuals positively associated with
exhibitions of modern and classical art and government positively associ-
ated with exhibitions of modern and European art. Foundations are not
particularly associated with scholarly art.

Table 5 also demonstrates that, as predicted, government sponsors a
disproportional share of postmodern and contemporary art, thus support-
ing shows of living artists. It is interesting that government sponsors a
larger share of both modern and postmodern art. Two characteristics
distinguish these styles: they predominantly contain American artists,
and they tend to require some art-historical training to appreciate. Gov-
ernment sponsors are negatively associated with additional style cate-
gories: crafts and costumes, commercial art, mixed styles, child- and
community-oriented art, and other styles. With the potential exception
(814°¢) (ss¢) (2bz’) (4L2’) (06¢")

SI's zL0°— Tey 671° sexe SET — cores ydessoqo4d
(pz9"¢) (862°) (49¢") (see*) (261)

an a9 LS" che — er exnS08" . Seti UBISY
(8zb'9) (60$") (p9S") (8z$°)

£56°8 Lee 092" fens ie Sete SqUta URDHOUNY
(T9P"€) (eee") (s62°) (992°) (66T’)

6I0t er er tee" anf 9S" eieeeseieneecosstieceeesoies g]9yS8UI PIO URLOUTY
(S9t's) (99¢') (122’) (.1¢") (682°)

169°r 29b°— sexx Sb'T 9sz"— oe" vrrsrerreeoes Kyerodurayuos pue uslapoursod,
(str) (489°) (gos") (2ps*) (I8¢")

80°21 — 6st — 184" a #S18" vo Teoqsse[D,
(€T8°2) (vez) (902°) (822°) (S8T°)

£226 — £82" «lft 9sz"— ) vers §anquas yy6T—TeAeipeur ‘ueadoiny
(soe’z) (osz’) (191°) (612°) (st)

oue'z 181 see LE" Hl 19° — nl 9b" Srrerereesseeesesneseeoesersseeese2" WSDOT
yueysuod, uonepunog yuautUIaA0y, uorerodiod yenptarpuy qX TALS

wTGNN

 

 

(suojssaiZay 918180) SNOILIGIHXY JO AIALS AHL NO ONIGNOY 40 Fd, AO SLOTIAY

$s ATaVL

oO
a
ee}
“100° > d xxx
‘10° > d xx
‘SO. >dx
“VAR PayUI[IO-AjUNTUUIOD JO -PpLyD Jo uOTIqIyxe Ue perosuods sTenprarpuT ou ‘paydures ported ay) Butnq »
“We IUY}2 Jo uoHIqIyxe ue paiosuods suoTepuNoy ou ‘pajdures pored ay} ZuLING ,
“yer ay} Jo aouaseid ay} soyworput ,,7,, yA ‘so|qerIeA [‘Q ae SaqVLIEA [TV q
“JapuUNy JO Satiosayed no} ay} Jo Aue Aq papunj jou suoniqiyxe

SI ase SIy) UT A1099}V9 payIuio sy J, “aAIsNpoxe Ajjenjnul jou are pue saqeiea [‘O are ,.UOHEpuNoy, pue ,,“UoUTUIZAOS,, ,,{UOTFeIOdIOD,, ,,“[ENPIATPUL,, SI|QRIIVA YT,»

“SUOTIIGIYX 970'F = AY ‘SUINaSNUT a[dures 10 sa[qeIzeA AUUINp BSurpnpoUt Aq (pa}iodas ou) s}DajJa UNasNUT J0j [OIJUOD SuOTyeNnby—"TLON

 

(€22'2)
298°L
(o¢g0"e)
781'6
(828°)
£86°L—

(2182)
e9r's

(e9s"¢)
TS4°LT

(6zs"¢)
sere

 

 

 
 
 

  

  

(822°) (622) (s8t’) (981°)

Ist: neaSL2— Ae x0 95° eeteeeteeesniieesseneessseeesnniesseeensees SOLS JIIIO
(€24°) (222’) (6ts*)
##000°2— #x97LT— xxl Ob — ue vrrtrerreresrerreseeceeee DaquatIO APUNUIOD JO PTYD,
(42¢") (49¢") (trr’) (6¢")

ocr ¢29°— ole — 206-0 tee ceseeeneeeneeeeee * syene e007]
(082) (usz’) (122) (091°)

L80°- 679° — Lz" eens eS” vrreersrerseseseee” SQIA]S PAXTTAL
(40$") (z9v°) (pre) (66¢")

a 826° — £91" OTSe—  JePoTeUIUO)
(68¢°) (61¢’) (¢92") (181°)

78e°— x6bL°— sy” 060" crrsresessessesees” SOT Duw ‘BATyeIOJap ‘aUINysod “IFeID,
of mixed styles, these categories all represent more accessible and nontra-
ditional exhibition contents.

Contrary to prediction, government agencies did not tend to sponsor
ethnic art. Indeed, virtually no funder sponsored art produced by nontra-
ditional artists, as measured by the American ethnic variable (see table
2). It is possible that this is not a good measure of support for minority
artists. There are very few exhibitions captured here. Although I suspect
that minority artists are underrepresented even in contemporary art exhi-
bitions, it is possible that funders sponsor ethnic artists who are catego-
rized by museums by their style, rather than in the “affirmative action”
exhibitions that explicitly focus on painters and sculptors from disenfran-
chised groups.

Corporations fund fewer of the modern exhibitions, and it is perhaps
no surprise that they sponsor more of the commercial art shows. Com-
mercial art shows may include artworks that are actually corporate prod-
ucts, and they indicate more accessible contents. Corporations are not
interested in children or in community shows (none of the funders are).

In addition to the modern and classical canonical styles, individuals
sponsor more exhibitions of American old masters, Asian art, crafts and
costumes, and mixed styles. (The last, mixed styles, largely reflects spon-
sorship of patron collections containing mixed styles of art.) Individuals
sponsor fewer shows of photography, local artists, and other styles, and
they sponsored no child- or community-oriented shows. Thus, individu-
als have a mixed pattern, preferring both scholarly (canonical) and ac-
cessible (American old masters and crafts and costumes) styles of exhibi-
tions. The only style that foundations have a positive association with is
Asian art. Foundations, like other funders, sponsored few child- and
community-oriented exhibitions; they also sponsored no ethnic art.
or cultural capital either to museums or to government funders. Founda-
tions parallel government funders in supporting both popular and scholarly
formats but do not mimic individual sponsors in their effects. Individual
patrons are uninterested in popular formats, actively shun accessible for-
mats, but at the same time sponsor fewer art-historical formats. Individual
sponsors fund both canonical styles and accessible styles, and overwhelm-
ingly support their own collections, legitimating their own, elite tastes.
Note that individuals and government agencies—those funders who claim
to judge exhibitions using some measure of artistic scholarship—fund
fewer exhibitions in the category other styles. It is interesting that of corpo-
rate sponsorship in the other category, the lion’s share is in the subcategory
“other” (table not shown). Styles that were classified in the subcategory
“other” were so classified precisely because they did not fit in well with
traditional and contemporary classifications.

In general, institutional funders are especially associated with block-
buster and traveling exhibitions; important types of mass-appeal, broad-
audience, and wide-exposure shows. Government may attempt to reach
more geographically diffuse audiences by sponsoring traveling shows,
and corporations increase audience size and name recognition by sponsor-
ing more broadly based exhibitions. The overlap in government, corpo-
rate, and foundation sponsorship of such exhibitions suggests that, along
the audience dimensions, institutional patrons have similar goals.

The results presented here are reasonably consistent with expectations,
given funders’ overarching goals. The data show, then, a fairly clear
translation of funder goals into exhibition formats and contents. The
patterns in tables 4 and 5 also suggest how funder interests align with
curator interests, assuming that curators prefer scholarly exhibitions to
popular and accessible exhibitions. No funder’s interests coincide with
those of curators. Corporations’ goals conflict with those of curators more
than the goals of the other funders, whose exhibition preferences overlap
with curator goals more often. I expect that curators will attempt to duck
the influence of funders, especially where those interests do not coincide
with their own. I will next examine how funder pressures impinge on
museums at the level of the exhibition pool.
TABLE 6

CHANGES IN THE FORMAT, CONTENT, AND STYLE OF EXHIBITIONS AFTER THE
INCREASE IN INSTITUTIONAL FUNDING (Logistic Regressions)

 

 

 

  

  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dependent Variable” B SE
Format:
Traveling exhibition ................ cess ccsseeeeeeeeeeeeeereeee .210* -095
Blockbuster exhibition .619* .299
Theme show ... 3814** 120
Art-historical exhibition . -3314** 072
Patron’s own collection — .418*** 118
Style:

Modern .. —.001 095
European, medieval—19th century — .006 109
Classical . 675* 334
Postmodern and contemporary 1,001*** -190
American old masters . — .022 138
American ethnic ...... 283 293
Asian ........ —.005 144
Photography . 67 3%* 141
Craft, costume, decorative, and folk —.197 123
Commercial .. :012 -190
Mixed styles . — .442*** .110
Local artists .. — .923%** -164
Child or community oriented —.291* 127
Other styles ..........cceeeeeeee .237%* 092

 

 

Note.—Equations control for museum effects (not reported) by including dummy variables for

sample museums. N = 4,026 exhibitions.

* The B coefficient indicates the difference between the exhibition pool in the years 1974-86 as
compared with the omitted category, the exhibition pool from 1960 to 1972.
> All variables are 0,1 variables where 1 indicates the presence of the trait.

*P<.05.
** P< 01.
wee P< 001.
That exhibitions of postmodern and contemporary art have increased
is not surprising, as postmodern styles are new during the period studied.
As we have seen, however, government funds a great deal of these types
of art. Although one would expect there to be more postmodern and
other contemporary styles in museums as these styles are invented, it is
not possible to know whether the availability of government money has
increased the proportion of these styles in museum exhibitions more than
would have occurred without such funding.

The big losers seem to be local artists, although it is possible that
museums exhibit local artists under the rubric of “contemporary art”
during the later period. It is interesting that exhibitions that are mounted
less frequently are mostly of contents that have been peripheral to mu-
seums (e.g., children’s art). Indeed, these contents may represent an
old style of community-outreach exhibitions: small, local, child- or
community-oriented, unfunded exhibitions. The current way to exhibit
art that may draw a similar middle-class audience is through popular and
accessible formats (rather than contents) that are also—notably—large,
visible, and funded.

Contents that are mounted more frequently appear to be more accessi-
ble styles, though not all the change seems to be associated with funding.
For instance, photography, generally an accessible style, has increased
as a proportion of the exhibition pool. It is interesting that individual
philanthropists sponsored disproportionally fewer photography exhibi-
tions. Corporations, foundations, and government agencies all sponsored
some photography exhibitions, but not out of proportion to such exhibi-
tions mounted without such sponsorship.
the format to change more, to protect the core of museums—shows con-
taining a variety of artistic contents.

Resource shifting may be an important strategy for donative nonprofit
organizations (Alexander 1996a). For instance, in a study of donors to a
university, Stout (1992) found that university officials used internal and
unspecified grant funds to subsidize departments underfunded by exter-
nal entities, reducing the disparity between them and more richly sup-
ported departments.

The evidence I have for resource shifting is more anecdotal than sys-
tematic; consequently, this interpretation is tentative, and more research
will be needed to understand the phenomenon. I conducted interviews
with museum directors, curators, and educators as part of the larger
study from which this article is drawn. I did not ask the respondents
about resource shifting or their strategies for avoiding external influence;
rather, I asked how exhibitions were funded and what influences funders
might have on museums and exhibitions. Nevertheless, some of what
the curators said supports my contention that museum managers react
strategically to environmental pressures. For instance, the director of a
large, encyclopedic museum told me that funding in the museum is a
“matching process.” Curators plan exhibitions that then “go looking”
for funding. At the same time, the development department tries to find
funding possibilities that then look for exhibitions curators are planning.
This process has some affinities to the garbage can decision model (Co-
hen, March, and Olsen 1972). The director, however, keeps a general
mix in the exhibition schedule, which is planned several years in advance:
“I try to shape shows on a yearly basis. That is, strike a balance between
large and small shows, shows with a broad audience and those with a
small audience, those [shown only in the museum] and those for outside
travel.” Funding usually happens after these decisions are made. In a
telling setback, the museum found itself short of funding (and time) for
a Chagall exhibition. The museum managers had anticipated easily ob-
taining support for the show and were quite surprised when several possi-
ble funders turned them down. But the show went on as scheduled, and
the museum used an internal source for underwriting the show: They
charged a hefty fee for the opening dinner.

A curator in a second museum avoided funder pressures by avoiding
funding. The modern art department he ran did not pursue corporate
funds, but as a result, also did not mount major exhibitions in modern
art and had reduced opportunity for scholarship published in the catalogs
that accompany such exhibitions. The curator said to me: “It’s a trade-
off. Contemporary art here is a low-budget operation. It was a very
conscious trade off.”

In addition, my reading of the annual reports of 30 museums suggest
two other strategies museums use to retain autonomy: “multivocality”
and a related strategy, “creative enactment,” both of which require
innovation on the part of museum personnel. By multivocality, I refer
to programs or activities that have many facets, and therefore, the ability
to appeal to a variety of stakeholders. Museums have mounted many
more shows that are multivocal—that appeal to different audiences on
different levels. Museum curators innovate to find art that is both accessi-
ble and can be viewed with a critical eye. Since corporate funders of
large, traveling blockbusters may be less interested in the art, per se,
than they are in the press coverage, some writers have argued that block-
busters are just low-quality pabulum designed to bring in mindless
crowds (Balfe 1987). It is important to recognize, however, that many
blockbuster and traveling exhibitions solve the problems posed by multi-
ple stakeholders pressing for different sorts of exhibitions. Curators,
along with NEA panels, are interested in the art-historical merit of exhi-
bitions. These stakeholders often have input into popular exhibitions.
Popular exhibitions, especially blockbusters, attract large, middle-class
audiences, many of whom are not particularly schooled in the intricacies
of art history. Along these lines, popular exhibitions also attract corporate
sponsors. The resources of a large, traveling, blockbuster exhibition,
however, can also finance scholarly advantages: well-researched and
nicely designed exhibitions often (1) bring together a large number of
objects from overseas museums, objects that have not been seen together
before, or objects that have not been seen in the United States, (2) publish
blockbuster catalogs, full of new scholarly analyses alongside the pretty
reproductions, and (3) provide an opportunity to conserve and repair
artworks, obtain display cases, or otherwise improve a museum’s hold-
ings. That some blockbuster exhibitions can have a scholarly component
points to the ability of curators to use funding to meet their own ends.'*

For instance, a traveling exhibition appearing at the Art Institute of
Chicago offered a valuable scholarly opportunity to its curators and al-
lowed an added local interpretation that pleased community elites: “The
superb survey of ‘Master Drawings by Picasso,’ organized by the Fogg
Art Museum, gave us both an insight into the private decisions behind
many of the artist’s public statements and a better understanding of how
works from the Institute’s superb holdings and those of a number of
private Chicago collections—which were added to the Chicago show-
ing—related to his entire oeuvre” (Art Institute of Chicago, 1980-81, p.
10). The exhibition also provided a scholarly and beautiful catalog and
attracted quite a few Chicago viewers. In addition to the Fogg, this show
also traveled to the Philadelphia Museum of Art; the exhibition was
supported by the NEA, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Spain, and
the Alsdorf Foundation, as was the catalog, which mentioned each of
the 102 objects displayed in the show (and also included an addendum
on items appearing at only one venue). The exhibition was indemnified
by the Federal Council on the Arts and Humanities.

Museum managers innovate to find multiple uses for available funding
as well as to mount multivocal exhibitions. The Fine Arts Museums of
San Francisco used a strategy that “was creative, fulfilling needs beyond
those of the immediate exhibit” (Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco,
1983-85, p. 13). The museum expanded its temporary exhibition space
to accommodate a large traveling blockbuster—art from the Vatican.
Funds for the gallery expansion came from donations supporting the
special show. The Vatican show was installed in the special exhibition
galleries and the newly created space. After the exhibition was over, the
American galleries, which were adjacent to the temporary exhibition
rooms, claimed the new space and American works were installed there.

To define “creative enactment,” I draw on Weick’s (1979) concept of
an enacted environment. Weick argues that people in organizations ac-
tively construct their environment through the sense-making process peo-
ple use to order all reality. To enact is to bring imagined things to life.
Here, I wish to say that managers who extend the possibilities of their
environment beyond the standard limits are creatively enacting their en-
vironment. Museum managers appear to creatively enact their environ-
ment as they seek external funding. They may think of clever ways to
attract funding for an exhibition they wish to mount by appealing to an
interest a corporation might have that is not ordinarily associated with
art. For instance, the Philadelphia Museum mounted an exhibition of
seventeenth-century Dutch art sponsored by Mobil Oil, which owns off-
shore drilling rigs in Dutch waters. Theme exhibitions sometimes have
theme sponsorship. For instance, Polo/Ralph Lauren sponsored the show
titled Horse and Man, filled with hunting pictures, other canvases of
people and horses, and hunting apparel (see Silverman 1986). Undercover
Agents: Antique Undergarments from the Costume Collection of the Fine
Arts Museums of San Francisco, was supported by Victoria’s Secret, the
lingerie firm. Folger’s has sponsored a traveling exhibitions of its silver
coffee pot collection. And Fisher-Price Toys underwrote Jouets
Américains, an exhibition of American toys, organized by the Musée des
Arts Décoratifs in Paris, which toured the United States.

Museums continue to mount exhibitions of more esoteric art, past and
present, but these shows tend to be funded by museum sources, some-
times supplemented by government grants, rather than by the combina-
tion of government and corporate monies that support the more popular
exhibitions. For instance, in 1987 the San Francisco Museum of Modern
Art started a program for small, flexible exhibitions that would comple-
ment its main program of larger exhibitions that are planned well ahead.
An auxiliary group, the Collector’s Forum (in this study, considered an
internal funder) supported the program, which was later also subsidized
by the NEA: “The New Work concept was to give the Museum a pro-
gram that could be reasonably nimble in responding to new ideas and
opportunities, in contrast to a large museum’s usual scheduling, which
occurs several years in advance. It consists of a series of five or six serious
but modestly scaled projects annually that are intended to provide West
Coast museum audiences with a timely opportunity to see and consider
some of the most interesting and important artistic accomplishments—
regional, national, and international—of the day, by both younger and
established artists” (San Francisco Museum of Modern Art 1988, p. 11).
This may suggest that unfunded exhibitions represent true curator de-
sires. Although curators most likely value exhibitions that are internally
funded (they would not be mounted otherwise), curators may equally
value at least some of the funded exhibitions. Further, if museums plan
ahead and shift resources, then it is important to recognize that to a
considerable degree, unfunded exhibitions should be seen as a residual
category, not just as art for curators’ sake.

Nevertheless, funding has clearly encouraged museums to mount
shows accessible to broad audiences. This has been the big change in
museums in the past two decades (Alexander 1996c). It is important to
recognize, however, that the situation in museums today is not a result
only of constraints imposed by the new funders. Instead, a different set
of funders (and attached opportunities, as well as constraints) has come
to rival an older set of funders: the institutional funders versus the tradi-
tional philanthropists. Museums have always mounted popular and ac-
cessible exhibitions (see Coleman 1939; Meyer 1979; and Zolberg 1974);
today these “middlebrow” exhibitions take the form of funded block-
busters, traveling exhibitions, and theme shows, rather than unfunded
community-outreach contents.

Still, this new emphasis on blockbusters, theme exhibitions, and popu-
lar subject matter does not make most curators happy (McGuigan 1985).
They often assert that corporations and government have distorted the
types of shows that museums put on. A general theme among curators
(but not among museum directors) is a belief that corporations, especially,
constrain and flaw exhibitions. However, museums clearly have some
discretion in balancing large, crowd-drawing exhibitions with much
smaller ones that lack external support. Museums attempt to balance
mass-appeal shows and smaller, more academic shows. Indeed, I believe
Strategic Institutional Theory

This analysis provides some support for resource dependency pressures
on organizations. It is easy to see the general orientations of funders
translated into exhibition outcomes. However, this resource effect is tem-
pered by institutional pressures that lead museum people to maintain the
legitimacy of museums by retaining art-historical standards in the face
of pressures for increased accessibility of exhibitions, and by balancing
the demands of funders.

Funders have goals that shape their giving. But the goals of the funders
conflict with one another, and more important, with normative visions
of museum integrity held by curators. In other words, coercive pressures
conflict with one another and with normative pressures. It is important
to recognize that museums must continue to win legitimacy both from
funders and from other actors internal and external to the organization,
especially curators, critics, and scholars who are oriented to the art-
historical merit of a museum’s operation. Neither institutional theory
nor resource dependency theory has adequately addressed the issue of
conflicting pressures. This research suggests that museum curators op-
erating within an institutional context actively manage external pressures
so as to keep museums functioning as closely as possible to curators’
normative requirements.

Though funders have goals that are readily apparent in their funding
patterns, the increasing prevalence of institutional funders has given cura-
tors leverage, allowing them to pick and choose funders and to play them
off one another to reach their own goals, and has spurred curators to inno-
vate in order to maintain their autonomy. The existence of multiple poten-
tial funders with competing agendas can allow organizational managers
more room to maneuver than a single entity or a unified or similar array
of entities would allow. In addition, there are more funds available in the
environment, and curators try to tap these funds. This argument has some-
thing in common with economic approaches to museums, which argue that
museums will innovate and mount appealing exhibitions when there are
monetary incentives to do so (Frey and Pommerehne 1989). But this article
argues that the engine is different: Curators do not innovate because they
are interested in financial incentives. Rather, they are constrained by the
need for external funding, and they innovate in order to keep as much au-
tonomy and legitimacy as possible.

I have shown elsewhere that the functions of museums have changed in
the past two decades: Museums have become more managerial and less
scholarly, more exhibition oriented and less curatorial (Alexander 1996),
1996c). It is not surprising that the existence of competing external entities
and related organizational strategies to manage them can engender a good
deal of internal conflict (Alexander 1996a). These changes suggest a strat-
egy that I cannot test with the data at hand. Museum curators tend to view
the changes in the exhibition pool as a distortion of the art-historical mission
of museums. Yet it is possible that museum curators allow the mounting
of a “corrupted” pool of exhibitions in an effort to preserve even more
valuable and permanent functions of the museum, such as the collection,
conservation, and art-historical research facets of the museum.

On a theoretical level, it is time to put aside the artificial distinctions
between resource dependency and institutional theories. As many theo-
rists have noted (e.g., Powell 1991; Zucker 1991), institutional and tech-
nical resources are hard to distinguish theoretically, let alone empiri-
cally.'® (Institutional resources grant legitimacy and provide rules of the
game; technical resources support production, service, and marketing
processes.) Though some have argued that institutional theory is a special
case of resource dependency theory (since legitimacy is a resource), I
would strongly disagree. Putting the two theories together in this way
eliminates many of the important insights of institutional theory. Rather,
resource dependency is a special case of institutional theory. While a
complete integration of these theories is beyond the scope of this article,
suffice it to say that institutional theory has both a resource dependency
(environmental effects) aspect and a broader cultural and cognitive as-
pect. Indeed, it is often the case that a given resource is institutionalized
so strongly as to be considered objective. Money (in such forms as capital,
loans, profit, income, and stock markets) is exactly such a highly con-
structed and legitimated resource. Some “realist” researchers (Jepperson
1991)—economists, for example—might be horrified to think of their
subject matter as socially constructed; however, much realist research
can be easily incorporated into the institutional framework.

There are at least three benefits of viewing the two theories as one.
First, highly institutionalized cultural resources are often indistinguish-
able from technical resources, so we are unable to truly separate the
two theories. Second, to the extent that distinctions can be made among
resources, institutional resources can attract technical resources, and
vice versa. Further, all organizations face a spectrum of resources, so
institutional theorists would be foolish to ignore the existence of real,
physical resources, and realist researchers would be conversely foolish
to ignore the existence of institutionalized resources. Though there is a
continuum of resources, running from most concrete to most abstract,
“resources impinging on organizations” can be understood as “coercive”
pressures, in accordance with DiMaggio and Powell (1983), or “re-
source” pressures, in accordance with Pfeffer and Salancik (1978).!” Arti-
ficially separating types of resources then ignoring one type reduces our
ability to understand organizations.

The third benefit to organizational theory comes from the unique con-
tribution of institutional theory, the understanding that institutional
frameworks actually create the context for technical efficiency (Orri,
Biggart, and Hamilton 1991; Dobbin 1994). To understand organiza-
tions, we must understand how cognitively held ideas shape organiza-
tional actors (Zucker 1991) and how normative frames interact with ex-
ternal pressures to form an organizational response. When curators decry
the increasing proportion of popular exhibitions in museums, they are
relying on their normative understandings of what an art museum is and
what makes a museum legitimate. Museum curators respond to external
pressures within a context created by their own personal and professional
’ Tt is useful to point out that institutional theorists do not deny the existence of a

physical reality. But they argue that reality is shaped and understood (and, in some
senses, created) by cognitive frames.
orientations. And they are no more shaped by their training and back-
ground than are other types of organizational managers.

The caricature of both institutional theory and resource dependency
theory in the literature suggests environmental determinism. The theme
of coercive pressures and related resource dependency, for instance, is
oversimplified to suggest the restructuring of organizational prerogative
as organizations import externally validated and required structures. As
Powell (1991, p. 194) points out, “Institutional isomorphism appears as
somehow external to human action, as a source of binding constraint.
We neglected, however, to emphasize that each form of constraint is, in
varying ways also a form of enablement. Constraints open up possibilities
at the same time as they restrict or deny others” (emphasis added). Fur-
ther, it does not take too careful a reading of these literatures to find a
concern with forms of human agency such as resistance to environmental
pressures (DiMaggio 1988; DiMaggio and Powell 1991; Oliver 1991; Pfef-
fer and Salancik 1978, chaps. 5—8). In addition to folding institutional
and resource dependency theories together, I suggest giving equal status
to the idea that individuals and institutional structure interact in a dialec-
tic (see Sewell 1992).1® This will create what might be termed “strategic
institutional theory.”

Strategic institutional theorists must look at managers’ reactions to and
interactions with environmental pressures. Organizations are buffeted by
institutional pressures. But organizations have some defense mechanisms
against such pressures. Meyer and Rowan (1977) suggest two: rituals of
good faith and loose coupling. In their work on organizational responses
to the technical environment, Pfeffer and Salancik (1978) suggest two
other strategies for which there was some evidence in this study: creative
enactment of the environment on the part of museum managers (clever
funding arrangements) and buffering artistic content by changing exhibi-
tion format. This research suggests an additional mechanism, resource
shifting within the organization.
which favor certain styles or genres of art (Griswold 1981), and populariz-
ing effects of market systems in contrast to patronage systems (DiMaggio
and Stenberg 1985). All of these effects are organizational: the mundane,
daily actions of decision makers acting in contexts such as a concentrated
industry or a patronage system profoundly shape the art that constitutes
that organization’s output. Thus, to understand art, we must study the
organizations that produce, distribute, or create it.

This article focuses on major American art museums, key organizations
in the fine arts distribution system. The main focus of the article is how
types of funding are related to the presentation of art. I study the exhibitions
produced by museums and determine how external funding arrangements
shape these exhibitions. Strategic institutional theory provides the frame
for understanding the pressures funders exert on museums and to under-
stand the museums’ response. More specifically, the research provides a
model of how funding arrangements affect art. Museum funders provide
opportunities to museums, which museums are free to accept or reject.
Funders do not force museums to change exhibition policy. Nevertheless,
funders have a general idea of the types of exhibitions they wish to fund,
and museums have ideas of exhibitions they would like to mount. More
exhibitions happen where these areas overlap. Such opportunity-providing
institutions stand in contrast to more frequently studied (and opportunity-
reducing) gatekeeping institutions.

Art is a social product, and what is seen in museums is an important
component of what art becomes institutionalized in the canon (Crane
1987; Danto 1987; Williams 1981). To the extent that museums legitimate
and signal current definitions of the artistic canon, museum exhibitions
influence artistic boundaries. Along these lines, the research suggests that
art is shaped by mundane organizational processes. The research suggests
as well that funder pressures for accessibility are mainly handled by
changes in exhibition formats, and because of the actions of professional
museum curators, the basis for inclusion of artworks in exhibitions re-
mains art-historical merit, rather than popularity.
Style

Postmodern (1); modern (2); contemporary (3); European, medieval
through 19th century (4); American old masters (5); American ethnic (6);
classical (7); primitive art of Asia, South America, Mexico, Africa, and
Oceania (8); Asian art, not primitive (9); South American and Mexican
art, not primitive (10); craft, costume, European or American decorative
arts, folk art (11); commercial art, illustration, design (12); architecture
(13); photography (14); film (15); local artists (16); child or community
oriented (17); other (18); mixed (19); unknown style (fine arts) (20); unclear
(21)
Alexander, Victoria D. 1996a. “Environmental Constraints and Organizational Strat-
egies: Complexity, Conflict, and Coping in the Nonprofit Sector.” In Private Action
and the Public Good, edited by Walter W. Powell and Elisabeth Clemens. New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, in press.

. 1996b. “From Philanthropy to Funding: The Effects of Corporate and Public

Support on American Art Museums.” Poetics: Journal of Empirical Research on

Literature, the Media and Arts, vol. 23, in press.

. 1996c. Museums and Money: The Impact of Funding on Exhibitions, Scholar-
ship, and Management. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, in press.

Allen, Barbara Jacobsen. 1974. “Organization and Administration in Formal Organi-
zation: The Art Museum.” Ph.D. dissertation. New York University.

Art Institute of Chicago. 1980-81. Annual Report.

Balfe, Judith Huggins. 1987. “Artworks as Symbols in International Politics.” Inter-
national Journal of Politics, Culture and Society 1:195—217.

. 1993a. “Art Patronage: Perennial Problems, Current Complications.” Pp.

306-23 in Paying the Piper: Causes and Consequences of Art Patronage, edited by

Judith Huggins Balfe. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

. 1993b. “ ‘Friends of . . .’: Individual Patronage through Arts Institutions.”

Pp. 119-33 in Paying the Piper: Causes and Consequences of Art Patronage, edited

by Judith Huggins Balfe. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

, ed. 1993c. Paying the Piper: Causes and Consequences of Art Patronage.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Becker, Howard S. 1982. Art Worlds. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali-
fornia Press.

Benedict, Stephen, ed. 1991. Public Money and the Muse: Essays on Government
Funding for the Arts. New York: Norton.

Blau, Judith R. 1989. The Shape of Culture: A Study of Contemporary Cultural Pat-
terns in the United States. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste,
translated by Richard Nice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Cohen, Michael, James G. March, and Johan P. Olsen. 1972. “A Garbage-Can Model
of Organizational Choice.” Administrative Science Quarterly 17:1-25.

Coleman, Lawrence Vail. 1939. The Museum in America: A Critical Study. Washing-
ton: American Association of Museums.

Crane, Diana. 1987. The Transformation of the Avant-Garde: The New York Art
World, 1940-1985. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Danto, Arthur C. 1987. The State of the Art. New York: Prentice-Hall.

Dauber, Kenneth. 1993. “The Indian Arts Fund and the Patronage of Native Ameri-
can Arts.” Pp. 76-93 in Paying the Piper: Causes and Consequences of Art Patron-
age, edited by Judith Huggins Balfe. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

DiMaggio, Paul J. 1982. “Cultural Entrepreneurship in Nineteenth-Century Boston:
The Creation of an Organizational Base for High Culture in America.” Media,
Culture and Society 4:33-50.

. 19826. “Cultural Entrepreneurship in Nineteenth-Century Boston, Part II: The

Classification and Framing of American Art.” Media, Culture and Society 4:303—22.

. 1986a. “Introduction.” Pp. 3-13 in Nonprofit Enterprise in the Arts: Studies

in Mission and Constraint, edited by Paul DiMaggio. New York: Oxford University

Press.

. 19866. “Can Culture Survive the Marketplace?” Pp. 65-92 in Nonprofit

Enterprise in the Arts: Studies in Mission and Constraint, edited by Paul DiMag-

gio. New York: Oxford University Press.

. 1986c. “Support for the Arts from Independent Foundations.” Pp. 113-39
in Nonprofit Enterprise in the Arts: Studies in Mission and Constraint, edited by

Paul DiMaggio. New York: Oxford University Press.

, ed. 1986d. Nonprofit Enterprise in the Arts: Studies in Mission and Con-

straint. New York: Oxford University Press.

. 1988. “Interest and Agency in Institutional Theory.” Pp. 3-21 in Institu-

tional Patterns and Organizations: Culture and Environment, edited by Lynne G.

Zucker. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger.

. 1991a. “The Museum and The Public.” Pp. 39-50 in The Economics of Art

Museums, edited by Martin Felstein. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. 19916. “Decentralization of Arts Funding from the Federal Government to

the States.” Pp. 216-56 in Public Money and the Muse: Essays on Government

Funding for the Arts, edited by Stephen Benedict. New York: Norton.

. 1991c. “Constructing an Organizational Field as a Professional Project:
U.S. Art Museums, 1920-1940.” Pp. 267-92 in The New Institutionalism in Orga-
nizational Analysis, edited by Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

DiMaggio, Paul J., and Walter W. Powell. 1983. “The Iron Cage Revisited: Institu-
tional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields.” American
Sociological Review 48:147-60.

. 1991. “Introduction.” Pp. 1-38 in The New Institutionalism in Organiza-
tional Analysis, edited by Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

DiMaggio, Paul J., and Kristin Stenberg. 1985. “Why Do Some Theatres Innovate
More than Others?” Poetics 14:107-22.

DiMaggio, Paul J., and Michael Useem. 1978. “Social Class and Arts Consumption:
The Origin and Consequences of Class Differences in Exposure to the Arts in
America.” Theory and Society 5:141-61.

Dobbin, Frank. 1994. Forging Industrial Policy: The United States, Britain, and
France in the Railway Age. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Dubin, Stephen C. 1992. Arresting Images: Impolitic Art and Uncivil Actions. New
York: Routledge.

Feld, Alan L., Michael O’Hare, and J. Mark Davidson Schuster. 1983. Patrons
Despite Themselves: Taxpayers and Arts Policy. New York: New York University
Press.

Feldstein, Martin, ed. 1991. The Economics of Art Museums. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco. 1983-85. Report.

Frey, Bruno S., and Werner W. Pommerehne. 1989. Muses and Markets: Explora-
tions in the Economics of the Arts. Oxford: Blackwell.

Galaskiewicz, Joseph. 1985. Social Organization of an Urban Grants Economy: A
Study of Corporate Contributions to Nonprofit Organizations. New York: Academic
Press.

Galligan, Ann M. 1993. “The Politicization of Peer-Review Panels at the NEA.” Pp.
254-72 in Paying the Piper: Causes and Consequences of Art Patronage, edited by
Judith Huggins Balfe. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Gingrich, Arnold. 1969. Business and the Arts: An Answer to Tomorrow. New York:
Eriksson.

Glennon, Lorraine. 1988. “The Museum and the Corporation: New Realities.” Mu-
seum News 66 (3): 36-43.

Griswold, Wendy. 1987. “American Character and the American Novel: An Expan-
sion of Reflection Theory in the Sociology of Literature.” American Journal of
Sociology 86:740-65.

Hirsch, Paul M. 1972. “Processing Fads and Fashions: An Organization-Set Analysis
of Cultural Industry Systems.” American Journal of Sociology 77:639-59.
Holsti, Ole R. 1969. Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and Humanities. Read-
ing, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Janson, Anthony F. 1986. History of Art, 3d ed. New York: Abrams.

Jepperson, Ronald L. 1991. “Institutions, Institutional Effects, and Institutionalism.”
Pp. 143-63 in The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, edited by
Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lieberson, Stanley. 1985. Making It Count: The Improvement of Social Research and
Theory. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Lowry, W. McNeil, ed. 1984. The Arts and Public Policy in the United States.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Martorella, Rosanne. 1990. Corporate Art. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University
Press.

, ed. 1996. Art and Business: An International Perspective on Sponsorship.
Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, in press.

McGuigan, Cathleen, with Shawn Doherty, Janet Huck, and Maggie Malone. 1985.
“A Word from Our Sponsor: Increasing Ties between Big Business and the Art
World Raise Some Delicate Questions.” Newsweek, November 25, pp. 96-98.

Meyer, John W., and Brian Rowan. 1977. “Institutionalized Organizations: Formal
Structure as Myth and Ceremony.” American Journal of Sociology 83:340-63.

Meyer, John W., and W. Richard Scott, eds. 1992. Organizational Environments:
Ritual and Rationality, 2d ed. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.

Meyer, John W., W. Richard Scott, and Terrence E. Deal. 1983. “Institutional and
Technical Sources of Organizational Structures: Explaining the Structure of Educa-
tional Organizations.” Pp. 45-67 in Organizational Environments: Ritual and Ra-
tionality, edited by John W. Meyer and W. Richard Scott. Beverly Hills, Calif.:
Sage.

Meyer, Karl E. 1979. The Art Museum: Power, Money, Ethics. New York: Morrow.

Moulin, Raymonde. 1987. The French Art Market: A Sociological View, translated
by Arthur Goldhammer. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.

Namenwirth, J. Zvi, and Robert Philip Weber. 1987. Dynamics of Culture. Boston:
Allen & Unwin.

Netzer, Dick. 1978. The Subsidized Muse: Public Support for the Arts in the United
States. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Odendahl, Teresa. 1987a. “Foundations and the Nonprofit Sector.” Pp. 27-42 in
America’s Wealthy and the Future of Foundations, edited by Teresa Odendahl.
New York: Foundation Center.

. 19876. “Independent Foundations and Wealthy Donors: An Overview.”

Pp. 1-26 in America’s Wealthy and the Future of Foundations, edited by Teresa

Odendahl. New York: Foundation Center.

. 1990. Charity Begins at Home: Generosity and Self-Interest among the Phil-
anthropic Elite. New York: Basic.

Oliver, Christine. 1991. “Strategic Responses to Institutional Processes.” Academy
of Management Review 16:145-79.

Orri, Marco, Nicole Woolsey Biggart, and Gary G. Hamilton. 1991. “Organizational
Isomorphism in East Asia.” Pp. 361-89 in The New Institutionalism in Organiza-
tional Analysis, edited by Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Peterson, Richard A., and David G. Berger. 1975. “Cycles in Symbol Production:
The Case of Popular Music.” American Sociological Review 40:158—73.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Gerald R. Salancik. 1978. The External Control of Organizations:
A Resource Dependence Perspective. New York: Harper & Row.

Porter, Robert, ed. 1981. A Guide to Corporate Giving in the Arts. New York: Ameri-
can Council for the Arts.

Powell, Walter W. 1991. “Expanding the Scope of Institutional Analysis.” Pp. 183—
203 in The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, edited by Walter W.
Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Powell, Walter W., and Paul J. DiMaggio, eds. 1991. The New Institutionalism in
Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Robinson, Rick E. 1987. “Why This Piece? On the Choices of Collectors in the
Fine Arts.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological
Association, Chicago.

San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. 1988. Annual Report.

Scott, W. Richard, and John W. Meyer. 1991. “The Organization of Societal Sectors:
Propositions and Early Evidence.” Pp. 108-40 in The New Institutionalism in
Organizational Analysis, edited by Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.

Sewell, William H. 1992. “A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency, and Transforma-
tion.” American Journal of Sociology 98:1-29.

Silverman, Debora. 1986. Selling Culture: Bloomingdale’s, Diana Vreeland, and the
New Aristocracy of Taste in Reagan’s America. New York: Pantheon.

Stout, Suzanne Kay. 1992. “The Dynamics of Organizational Linkages: The Case
of Higher Education and Philanthropy.” Ph.D. dissertation. Stanford University,
Graduate School of Business.

Thompson, James D. 1967. Organizations in Action. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Useem, Michael. 1985. The Inner Circle: Large Corporations and the Rise of Business
and Political Activity in the U.S. and the U.K. New York: Oxford University
Press.

. 1987. “Corporate Philanthropy.” Pp. 340-59 in The Handbook of Non-Profit
Organizations, edited by Walter W. Powell. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press.

Useem, Michael, and Stephen I. Kutner. 1986. “Corporate Contributions to Culture
and the Arts: The Organization of Giving and the Influence of the Chief Executive
Officer and of Other Firms on Company Contributions in Massachusetts.” Pp.
93-112 in Nonprofit Enterprise in the Arts: Studies in Mission and Constraint,
edited by Paul DiMaggio. New York, Oxford University Press.

Weber, Max. 1946. “Class, Status and Party.” Pp. 180-95 in From Max Weber:
Essays in Sociology, edited by H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Weick, Karl E. 1979. The Social-Psychology of Organizing, 2d ed. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley.

Williams, Raymond. 1981. The Sociology of Culture. New York: Schocken.

Zolberg, Vera L. 1974. The Art Institute of Chicago: The Sociology of a Cultural
Organization. Ph.D. dissertation. University of Chicago.

. 1981. “Conflicting Visions in American Art Museums.” Theory and Society

10:103-25.

. 1986. “Tensions of Mission in American Art Museums.” Pp. 184—98 in
Nonprofit Enterprise in the Arts: Studies in Mission and Constraint, edited by Paul
DiMaggio. New York: Oxford University Press.

Zucker, Lynne G. 1991. “The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence.”
Pp. 83-107 in The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, edited by
Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
