Ability to Alter Skin Color: Some Implications for American Society
Author(s): Richard L. Henshel

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Jan., 1971), pp. 734-742
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776437

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:17 UTC
In light of advances in dermatology it has become pertinent to consider
what the social consequences would be of an ability to change one’s
apparent race. Specifically, since social reaction to race often is deter-
mined by outward, visible manifestations, the effects of a capacity to
alter at will the color of one’s skin must be seriously examined.? It must
be clear at the onset that this does not mean the application of superficial
external dressings or stains to the skin but to controlled alterations of its
color. In view of the importance that so much of the world attaches to
skin color, it is mystifying how it should have escaped widespread atten-
tion that crude techniques to change skin color already exist and that
these techniques are probably improvable. This paper reviews briefly
the work that has been done before discussing possible social implications.
examine several color photographs in Stolar (1963), Lasker (1968), and—
if frogs suffice—Lerner (1961).

Skin darkeners, excluding stains, are of two types: those that stimulate
the creation of melanin pigment and those that stimulate the tanning
process from exposure to ultraviolet radiation. The drug psoralen will
cause light skin to tan deep brown—strikingly dark—upon exposure to
the sun or ultraviolet light. John Griffin used psoralen treatment prior to
his experiences as a “Negro.’”’ Psoralen is sometimes used, in smaller
doses, as a treatment for vitiligo, a skin disorder in which patches of skin
turn dead-white, leaving the individual more or less disfigured by
blotches of different color. Treatment of vitiligo has also played a role in
the study of skin lightening.

A second technique for darkening skin uses a hormone known as MSH
(for melanocyte-stimulating hormone) to stimulate the production of
melanin in the skin.* The operation of MSH is still imperfectly under-
stood, but it is clearly effective. MSH has now been synthesized, and in
mass production its price would probably be modest. It can be applied
only through injection. Human subjects given large injections of MSH
begin to darken within twenty-four hours; daily doses increase darkening
until discontinued. The skin returns to its normal color three to five
weeks after the last injection. The skin of Negroes shows a more marked
and more rapid response to MSH than that of whites (Lerner 1961, p.
102). Psoralen and MSH constitute the known effective means of darken-
ing human skin.*

Of greater social interest, however, in view of the state of the world's
prejudices, are means of rendering human skin lighter in color.

Monobenzy] ether of hydroquinone (MBEH) lightens skin and, since
the late 1940s, Dr. Robert Stolar has used it to treat Negro patients who
have vitiligo. He has used MBEH to make some of his patients “white.’”

solely by changing skin color. Halsell never altered intonation or vocabulary. In addi-
tion to factual experience, the 1960s also witnessed considerable fictional treatment
of pigment change.

3 All human skins except those of albinos contain melanin, a brown-to-black pigment
which forms the basis of skin color. Color difference among races stems from the
amount and spatial distribution of melanin in the skin.

4 In addition to these agents, estrogen is now recognized as a marginal skin darkener,
which explains why some pregnant women become slightly darkened. Artificial use
of estrogen also produces darkening.

5 The treatment has consisted of daily application of MBEH to the skin in ointment
form. After four to eight weeks, skin depigmentation becomes apparent. Hair and eye
color remain normal. In some patients, depigmentation occurs in skin areas distant
from the sites of application. It has also been noted that depigmentation may continue
even after treatment with MBEH is discontinued (Spencer 1961). No patient has
failed to respond with at least some degree of depigmentation. In fifty-five patients
(Lasker 1968), Stolar has continued his treatment to virtually total depigmentation,
American Journal of Sociology

On nonvitiliginous subjects, depigmentation of various degrees also oc-
curred, but repigmentation occurred spontaneously if the ointment was
not continually applied.®

There are obviously drawbacks that cast doubt on the efficacy of
MBEH in mass usage, although its present limited application on vitiligo
sufferers has evidently been a great success. But, of the drawbacks, some
are clearly hypothetical, some can be eliminated, and some depend
simply on individual conscientiousness.

It is impossible to predict future development in this or any field, but
one can detect enthusiasm among research dermatologists.? The skin
darkener, MSH, now synthesized, is a naturally occurring hormone from
the pituitary gland. There are, in fact, two natural varieties of MSH, both
of which produce the darkening effect. Theoretically, there should also be
one or more hormones that lighten human skin; that is, there should be
at least one natural mechanism that works in each direction.’ Since per-
sons with vitiligo are born with normal-appearing skin, there must be a
natural mechanism to produce the white patches later. There may, in
fact, be more than one such mechanism, in view of the possibility that
there are several forms of vitiligo (Stolar 1963, p. 72). There is widespread
feeling that the medical exploration of enpigmentation and depigmenta-
tion has only begun to bear fruit.
ACCEPTANCE OF SKIN LIGHTENERS

The rise of ‘black militancy,” the search for black identity, and the stress
placed upon Black Pride have had myriad implications over the past few
years—from widespread rejection of the word ‘‘Negro”’ to promotion of
the idea that “black is beautiful.’ That mass acceptance of anything so
destructive of these new concepts as a truly effective skin lightener is
unlikely might appear to be self-evident.* But the analysis is not so
straightforward; for example, Ebony and many other Negro-oriented
magazines still carry advertisements for skin creams, hair straighteners,
and similar blandishments.’° In spite of the marginal usefulness of these
products, manufacturers are still making money or hope to do so."

As Cruse (1968) illustrates, the polar themes of integration and sepa-
ratism have for years been a burning question among black intellectuals.
Disputes about criteria of beauty—whether to be as close as possible to
whites or as far removed as possible—have reflected parallel questioning
on the part of the black masses. The question of mass acceptance of a
skin lightener, therefore, defies easy solution.

The complexity of the question can be illustrated by examining the
critical variables involved. Prominent among these are contemporary
attitudes, prior to public announcement, toward the phenomenon of
passing. The analogy between contemporary passing and the situation
which would ensue under a technique to alter skin color may, in some
respects, be a close one, so that these “pre-announcement”’ attitudes
provide a useful first step in our inquiry.”

* It is widely known that “black beauty” is promoted to eliminate a hopeless attempt
to emulate white appearance standards. But Grier and Cobbs (1968) equally stress the
psychological significance (and detrimental quality) of the hair-straightening process
which all Negro women used to endure. Thus, in addition to obvious psychological
attractions, the stress upon blackness and naturalness reaps less recognized benefits.

10 The ads which promise to lighten skin are not so blatant or direct as in earlier
years; the reader must read between the lines: ‘‘Helps to clear away unnaturally dark
areas.” The recent issues of Negro magazines contain advertisements for both “natu-
ral’ or “Afro” hairstyles and the more traditional ones. The word “natural” has
become such a good word that even ads which obviously offer the traditional styles
(pictorially) usually use it.

1 Ebony itself, a mass-circulation magazine with some 3 million readers, far surpasses
in volume of sales any other single medium of black expression. It is obvious that the
old market is still alive. Lasker (1968) quotes a figure of $14 million for sales in 1968
of marketed bleaches (relatively ineffective) and hair straighteners.

12 Estimates of the volume of permanent passing in the United States vary from 25,000
to 300,000 per year. These are estimates only; the real figure is not only unknown but
Even a skin lightener of unparalleled effectiveness, however, would
obviously not remove secondary racial characteristics, which might im-
pede passing for certain individuals. Stolar’s vitiligo patients are quite
instructive, for they were just ordinary-looking Negroes whose only
unique characteristic was their common affliction, and later their com-
mon depigmentation, while their secondary racial characteristics did not
change. Stolar reports that “almost all the patients I worked with, even
the ones with very Negroid features, pass easily, because there are whites
walking around with comparable features” (Lasker 1968, p. 65). This was
especially likely if the patients dyed their hair. One patient was able to
move among her friends without being recognized, and each patient evi-
dently changed social status; many obtained better jobs. And of course
the experience of John Griffin and Grace Halsell shows that whites will
be taken for blacks if they are black. Nevertheless, one must be cautious
in extrapolating such findings, since increased public knowledge of the
technique would presumably make a decided difference in the acceptabil-
ity of those with marked Negroid features.

Assuming for the moment an analogy to traditional passing, it is im-
portant to note that passing itself is complex, and several forms may be
distinguished. ‘There are various degrees of passing, accompanied by
different degrees of estrangement from the Negro group and emotional
identification with the white community” (Drake and Cayton 1962, p.
160). Many Negroes will occasionally pass just for convenience, to get
better service; some develop the practice of passing just for amusement.
Since it is at the whites’ expense, this behavior apparently generates no
feeling of guilt or disloyalty to the race. This may be true also of passing
for economic necessity, in which case the individual gains better employ-
ment but returns to the black community for social contacts. Finally, a
light-skinned Negro may turn his back on the race and cross the color
line completely, associating only with whites. As Drake and Cayton put
it, “For a Negro to pass socially means sociological death and rebirth”
(1962, p. 163).

Whether or not other Negroes protect the identified passer may depend
upon whether the acquaintance feels he is being slighted or whether he
understands that the passing is for economic reasons. While passing for
social reasons (for the company of whites) almost invariably arouses deep
hostility, passing for economic reasons may be treated with understand-
ing or at least acceptance.’

essentially unknowable, given the delicacy of the matter. For an excellent discussion,
see Drake and Cayton (1962, pp. 159-73).

13 Parenthetically, it is significant that we know virtually nothing about the psycho-
logical effects of racial passing. It should also be noted that our information on passing
in the United States has become dated.
Attitudes today are in flux due to the emergence of militant perspec-
tives. The time of introduction would be a major factor because, espe-
cially among the younger blacks, the trend is running strongly toward
acceptance of cultural pluralism." With only modest extrapolation of
these trends, it seems clear that the later such an innovation is intro-
duced, the greater the hostility to passing may be.” There are numerous
indications that attitudes are changing; cultural manifestations of Black
Pride are becoming widely accepted." Just how successful this search by
American Negroes for a new identity will be is crucial; it can provide a
psychological anchor for the individual, notwithstanding the economic
inducements of passing. If, on the other hand, passing affords only tem-
porary respite, then the appearance of a true skin lightener should be
received by at least inward rejoicing and a concomitant strain toward
acceptance.”

Analysis of pre-announcement attitudes, instructive though it may be,
is insufficient to forecast the degree of mass acceptance. Response to an
innovation of this magnitude would be based not only on preexisting
attitudes; the innovation would generate new attitudes in its own right,
and the very announcement of such an epochal innovation would demand
reconceptualization. Presumably, a fundamental reappraisal of racial
questions would occur by black and white, militant and integrationist.®

14 Several recent studies have shown that, in spite of militant urging, a strong ma-
jority of the black community still supports structural assimilation (as opposed to,
say, a black state). But the studies also show growing support for cultural pluralism
(or cultural nationalism) with separateness in clothing, music, and concepts of beauty.
(William J. Wilson presented a substitute paper on this topic: Session 65, 1969 ASA
meetings.)

1% For further substantiation of recent attitude change in Negro college students, see
Morland and Williams (1969, p. 110).

16 Along with other observers, Glenn (1963) concluded that the importance of skin
color as a basis for status is diminishing; from data of a study published elsewhere in
this issue of the Journal, Udry, Bauman, and Chase conclude that the traditional
advantage of light-skinned Negro men in mate selection has declined, although no
change is found for women.

17Some doubts about the ultimate efficacy of Black Pride are raised by a limited
study of Philadelphia black preschool children. For his undergraduate thesis at
Princeton, James A. Floyd, Jr., ascertained the strength of parental beliefs in Black
Pride and Black Power concepts. Using Morland’s picture test, he examined racial
awareness in their children (‘Self-Concept Development in Black Children,” 1969).
He found the only significant relationship between parent beliefs and childrens’ re-
sponses was: “‘the stronger the parent’s support of ‘Black Power,’ ‘Black Pride,’ and
the ‘Black Revolution’ in general, the more the child wants to be white.’ The study
is reported in Morland (1969, p. 373).

18 A voluminous and sophisticated literature exists on the topics of attitude change
and acceptance (diffusion) of innovations, both of which appear relevant to the ques-
tion at hand. For an overview of the literature on the diffusion of innovations, see
Katz, Levin, and Hamilton (1963) and Rogers (1962). For attitude-change theories,
see Cohen (1964).
American Journal of Sociology

Preexisting attitudes cannot be ignored in the reformulation, but they
will provide only one component of the emerging post-announcement
orientation.

For post-announcement attitudes, the nature of the perfected tech-
nique itself, its strengths and drawbacks, would inevitably be significant.
This refers not only to such evident factors as cost and availability, ease
of application, or toxicity, although these have obvious implications for
usage, but most clearly in those variables specific to the problem of skin
color change: the rapidity of change from a single dose, the ‘“naturalness”’
of appearance, the evenness of the change across body surfaces. Sig-
nificantly, of the three existing techniques, only MSH comes out success-
fully on most of these dimensions. The lightener does not perform at all
well.

The nature of white reactions should be of great significance. Indeed,
the reaction among Negroes in America might depend to a considerable
degree upon the reaction among American whites. This is paradoxical not
only because of the strong thrust for black cultural independence; the
reaction might perhaps be strongest by the militants who regard them-
selves as most independent of white demands. If white racists passed
laws against color change in a last stand against ‘“defilement,” the black
reaction, even by militants, might be extensive use as a measure of
defiance. They would be mightily tempted to “singe the king’s beard.”
At the same time, perceptive individuals would recognize that the tech-
nique precipitates a crisis for black identity.

Widespread popular adoption of skin lighteners would undoubtedly
engender efforts to transfer prejudice to such secondary racial character-
istics as lips, nostrils, and hair. Whites possessing one or more Negroid
characteristics, however, would greet such attempts with rage.!® It is
questionable whether such efforts to transfer prejudice would be entirely
successful.
which turns one dark under the bathing suit as well as elsewhere could
become fashionable. The question is impossible to answer in its entirety,
but certain conclusions are clear. To begin with, technology for turning
light people dark is more effective than that for turning dark people light.
It is clear that the technical characteristics of a skin darkener would
affect popular acceptance, and it is interesting to note that on most
criteria MSH comes out very well. Thinking, then, of a decade after
introduction (perhaps conservative), the adoption of skin darkeners for
beauty purposes is entirely possible.

That this estimate may be conservative is clear when the recent history
of the “natural” hairstyle is examined. What started as a symbol of black
militant protest was ultimately absorbed by many in the Negro middle
class. The latest stage has been adoption of the “kink” by white fashion.
In certain metropolitan centers, fashionable boutiques and even depart-
ment stores have carried “natural” wigs for whites in all colors from black
to blonde.2” Fashion, then, which can lead white men and women to
broil for hours under the sun, and which can steal the militants’ “thing,”
may ultimately be capable of making darkness under the bathing suit
fashionable.

The possibility of an ideological use of a skin darkener must be seri-
ously considered within the near future. The idealism and direct-action
orientation of youth today provide fertile ground for a movement of
reverse passing. Analogies with the southern Freedom Riders come
quickly to mind. The alienated segment today easily outnumbers pre-
vious cohorts. The desire to throw off parental bonds, the moral admoni-
tion to “do one’s own thing,” the enthusiasm to expose hypocrisy, even
a desire for ‘‘voluntary servitude” in the black cause—all could be served
by reverse passing. This suggests that the experiences of Griffin and
Halsell may be repeated by hundreds, perhaps thousands, and that the
use of skin darkeners for serious ideological purposes (or for psychiatric
adjustment) must be considered as a possibility.
REFERENCES

Cohen, Arthur R. 1964. Attitude Change and Social Influence. New York: Basic.

Cruse, Harold. 1968. The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. New York: Morrow.

Drake, St. Clair, and Horace R. Cayton. 1962. Black Metropolis. New York: Harper.

Glenn, Norval D. 1963. “Negro Prestige Criteria: A Case Study in the Bases of
Prestige.” American Journal of Sociology 68 (March) :645-57.

Grier, William H., and Price M. Cobbs. 1968. Black Rage. New York: Basic.

Griffin, John Howard. 1960. Black Like Me. New York: Signet.

Halsell, Grace. 1969. Soul Sister. Cleveland: World.

Katz, Elihu, Martin L. Levin, and Herbert Hamilton. 1963. ‘Traditions of Research
on the Diffusion of Innovation.’”’ American Sociological Review 28 (April) : 237-52.

Lasker, Lawrence. 1968. “‘A Whiter Shade of Black.” Esquire 70 (July) :62-65.

Lerner, Aaron B. 1961. ‘Hormones and Skin Color.’ Scientific American (July),
pp. 99-108.

Morland, J. Kenneth. 1969. ‘Race Awareness among American and Hong Kong
Chinese Children.’ American Journal of Sociology 75 (November) : 360-74.

Morland, J. Kenneth, and John E. Williams. 1969. ‘Cross-cultural Measurement of
Racial and Ethnic Attitudes by the Semantic Differential.’ Social Forces 48 (Sep-
tember) : 107-12.

Rogers, Everett M. 1962. Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press.

Spencer, M. C. 1961. ‘“Hydroquinone Bleaching.” Archives of Dermatology 84 (July):
131-34.

Stolar, Robert. 1963. “Induced Alterations of Vitiliginous Skin.”’ Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences 100 (February) : 58-75.

Udry, J. Richard, Karl E. Bauman, and Charles Chase. 1971. “Skin Color, Status,
and Mate Selection.” American Journal of Sociology 76 (January) :722-33.
