Recombinant Property in East European Capitalism

Author(s): David Stark

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Tan., 1996), pp. 993-1027
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782236

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:14 UTC
Recombinant property is a form of organizational hedging in which
actors respond to uncertainty by diversifying assets, redefining and
recombining resources. It is an attempt to hold resources that can
be justified by more than one legitimating principle. Property trans-
formation in postsocialist Hungary involves the decentralized reor-
ganization of assets and the centralized management of liabilities.
Together they blur the boundaries of public and private, the bound-
aries of enterprises, and the boundedness of justificatory principles.
Enterprise-level field research, data on the ownership structure of
Hungary’s 220 largest enterprises and banks, and an examination
of the government’s recent debt consolidation programs suggest the
emergence of a distinctively East European capitalism that will
differ as much from West European capitalisms as do contemporary
East Asian variants.
besetting European societies at the end of the 19th century was diagnosed
as a normative and institutional vacuum. The old order regulated by
tradition had passed, but a new moral order had not yet been established.

During our own fin de siécle, not the crumbling of traditional structures
but the collapse of communism gives new life to the transition problem-
atic (Nee 1989; Lipset 1990; and see Alexander [1994] for an extended
critical discussion). Within that problematic, the present is studied as an
approximation of a designated future (Blanchard, Froot, and Sachs
1994), risking an underlying teleology in which concepts are driven by
hypostasized end-states. In the framework of transitology, the transi-
tional present is a period of dislocation as society undergoes the passage
through a liminal state suspended between one social order and another
(Bunce and Csanadi 1993), each conceived as a stable equilibrium orga-
nized around a coherent and more or less unitary logic.

But is ours still the century of transition? And is that model of social
change, so formative in the launching of sociology, still adequate for
understanding the momentous changes in contemporary Eastern Europe?

Difficult to assimilate within the transition problematic are the numer-
ous studies from Eastern Europe documenting parallel and contradictory
logics in which ordinary citizens were already experiencing, for a decade
prior to 1989, a social world in which various domains were not inte-
grated coherently (Gabor 1979, 1986; Szelényi 1988; Stark 1986, 1989;
Rona-Tas 1994).? Through survey research and ethnographic studies,
researchers have identified a multiplicity of social relations that did not
conform to officially prescribed hierarchical patterns. These relations of
reciprocity and marketlike transactions were widespread inside the so-
cialist sector as well as in the “second economy” and stemmed from the
contradictions of attempting to “scientifically manage” an entire national
economy. At the shop-floor level, shortages and supply bottlenecks led
to bargaining between supervisors and informal groups; at the manage-
rial level, the task of meeting plan targets required a dense network of
informal ties that cut across enterprises and local organizations; and the
allocative distortions of central planning produced the conditions for the
predominantly part-time entrepreneurship of the second economies that
differed in scope, density of network connections, and conditions of legal-
ity across the region (Gabor 1979; Kornai 1980; Sabel and Stark 1982;
Szelényi 1988).

The existence of parallel structures (however contradictory and frag-
mentary) in these informal and interfirm networks that “got the job
done” means that the collapse of the formal structures of the socialist
regime does not result in an institutional vacuum. Instead, we find the
persistence of routines and practices, organizational forms and social ties,
that can become assets, resources, and the basis for credible commitments
and coordinated actions in the postsocialist period (Bourdieu 1990; Nel-
son and Winter 1982). In short, in place of disorientation, we find the
metamorphosis of sub-rosa organizational forms and the activation of
preexisting networks of affiliation.

If, by the 1980s, the societies of Eastern Europe were decidedly not
systems organized around a single logic, they are not likely in the post-
socialist epoch to become, any more or less than our own, societies with
a single system identity. Change, even fundamental change, of the social
world is not the passage from one order to another but rearrangements
in the patterns of how multiple orders are interwoven. Organizational
innovation in this view is not replacement but recombination (Schum-
peter 1934).

Thus, we examine how actors in the postsocialist context are rebuilding
organizations and institutions not on the ruins but with the ruins of
communism as they redeploy available resources in response to their
immediate practical dilemmas. Such a conception of path dependence
does not condemn actors to repetition or retrogression,’ for it is through
adjusting to new uncertainties by improvising on practiced routines that
new organizational forms emerge (Nelson and Winter 1982; White 1993;
Kogut and Zander 1992; Sabel and Zeitlin 1996). The analysis that fol-
lows emphasizes the organizational reflexivity that is possible when actors
maneuver across a multiplicity of legitimating principles and strategically
exploit ambiguities in the polyphony of accounts of work, value, and
justice that compose modern society (Boltanski and Thevenot 1991;
White 1992; Stark 1990; Padgett and Ansell 1993; Breiger 1995).
mid-1980s in Hungary, the debate had shifted to the correct mix of “pub-
lic and private property” as the earlier sacrosanct status of collective
property eroded with the growth of the second economy. It was thus, in
the waning years of state socialism, that Gabor (1986) and Szelényi (1988)
coined the term “socialist mixed economy” to designate the new eco-
nomic configuration.* Meanwhile, Stark (1989, p. 168), amplifying Ga-
bor’s call to acknowledge a mixed economy “as a viable hybrid form
and not as inherently unstable and necessarily transitional,” questioned
nonetheless whether the concept of mixed economy was adequate to grasp
the emergent phenomena of late socialism. On the basis of field research
on “intrapreneurial” subcontracting units in Hungarian firms, I argued
that aspects of emergent private property were not respecting the bound-
aries of the second economy but were being fused with public ownership
inside the socialist firm resulting in a “diversification of property forms.”
Identifying “hybrid mixtures of public ownership and private initiative”
(Stark 1989, pp. 167-68) I argued that, instead of a mixed economy with
well-bounded public and private sectors, analysis should begin to address
the growing plurality of “mixed property forms” that transgressed and
blurred traditional property boundaries.

Scholars of economic reforms in China subsequently developed related
concepts to analyze the fiscal reforms reshaping incentives among local
governments giving rise to “township and village enterprises.” Oi’s
(1992) concept of “local corporatism,” Nee’s (1992) “hybrid property,”
and Cui’s (in press) notion of “moebius-strip ownership” each illumi-
nated a particular facet of Chinese property reforms that supported the
general conclusion that China’s is not a simple mixed economy but a
kaleidoscope of mixed public and private property forms.

Of special relevance to my concerns is Walder’s (1994) insight that
property reform should not be equated with privatization. Walder argues
that “clarification of property rights” in the Chinese fiscal reforms can
yield performance enhancing incentives even while maintaining “public
ownership” without privatization. Our analysis of the Hungarian case
also demonstrates that property transformation can occur without con-
ventional privatization.° The difference, however, is that property trans-
formation in Hungary does not necessarily clarify property rights. As
we shall see, the emerging new property forms in Hungary blur (1) the
boundaries of public and private, (2) the organizational boundaries of
enterprises, and (3) the boundedness of justificatory principles. To denote
these processes of triple boundary blurring I adopt the term recombinant
property.

Recombinant property is a form of organizational hedging, or portfolio
management, in which actors respond to uncertainty in the organiza-
tional environment by diversifying their assets, redefining and recombin-
ing resources. It is an attempt to hold resources that can be justified or
assessed by more than one standard of measure.

The distinctive variant of organizational hedging that is recombinant
property in Hungary is produced in two simultaneous processes: Parallel
to the decentralized reorganization of assets is the centralized manage-
ment of liabilities. On the one hand, decentralized reorganization pro-
duces the crisscrossing lines of interenterprise ownership networks; on
the other, debt consolidation transforms private debt into public liability.
Although these two dimensions are discussed separately, their simultane-
ity gives distinctive shape to Hungarian property. The clash of competing
ordering principles produces organizational diversity that can form a
basis for greater adaptability but, at the same time, creates acute prob-
lems of accountability.

Data.—My arguments are based on data collected during an 11-month
stay in Budapest in 1993-94. That research includes (1) field research in
six Hungarian enterprises,° (2) compilation of a data set on the ownership
structure of Hungary’s 200 largest corporations and top 25 banks,’ and
(3) interviews with leading actors in banks, property agencies, political
parties, and government ministries.*
PROPERTY TRANSFORMATION IN HUNGARY:
THE POLICY DEBATE

My point of departure is a question central to contemporary debates in
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union: By what means can private
property become the typical form of property relations in economies over-
whelmingly dominated by state ownership of productive assets?

Much of that debate can be organized around two fundamental policy
strategies. First, the institutionalization of private property can best be
established by transferring assets from public to private hands. Despite
differences in the specific methods designated for such privatization (e.g.,
sale vs. free distribution, etc.), the various proposals within this radical
perspective share the assumption that the creation of a private sector
begins with the existing state-owned enterprises, that is, the basic organi-
zational units of the emergent market economy will be the preexisting
but newly privatized enterprises.

The second policy strategy argues from the perspective of institutional
(and specifically, evolutionary) economics that, although slower, the more
reliable road to institutionalizing private property rests in the develop-
ment of a class of private proprietors. Instead of transferring the assets
of a given organizational unit from one ownership form to another, public
policy should lower barriers to entry for small and medium scale, genu-
inely private ventures. This perspective typically looks to the existing
second economy entrepreneurs as the basic organizational building block
of an emergent market economy.

Recent evidence suggests that Hungary is adopting neither a big bang
approach nor the policy prescriptions of evolutionary economics. Con-
trary to the optimistic scenarios of domestic politicians and Western econ-
omists who foresaw a rapid transfer of assets from state-owned enter-
prises to private ownership, the overwhelming bulk of the Hungarian
economy remains state property. Two years after Prime Minister Jozsef
Antall confidently announced that his new government would privatize
more than 50% of state property by 1995, the director of the Privatization
Research Institute functioning alongside the State Property Agency (SPA)
estimated that only about 3% of the state-owned productive capital has
been privatized (Mellar 1992). According to a recent study commissioned
by the World Bank (Pistor and Turkewitz 1994), by mid-1994 the SPA
had only sold about 11% of the value of its original portfolio.

Contrary as well to the hopes of evolutionary economics, a considerable
body of evidence now suggests that the second economy has not become
a dynamic, legitimate private sector: Although the number of registered
private ventures has skyrocketed, many are “dummy firms,” tax evasion
is pervasive, and many entrepreneurs (a majority in some categories) still
engage in private ventures only as a second job (Laky 1992; Gabor 1994,
1996). And although employment is slowly increasing in the sector, most
researchers agree that the proportion of unregistered work (for which the
state receives no social security payments and the employee receives no
benefits) is increasing faster (Kornai 1992, p. 13).

These tendencies together with new forms of corruption, extortion,
and exploitation have prompted one researcher to label the transition as
one “from second economy to informal economy” arguing that it is now,
under these new conditions, that Latin American comparisons are more
applicable to the Hungarian setting (Sik 1992). When private entrepre-
neurs look to government policy, they see only burdensome taxation,
lack of credits, virtually no programs to encourage regional or local devel-
opment, and inordinate delays in payments for orders delivered to public-
sector firms (Webster 1992; Kornai 1992). Through violations of tax
codes, off-the-books payments to workers, and reluctance to engage in
capital investment, much of the private sector is responding in kind
(Gabor 1996). Such government policies and private-sector responses are
clearly not a recipe for the development of a legitimate private sector as
a dynamic engine of economic growth.
“ABT WIJ JUNOD ay} sasn YOIYM ‘}66T Joy Jdaoxe ‘1eaK yova Jo Jaquiaseq] UT PayUNod suLIY Jo JaquINu oy} JUEsaIder BYep 94, —"ALON
“S/v661 ‘saugstDIS fo unang Gyro py ‘aryJO [EONSHeIS [BUD URTIeZUNH pur ‘Z/P661 Mody Kyo ‘AreBuNF Jo Yueg [eUCTN—"AIANOS

 

 

 

 

 

$6e'6L L68‘7L 7z97LS 902‘Tr LTe‘ST v9r'b Ost tees (SL spy) sotueduios ApTqety paywyry

6L9'7 Slee 2tLT ZL0'T 9r9 Loe OIL cress (g7 yy) sotueduros Surpjoyareys

268 Oet‘t eeu‘ ee7'z e9e'z oor‘z gLe7 “* sastidiayua 33e}S
661 £661 2661 1661 0661 6861 8861 woy euoTyeztULZIC,

 

 

p6-886T ‘AUVONNH NI SWYOY ASIAdATLNY NIVIAL

T ATaVL
New Forms of State Ownership

Take first the shareholding companies (RTs) on line 2 of the table. Some
of these corporations are private ventures newly established after the
“system change.” But many are the legal successors of the state-owned
enterprises that would have been enumerated in the previous year on
line 1 of the table. Through a mandatory process of “corporatization,”
the former state-owned enterprise transforms its legal organizational form
into a shareholding company. The question, of course, is who is holding
the shares? In most of these corporatized firms the majority of shares are
held by the State Property Agency or the newly created State Holding
Corporation (AV-Rt). That is, as “public” and “private” actors copar-
ticipate in the new recombinant property forms, the nature and instru-
ments of the “public” dimension change: Whereas “state ownership”
in socialism meant unmediated and indivisible ownership by a state min-
istry (e.g., Ministry of Industry), corporatization in postcommunism en-
tails share ownership by one or another government agency responsible
for state property.

Such corporatization mandated by a privatization agency in the current
context has some distinctive features of renationalization. In the 1980s,
managers in Hungary (and workers in Poland) exercised de facto property
rights. Although they enjoyed no rights over disposal of property, they
did exercise rights of residual control as well as rights over residual in-
come streams. In the 1990s, corporatization paradoxically involves efforts
by the state to reclaim the actual exercise of the property rights that had
devolved to enterprise-level actors. Ironically, the agencies responsible
for privatization are acting as agents of étatization (Voszka 1992).

The “trap of centralization” already well known in the region (Bruszt
1988) stands as a warning, however, that the effective exercise of such
centralized control varies inversely with the scope and the degree of direct
intervention. One encounters, therefore, proposals for privatizing the
asset management function. In such programs, the state retains the right
to dispose of property but delegates its rights as shareholder to private
consulting firms and portfolio management teams who oversee daily oper-
ations and strategic decisions on a subcontracting or commission basis.
table 1? To answer this question, I compiled a data set on the ownership
structure of the largest 200 Hungarian corporations (ranked by sales).°
These firms compose the “Top 200” of the 1993 listing of Figyelé, a
leading Hungarian business weekly. Like their Fortune 500 counterparts
in the United States, the Figyelé 200 firms are major players in the
Hungarian economy employing an estimated 21% of the labor force and
accounting for 37% of total net sales and 42% of export revenues (Figyelé
1993). The data also include the top 25 Hungarian banks (ranked by
assets). Ownership data were obtained directly from the Hungarian
Courts of Registry where corporate files contain not only information on
the company’s officers and board of directors but also a complete list of
the company’s owners as of the 1993 annual shareholders’ meeting. The
data analyzed here are limited to the top 20 shareholders of each corpora-
tion.’° In the Budapest Court of Registry and the 19 county registries,
we were able to locate ownership files for 195 of the 200 corpora-
tions and for all of the 25 banks, referred to below as the “Top 220”
firms.

Who holds the shares of these 220 largest enterprises and banks? I
found some form of state ownership—with shares held by the AV-Rt,
the SPA, or the institutions of local government (who had typically ex-
changed their real estate holdings for enterprise shares)—present in the
overwhelming majority (71%) of these enterprises and banks. More sur-
prisingly, given the relatively short time since the “system change” in
1989-90, we found 36 companies (i.e., more than 16% of this population)
in majority foreign ownership. Hungarian private individuals (Summed
down the top 20 owners) hold at least 25% of the shares of only 12 of
these largest enterprises and banks.

Most interesting from the perspective of this article is the finding of
87 cases in which another Hungarian company is among the 20 largest
shareholders. In 42 of these cases the other Hungarian companies to-
gether hold a clear majority (50% plus one share). Thus, by the most
restrictive definition, almost 20% of our Top 220 companies are unambig-
uous cases of interenterprise ownership; and we find some degree of
interenterprise ownership in almost 40% of these large companies.

Figure 1 presents two discrete networks formed through such interen-
terprise ownership. Arrows indicate directionality in which a given firm
holds shares in another large enterprise. Weak ties (shareholdings with
other firms that do not have at least one other tie, whether as owner or
owned, to any other firm in the network) are not displayed.'! The rela-
tions depicted in the figure, we emphasize, are the direct horizontal ties
among the very largest enterprises—the superhighways, so to speak, of
Hungarian corporate networks. The diagrams presented in figure 1 indi-
cate a different way of mapping the social space of property transforma-
tion than that suggested in table 1. Whereas table 1 grouped entities
according to their legal corporate status, here we trace not the distribu-
tion of attributes but the patterns of social ties.

In analyzing the relational dynamics of recombinant property, we now
shift our focus from the corporate thoroughfares linking the large enter-
prises to examine the local byways linking spin-off properties within the
gravitational field of large enterprises.
NZ

B = Financial Institution (Bank or Insurance) E = Enterprise

Fic. 1.—Two interenterprise ownership networks among large Hungarian
firms (based on data gathered from corporate files of 200 largest enterprises and
top 25 banks in Hungarian Courts of Registry).

in the portfolio of the State Holding Corporation, is the majority share-
holder of 26 of its 40 corporate satellites.

Like Saturn’s rings, Heavy Metal’s satellites revolve around the giant
corporate planet in concentric orbits. Near the center are the core metal-
lurgy units, hot-rolling mills, energy, maintenance, and strategic plan-
ning units held in a kind of geosynchronous orbit by 100% ownership.
In the next ring, where the corporate headquarters holds roughly 50%—-
99% of the shares, are the cold-rolling mills, wire and cable production,
the oxygen facility, galvanizing and other finishing treatments, special-
ized castings, quality control, and marketing units. As this listing sug-
gests, these satellites are linked to each other and to the core units by
ties of technological dependence. Relations between the middle-ring satel-
lites and the company center are marked by the center’s recurrent efforts
to introduce stricter accounting procedures and tighter financial controls.
These attempts are countered by the units’ efforts to increase their auton-
omy—coordinated through personal ties and formalized in the biweekly
meetings of the “Club of KFT Managing Directors.”

The satellites of the outer ring are even more heterogeneous in their
production profiles (construction, industrial services, computing, ceram-
ics, machining) and are usually of lower levels of capitalization. Units of
this outer ring are less fixed in Heavy Metal’s gravitational field: some
have recently entered and some seem about to leave. Among the new
entrants are some of Heavy Metal’s domestic customers. Unable to collect
receivables, Heavy Metal exchanged interenterprise debt for equity in its
clients, preferring that these meteors be swept into an orbit rather than
be lost in liquidation. Among those satellites launched from the old state
enterprise are some for which Heavy Metal augments its less than major-
ity ownership with leasing arrangements to keep centrifugal forces in
check.

The corporate satellites among the limited liability companies enumer-
ated on line 3 of table 1 are, thus, far from unambiguously “private”
ventures; yet neither are they unmistakably “statist” residues of the
socialist past. Property shares in most corporate satellites are not limited
to the founding enterprise. Top- and mid-level managers, professionals,
and other staff can be found on the lists of founding partners and current
owners. Such private persons rarely acquire complete ownership of the
corporate satellite, preferring to use their insider knowledge to exploit
the ambiguities of institutional coownership. The corporate satellites are
thus partially a result of the hedging and risk-sharing strategies of indi-
vidual managers. We might ask why a given manager would not want
to acquire 100% ownership in order to obtain 100% of the profit, but
from the perspective of a given manager the calculus instead is, “Why
acquire 100% of the risk if some can be shared with the corporate cen-
ter?” With ambiguous interests and divided loyalties, these risk-sharing
(or risk-shedding) owner/managers are organizationally hedging (Sabel
1990). ?

Not uncommonly, these individuals are joined in mixed ownership by
other joint stock companies and limited liability companies—sometimes
by independent companies, often by other KFTs in a similar orbit around
the same enterprise, and frequently by shareholding companies or KFTs
spinning around some other enterprise with lines of purchase or supply
to the corporate unit (Voszka 1991). Banks also participate in this form
of recombinant property. In many cases, the establishment of KFTs and
other new corporate forms is triggered by enterprise debt. In the reorgani-
zation of the insolvent firms, the commercial banks (whose shares as joint
stock companies are still predominantly state owned) become sharehold-
ers of the corporate satellites by exchanging debt for equity.

We have used the term “corporate satellite” to designate this instance
of recombinant property. An exact (but cumbersome) terminology reflects
the complex, intertwined character of property relations in Hungary: a
limited liability company owned by private persons, by private ventures,
and by other limited liability companies owned by joint stock companies,
banks, and large public enterprises owned by the state. The new property
forms thus find horizontal ties of cross-ownership intertwined with verti-
cal ties of nested holdings.
Fic. 3.—A metamorphic network (based on data from Heavy Metal internal
documents, SPA files, corporate files, and the Budapest Court of Registry).
I label this emergent form of recombinant property a metamorphic
network. Here we see that the limited liability companies that began as
corporate spin-offs are oriented through ownership ties either to more
than one shareholding company and/or to other limited liability compa-
nies. In the metamorphic network, actors recognize the network proper-
ties of their interdependent assets and regroup them across formal organi-
zational boundaries. These creative regroupings fail to respect the
organizational boundaries between enterprises as well as the boundaries
between public and private.

With few exceptions (Sabel and Prokop 1994), the literature on postso-
cialist property transformation (most of it confined to “privatization”)
assumes that the economic unit to be restructured is the individual enter-
prise. But the identification of interfirm networks suggests that policies
and practices aimed at restructuring should target not the isolated firm
but networks of firms. Such an alternative strategy of restructuring recog-
nizes that assets and liabilities have distinctive network properties.

The industrial structure of the socialist economy commonly grouped,
within a single enterprise, assets that were incompatible (except within
the logic of central planning). Merely separating or simply regrouping
such assets within existing enterprises alone (on a firm-by-firm basis)
cannot equal the more fruitful recombinations of complementary assets
across a Set of firms. Restructuring via recombinant networks thus opens
the possibilities of increasing the value of existing assets through their
recombination. This regrouping does not necessarily imply bringing inter-
dependent assets under the common ownership umbrella of a hierarchi-
cally organized enterprise. As such, Hungarian recombinant property
provides examples of intercorporate networks as alternatives to a dichoto-
mously forced choice between markets and hierarchies.
accounting of assets and liabilities in an attempt to maintain its lead in
regional competition for foreign investments and international credits.
Hungary’s comparative advantage, it appeared, was its gradualism,
which, across the decades of the 1970s and 1980s, had yielded a full range
of marketlike institutions. Admittedly, these were not the institutions of
a market economy, but they were close; and so, the government reasoned,
why not take the last small steps? As the pioneer attempt to bring postso-
cialist practice in full conformity with Western accounting and banking
standards, the new measures could be cast as a bold move when appeal-
ing to international lending agencies. But because they were not big
steps, the new measures could gain external legitimation without creating
a domestic shock.

Thus, the new Accounting Law of 1991 (which took effect on January
1, 1992) required enterprises to switch to Western-style accounting princi-
ples. The simultaneously enacted, tough new Western-style Bankruptcy
Act similarly contained stiff personal penalties for directors of enterprises
that failed to file for bankruptcy after the accountants (using the new
accounting principles) sounded the alarm. At the same time, the new Act
on Financial Institutions introduced in December 1991 was designed to
put Hungary’s commercial banks on a Western footing. In particular,
the reserve requirements for measuring capital-adequacy ratios were
modified and the securities and other financial instruments for provi-
sioning against qualified loans were respecified.

The last small steps proved to be a leap into the abyss. Already reeling
from the collapse of the CMEA (Council for Mutual Economic Assis-
tance) markets, enterprise directors now learned from their accountants
that the new accounting practices were coloring the companies’ books
even redder than expected. By the end of 1992, over 10,000 bankruptcies
and liquidation proceedings had been initiated—a figure 10 times higher
than during the previous year when enterprises had experienced the worst
shock of the collapsed Eastern markets (Bokros 1994). With one-third to
one-half of enterprises in the red, the loss-making firms began to stop
payment on their bank credits. By the end of 1992, the overdue loan
stock of the banking system was 127 billion forints (1.5 billion in U.S.
dollars) up 90% from the previous year (National Bank of Hungary 1992,
p. 109).

With thousands of firms filing for bankruptcy, the banks were forced
by the new banking law to reclassify loans. The subsequent dramatic
increase in the new legally required provisionings against poorly per-
forming loans cut deeply into bank profits, slashed dividends and tax
revenues from the banking sector to the state treasury, and turned the
banks’ capital-adequacy ratios from positive to negative. The banking
From Small Steps to Big Bailouts

The same government that had launched an unintended financial shock
now initiated a bold plan to save the banks, In its 1992 loan consolidation
program, the government bought Ft 104.9 billion (about $1 billion) of
qualified debt (almost all in the “bad” debt classification) involving 14
banks and 1,885 companies. In a related move in early 1993, the govern-
ment also purchased the bank debt of 11 giant enterprises (the so-called
dirty dozen) for roughly $300 million. But the loan consolidation and
enterprise recapitalization programs did not restore stability in the bank-
ing sector. By September 1993, only nine months later, financial experts
were estimating that loans in arrears had once again soared to 20% of
total loan portfolios. And the 10 largest banks were again hovering at or
below the 0% capital-adequacy ratio (a condition of technical insolvency).

For the government, the new banking rules did not exclude bailing
out banks and enterprises again and again. But the big bailout of 1993
had a new twist. Instead of buying the debt from the banks, this time
the government adopted a two-stage strategy of first recapitalizing the
banks and then using the banks to work out the enterprise debt. By
injecting enormous sums of fresh capital into the banks, the Ministry of
Finance became the dominant shareholder of the large commercial
banks. The first stage of the strategy, then, could be summarized in a
phrase: Do not acquire the debt, acquire the banks.

The second stage of the strategy was designed to harness the expertise
of the banks to the service of the state. Because it was the banks, and
not the state, that would be left holding the qualified debt, the banks
would have an incentive to collect that debt, or at least the part they
had not already written off their books. And they would do so, this time,
not with the state as their sometime partner but with the state as their
majority owner. But as Hungary’s conservative-nationalist government
should have learned from the earlier experience of state socialism, efforts
to exercise control through direct ownership do not equal more effective
state capacity. Banks have shown almost no willingness to use the consol-
idation funds for actively restructuring firms; and, despite the assumption
that the Ministry of Finance’s ownership would yield control of the
banks, the government has been almost entirely ineffective in monitoring
how the banks use the recapitalization funds.

The massive bailout programs were not, of course, without effects: At
Ft 300 billion ($3 billion)—amounting to 10% of Hungarian GDP and
18.3% of the 1994 national budget (i.e., proportionally more than the
U.S. savings and loan bailout)—the bailouts created a long queue of
banks and firms with their hands out, reaching for the state’s pock-
etbook.

Thus, at the same time that the corporate networks were engaged in
the decentralized reorganization of assets, the Hungarian state attempted
the centralized management of liabilities. That centralization has not
left the decentralized processes untouched. From the perspective of the
enterprises, “debt consolidation” triggers the organizational separation
of debts from assets. The Hungarian government’s attempt at the central-
ized management of liabilities stimulates the networks to complement
their strategies of risk spreading with new strategies of risk shedding.
Two types of strategies can be identified, each based on the organiza-
tional separation of assets and liabilities. In one type, assets are distrib-
uted to the satellites and debts are centralized, increasing the enterprises’
chances of inclusion in the government-funded debt consolidation. In the
other, assets are closely held by the enterprise center and liabilities are
distributed to the satellites where network ties and political connections
manipulate proceedings in a Hungarian version of “bankruptcy for
profit” (Akerlof and Romer [1993] coin the term in their study of state-
managed liabilities in the U.S. savings and loan bailout).

We thus see a new paternalism in Hungary: Whereas in the state
socialist economy paternalism was based on the state’s attempts to cen-
trally manage assets (Kornai 1993a), in the first years of the postsocialist
economy paternalism is based on the state’s attempts to centrally manage
liabilities. Centralized management of liabilities will not continue indefi-
nitely, but the organizational dynamics of enterprises formed under the
new paternalistic conditions are likely to have strong path-dependent
effects.
than a bankrupted limited liability company—except, of course, if you
have shed the risk to the banks (and then to the state) and put the assets
in another form. Assets and liabilities have value not in themselves but
in relation to legitimating principles.

To examine how economic actors in the postsocialist setting maneuver
not only through an ecology of organizations but also through a complex
ecology of ordering principles we need to understand the doubly associa-
tive character of assets. There are no free-floating resources. To exist as
an asset a potential resource must be mobilizable through ties of associa-
tion among persons (Granovetter 1985). And to be of value a potential
resource must also have relative worth according to a standard of mea-
sure. To be able to circulate through the ties that bind (and thus contrib-
ute to that binding) an asset must be justified within a relatively stabilized
network of categories that make up a legitimating principle (Thévenot
1985; Boltanski and Thévenot 1991; Latour 1988; White 1992). Regroup-
ing assets thus involves making new associations—not only by rearrang-
ing social ties among persons and things but also by drawing on diverse
repertoires of justificatory principles.

To emphasize the patterned and the performative aspects of this pro-
cess, I exploit a notion of accounts. Etymologically rich, the term simulta-
neously connotes bookkeeping and narration. Both dimensions entail
evaluative judgments, and each implies the other: Accountants prepare
story lines according to established formulae, and in the accountings of
a good storyteller we know what counts. In everyday life, we are all
bookkeepers and storytellers. We keep accounts and we give accounts,
and most important, we can all be called to account for our actions.
When we make such an accounting, we draw on and reproduce social
orders. We can competently produce justifications only in terms of estab-
lished and recognized ordering principles, standards, and measures of
evaluation. Because we do not simply give reasons but also have reasons
for doing things, accounts are not simply retrospective; the imperative
of justification (Boltanski and Thévenot 1991) structures what we do and
not simply how we explain. We can never simply “calculate” because
we must do so with units and instruments of measurement that are deeply
structured by accounts of what can be of value. We reproduce these units
of measurement and we recalibrate the measuring instruments when we
assert our worthiness, when we defer to the “more worthy,” or when
we denounce their status according to some other standard of evaluation.
When we give an account, we affirm or challenge the ordering criteria
according to which our actions (and/or those of others) have been or will
be evaluated. And it is always within accounts that we “size up the
situation,” for not every form of worth can be made to apply and not
every asset is in a form mobilizable for the situation. We evaluate the
situation by maneuvering to use scales that measure some types of worth
and not others, thereby acting to validate some accounts and discredit
others.

The multiple accounts of recombinant property respond to and exploit
the fundamental, though diffused, uncertainty about the organizational
environment. In transformative economies, firms have to worry not sim-
ply about whether there is demand for their products, or about the rate
of return on their investment, or about the level of profitability but also
about the very principle of selection itself. Thus, the question is not only
“Will I survive the market test?”—-but also, under what conditions is
proof of worth on market principles neither sufficient nor necessary to
survive? Because there are multiply operative, mutually coexistent prin-
ciples of justification according to which you can be called on to give
accounts of your actions, you cannot be sure what counts. By what
proof and according to which principles of justification are you worthy
to steward such and such resources? Because of this uncertainty, actors
will seek to diversify their assets, to hold resources in multiple accounts.

This ability to glide among principles and to produce multiple account-
ings is an organizational hedging. It differs, however, from the kind of
hedging to minimize risk exposure that we would find within a purely
market logic—as, for example, when the shopkeeper who sells swimwear
and suntan lotion also devotes some floor space to umbrellas. Instead of
acting within a single regime of evaluation, these actors use organiza-
tional hedging that crosses and combines disparate evaluative principles.
Recombinant property is a particular kind of portfolio management. It
is an attempt to have a resource that can be justified or assessed by more
than one standard of measure (as, e.g., the rabbit breeder whose roadside
stand advertises “pets and meat” in the documentary film, Roger and
Me). In managing one’s portfolio of justifications, one starts from the
dictum: diversify your accounts.

The adroit recombinant agent in the transformative economies of East
Central Europe diversifies holdings in response to fundamental uncer-
tainties about what can constitute a resource. Under conditions not sim-
ply of market uncertainty but of organizational uncertainty, there can be
multiple (and intertwined) strategies for survival—based in some cases
on profitability but in others on eligibility. Where your success is judged,
and the resources placed at your disposal determined, sometimes by your
market share and sometimes by the number of workers you employ in a
region; sometimes by your price-earnings ratio and sometimes by your
“strategic importance”; and, when even the absolute size of your losses
can be transformed into an asset yielding an income stream, you might
be wise to diversify your portfolio, to be able to shift your accounts, to
be equally skilled in applying for loans as in applying for job creation
subsidies, to have a multilingual command of the grammar of credit
worthiness and the syntax of debt forgiveness. To hold recombinant
property is to have such a diversified portfolio.

To gain room for maneuver, actors court and even create ambiguity.
They measure in multiple units, they speak in many tongues. They will
be less controlled by others if they can be accountable (able to make
credible accounts) to many.'* In so doing, they produce the polyphonic
discourse of worth that is postsocialism.

We can hear that polyphonic chorus in the diverse ways that firms
justify their claims for participation in the debt-relief program. The fol-
lowing litany of justifications are stylized versions of claims encountered
in discussions with bankers, property agency officials, and enterprise
directors: Our firm should be included in the debt relief program

because we will forgive our debtors (i.e., our firm occupies a strategic place
in a network of interenterprise debt)

because we are truly credit worthy (i.e., if our liabilities are separated from
our assets, we will again be eligible for more bank financing. Similar
translations could be provided for each of the following justifications)

because we employ thousands

because our suppliers depend on us for a market

because we are in your election district

because our customers depend on our product inputs

because we can then be privatized

because we can never be privatized

because we took big risks

because we were prudent and did not take risks

because we were planned in the past

because we have a plan for the future

because we export to the West

because we export to the East

because our product has been awarded an International Standards Quality
Control Certificate

because our product is part of the Hungarian national heritage

because we are an employee buy-out

because we are a management buy-in

because we are partly state-owned

because we are partly privately held

because our creditors drove us into bankruptcy when they loaned to us at
higher than market rates to artificially raise bank profits in order to
pay dividends into a state treasury whose coffers had dwindled when
corporations like ourselves effectively stopped paying taxes.

And so we must ask, into whose account and by which account will debt
forgiveness flow? Or, in such a situation, is anyone accountable?
Mixture

Imagine two economies, each of equal parts public and private. In one,
half the firms are fully private, half are fully public. In the other, every
firm is half public, half private. Each is a “mixed economy.” Yet is it
likely that their dynamics will be the same?!° No two economies closely
approximate the thought experiment’s ideal types; but it nonetheless puts
in sharp relief the question What is the mix of the postsocialist mixed
economy?

My findings of corporate spin-offs and recombinant reorganization at
the enterprise level, and of widespread public ownership combined with
interenterprise ownership networks among the very largest enterprises,
challenges the assumption, widely held on all sides of the privatization
debate, that postsocialist economies can be adequately represented in a
two-sector model. That analytic shortcoming cannot be remedied by
more precise specification of the boundary between public and private:
the old property divide has been so eroded that what might once have
been a distinct boundary line is now a recombinant zone. Hungary is a
postsocialist mixed economy not because of a simple dualism of well-
bounded state-owned firms in one sector and privately owned firms in
another but because many firms themselves exploit aspects of public and
private property relations.'° What we find are new forms of property in
which the qualities of private and public are dissolved, interwoven, and
recombined. Property in East European capitalism is recombinant prop-
erty, and its analysis suggests the emergence of a distinctively East Euro-
pean capitalism that will differ as much from West European capitalisms
as do contemporary East Asian variants.
Diversity

Our first analytic shift, therefore, must be from the conceptual tools
around the concept of mixture to those around that of diversity. Capital-
isms are diverse, and that diversity is manifested in forms that cannot
be adequately conceptualized as mixtures of capitalism and socialism.”
By analyzing recombinant property not only as the dissolution and inter-
weaving of elements of public and private but also as a blurring of organi-
zational boundaries in networks of interlocking ownership, we can es-
cape, for example, the terms of the debate about whether the “lessons
of East Asia for Eastern Europe” are the virtues of neoliberalism or of
neostatism (World Bank 1993; Amsden 1994). Instead we join economic
sociologists who are studying the East Asian economies from a network-
centered approach in which not markets, nor states, nor isolated firms,
but social networks are the basic units of analysis (Gereffi 1994; Hamil-
ton, Zeile, and Kim 1990; Hamilton and Feenstra 1995). In this perspec-
tive, the ability of the East Asian economies to adapt flexibly to changes
in world markets rests in the interlocking ties characteristic of corporate
groups (Orru, Biggart, and Hamilton 1991; Granovetter 1995), whether
these be the patterns of mutual shareholding within the Japanese keiretsu
(Gerlach and Lincoln 1992; Hoshi 1994); the ties of family ownership
within the more vertically integrated South Korean chaebol (Kim 1991;
Hamilton and Feenstra 1995); the social ties of the more horizontally
integrated Taiwanese quanxigiye “related enterprises” (Numazaki
1991); or the dense ties that transgress organizational boundaries in the
“buyer-driven” and “producer-driven” networks in Hong Kong, Singa-
pore, and elsewhere in Southeast Asia (Gereffi 1994).

These recent studies of the social embeddedness and local organiza-
tional innovation characteristic of East Asian corporate networks suggest
that the strategic choice is not plans or markets, or even clans or markets,
but clans for markets. Market orientation must be distinguished from
market coordination: a broad variety of institutions of nonmarket coordi-
nation are compatible with high performance market orientation (Schmit-
ter 1988; Boyer 1991; Bresser Pereira 1993). Many of the most successful
forms of network coordination in East Asia, moreover, appeared to early
observers as highly improbable forms whose atavistic features could not
possibly survive beyond the period of postwar reconstruction from which
they arose.'* Our point of departure, it should be clear, however, is not
to look to Eastern Europe to find Hungarian keiretsu or Czech chaebol.
Instead of searching for direct counterparts, East Asian/East European
comparisons will yield new concepts when we grasp the specificity of the
regional variants by explaining the differences among the various coun-
tries within a region.’

Future research must examine whether the East European corporate
networks are becoming successfully oriented to the world market. But it
is not too early to pose analytic dimensions along which we could assess
the potential for recombinant property to contribute to economic devel-
opment.
One starting point, ready-at-hand from the burgeoning literature on
the “transitional” economies, would be to ask, Do they contribute to
creative destruction? That litmus test is based on a widely held assump-
tion that economic development will be best promoted by “allowing the
selection mechanism to work” through bankruptcies of underperforming
enterprises. Recombinant property would not receive an unambiguously
positive score measured by this standard. Indeed, the kinds of interenter-
prise ownership described above are classic risk-spreading and risk-
sharing devices that mitigate differences across firms. By dampening the
performance of the stronger and facilitating the survival of the weaker
firms in the interfirm networks, they might even impede creative destruc-
tion in the conventional sense.

But there is some question that a tidal wave of mass bankruptcies is
a long-term cure for the postsocialist economies. With the catastrophic
loss of markets to the East and with the stagnation of the economies of
potentially new trading partners to the West, the depth and length of the
transformational crisis in East Central Europe now exceeds that of the
Great Depression of the interwar period (Kornai 19930). In such circum-
stances, an absolute hardening of firms’ budget constraints not only
drives poorly performing firms into bankruptcy but also destroys enter-
prises that would otherwise be quite capable of making a high perfor-
mance adjustment (see esp. Cui 1994). Wanton destruction is not creative
destruction, goes this reasoning, and recombinant property might save
some of these struggling but capable firms through risk-sharing networks.
Along this line of reasoning, we would want to assess whether the sacri-
fice in allocative efficiency by retarding bankruptcy is being offset by the
preservation of assets with real potential for high performance in a situa-
tion of economic recovery.

A related, but analytically separate, point is that risk spreading can
be a basis for risk taking. Extraordinarily high uncertainties of the kind
we see now in the postsocialist economies can lead to low levels of invest-
ment with negative strategic complementarities (as when firms forgo in-
vestments because they expect a sluggish economy based on the lack
of investments by others). By mitigating disinclinations to invest, risk
spreading might be one means to break out of otherwise low-level equilib-
rium traps.”? Firms in the postsocialist transformational crisis are like
mountain climbers assaulting a treacherous face, and the networks of
interenterprise ownership are the safety ropes lashing them together.
Neoliberals who bemoan a retarded bankruptcy rate fail to acknowledge
that there might be circumstances when this mutual binding is a precon-
dition for attempting a difficult ascent. Along this line of reasoning, we
would want to assess whether the opportunities for risk shedding in the
Hungarian setting can be offset when networks (rather than “develop-
mental states” [Evans 1992]) perform disequilibrating functions that fa-
cilitate and stimulate entrepreneurial risk taking.

Economic development in East Central Europe does require more exit
(some, indeed many, firms must perish) and more entry as well. But for
destruction to be creative, these deaths must be accompanied by births
not simply of new organizations but of new organizational forms. Organi-
zational forms are specific bundles of routines, and the reduction of their
diversity means the loss of organized information that might be of value
when the environment changes (Hannan 1986; Boyer 1991; Stark 1989,
1992). From this perspective, an economy that maximized allocative effi-
ciency (by putting all resources in the most efficient form) would sacrifice
adaptive efficiency. Socialism, in this view, failed not only because it
lacked a selection mechanism to eliminate organizations that performed
poorly but also because it put all its economic resources in a single organi-
zational form—the state enterprise. Socialism drastically reduced organi-
zational diversity and in so doing prohibited a broad repertoire of orga-
nized solutions to problems of collective action. Along this line of
reasoning, an assessment of forms of recombinant property in an East
European capitalism should start not by testing whether they reproduce
state socialism or harbor real private property but whether they contrib-
ute to adaptive efficiency.

For the property rights school, it is not destruction (bankruptcy) nor
diversity but the clarity of property rights that will yield the right set
of incentives to make restructuring in the postsocialist transformation
performance enhancing. Instead of reassigning property rights to an
owner (an ironic legacy of an essentially Marxist notion of property), this
school argues that property can be productively “dis-integrated” (Grey
1980) such that different actors can legitimately claim rights to different
aspects and capacities of the same thing (Hart 1988; Comisso 1991). But
however disaggregated, property rights must be clarified if accountability
is to be insured. Walder (1994), the leading proponent of this perspective
in the postsocialist debate, for example, shows that it is not the privatiza-
tion of assets but the clarification of property rights that has contributed
to the dynamism of township and village enterprises in Chinese light
industry.

Along this line of reasoning, we should assess whether recombinant
property is leading to well-defined property rights. The initial evidence
presented in this article suggests that recombinant property would fail
such a test. But from another perspective in the debate over property
rights, the blurring of enterprise boundaries might be a viable strategy
to promote organizational flexibility. On the basis of research in advanced
manufacturing fields in Germany and the United States, Sabel (1990) and
Kogut, Shan, and Walker (1992) demonstrate that under conditions of
extreme market volatility or of extraordinarily rapid technological
change, economic actors engage in hedging strategies vis-a-vis other or-
ganizations (partners or competitors) in their organizational field. When
the future is highly uncertain, it is far from clear at 71 whether your
assets will be interdependent with mine at 72. In such situations, in
addition to the dualism make or buy (hierarchy or market) there is an
alternative—cooperate. Kogut observes that one manifestation of such a
hedging strategy is cross-ownership (not simply among purchasers and
suppliers but also among competitors), and he finds dense patterns of
cross-ownership among competitors in the field of microprocessing where
firms cannot be certain whose standards will be the industry standards
in the next round. Sabel goes even further, arguing that, in cases of
extremely complex asset interdependence, it is not clear-cut property
claims (however dense the cross-ownership) but an ambiguity of property
claims that provides flexible adaptation to the market. Sabel’s argument
departs radically from the property rights school: he is claiming that
actors are not assigned different rights over different aspects of an asset
but are making overlapping claims on the same aspect. This is ambiguous
property, not disaggregated property.

The hedging strategies and boundary blurring in postsocialist recon-
struction, it seems, find counterparts in some of the technologically most
highly sophisticated sectors of North American and West European capi-
talism. Along the dimension of this line of reasoning, we should assess
whether recombinant property is, in fact, contributing to flexibility and
whether any gains that might so accrue are enough to offset the possible
sacrifice of accountability. We reencounter this trade-off of adaptability
and accountability as we turn from the issues of organizational diversity
and property rights to the problem of heterogeneous legitimating prin-
ciples.
adaptability in this view is not simply the diversity of types of organiza-
tions but the possibilities for cross-fertilization inside and across organiza-
tions where multiply operative legitimating principles collide—or in Har-
rison White’s (1993) phrase, “values mate to change.””!

Some might argue, of course, that multiple orders are fine—provided
that each occupies a distinctly bounded domain. Such is the model of
modernity in “modernization” theory: through differentiation, each do-
main of society would develop as a separate autonomous subsystem with
its own distinctive logic. Complexity in this view requires diversity but
only as the juxtaposition of clearly bounded rationalities. Marxism, of
course, has its own conception of complexity: the temporary overlap of
mutually contradictory principles. Both modernization theory and Marx-
ism are deeply grounded in the transition problematic. The noisy clash
of orders is only temporary: the revolutionary moment for one, the pas-
sage to differentiated domains in the other.

If we break with this transition problem, we can escape from the
impoverished conceptions of complexity in both Marxism and moderniza-
tion theory. In the alternative conception offered here, complexity is the
interweaving of multiple justificatory principles on the same domain
space. That view, of course, shares with modernization theory the notion
of distinctive domains—relatively autonomous fields of action (Bourdieu
1990). And it shares with Marxism the notion of the collision of ordering
principles. But unlike modernization theory, each domain is a site of
heterogeneity; and unlike Marxism, that tension is not consolidated and
then released in an all-encompassing revolutionary moment. The noisy
clash of orders occurs throughout the social world, and it is not transient
but ongoing—punctuated by relative, localized stabilizations but never
equilibrium (Latour 1988).

Postsocialist societies are entering this discordant world. To still that
noisy clash by the ascendency of one accounting, with profitability as the
sole metric and markets as the only coordinating mechanism, would be
to duplicate the attempt of Communism, with its imposition of a unitary
justificatory principle, a strict hierarchy of property forms, and a single
coordinating mechanism. To replicate the monochrome with a different
coloring would be to destroy the heterogeneity of organizing principles
that is the basis of adaptability.

As this account of recombinant property has demonstrated, postso-
cialist societies are not lacking in heterogeneous organizing principles.
The problem therefore is not a simple lack of accountability but an over-
REFERENCES

Akerlof, George A., and Paul M. Romer. 1993. “Looting: The Economic Underworld
of Bankruptcy for Profit.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1-73.

Alexander, Jeffrey C. 1994. “Modern, Anti, Post, and Neo: How Social Theories
Have Tried to Understand the ‘New World’ of ‘Our Time.’” Zeitschrift fiir Soci-
ologie 23:165—97.

Amsden, Alice. 1994. “Can Eastern Europe Compete by Getting the Prices Right?
Contrast with East Asian Structural Reforms.” Pp. 81-107 in Rebuilding Capital-
ism: Alternative Roads after Socialism and Dirigisme, edited by Andres Soimano,
Osvaldo Sunkel, and Mario I. Blejer. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Blanchard, Oliver Jean, Kenneth A. Froot, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 1994. Introduction
to The Transition in Eastern Europe, vol. 2. Edited by Oliver Jean Blanchard,
Kenneth A. Foot, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bokros, Lajos. 1994. “Privatization and the Banking System in Hungary.” Pp.
305-20 in Privatization in the Transition Process. Recent Experiences in Eastern
Europe, edited by Laszl6 Samuely. Geneva: United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and KOPINT-DATORG.

Boltanski, Luc, and Laurent Thévenot. 1991. De la justification: Les Economies de
la grandeur. Paris: Gallimard.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1990. The Logic of Practice, translated by Richard Nice. Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Boyer, Robert. 1991. “Markets within Alternative Coordinating Mechanisms: His-
tory, Theory, and Policy in the Light of the Nineties.” Paper presented to the
Conference on the Comparative Governance of Sectors, Bigorio, Switzerland.

Breiger, Ronald L. 1995. “Social Structure and the Phenomenology of Attainment.”
Annual Review of Sociology 21:115-36.

Breiger, Ronald L., and Philippa E. Pattison. 1986. “Cumulated Social Roles: The
Duality of Persons and Their Algebras.” Social Networks 8 (3): 215-56.

Bresser Pereira, Luiz Carlos. 1993. “The Crisis of the State Approach to Latin
America.” Discussion paper no. 1., Instituto Sul-Norte, November.

Bruszt, Laszl6. 1988. “A centralizacié csapdaja és a politikai rendszer reformalternati-
vai” (The trap of centralization and the alternatives of reforming the political
system). Medvetdnc, no. 1, pp. 171-97.

Bunce, Valerie, and Maria Csanadi 1993. “Uncertainty in the Transition: Post-
Communism in Hungary.” East European Politics and Societies 7 (2): 240-75.
Burawoy, Michael, and Pavel Krotov. 1992. “The Soviet Transition from Socialism

to Capitalism: Worker Control and Economic Bargaining in the Wood Industry.”
American Sociological Review 57:16-38.
Burt, Ronald. 1992. Structural Holes. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Comisso, Ellen. 1991. “Property Rights, Liberalism, and the Transition from
‘Actually Existing’ Socialism.” East European Politics and Societies 5 (1): 162-
88.

Conrad, Michael. 1983. Adaptability. New York: Plenum Press.

Cui, Zhiyuan. 1994. “Epilogue: A Schumpeterian Perspective and Beyond.” In
China: A Reformable Socialism? edited by Yang Gan and Zhiyuan Cui. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

. In press. “Moebius-Strip Ownership and Its Prototype in Chinese Rural
Industry.” Economy and Society.

Denton, Nicholas. 1993. “Two Hungarian Banks Said to Be Technically Insolvent.”
Financial Times, May 20.

Evans, Peter. 1992. “The State as Problem and as Solution.” Pp. 139-81 in The
Politics of Economic Adjustment, edited by Stephan Haggard and Robert Kaufman.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Figyelé. 1993. Top 200: a legnagyobb vdllalkozdsok (The top 200 largest enterprises).
Figyelé, special issue.

GAbor, Istvan. 1979. “The Second (Secondary) Economy.” Acta Oeconomica 22 (3—
4): 91-311.

. 1986. “Reformok masodik gazdasag, allamszocializmus. A 80-as évek tapasz-

talatainak feljédéstani és 6sszehasonlité gazdasdgtani tanulsdgairél” (Reforms, sec-

ond economy, state socialism: Speculation on the evolutionary and comparative

economic lessons of the Hungarian eighties). Valdésdg, no. 6, pp. 32-48.

. 1994. “Modernity or a New Type of Duality? The Second Economy of To-

day.” Pp. 3-21 in The Legacy of Communism in Eastern Europe, edited by Janos

Matyds Kovacs. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books.

. 1996. “Too Many, Too Small: Small Businesses in Postsocialist Hungary.” In
Restructuring Networks: Legacies, Linkages, and Localities in Postsocialist Eastern
Europe, edited by Gernot Grabher and David Stark. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Gereffi, Gary. 1994. “The Organization of Buyer-Driven Global Commodity Chains:
How U.S. Retailers Shape Overseas Production Networks.” Pp. 95-122 in Com-
modity Chains and Global Capitalism, edited by Gary Gereffi and Miguel Kornze-
niewicz. Westport, Conn.: Praeger.

Gerlach, Michael L., and James R. Lincoln. 1992. “The Organization of Business
Networks in the United States and Japan.” Pp. 491-520 in Networks and Organiza-
tions, edited by Nitin Nohria and Robert G. Eccles. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
Business School Press.

Grabher, Gernot. 1994. In Praise of Waste: Redundancy in Regional Development.
Berlin: Edition Sigma.

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. “Economic Action, Social Structure, and Embeddedness.”
American Journal of Sociology 91:481-510.

. 1995. “Coase Revisited: Business Groups in the Modern Economy.” Indus-
trial and Corporate Change 4 (1): 93-130.

Grey, Thomas. 1980. “The Disintegration of Property.” Pp. 69-85 in Property, edited
by J. Rolland Pennock and John W. Chapman. New York: New York University
Press.

Hamilton, Gary G., and Robert C. Feenstra. 1995. “Varieties of Hierarchies and
Markets: An Introduction.” Industrial and Corporate Change 4 (1): 51-91.

Hamilton, Gary G., William Zeile, and Wan-Jin Kim. 1990. “The Network Struc-
tures of East Asian Economies.” In Capitalism in Contrasting Cultures, edited by
S. R. Clegg and S. G. Redding. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

Hannan, Michael T. 1986. “Uncertainty, Diversity, and Organizational Change.”
Pp. 73-94 in Behavioral and Social Science: Fifty Years of Discovery. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
Hart, Oliver. 1988. “Incomplete Contracts and the Theory of the Firm.” Journal of
Law, Economics and Organization 4 (1): 119-39.

Hirschman, Albert. 1958. The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press.

Hoshi, Takeo. 1994. “The Economic Role of Corporate Grouping and the Main Bank
System.” Pp. 285-309 in The Japanese Firm: The Sources of Competitive Strength,
edited by Masahiko Aoki and Ronald Dore. London: Oxford University Press.

Kim, Eun Mee. 1991. “The Industrial Organization and Growth of the Korean
Chaebol: Integrating Development and Organizational Theories.” Pp. 272-99 in
Business Networks and Economic Development in East and Southeast Asia, edited
by Gary Hamilton. Hong Kong: University of Hong Kong, Centre of Asian
Studies.

Kogut, Bruce, and Udo Zander. 1992. “Knowledge of the Firm, Combinative Capa-
bilities, and the Replication of Technology.” Organization Science 3 (3): 383-97.
Kogut, Bruce, Weijan Shan, and Gordon Walker. 1992. “The Make-or-Cooperate
Decision in the Context of an Industry Network.” Pp. 348-65 in Networks and
Organizations, edited by Nitin Nohria and Robert G. Eccles. Cambridge, Mass.:

Harvard Business School Press.

Konrad, George, and Ivan Szelényi. 1979. Intellectuals on the Road to Class Power.
New York: Harcourt Brace & Jovanovich.

Kornai, Janos. 1980. The Economics of Shortage. Amsterdam: North-Holland Pub-
lishing.

. 1992. “The Post-Socialist Transition and the State: Reflections in the Light

of Hungarian Fiscal Problems.” American Economic Review 82 (2): 1-21.

. 1993a. “The Evolution of Financial Discipline under the Postsocialist Sys-

tem.” Kyklos 46:315-36.

. 1993b. “Transitional Recession.” Discussion paper. Institute for Advanced
Study/Collegium Budapest.

Laky, Teréz. 1992. “Small and Medium-Size Enterprises in Hungary.” Report for
the European Commission. Institute for Labour Studies, Budapest.

Landau, Martin. 1969. “Redundancy, Rationality, and the Problem of Duplication
and Overlap.” Public Administration Review 29 (4): 346-58.

Latour, Bruno. 1988. The Pasteurization of France. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Lipset, Seymour Martin. 1990. “The Death of the Third Way.” National Interest,
no. 20 (Summer): 25-37.

Litwack, John. 1994. “Strategic Complementarities and Economic Transition.” Dis-
cussion paper. Institute for Advanced Study/Collegium Budapest.

Mellar, Tamas 1992. “Two Years of Privatization.” Népszabadsdg, May 22.

Morin, Edgar. 1974. “Complexity.” International Social Science Journal 26 (4):
555-82.

National Bank of Hungary. 1992. Annual Report. Budapest: National Bank of
Hungary.

Nee, Victor. 1989. “A Theory of Market Transition.” American Sociological Review
4 (5): 663-81.

. 1992. “Organizational Dynamics of Market Transition: Hybrid Forms, Prop-
erty Rights, and Mixed Economy in China.” Administrative Science Quarterly
37:1-27.

Nelson, Richard R., and Sidney G. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Eco-
nomic Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Neumann, Laszl6. 1989. “Market Relations in Intra-Enterprise Wage Bargaining?”
Acta Oeconomica 40:319-38.

Numazaki, Ichiro. 1991. “The Role of Personal Networks in the Making of Taiwan’s
Guanxigiye (Related Enterprises).” Pp. 77-93 in Business Networks and Economic
Development in East and Southeast Asia, edited by Gary Hamilton. Hong Kong:
University of Hong Kong, Centre of Asian Studies.

Oi, Jean C. 1992. “Fiscal Reform and the Economic Foundations of Local State
Corporatism in China.” World Politics 45:99-126.

Orru, Marco, Nicole Woolsey Biggart, and Gary G. Hamilton. 1991. “Organizational
Isomorphism in East Asia.” Pp. 361-89 in The New Institutionalism in Organiza-
tional Analysis, edited by Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Padgett, John F., and Christopher K. Ansell. 1993. “Robust Action and the Rise of
the Medici, 1400-1434.” American Journal of Sociology 98:1259-1319.

Pistor, Katharina, and Joel Turkewitz. 1994. “Coping with Hydra State Ownership
after Privatization: A Comparative Study of Hungary, Russia, and the Czech Re-
public.” Presented to the Conference on Corporate Governance in Central Europe
and Russia, the World Bank, December.

Rona-Tas, Akos. 1994. “The First Shall Be Last? Entrepreneurship and Communist
Cadres in the Transition from Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 100:
40-69.

Sabel, Charles. 1990. “Mdbius-Strip Organizations and Open Labor Markets: Some
Consequences of the Reintegration of Conception and Execution in a Volatile Econ-
omy.” Pp. 23-54. in Social Theory for a Changing Society, edited by Pierre Bour-
dieu and James Coleman. Boulder, Colo., and New York: Westview Press and
Russell Sage Foundation.

Sabel, Charles, and Jane E. Prokop. 1994. “Stabilization through Reorganization?
Some Preliminary Implications of Russia’s Entry into World Markets in the Age of
Discursive Quality Standards.” Conference on Corporate Governance in Central
Europe and Russia, World Bank, December.

Sabel, Charles, and David Stark. 1982. “Planning, Politics, and Shop-Floor Power:
Hidden Forms of Bargaining in Soviet-Imposed State-Socialist Societies.” Politics
and Society 11:439-75.

Sabel, Charles, and Jonathan Zeitlin. 1996. “Stories, Strategies, Structures: Rethink-
ing Historical Alternatives to Mass Production.” In Worlds of Possibility: Flexibil-
ity and Mass Production in Western Industrialization, edited by C. Sabel and J.
Zeitlin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schmitter, Philippe. 1988. “Modes of Governance of Economic Sectors.” Manuscript.
Stanford University.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1934. The Theory of Economic Development. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Sik, Endre. 1992. “From Second Economy to Informal Economy.” Journal of Public
Policy 12 (2): 153-75.

Staniszkis, Jadwiga. 1991. “‘Political Capitalism’ in Poland.” East European Politics
and Societies 5:127—-41.

. 1993. “Ontology, Context and Chance: Three Exit Routes from Commu-
nism.” Working Papers on Central and Eastern Europe, no. 31. Harvard Univer-
sity, Center for European Studies.

Stark, David. 1986. “Rethinking Internal Labor Markets: New Insights from a Com-
parative Perspective.” American Sociological Review 51:492-504.

. 1989. “Coexisting Organizational Forms in Hungary’s Emerging Mixed

Economy.” Pp. 137-68 in Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism: China

and Eastern Europe, edited by Victor Nee and David Stark. Stanford, Calif.: Stan-

ford University Press.

. 1990. “Work, Worth, and Justice.” Central and East Europe Working Paper,

no. 5. Harvard University, Center for European Studies.

. 1992. “Path Dependence and Privatization Strategies in East Central Eu-

rope.” East European Politics and Societies 6:17-51.
Stark, David, and Ldszl6 Bruszt. 1995. “Restructuring Networks in the Postsocialist
Economic Transformation.” Cornell Working Papers on Transitions from State
Socialism, no. 95.4. Cornell University, Einaudi Center for International Studies.

Stark, David, and Victor Nee. 1989. “Toward an Institutional Analysis of State
Socialism.” Pp. 1-31 in Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism: China
and Eastern Europe, edited by Victor Nee and David Stark. Stanford, Calif.: Stan-
ford University Press.

Szelényi, Ivan. 1978. “Social Inequalities in State Socialist Redistributive Econo-
mies.” Theory and Society 1—2:63—87.

. 1988. Socialist Entrepreneurs. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

. 1994. “Socialist Entrepreneurs—Revisited.” Working Paper no. 4. Univer-
sity of Michigan, International Institute.

Sziics, Jend. 1985. Les trois Europes. Paris: Harmattan.

Thévenot, Laurent. 1985. “Rules and Implements: Investment in Forms.” Social
Science Information 23 (1): 1-45.

Voszka, Eva 1991. “Homdlybél homalyba. A tulajdonosi szerkezet a nagyiparban”
(From twilight to twilight: Property changes in large industry). Térsadalmi Szemle,
no. 5, pp. 3-12.

. 1992. “Escaping from the State, Escaping to the State.” Paper presented at
the Arne Ryde Symposium on the “Transition Problem.” Rungsted, Denmark,
June.

Walder, Andrew. 1994. “Corporate Organization and Local Government Property
Rights in China.” Pp. 53-66 in Changing Political Economies: Privatization in
Post-Communist and Reforming Communist States, edited by Vedat Milor. Boulder,
Colo.: Lynne Rienner.

Webster, Leila. 1992. “Private Sector Manufacturing in Hungary: A Survey of
Firms.” Manuscript. World Bank, Industry Development Division.

White, Harrison C. 1992. Identity and Control: A Structural Theory of Social Action.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

. 1993. “Values Come in Styles, Which Mate to Change.” Pp. 63-91 in The
Origins of Values, edited by Michael Hechter, Lynn Nadel, and Richard E. Michod.
New York: Aldine de Gruyter.

World Bank. 1993. The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
