Diffuse Status Characteristics and the Spread of Status Value: A Formal Theory
Author(s): Joseph Berger and M. Hamit Fisek

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 111, No. 4 (January 2006), pp. 1038-1079
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/498633

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:44 UTC
The authors present a formal theory of the social construction of
diffuse status characteristics. The theory is formulated within the
framework of earlier work on status construction by Ridgeway and
others and uses the mathematical framework of the theory of status
characteristics and expectation states. This theory describes how an
initially nonvalued characteristic can acquire status value and gen-
eralized expectation states from its association with already estab-
lished and valued status elements. The authors derive eight theorems
from their theory that describe different conditions under which the
initially nonvalued characteristic acquires such status value. They
consider illustrative applications of the theory and some research
that is relevant to the formulation. The authors then conclude with
a discussion of the implications of their formulation for the general
understanding of status organizing processes.
are only two actors and only a single diffuse status characteristic is op-
erating, there have been extensive elaborations of the theory. These ex-
tensions enable us to deal with situations that involve multiple status
characteristics (whether they are consistently or inconsistently allocated),
situations in which actors can form status-based expectations for rewards,
and situations where actors can interact across a sequence of different
tasks with different others who may possess different status distinctions
(Berger et al. 1977; Berger et al. 1985; Berger, Fisek, and Norman 1989).’

A key concept in the theory of status characteristics and expectation
states is that of a diffuse status characteristic. The structure of a diffuse
status characteristic can be said to involve four major features: (1) a
socially significant characteristic such as gender, race, and occupational
position; (2) states of the characteristic such as male-female, white-black,
and higher-lower occupational positions, which can partition the relevant
population; (3) different status evaluations of these states relative to each
other in terms of honor, prestige, and general social worth; and (4) high
and low conceptions of the generalized capacities of the individuals who
possess these different states, where these high and low conceptions are
consistent with the status evaluation of the states. Thus gender may be
a diffuse status characteristic for a population at a given time if the
members of that population hold differential status evaluations for male
and female, with, say, males being more highly esteemed, honored, and
in general more socially valued than women, and with the members of
the population commonly assuming that men are in general superior and
more capable than women on a wide (and typically unspecified) range of
valued tasks and activities. In this article we shall be concerned with
developing a theory that describes the social construction of diffuse status
characteristics.*
The Status Construction Theory: An Overview

The theory of status construction was originally developed by Cecilia
Ridgeway to describe a process by which an initially nonvalued nominal
characteristic acquires status beliefs and becomes a status characteristic
(Ridgeway 1991). An example of a nonvalued nominal characteristic is
one used by Ridgeway and her associates in their experimental research:
the preference for Paul Klee over Wassily Kandinsky versus the preference
for Kandinsky over Klee, as artists. Briefly, Ridgeway reasoned that if
individuals who possessed the different states of a nonvalued character-
istic, V, also were discriminated by their control of resources such as high
and low levels of rewards, the differences in rewards would result in
congruent high and low differences in their power and prestige positions.
High and low assessments of the task performances of these individuals
would then correspond with their differences in superordinate and sub-
ordinate power and prestige behaviors. She further reasoned that if in-
dividuals were exposed to multiple instances of these “double dissimilar
situations” that were consistent (the same states of the characteristic, NV,
associated with same high or low level of rewards), a point could be
reached where the superior-inferior performance assessments would come
to be associated with the states of the neutral characteristic the individuals
possessed. If this occurred the states of the initially neutral characteristic,
N, would acquire status value, and through a process of diffusion (de-
scribed in some detail), would become a status characteristic for a given
population.

Ridgeway’s formulation has been further developed and her arguments
tested in a series of cumulative experiments (Ridgeway et al. 1998; Ridge-
way and Erickson 2000). In addition, her theory has been elaborated by
her and others in a set of theoretical papers (Ridgeway 1997, 2000; Webster
and Hysom 1998; Berger et al. 2002). Our theory is formulated within
the framework of this important body of research.

Our principal concern in this article is with the core process of status
construction. Following Ridgeway and others, we will separate the treat-
ment of the core process of status construction from the process that deals
with the diffusion of a constructed status characteristic through a given
population. (For relevant papers on the issue of diffusion of a constructed
status characteristic, see, in addition to Ridgeway’s original paper, Ridge-
way and Balkwell [1997] and Mark, Smith-Lovin, and Ridgeway [2000].)
(Webster and Hysom 1998) is the focus on how differentiated status beliefs
come to be attached to the states of an initially nonvalued characteristic
through a process involving the possession of differential resources. In
contrast, the focus of the approach to be developed here is on describing
how an initially nonvalued characteristic can acquire status value and
performance expectations as a result of its association with status char-
acteristics and other status elements that already have status value and
associated performance components. We also shall argue that when an
initially nonvalued characteristic, say, N, does acquire status value, it
becomes connected to generalized performance expectations. Further, as
the initially nonvalued characteristic, N, builds up status value through
associations with valued status elements, the connections between the
states of the characteristic and those of performance expectations become
stronger until they approach a maximum strength. Thus as the charac-
teristic, N, accumulates status value it becomes increasingly effective in
organizing the status behaviors of individuals until it reaches a maximum
effectiveness. But we claim that more is required for such a characteristic
N to become a status characteristic. We believe that the characteristic V
must become an object in the public domain, that it must be externalized,
and that it must become part of social reality. One way by which these
changes can be achieved is through a process of social validation. This
involves enacting, and consensually supporting, the meanings and be-
haviors implied by the status characteristic.

We summarize some of the major differences in these two approaches.
To begin with, the Ridgeway et al. (1998) formulation argues that the fact
that M(a)s and N(b)s control, say, high and low resources (e.g., rewards),
respectively, leads to N(a)s occupying higher positions than M(b)s in the
group’s interaction hierarchy. Second, it argues that the higher an indi-
vidual’s position on the group’s interaction hierarchy, the higher the eval-
uation of the performances of that individual. Third, it argues that if such
situations are repeated and consistent, a point can be reached where these
high and low performance evaluations come to be attributed to the states
of the N characteristic that an individual possesses. The key mechanism
is the group’s interaction hierarchy. It is out of the evaluation of assertive
(proactive) and deferential (reactive) performances of individuals in high
and low positions, respectively, of the group’s interaction hierarchy that
performance beliefs emerge which come to be attributed by actors to the
states of NV. On the other hand, in the formulation we present here, the
process of status creation is initiated by the association of an initially
nonvalued characteristic with already valued status elements such as ex-
isting diffuse and specific status characteristics. As a result of a spread
of status value process, the states of the characteristic acquire differential
status evaluations. Second, we argue that as the acquisition of status value
occurs, generalized performance expectations emerge that become con-
nected to the states of the initially nonvalued characteristic. Third, we
argue that once these generalized performance expectations are maximally
connected to the states of the newly evaluated characteristic, the confir-
mation of these expectations through a social validation process creates
the likelihood that this characteristic becomes a stable diffuse status char-
acteristic. The key mechanism is a process by which the status value of
associated valued status elements spreads to the states of NV, and as this
occurs, differential generalized performance expectations are generated
from the performance components of these valued status elements. The
core theoretical processes involved in these formulations are schematically
represented in figure 1.

It is to be noted that we do not conceive of these two formulations as
describing conflicting processes. However, because they involve different
core processes, they are likely to be applicable to different situations. That
is, depending upon the specific conditions and the nature of any particular
application, one or the other of these theories may be more appropriate
to employ. Assuming this to be the case, our formulation enables us to
expand the domain of problem areas to which status emergence theories
can be applied (see below on our applications).

Our task now is to develop a formal theory of the construction of status
characteristics that embodies these ideas on the acquisition of status value
by associations and on social validation processes. Below, we shall review
some of the concepts and principles from the graph version of the status
characteristics theory that we need in our work. Then, we introduce the
new concepts and assumptions that are used to describe this status con-
struction process. Next, we examine some of the consequences of our new
formulation. Finally, we briefly consider some applications of the theory
and review and assess some of the implications of this research.
sassao0id [voNa109y} w0Q—'T “Ol

“NJO “ssassod *JPAQ] TeuoKEONpo ‘uonIsod
soqis payenyeas Ayfenuarayyip om sacwe sopstaooumeo enum 30 jeuoednogo “8'9 ‘ssossod Kamp fsoan!
Aq pormboe onyea snqeys JO [2A9] (oJ J0 yam) adh pur ‘coueasyor <— _ sonstaoerEYo snyEIs MO] JO YBTY anqe, snyKIg
oy Jo uonouny e se(-)N ‘(HN <— “zaqumu jo uorjoury e se (-)N am pur (q)N ‘(@)N souofozeo Jo peaidg
Me ea “GON ‘anyea snyeys TeqUaZayzIp ponyeA-uoU Uo JayIp sI0}9V
po}euu0s ouI0seq suonE}sadxo aimboe sowo8oteo ponpea-toN|
poziyersuad mo] pue YStH . .
‘Q@N ‘@N sores uaIayIp
0} sjUsuISsasse souRULIOJIod “sgomosai Jo jonu0a “spremar ‘B'9 A100,
asamp aqe1oosse siojoe suonneder <— Jroy TIM yusistsuoo Ayoresory ~<— ‘soamosar Moy JO YtY Jo JoRUCD oo anes
IM “Aqoresory uonoeioyuT uonoeIaqUI Ss ,dnoxd uo suontsod Jiaqy pue (q)N ‘(e)N seuo8aye0 ° vate 5
Uo suontsod YIM yUa}SISHOD MO JO YSIY Ureye sIO}OY PonyeA-OU Uo Jay Ip sIN}oy
syuouIssosse souBULIoyiod
MOT JO YBIY SyeUr SIO}Y
formation in the situation (salience), how they become connected with
task and reward outcome states (burden of proof and activation of ref-
erential structures), and how the actors’ immediate situation changes with
the admission of new actors, new status distinctions, and new tasks
(sequencing).

We are concerned with representing a situation where a number of
actors are collectively oriented to solving a task or a sequence of distinct
tasks where each task has the valued outcomes of success and failure.
These outcomes, represented by 7,,, and T\_,, are points in our graph, as
are the states of a performance characteristic, C7,, and C’,, which, re-
spectively, are instrumental to the success and failure outcomes of the
group’s immediate task.

Our situation contains actors, p, 0,,0,, . . ., 0,, who possess states of
status characteristics that are either (a) initially connected to task outcomes
by relevance relations, or who possess, say, diffuse status characteristics
that (b) become connected through processes described by the status char-
acteristics or the reward expectations theories. In figure 2 we present graph
representations of two examples of these types of situations.

In the top part of figure 2, p possesses the high state, C7,), and o the
low state, C7, of a specific performance characteristic. The states of this
characteristic are instrumental to outcomes of success, T,,,, and failure,
T_,, on the group task. This is an example of a situation where the actors
are initially connected to task outcomes.

In the bottom part of figure 2, p possesses the more highly evaluated
state, D,,,, of a diffuse status characteristic, and o the less highly evaluated
state, D..,, of that characteristic. The diffuse status characteristic has be-
come salient, and high and low states of generalized expectations, I... and
T\_,, have come to connect the states of the status characteristic with the
task outcome states by the action of the burden-of-proof process.

In reading these diagrams two things should be noted: (a) oppositely
evaluated states that are possessed by the actors are separated from each
other by a dimensionality relation which carries a negative sign, and (b)
all other relations in the diagram (possession and relevance) have positive
signs.

We shall call all paths starting from an actor and connected to a task
outcome state actor paths of relevance. The length of any such path is
simply the number of relations in the path. The sign of any such path is
the product of the signs of the relations on the path times the sign of the
outcome state to which the path is connected. Thus in the top part of
figure 2, p has two positive paths of lengths 2 and 3, and o has two
negative paths of lengths 2 and 3. In the bottom part of figure 2, p has
two positive paths of lengths 4 and 5, and o has two negative relations
of lengths 4 and 5.
Paths of different lengths contribute different amounts to the expec-
tations of an actor—specifically, the longer the path connecting the actor
to an outcome state, the weaker its contribution to his performance ex-
pectations. To capture this idea the theory assumes that the strength of
a path is given by a function, /(i), of its length, i. This function is an
inverse function; that is, the longer the path, the less its strength. Paths
can take on values in the interval (0, 1). The method for computing these
values is given in appendix A.

In graphs that represent status situations in which differential rewards
are distributed, there are additional points representing high and low
reward levels which, respectively, are relevant to positively and negatively
evaluated goal objects (or rewards). Our notion of actor paths of relevance
with the concepts of length, sign, and strength of such paths that we
previously developed also apply to situations that involve differential
rewards where paths start from actors and can be connected to goal object
outcomes.

In any given situation actors may be confronted with multiple salient
status characteristics, with additional status information specific to the
actors, and with information on behaviors that have occurred in their
CONCEPTS AND ASSUMPTIONS OF STATUS VALUE THEORY

We now introduce a new type of path of relevance that we shall call a
characteristic path of relevance. A characteristic path of relevance starts
with the state of a characteristic that is connected to an actor who in turn
is connected to the states of possessed evaluated status elements, for ex-
ample, states of status characteristics or states of task abilities. Depending
upon the situation, these paths are either initially connected to task and
reward outcomes or come to be connected by the processes described in
the status characteristics or reward expectation states theory. Our im-
mediate concern is with characteristic paths of relevance that originate
with states of an initially nonvalued characteristic. Figure 3 displays a
representation of characteristic paths of relevance that start from states
of N and connect to actors possessing the discriminating states of a diffuse
status characteristic that has become relevant to task outcomes by the
burden-of-proof process.

We shall directly apply the concepts that we have previously developed
for the sign, the length, and the strength of actor paths of relevance to
characteristic paths of relevance. Thus in figure 3, for example, there are
two positive paths of lengths 5 and 6 starting from N(a) and two negative
paths of lengths 5 and 6 starting from N(b) connecting NW to the task
outcomes. There are also four positive paths of lengths 4, 5, 6, and 7
starting from N(a), and four negative paths of the same lengths starting
from M(b) connecting N to the reward outcomes. As is true with possessed
valued status elements, we assume that the states of an initially nonvalued
GO (+)

N(a) R(+)

 

 

T+——_C* (+)

 

Ti (+)

Ti(-)

 

GO(-)
teristic N, we refer to the relatively positive or negative or high-low
evaluations of states of N in terms of honor, esteem, prestige, and general
social worthiness. Let us for the moment fix on one state, say M(a), and
ask what combination of paths will increase the positive status value of
this state while simultaneously increasing the negative status value of the
contrasting state, N(b). We shall say that all such paths are paths of
positive significance and argue that paths of positive significance are paths
which
y= —-1-A-f@) - A —fn’)yl.

The aggregated status value acquired by an initially nonvalued charac-
teristic through association is given by

pevtr.

As the status value association of the initially nonvalued characteristic,
N, increases, a differential evaluation of its states emerges. As this dif-
ferential evaluation emerges, the states of high and low generalized per-
formance expectations come to be connected to the states of V in a con-
sistent manner. As previously observed, these states of generalized
expectations represent relatively greater and lesser performance capacities
on a broad and unspecified range of tasks that individuals who hold
different states of V are expected to possess given simply that they possess
these different states. We assume that these performance expectations are
generated from the performance components associated with valued status
elements such as the generalized expectations associated with diffuse
status characteristics. Thus, as the discriminating characteristic, NV, ac-
quires status value by its association with already valued status elements
in the situation, it also acquires generalized performance expectations.
Furthermore, we assume that the lines connecting the differentially eval-
uated states of V, M(+/—), to high and low states of generalized perfor-
mance expectations, I\,, and I\_,, are of variable length and inversely
related to v, the strength of the status value association of N.° Therefore,
as the value of v increases for a given N, the length of the lines connecting
its states with states of high and low generalized performance expectations
decrease. They can decrease until they approach a line of length 1. A line
of length 1, it is important to observe, is exactly the length of those lines
connecting the states of generalized expectations with the states of an
already established diffuse status characteristic (see bottom half of fig. 2).
These ideas are presented in the following assumption:

ASSUMPTION.—Evaluated states and generalized expectations.

Assume that the states of an initially nonvalued discriminating char-
acteristic N have become differentially evaluated. Then these states,
N(+/-—), will become connected by lines of length J, in a consistent manner
The effect of a in the above expression is to increase the rate at which
1 goes to one for a <1, and to decrease that rate for a>1, given y<1.
The parameter a is necessary because the length of the line connecting
N(+/-) to I'(+/—) may depend on situational factors other than associa-
tion, such as degree of task orientation or relations of sentiment among
the actors. The a parameter can account for the effect of such factors.

We assume that if the differential evaluation of the states of N has
occurred, the operation of N in a task situation is governed by the prin-
ciples of the status characteristic theory: If, in a given situation, it is a
basis of discrimination, then it will become salient. If it is salient and not
initially connected to outcome states, then it will become outcome con-
nected through the burden-of-proof process. If it operates in a situation
where established status elements exist, it will be aggregated along with
these elements in the formation of aggregated expectation states via the
principle of organized subsets (see app. A).

By the spread of status value processes we have described above, it is
possible for an initially nonvalued characteristic, V, to acquire amaximum
status value. However, we argue that more is required for such a char-
acteristic to become a diffuse status characteristic. We believe that this
newly evaluated characteristic, NV, and its behavioral implications must
be established as an object in the public domain, that it must be exter-
nalized through the behavior of others, and that it must be defined as
being real through a demonstration of social consensus. One of the ways
(but surely not the only one) by which this can occur is through a process
of social validation (Berger et al. 2002). Given, for example, that an actor
in the group behaves in accord with the performance expectations of the
newly evaluated characteristic, V, and that this behavior is supported or
affirmed by others, we say that the characteristic, N, has been socially
validated. An actor is said to behave in accord with the performance
expectations of the characteristic if she or he behaves in a proactive and
assertive manner when possessing the positively evaluated state of the
characteristic, and in a reactive and deferential manner when possessing
the negatively evaluated state of the characteristic. There are at least
three important consequences of the social validation process. The vali-
dation process confirms the performance expectations of the newly eval-
uated characteristic, NV; it translates these performance expectations into
publicly observable behaviors that define the role of the actor, the reactor,
and the bystanding other; and it demonstrates that there is a consensus
on the existence of the newly evaluated characteristic within the imme-
diate group.

Validation may be strong (explicit) or weak (implicit). The behavior of
one actor is strongly validated by a second if the second actor’s behavior
is similar to, supportive of, or overtly confirms that of the first. The
behavior of one actor is weakly validated by a second if the second does
not engage in behavior that is inconsistent or contradicts that of the first.
We shall say that the behavior of an actor is validated by a specific other
if the specific other strongly validates the actor’s behavior while the re-
maining members of the group (if any) weakly validate that behavior.’

We now argue that if an actor in a group acts in accord with the
performance expectations of a characteristic, NV, that has acquired a max-
imum status value association, and if that behavior is socially validated
by a specific other, the probability exists that this characteristic becomes
a diffuse status characteristic for the individuals involved. In addition,
validation by multiple specific others will increase that probability. These
ideas are stated in the following assumption:

ASSUMPTION.—Construction of a diffuse status characteristic.

Given a characteristic, N, whose status value association, v, comes
within epsilon of one. Assume an actor in the group behaves in accord
with the performance expectations of this characteristic. If the actor’s
behavior is strongly validated by a specific other, then there is a probability
that this characteristic becomes a diffuse status characteristic for the actors
involved. The greater the number of specific others validating the actor’s
behavior, the greater this probability.

Given that a characteristic V has become a diffuse status characteristic
for a given population to which it is applicable in a given situation, what
factors can account for its stability? We believe that there are at least
three factors that are extremely important: the status organizing process,
the reverse process, and the maintenance of the generating valued set.

Status organizing process.—If N has become a diffuse status charac-
teristic, the core status characteristics and expectation states theory de-
scribes it impact on behavior. According to that theory, if MW becomes
salient it will be used in determining superordinate and subordinate power
and prestige positions that actors come to occupy in the group. These
positions in turn are expected to be consistent with actors’ status states
on JN. We can also expect to find that the evaluations of actors’ perfor-
mances in a given situation will be based on their power and prestige
positions. If this is so, these evaluations will tend to be consistent with
the generalized performance expectations embodied in N and therefore
will operate to maintain W as a diffuse status characteristic (Ridgeway
1991; Berger et al. 2002).

Reverse process.—Aside from the outcome of a normal status organizing
process as described above, the stability of N as a diffuse status char-
acteristic can be also enhanced in situations where differential rewards
are allocated. Theoretical arguments claim (Berger et al. 1985), and pre-
vious research has demonstrated (Cook 1975; Harrod 1980; Bierhoff,
Buck, and Klein 1986; Stewart and Moore 1992), that by what is referred
to as the “reverse process” (Berger, Zelditch et al. 1972), the allocation of
high and low rewards will generate, respectively, high and low perfor-
mance expectations. Thus in situations where high and low rewards are
allocated consistent with the high and low evaluated states of N, a fairly
common occurrence, the allocation of such rewards is expected to con-
tribute to the stability of N as a status characteristic.

Maintenance of valued set.—In addition to the normal operation of the
status organizing process and the operation of the reverse process, we
argue that the maintenance of the valued set that is involved in the
generation of the status value of N is important to maintaining the stability
of N as a status characteristic. If the elements of the set are modified or
eliminated and are not replaced by an equivalent set of elements, then
the status value of WN will be accordingly modified, as will also the strength
of its association with the states of generalized performance expectations.
Furthermore, we suggest that there may be an important difference in
the relation of these three factors to the stability of V. While the normal
status organizing process and the reverse process may operate as sufficient
conditions for the stability of NV, the maintenance of the valued set from
which the status evaluation of NV is generated may operate as a necessary
condition for the stability of V as a diffuse status characteristic.
characteristic, V, after it has acquired some status value in different spe-
cific status situations.

Our concern in this section is with how different types of status con-
ditions affect the process by which an initially nonvalued discriminating
characteristic acquires status value. There is no attempt, of course, to be
exhaustive of all that can be said on the basis of our formulation. Rather,
we concentrate on results that we believe are substantively informative
and that are important for empirical tests.

For the results that follow we assume that there are a number of actors,
P, 0,, 0,, . . -) 0,, Who are interacting in a collective and valued task
situation, who accept the evaluations and expectations embodied in status
elements (diffuse and specific status characteristic and goal objects) that
become salient, and who assume (unless and until they learn otherwise)
that there is consensus in the group on these evaluations and expectations.
Further, in some situations, the allocation of differential rewards may be
part of the initial working conditions. In such situations, in addition to
forming task expectations, our theory also describes the processes by
which actors form reward expectations (see app. A). A situation in which
these conditions obtain is designated as situation S.

Before proceeding we introduce some terms that we use in formulating
and proving these assertions. A discriminating status element is a status
characteristic, diffuse or specific, and/or a goal object whose differentially
evaluated states are possessed by interactants in the given situation S. A
set of status elements is consistently assigned in the situation if, in the
graph representing S, all paths joining interactants with outcome states
that contain the status elements in the set have the same sign. A status
element is normal, if in the graph representing S, there is no actor for
whom there are both positive and negative paths to outcome states con-
taining this element. We shall assume in what follows that all status
elements that are being considered are normal.

For convenience in exposition we shall group our results into four sets:
basic conditions of status value acquisition, expectation advantages and
status value acquisition, status structures and status value acquisition,
and task and reward outcomes and status value acquisition. For proofs
of these results, see appendix B.
possess different states of an initially nonvalued characteristic. In addition,
p and o possess the oppositely evaluated states of any number of discrim-
inating status elements, and they perform a task together. Further, one
of these actors, p or o, has a task and/or reward expectation advantage
over the other. We predict that under such conditions the initially non-
valued characteristic will acquire status value. For example, a situation
in which p possesses the N(a) state of N (say, prefers Klee over Kandinsky)
and o the N(b) state (preferring Kandinsky over Klee), and in which p is
a black male professional and o is a white female secretary (and race,
gender, and occupation are equally weighted), comes within our general
conditions. In this situation p will have a task expectation advantage over
o, and we predict that the initially nonvalued states of characteristic V
will acquire status value. In theorem 1, we state this basic result.

THEOREM 1.—Basic conditions of status value acquisition.

Assume that p and o are interacting in situation S such that: (1) p and
o possess the different states of a nonvalued characteristic, N(a) and N(b),
respectively; (2) p and o are discriminated by normal status elements; and
(3) p has a task and/or reward expectation advantage over 0; then the
initially nonvalued characteristic, N, will acquire status value.

In the following theorems we assume that the actors are in an S situation
and that the basic conditions of value acquisition as defined by theorem
1 are given.
Status Structures and Acquisition of Status Value

The configuration of the status structure that exists in a given situation
has a major impact on the process by which a nonvalued characteristic
acquires status valuation. Given the basic conditions for the acquisition
of status value, the more monolithic the status structure that exists in a
situation at a given time, the greater the acquisition of status value. A
monolithic structure is one in which the status distinctions are consistent,
are highly relevant to task and goal object outcomes, are comprehensive,
and reflect a high level of uniformity. We consider each of these factors
separately.

Consistency.—Status structures may differ in the degree of consistency
that exists among the different status distinctions in the structure. In a
fully consistent structure all actors possess the same status level on each
of the different status distinctions that are salient in the situation. In an
inconsistent structure actors may hold high positions on some status char-
acteristic while holding low positions on other characteristics. The im-
portant consideration is that in consistent structures, status characteristics
are providing actors with mutually supporting information on how to
evaluate and what to expect of the different members in the group. In
inconsistent structures status characteristics are providing actors with
contradictory information on how to evaluate and what to expect from
the different members of the group. Therefore, given our basic conditions
for the acquisition of status value, we would expect to find that the greater
the degree of status consistency of a structure the greater the acquisition
of status value by an initially nonvalued characteristic. What does this
mean in terms of our basic example? If in our example case, the male
professional had been white and the female secretary had been black, the
discriminating characteristics would have been more consistent, and his
expectation advantage over her would have been greater together with
the status value association of artist preference. Our general result on the
effect of consistency is given in theorem 3.

THEOREM 3.—Consistency of status elements and status value
acquisition.

Assume that p and o are discriminated by a fixed number of status
elements equally relevant to task outcomes. The greater the consistency
of these status elements, the greater the status value acquired by the
nonvalued characteristic, N.

Relevance.—Status characteristics in status structures may differ in
their relevance to the group’s goal states. In some status structures, ex-
isting status distinctions are closely tied to the group’s task goals. In other
structures, status distinctions have either no initial connection or have an
extended connection to these goals. The degree of relevance of a status
characteristic depends on the nature of the characteristic, the nature of
the task, and the actors’ beliefs about the characteristic. In this context,
consider the common belief in our culture that associates mechanical
ability and gender. As a consequence of this belief, gender typically is a
directly relevant status characteristic in a situation involving a mechanical
task. Given other situations, gender may have no initial connection to the
task goal, but may become connected to the task through the burden-of-
proof process (see fig. 3).

What is important here is the theoretical argument that the greater the
degree of relevance of a status characteristic to a task goal, the stronger
are the expectations provided by that characteristic which connects an
actor to the task. As a consequence, what we expect to find, given our
basic conditions for the acquisition of status value, is that differences in
the relevancies between any two otherwise similar status structures will
produce corresponding differences in the processes by which the non-
valued characteristic N acquires status value. What does this mean in
terms of our gender example? If a male and female are discriminated by
artist preferences, and they are working on a mechanical task, his ex-
pectation advantage over her will be greater than it would be if they are
working on a task in which gender is not initially connected to the task.
As a consequence, the status value acquired by type of artist preference
will be greater in the first situation as compared to the second situation.
Our general arguments concerning the effect of relevance are stated in
theorem 4.

THEOREM 4.—The relevance of status elements and status value
acquisition.

Assume that p and o are consistently discriminated by a fixed number
of status elements that are equally relevant to task outcomes. The greater
the relevance of the status elements to task outcomes, the greater the
status value acquired by the nonvalued characteristic, N.

Comprehensiveness.—Given a status structure consisting of a set of
discriminating and consistently allocated status characteristics, the intro-
duction of an additional discriminating characteristic consistent with the
initial set increases the comprehensiveness of the structure. Each addi-
tional status characteristic reinforces and increases the impact of the initial
set of characteristics on the status behavior in the situation. Therefore,
given our basic conditions for the acquisition of status value, we would
expect to find that the more comprehensive the status structure, the greater
the acquisition of status value for an initially nonvalued characteristic.
To see what this means consider the consistent version of our basic ex-
ample, where / and o are discriminated on artist preferences, and p is a
white male professional and o is a black female secretary. If we now learn
that p is a good athlete and o is a poor athlete, the number of status
elements discriminating them will be increased. The result is that p’s
expectation advantage over o will be increased as will the status value
acquired by type of artist preferences.

The general process we have been describing is subject to an attenuation
effect. The more status characteristics in the initial set, the less the in-
cremental change that results with each additional characteristic. These
ideas are given in theorem 5.

THEOREM 5.—The number of status elements and status value
acquisition.

Assume that p and o are consistently discriminated by a number of
status elements equally relevant to the task outcomes. The greater the
number of these status elements, the greater the status value acquired by
the nonvalued characteristic, N. However, the marginal contribution of
each element will be less as the number of characteristics increases.

Uniformity—The number of actors in a group who possess oppositely
defined states of an initially nonvalued characteristic and discriminating
states of valued status elements can affect the acquisition of status value.
This can come about in the following way. Given that actors who possess
the different states of an initially nonvalued characteristic also possess a
fixed number of consistent discriminating status characteristics, then the
greater the number of actors involved in the situation, the greater the
status value association of the characteristic NV. In the simplest case, if
actors who are discriminated on the possession of V(a) and M(b) are uni-
formly discriminated on gender, that is, all males possess one state of NV
and all females the second state of N, then the greater the number of
males and females involved, the greater the status value acquisition of
N. These ideas are stated in theorem 6.

THEOREM 6.—Number of actors and status value acquisition.

Assume that p and o, through 0, are actors such that:

1. p and o, through o, (k <n) possess the N(a) state of a nonvalued
characteristic NV, and o,,, through o,, possess the M(b) state;

2. pando, through 0, and o,,, through o,, are consistently discriminated
by a fixed number of status elements of equal relevance; and

3. p and o, through o, have task and/or reward expectation advantages
over o,,, through o,.

The greater the number, 7, actors in this situation, the greater the status
value acquired by the nonvalued characteristic, NV.
We are particularly concerned with how the assignment of task success
or task failure and/or the allocation of differentially evaluated goal objects
(or rewards) affect the status value acquisition process. The status char-
acteristics theory is formulated to deal with such task sequence situations
(Berger et al. 1989).

Before turning to these theorems we must first attend to some prelim-
inary matters. It can be shown that when sequences of successive tasks
occur, expectations that are formed on an initial task can transfer to the
succeeding task (Markovsky et al. 1984; Berger et al. 1989). It can also
be shown that the status value acquired by an initially nonvalued dis-
criminating characteristic can increase until it reaches a stable limiting
value simply as a result of the fact that actors are working on successive
tasks. In our next two theorems we restrict ourselves to situations in which
the discriminating status elements possessed by the actors are not initially
connected to outcome states, and where successive tasks are not disso-
ciated or inversely related to each other.*

There are many factors that can affect actors’ expectations when they
move through a successive sequence of tasks. These include the intro-
duction of new tasks, the introduction of new information on the skills
and abilities of actors already in the situation, and the introduction of
new actors with the new salient status distinctions that they might possess.
Among the factors that have a major impact on actors’ expectations are
evaluations of their overall performances in terms of task success and
task failure. Such evaluations, which may or may not be based on explicit
performance standards, may come from external authorities, or they may
be the result of consensual assessments occurring within the group. Be
that as it may, we assume that these evaluations involve the assignment
of task success and task failure outcome states to specific actors. Given
our basic conditions for the acquisition of status value, such assignments,
occurring at the end of one task episode and when consistent, will increase
the status value acquired by the nonvalued discriminating characteristic
on the succeeding task. An assignment is consistent if the actor with the
expectation advantage is assigned task success, and that actor with the
disadvantage is assigned task failure. These ideas are given in the fol-
lowing theorem.

THEOREM 7.—Success/failure and status value acquisition.

Assume that (1) the status elements discriminating p and o are not
initially task relevant, and (2) that p and o interact on two successive
tasks that are not dissociated or inversely related to each other. If task
outcomes are consistently attained by p and o on the first task, then the
status value acquired by the nonvalued characteristic, NV, will increase on
the second task.

In what follows, the antecedent conditions stated in 1 and 2 in this
theorem are referred to as the basic conditions of transfer of expectations.

In situations where differential rewards are to be distributed, actors
form expectations for goal objects (or rewards). In such situations, as is
true in the case of the overall evaluations of performances, the allocation
of goal objects may have a major effect in changing actors’ expectations
as they move from one task setting to another. Again we are interested
in situations where the allocation, which involves differentially valued
goal objects, occurs at the end of one task episode, and where our basic
conditions for the acquisition of status value obtain. Given such condi-
tions, we argue that if differentially valued goal objects are allocated to
specific actors in a consistent manner on a given task, then the status
value of the initially nonvalued discriminating characteristic possessed by
these actors will increase on their succeeding task. Goal objects are con-
sistently allocated if the actor with the expectation advantage receives
the more highly valued goal object, and the one with the expectation
disadvantage receives the less highly valued goal object. Thus, if the white
male professional who prefers Klee works with the black female secretary
who prefers Kandinsky on a “contrast sensitivity” task, at the end of which
the male receives the highly valued reward while the female receives the
less valued reward, and they start to work together on a “meaning insight”
task, the status value association of artist preference will increase sub-
stantially. The general ideas are presented in our final theorem.

THEOREM 8.—Allocation of rewards and status value acquisition.

Assume that the basic conditions of transfer of expectations obtain. If
goal objects are consistently allocated to p and o on the first task, then
the status value acquired by the nonvalued characteristic, NV, will increase
on the second task.

As a set, all of the theorems presented above describe social conditions
under which there is greater and lesser likelihood that a diffuse status
characteristic will be created. Since these results are new in the study of
status creation processes, the task ahead will be to subject them to em-
pirical tests.
APPLICATIONS

We can apply our theory to understanding some of the important and
puzzling issues connected with the maintenance of established status char-
acteristics. For example, since a characteristic can acquire status value
and generalized expectations as a result of its association with a set of
discriminating valued status elements, what do we expect to occur if the
initial set of valued status elements no longer exists? Our theory predicts
that in this case, the differences in the status evaluations of states of the
characteristic will be reduced (if not disappear) as will be the differences
in performance expectations associated with these states. If this is the
case, how can we explain the situation where the initial set of valued and
discriminating status elements is no longer associated with the states of
a characteristic, but where these states are still differentially valued, and
expectations of superiority and inferiority continue to exist? It seems rea-
sonable to suggest that under these circumstances the initial set of valued
status elements has been replaced by an equivalent set of discriminating
and valued status elements. Thus, for example, there is little question that
the association of the differentially valued states of freeman and slave
with those of whites and blacks played a fundamental role in the emer-
gence of race as a diffuse status characteristic in colonial American society
(Durant and Knottnerus 1999; Ellis 2000; Wiencek 2003). But while the
freeman-slave distinction no longer exists and therefore is no longer as-
sociated with the states of race, race continues to operate as a diffuse
status characteristic. Our theory leads us to believe that an equivalency
set probably exists. In all likelihood, among the most important elements
in this set are different levels of educational attainment and different
levels of occupational positions, with those associated with whites being
generally more highly evaluated and more highly rewarded than those
associated with blacks. It is reasonable to hypothesize that race may
continue to be a diffuse status characteristic in our society as long as such
status elements remain associated with its states. Thus our formulation
identifies the importance of equivalency sets. It highlights the need to
identify their elements and determine their specific role in maintaining
the status evaluations and expectations of superiority and inferiority that
continue to be associated with such established status characteristics as
gender, race, and ethnic distinctions in our society.

Our theory may be useful in understanding some of the consequences
of mass migration movements for intergroup relations. Assume that an
immigrant group moves into a particular country and that the related
social categories of “native population” group to “immigrant X” group
come into existence.’ As has been true of most such groups in the south
to north and east to west migrations into Europe since World War I, the
members of such an immigrant group may occupy lower occupational
positions, earn considerably less, and possess lower educational levels than
is generally true of individuals in the native population (Castles and Ko-
sack 1985). Given these conditions, we expect the spread of status values
to the social categories of immigrant X and native population, with the
evaluations of the former tending to be negative while those of the latter
tend to be relatively positive. Simultaneous with this process, according
to our theory, high and low generalized performance expectations will
become strongly connected, respectively, to the native population state
and the immigrant X state. It is also important to note in describing these
processes that the nature and extent of cultural, religious, and physical
differences that exist between the native population and the immigrant
group can play a crucial role in their outcome. Be that as it may, out of
these conditions and the status value processes we have described, a
diffuse status characteristic can be created that then gives rise to the
problems of racism, which are manifested in prejudicial attitudes, dis-
crimination, and political action (Pettigrew 1998).

In the situation described above, in-group/out-group biases, from the
standpoint of the native population, are operating congruently with spread
of status value processes in defining the immigrant X group. But assume
the existence of an immigrant group Y, such as Chinese immigrants in
Malaysia, whose members in general occupy or come to attain a highly
advantaged position in the economic structure of the society (in terms of
occupations, earnings, and education) relative to the indigenous popula-
tion (Sowell 1996).'° In this case the differential evaluations based on
spread of status value processes are working in opposition to those based
on in-group/out-group biases. We would expect to find positive evaluations
of this group by the native population as a result of status value processes
as well as negative reactions stemming from the fact that they are an out-
group, and from the fact that the native population is in a socially dis-
advantaged position. However, since status value processes and in-group/
out-group biases are operating congruently from the standpoint of
immigrant group Y, we expect them to form relatively strong negative
evaluations of the status worth of the native population. If we consider
in this context, for example, the case of Chinese immigrants and Malays,
we find that reports on the conceptions of these groups by each other, in
general, have been consistent with these theoretical expectations (Vreeland
et al. 1977)."' More generally, our theory may enable us to understand the
processes and the conditions under which native population—immigrant
group distinctions are transformed into diffuse status distinctions. In fact,
this may be the principal social setting out of which ascriptive diffuse
status characteristics are currently being created.

Nothing in our conception of a diffuse status characteristic requires
that it be applicable to the population of an entire society as in the case
of such status categories as race, gender, and age. The emergence and
breakdown of such encompassing diffuse status characteristics may rep-
resent socially important but unusual events. However, the emergence,
modification, and even breakdown of status categories that are applicable
to more restricted contexts may in fact be much more common events.

The spread of status value theory may be applied to account for the
development of status characteristics (including informal ones) within or-
ganizational and institutional contexts. It may be used, for example, to
account for the emergence in universities of status categories that are
based on students’ different fields of study. Thus, for example, the dif-
ferences in the status evaluations and generalized performance expecta-
tions embodied in such categories as “techies” and “fuzzies” can be ex-
plained by the association of different fields of study with occupations
which in our society differ markedly in prestige and rewards. Changes
in this association between fields of study and occupations that differ in
social prestige and rewards should produce changes in the evaluation of
these student status categories.

This theory may also be used to account for differences in the status
evaluations accorded to different regional settings. Thus, for example, the
relatively high or low status evaluations accorded to different residential
areas may be accounted for by the associated differences in these areas
of residents who differ on educational or ethnic or racial status charac-
teristics. From this standpoint, changes in the association of a residential
area and the racial or ethnic or occupational composition of its residents
can explain both the gains and losses in status that are so often found to
occur in different residential areas.
The spread of status value theory can also be used to describe the
process by which the states of an initially nonvalued social object can
become a goal object, that is, an exchange object with states that embody
different levels of social worth. Shane Thye, in an important set of ex-
periments (2000), has shown how poker chips of different colors can be
made to acquire different levels of status value. In Thye’s experiments,
different-colored poker chips are associated with the differentially eval-
uated states of diffuse and specific status characteristics, and by a spread
of status value process, high and low evaluations are transferred from
the status characteristics to these objects. Thye then shows that these
different-colored poker chips are treated as having greater or lesser
amounts of exchange value among actors who are interacting on a set of
negotiating tasks in a network exchange situation (Thye 2000). The theory
we have presented here can be applied to give a general account of this
spread of status value process. In addition, our theory predicts that actors
who possess the different states of this goal object (the different-colored
poker chips) will also differ, in a status-consistent manner, in the gener-
alized performance expectations that they hold. Recent work by Thye
(2003) and Thye et al. (2005), in which they introduce the notion of per-
formance expectations to predict an actor’s negotiating behavior, in fact,
provides support for this theoretical derivation from our formulation.
Finally we observe that by this application, the spread of status value
theory provides a theoretical bridge for two programs of research that up
to now have been pursued along independent lines: research on the social
construction of status characteristics and research on the construction of
status-valued social objects.
Second, our theory argues that when the discriminating characteristic
acquires status value, states of generalized performance expectations come
to be connected to the states of the discriminating characteristic in a
consistent manner. Further, as the status value acquired by the discrim-
inating characteristic approaches a maximum value, the connections of
states of generalized performance expectations to states of the discrimi-
nating characteristic approach a maximum strength.

Third, given that the status value acquired by the discriminating char-
acteristic has attained maximum value, then if the performance expec-
tations of the characteristic are socially validated, the probability exists
that the characteristic will become a diffuse status characteristic. By social
validation, the behavioral meaning of the characteristic is confirmed and
is shown to be a consensually accepted object of social reality.

We have also presented a set of theorems that are theoretical conse-
quences of our formulation. These describe different types of conditions
that affect the status acquisition process. Among the most important of
these are conditions that describe the effects of different types of status
structures and the effects of task success and failure, as well as the al-
location of goal objects (rewards) on the acquisition process."

Our assumptions and theorems allow us to construct empirical tests of
the many consequences of our formulation. Further, since a constructed
diffuse status characteristic, as conceptualized in this theory, has the same
properties as a diffuse status characteristic as originally conceptualized
in the core status characteristics theory (Berger et al. 1977), this also
enables us to use the principles and consequences of the core theory and
its theoretical extensions to construct rigorous empirical tests of the spread
of status value formulation."*

Finally, as we have previously observed, we make no claim that there
is a unique process that can explain the construction of status categories.
We believe that a number of different processes such as that represented
by Ridgeway’s interaction-hierarchy approach or that represented by the
spread of status value approach (or still other approaches involving gen-
eral processes), singly or in combination, may be necessary to account for
the emergence of status categories in different types of situations. Fur-
thermore, we recognize that historically particular events may play im-
portant roles in the shaping of particular status distinctions. Nevertheless
we do believe that if we can understand theoretically the general social
processes by which status characteristics are constructed, we may also
understand how such characteristics, with their invidious beliefs and
status evaluations, can be modified and fundamentally changed. We think
this is a theoretical challenge to which it is worth responding.
ASSUMPTION.—Sequence of structure completion.

A given structure will be developed for the interactants through the
processes of salience and burden of proof. If a noninteractant later be-
comes an interactant, or a new actor enters the situation, a new task is
introduced, a new behavior interchange pattern comes into existence, or
new imputations of status characteristics are made, then the structure
will be further developed through the operation of the same processes.
For any actor, those parts of the actor’s structure previously completed
will remain while the actor is in the given situation.

ASSUMPTION.—Formation of aggregated expectation states.

Given that an actor x is connected to states of an outcome a(+) (task
or reward) by sets of positive paths of strengthsf(z), . . .,f(m) and negative
paths of strengths f(i’), . . ., f('). These paths will first be combined
within like-signed subsets to yield a positive path value, e’, and a neg-
ative path value, e“”, via the following function:

x
in the second task, then relevance relations will be established in a con-
sistent manner between the outcome states of the two tasks.

Figure 3 gives the situational graph for a hypothetical situation—a male
Klee fan and a female Kandinsky fan are writing a scenario together for
a television advertising clip, and rewards are to be given for task per-
formance. We now want to describe how this situational graph is deter-
mined by our formulation. First, any situational graph starts out with a
minimal initial structure. The minimal structure consists of one point for
each actor (at least two of them), and a task outcome structure which
consists of the task outcome states, 7(+) and 7(—), standing for task
success and failure, respectively, and the states of the instrumental char-
acteristic (i.e., the ability necessary to perform the task), C*(+) and
C*(-), standing for high and low ability states, respectively. The states of
the instrumental characteristic are relevant to the similarly signed states
of task outcomes. If rewards are to be given in the situation, the initial
graph also includes the reward outcome structure which consists of the
reward outcome states, GO(+) and GO(-—), standing for the more valued
and less valued rewards, respectively, and the states of “reward level” (an
abstract conception of high and low rewards), R(+) and R(—), standing
for high and low rewards, respectively. The states of reward levels are
relevant to similarly signed states of reward outcomes. We also assume
that in any situation where rewards are allocated, the “ability referential
structure” will be automatically salient, so that states of the instrumental
characteristic will be relevant to the similarly signed states of reward
level. All the elements of this initial structure can be seen in figure 3.

Given the initial structure, the states of the diffuse status characteristic,
gender, D(+) and D(-—), standing for male and female, respectively, and
the states of the nonvalued characteristic, type of instrument, N(a) and
N(b), standing for Klee preference and Kandinsky preference, respectively,
became salient through the action of the salience process because they
discriminate the actors. The actors are connected to these states by pos-
session lines. Since gender is not task relevant, the burden-of-proof process
comes into play, the generalized expectations associated with gender are
activated, and burden-of-proof paths are established, connecting the ac-
tors to the task outcomes. Furthermore, we assume that gender is refer-
entially connected to reward levels, and therefore, a categorical referential
structure for gender will become salient, and the states of D will be
relevant to reward levels. The resulting situational graph is given in figure
3.

We now need to determine the paths connecting the actors to the out-
come states in order to determine their expectations according to the
formation of aggregated expectations assumption. We first look at task
expectations and see that all paths connecting p to task outcome states,
T(+), are positive. We see that p is task connected with two paths of
lengths 4 and 5 going through D and C™% states, and two other paths of
the same lengths going through D and R states, so that

ee =1-[1— fy — AS) — AAI — AS).

We need actual numerical values for the strengths of paths of different
lengths to compute the actual expectation value. Fisek, Norman, and
Nelson-Kilger (1992) have shown that the function giving these values
has a specific form, and the parameters of the form can be determined
by making theoretical assumptions about path lengths. We use the func-
tion proposed by them:
‘To compute the status value association of N(x), we need to note several
points. The first is that all paths connecting N(x) to the outcome states
(both task and reward) are of positive significance; that is, all paths con-
necting M(a) to outcome states are positive, and all paths connecting N(b)
to the outcome states are negative. Therefore all paths will be combined
together according to our combining function. The second thing to note
is that each path connecting an actor to an outcome state constitutes a
path connecting N(x) to an outcome state of one greater length.

Thus there were two paths of length 4 and two paths of length 5
connecting p to 7(+); they constitute two paths of length 5 and two paths
of length 6 connecting M(x) to T(+). Since o was task connected by paths
of the same lengths that were of negative sign for task expectations, but
are of positive significance for status value association, we have four paths
of length 5 and four paths of length 6 connecting M(x) to task outcomes.
By the same reasoning there are two paths of length 4 and two paths of
length 5, and two paths of length 6 (the paths of length 6 connecting
actors to reward outcomes drop out as they become paths of length 7)
connecting N(x) to GO(+)." In total there are six paths of length 5 and
six paths of length 6 contributing to the status value association of V(x),
Vy:
en

Fic. Al.—Male with preference for Klee and female with preference for Kandinsky, after
the scenario task, work on a set of cartoons to be used in advertising a different product.
Rewards to be given on completion of the task.

The new part of the structure due to the current formulation is the
connection of M(x) to the second task because it has acquired status value
on the first task. The evaluated states and generalized expectations as-
sumption states that when evaluated states are salient, then generalized
expectations will become salient and task connect the evaluated states.
However the line connecting the evaluated states to the generalized-
expectation states will not be a standard length-1 line, but a variable-
length line, depending on the status value association of N(x). These var-
iable-length lines are represented by dashed lines in the graph. The length
of the line is given by:
APPENDIX B
The Proofs of the Theorems

Below, we will first define a few terms. Then, we will state a basic property
of the combining function to facilitate the presentations of the proofs of
the theorems.

A status element is normal in situation S, if in the graph representing
S, there is no actor for whom there are both positive and negative paths
to outcome states containing this element. We shall assume in what follows
that all status elements that are being considered are normal.

A t-path is a path connecting an actor or the state of a nonvalued
characteristic to a task outcome state; similarly, an 1-path is a path con-
necting an actor or the state of a nonvalued characteristic to a reward
outcome state.

An extension of a set of paths is the set of paths obtained by adding
an equal number of lines to each path in the set; in particular, a first-
order extension is an extension obtained by adding one line to each path.
We use the convention that if e is the combined strength of a set of paths,
then e’ is the combined strength of the first-order extension of that set of
paths.

The combining function has the property of preserving order. The sim-
plest example of order preservation is that if two paths are each combined
with a third path of the same length, the combined paths will have the
same order of strength as the two original paths. A more important in-
stance of this property is that given two sets of paths of differing combined
strengths, then the combined strengths of the same-order extension of
each will also have the same order of strength.

Proof of theorem 1.—We need to show that the status value association,
pv, of N is nonzero. That is,

vy = (vy U-¥%,) —(% U-H, ) > 0.

For the components of v, the subscripts indicate the state of the non-
valued characteristic, and the superscripts the sign of the paths. Thus,
y* is the combined strength of the positive paths linking N(a) to the
outcome states. Each component will have both t-paths and r-paths; how-
ever, since normal status elements are hypothesized, we know that the
two types of paths will be consistent. Thus it will be sufficient to show
that v is nonzero for one type of path; the other type will only increase
the magnitude of y. Let us consider ¢-paths and use »‘ to stand for the
status value association due only to ¢-paths. We can now write the ex-
pression for v' as follows:

t

y= (en Ue) = (CMOU =e"),

Because discriminating status elements are hypothesized

+) _ _ot-) +) _ _ t+)
en? = —e andes? = —es”,
by the order-preservation principle
M+) — _pit(-) t+) — _ pit(-)
en”? = —ee andes? = -el.

We can rewrite v’ as follows:

= ( )
y= (e" YU =e) = (eG elt),

Since the expectation advantage of p over o is hypothesized as positive,

u+)
0)

+)
ey >e

and by the order-preservation principle

i+)
0)

m+)
ey > e

we can conclude that the status value association is greater than zero.

Proof of theorem 2.—Since task and reward expectations are consistent,
as in the case of the first theorem, we need only show that the theorem
is valid for task expectations. Further, we need only show that the theorem
is valid for increasing expectation advantage; the decreasing case will
follow by symmetry. Let us denote the original expectations by the sub-
script “1” and the expectations after new status elements have become
salient by the subscript “2.” We want to show that if

t t
€p—01 S &p—o2»
We can now see that this inequality can be obtained by combining each
component of the final form of the antecedent by itself. Since that op-
eration maintains order, we have obtained the desired result.

Proof of theorem 3.—Let us say that p and o are discriminated by n
equally relevant status elements, and that p possesses the negative states
of k of these elements. Then we can say that the larger k, the greater the
inconsistency; note, however, that since p has expectation advantages over
o,k <n/2. Clearly, maximum consistency is achieved when k = 0, so that
the smaller k, the greater the consistency. Therefore, we want to show
that the smaller the k, the greater the status value association,
y=1-(-f)",

when # and 0 are consistently discriminated by status elements of equal
relevance, and f is the strength of connection of each element. Obviously,
the larger f, the larger v, which is the assertion of the theorem.

Proof of theorem 5.—Each element will connect f, and therefore (a),
to the outcome states by a number of positive paths, the number being
dependent on whether a reward structure is salient or not, and if the
reward structure is salient, which referential structures are salient. The
length of the paths will also differ, but they will be the same for each
characteristic since equal task relevance is hypothesized. Let us say that
the positive paths connecting (a) to the outcome states positively have
a combined strength, f, for each characteristic. There will be no negative
paths connecting N(a) to the task outcomes. By symmetry, N(b) will be
negatively task connected by a set of paths of joint strength —f for each
characteristic, and there will be no positive paths connecting N(b) to the
task outcomes.

The expression for status value association,
y,—%, = A -f)"- a —f)’)
y= (1-fy"—-fy i -a—-f)')
a-fy"h-a-fyl>a-fy"a fy - af"),
1>(1—-ff.

This proves the second part of the theorem.

Proof of theorem 6.—Each one of the actors p through o, will connect
N(a) to the outcome states by positive paths, the number of paths will
depend on the number of discriminating elements, and the lengths of the
paths will depend on the relevance of the elements; however, they will
be the same for each actor. Let us denote the combined strength of the
paths due to one actor by f. Similarly, each one of the actors o0,,, will
connect M(b) to the outcome states by negative paths. By symmetry, the
combined strength of the paths due to each actor will be —f. The status
value association is given by
lished when tasks are performed in sequence. And these further connec-
tions, being consistent with the old, will increase p’s expectation advan-
tages over o. Therefore, by theorem 2, the status value association of V
will be higher on the second task than on the first. Now when there is
attainment, this will add even further paths to the structure: attainment
provides two positive ¢-paths of lengths 3 and 4, and either two positive
r-paths of lengths 4 and 5 (if there is a salient outcome referential structure)
or two positive r-paths of lengths 5 and 6 (if there is only the ability
referential structure salient) linking N(a) to the outcome states. Paths of
the same lengths but of negative sign connect V(b) to the outcome states.
These attainment paths contribute to status value association, and there-
fore status value association will be greater than it would have been
without these attainment paths. This completes the proof.

Proof of theorem 8.—The proof is exactly parallel to the proof of the-
orem 7. Reward allocation creates additional paths in the graph for the
second task, just like goal attainment does: goal object allocation provides
two positive r-paths of lengths 3 and 4, and either two positive ¢-paths
of lengths 4 and 5 (if there is a salient outcome referential structure) or
two positive ¢-paths of lengths 5 and 6 (if there is only the ability referential
structure salient) linking M(a) to the outcome states. Paths of the same
length but of negative sign connect N(b) to the outcome states. All these
paths contribute to status value association, and therefore, it will be
greater than it would have been without these additional reward allo-
cation paths. This completes the proof.
Pp. 165-85 in Justice and Social Relations, edited by Hans W. Bierhoff, Ronald L.
Cohen, and Jerald Greenberg. New York: Plenum.

Brezina, T., and K. Winder. 2003. “Economic Disadvantage, Status Generalization,
and Negative Racial Stereotyping by White Americans.” Social Psychology Quarterly
66:402-18.

Castles, S., and G. Kosack. 1985. Immigrant Workers and Class Structure in Western
Europe, 2d ed. New York: Oxford University Press.

Cohen E. G., and S. S. Roper 1972. “Modification of Interracial Interaction Disability.”
American Sociological Review 37:643-65.

Cohen, E. G., and S. Sharan. 1980. “Modifying Status Relations in Israeli Youth.”
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 11:364-84.

Cook, S. K. 1975. “Expectations, Evaluations, and Equity.” American Sociological
Review 40:372-88.

De Gilder, D., and H. A. M. Wilke. 1990. “Processing Sequential Status Information.”
Social Psychology Quarterly 53:340-51.

Durant, T. J., and J. D. Knottnerus, eds. 1999. Plantation Society and Race Relations:
The Origins of Inequality. Westport, Conn.: Praeger.

Ellis, J. 2000. Founding Brothers: A Revolutionary Generation. New York: Random
House.

Fisek, M. H., J. Berger, and R. Z. Norman. 1991. “Participation in Heterogeneous and.
Homogeneous Groups: A Theoretical Integration.” American Journal of Sociology
97 (1): 114-42.

. 1995. “Evaluations and the Formation of Expectations.” American Journal of

Sociology 101:721-46.

. 2005. “Status Cues and the Formation of Expectations.” Social Science
Research 34:80-102.

Fisek, M. H., and S. J. Hysom. 2004. “Status Characteristics and Reward Expectations:
Test of a Model.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological
Association, San Francisco, August.

Fisek, M. H., R. Z. Norman, and M. Nelson-Kilger. 1992. “Status Characteristics and
Expectation States Theory: A Priori Model Parameters and Test.” Journal of
Mathematical Sociology 16:285-303.

Foddy, M., and P. Riches. 2000. “The Impact of Task and Categorical Cues on Social
Influence: Fluency and Ethnic Accent as Cues to Competence in Task Groups.” Pp.
103-30 in Advances in Group Processes, vol. 17. Edited by Shane R. Thye, Edward
J. Lawler, Michael W. Macy, and Henry A. Walker. Stamford, Conn.: JAI Press.

Foschi, M., and S. Buchan. 1990. “Ethnicity, Gender, and Perceptions of Task
Competence.” Canadian Journal of Sociology 15:1-18.

Harrod, W. J. 1980. “Expectations from Unequal Rewards.” Social Psychology
Quarterly 43:126-30.

Jackson, L. A., J. E. Hunter, and C. Hodge. 1995. “Physical Attractiveness and
Intellectual Competence: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Social Psychology Quarterly 59:
108-22.

Lambert, R., and M. Ehrlich. 1980. “Statut scolaire et influence sociale au cours d’une
tache discrimination perceptive.” Researches de psychologie sociale 2:57-68.

Lockheed, M. E., and K. P. Hall. 1976. “Conceptualizing Sex as a Status Characteristic:
Applications to Leadership Training Strategies.” Journal of Social Issues 32:111-24.

Mark, N., L. Smith-Lovin, and C. L. Ridgeway. 2000. “The Emergence of Status
Inequality.” Manuscript. Stanford University, Department of Sociology.

Markovsky, B., L. F. Smith, and J. Berger. 1984. “Do Status Interventions Persist?”
American Sociological Review 49:373-82.

Ness, G. D. 1967. Bureaucracy and Rural Development in Malaysia. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Pan, L., ed. 1999. The Encyclopedia of the Chinese Overseas. Richmond: Curzon.
Pettigrew, T. F. 1998. “Reactions toward the New Minorities of Western Europe.”
Annual Review of Sociology 24:77-103.

Rabushka, A. 1973. Race and Politics in Urban Malaya. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover
Institution.

Riches, P., and M. Foddy. 1989. “Ethnic Accent as Status Cue.” Social Psychology
Quarterly 52:197-206.

Ridgeway, C. L. 1991. “The Social Construction of Status Value: Gender and Other
Nominal Characteristics.” Social Forces 70:367-86.

. 1997. “Interaction and the Conservation of Gender Inequality: Considering

Employment.” American Sociological Review 62:218-35.

. 2000. “The Formation of Status Beliefs: Improving Status Construction
Theory.” Pp. 77-102 in Advances in Group Processes, vol. 17. Edited by Shane Thye,
Edward J. Lawler, Michael W. Macy, and Henry A. Walker. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI
Press.

Ridgeway, C. L., and J. W. Balkwell. 1997. “Group Processes and the Diffusion of
Status Value Beliefs.” Social Psychology Quarterly 60:14-31.

Ridgeway, C. L., E. Boyle, K. J. Kuipers, and D. T. Robinson. 1998. “How Do Status
Beliefs Develop? The Role of Resources and Interactional Experience.” American
Sociological Review 63:331-50.

Ridgeway, C. L., and S. Correll. 2000. “Limiting Inequality through Interaction: The
End(s) of Gender.” Contemporary Sociology 29 (1): 110-20.

Ridgeway, C. L., and D. Diekema 1992. “Are Gender Differences Status Differences?”
Pp. 157-81 in Gender, Interaction and Inequality, edited by C. L. Ridgeway. New
York: Springer-Verlag.

Ridgeway, C. L., and K. G. Erickson. 2000. “Creating and Spreading Status Beliefs.”
American Journal of Sociology 106:579-615.

Rosenholtz, S., and J. Cohen. 1985. “Activating Ethnic Status.” Pp. 430-44 in Status,
Rewards and Influence: How Expectations Organize Behavior, edited by J. Berger
and M. Zelditch, Jr. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Sowell., T. 1996. Migrations and Cultures. New York: Basic Books.

Stewart, P., and J. C. Moore. 1992. “Wage Disparities and Performance Expectations.”
Social Psychology Quarterly 55:78-85.

Thye, S. 2000. “A Status Value Theory of Power in Exchange Relations.” American
Sociological Review 65:407-32.

. 2003. “Status-Driven Power: New Models Bridging Two Theories.” Paper
presented at the Conference for Theory and Research on Group Processes, Atlanta,
August.

Thye, S., D. Willer, and B. Markovsky. 2005 “From Status to Power: New Models at
the Intersection of Two Theories.” Manuscript. University of South Carolina,
Department of Sociology.

Veblen, T. 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Macmillan.

Vreeland, N., G. B. Dana, G. B. Hurwitz, P. Just, P. Moeller, and R. S. Shinn. 1977.
Area Handbook for Malaysia, 3d ed. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

Wagner, D. G., and J. Berger. 1998. “Gender and Interpersonal Task Behaviors: Status
Expectation Accounts.” Pp. 229-61 in Status, Power, and Legitimacy: Strategies and
Theories, edited by J. Berger and M. Zelditch, Jr. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction.

Webster, M., Jr., and J. E. Driskell, Jr. 1983. “Beauty as Status.” American Journal of
Sociology 89:140-65.

Webster, M., Jr., and S. J. Hysom. 1998. “Creating Status Characteristics.” American
Sociological Review 63:351-78.

Webster, M., Jr., S. J. Hysom, and E. M. Fullmer. 1998. “Sexual Orientation and
Occupation as Status.” Pp. 1-21 in Advances in Group Processes, vol. 15. Edited
by J. Skvoretz and J. Szmatka. New York: JAI Press.
Webster, M., Jr., and B. Sobieszek. 1974. Sources of Self-Evaluation: A Formal Theory
of Significant Others and Social Influence. New York: John Wiley.

Wiencek, H. 2003. An Imperfect God: George Washington, His Slaves, and the Creation
of America. New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux.

Wilke, H. A. M., A. F. M. van Knippenberg, and J. Bruins. 1986. “Conservation
Coalitions: An Expectation-States Approach.” European Journal of Social
Psychology 16:51-63.

‘Yuchtman-Yarr, E., and M. Semyonov. 1979. “Ethnic Inequality in Israeli Schools and
Sport: An Expectation-States Approach.” American Journal of Sociology 85:576-90.

Zelditch, M., P. Lauderdale, and S. Stublarec. 1980. “How Are Inconsistencies between
Status and Ability Resolved?” Social Forces 58:1025-43.
