Review: Neoclassical Sociology: From the End of Communism to the End of Classes
Author(s): Michael Burawoy

Review by: Michael Burawoy

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 106, No. 4 (January 2001), pp. 1099-1120
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/320299

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:31 UTC
American sociology marked the triumphalism of the immediate postwar
period with its emblematic “end of ideology” thesis. Class struggle for an
alternative socialist order was ruled an anachronism because capitalism
and liberal democracy could effectively deliver expanded freedoms and
improved living standards. America was as good as it gets while “com-
munism” was the despised, totalitarian “other.” Protagonists of the “the
end of ideology”—the most famous being Seymour Martin Lipset, Daniel
Bell, and Philip Selznick—had themselves started out as unrepentant
socialists in the 1930s. Their drift toward complacency, culminating in
1950s “functionalism,” was itself overtaken by the successor radicalism
of the 1960s, a radicalism that pointed to the seamy side of U.S. capitalism
and the limits of its “democracy.” This revolt against the end of ideology
and its concomitant “anticommunism” inspired such commentators as
Ivan Szelényi and David Stark in the 1970s and 1980s to develop alter-
native class critiques of actually existing “communism.” They reconcep-
tualized communism in more positive terms as “state socialism,” pointing
to its potentialities as well as its limits. Szelényi came to his (new) class
analysis of state socialism by joining critical sociology drawn from the
West to the critical theory of the Budapest school, while Stark’s interest
CENTRAL EUROPE: A LABORATORY FOR THE STUDY OF
COMPARATIVE CAPITALISMS

In Making Capitalism without Capitalists Gil Eyal, Ivan Szelényi, and
Eleanor Townsley call the new paradigm neoclassical sociology. If the
classical sociology of Karl Marx, Max Weber, and Emile Durkheim
achieved canonical status by engagement with the problems and possi-
bilities of the 19th-century transition to modern capitalism, then neo-
classical sociology is the analogous engagement with the capitalist tran-
sitions at the end of the 20th century. Whereas classical sociology was
haunted by the prospect of a socialist alternative to capitalism, neoclassical
sociology marks the demise of that alternative. In place of the classical
concern with the origins, dynamics, and reproduction of a singular cap-
italism, neoclassical sociology is concerned with capitalism’s diversity, “a
mosaic of the most diverse socio-economic structures and institutions”
(Eyal et al., p. 16). It is no longer a matter of studying the origins of a
single order but the multiple origins of plural orders. Whereas classical
sociology dwelt on the uniqueness of capitalism through comparison with
noncapitalist societies—the feudal past or a socialist future—neoclassical
sociology compares capitalism with capitalism. The contemporary world,
in particular the burial of socialism, calls for a research program of com-
parative capitalisms.

In a similar vein David Stark and Laszl6 Bruszt, in their Postsocialist
Pathways, argue that the eclipse of communism redirects the sociological
focus and sociological imagination to the different paths to multiple but
always capitalist futures. “When we stop defining capitalism in terms of
socialism, we see that, in our epoch, capitalism as a construct is analyt-
ically interesting only in the plural: Capitalisms must be compared vis-
a-vis each other” (p. 3; emphasis in the original). Like Eyal et al. they
regard East and Central Europe as natural laboratories for the new so-
ciology. Both books try to grapple with the continuities and discontinuities
of socialism and capitalism. Both try to come to terms with the eerie
echoes of the past alongside entirely novel economic, political, and social
forms. Rather than revolutions or evolutions, they think in terms of
mutations, reconfigurations, or, to use Stark’s prescient concept,
“recombinations.”

Their similarities notwithstanding, the books focus on different analytic
levels of the transition. Stark and Bruszt focus on institutions, the collapse
of the old and the creation of the new, connected by strategies of extri-
cation. They call their approach path dependent in that institutional so-
lutions—forms of democracy and privatization—forged within the mo-
ments of extrication from socialism, have locked Hungary, the Czech
Republic, East Germany, and Poland into divergent paths. On the one
side, Stark and Bruszt distinguish their perspective from the neoliberal
“transition as imitation” of textbook capitalism, what they call “capitalism
by design” or one might call future dependence. On the other side, they
hotly dispute the past dependence of involutionary approaches that treat
postsocialism as the degenerative product of communist legacies.’

Eyal et al. adopt a similar “path” perspective toward the transition,
but in contrast to Stark and Bruszt their paths go back deep into com-
munist and even precommunist days of Hungary, Poland, and the Czech
Republic. Their paths, however, are not of institutions but of individuals.
Indeed, they have little to say about institutional transformation—the
logic of collapse, extrication, and creation. Instead they focus on the tra-
jectory of various elites—individuals endowed with different forms of
capital (economic, social, political, and cultural resources) who strategi-
cally adjust to the exigencies of traversing different orders. They call their
approach trajectory adjustment: institutions shape the dispositions of in-
dividuals, who in turn contest and transform those institutions, leading
to the readjustment of individual trajectories. Both books share acommon
outlook on the transition: they both optimistically celebrate the indeter-
minacy, novelty, and variety of the transformations—whether of insti-
tutional patterns or elite alliances—taking place in post-Soviet societies.

In this essay I would like to suggest that such neoclassical optimism is
misplaced and unsubstantiated—rooted more in faith than in reality. The
optimism of these authors is based, I argue, on an overestimation of the
importance of elites, patterns of privatization, and political democracy,
and on an underestimation of the importance of capital accumulation,
class relations,’ and global forces. In other words, in their “comparative
capitalisms,” capitalism drops out of the picture. In pursuing openness

and plurality, neoclassical sociology forsakes classical sociology’s elabo-
ration of the limits of capitalism—limited possibilities for democratic in-
stitutions and individual self-fulfillment. Thus, Eyal et al. extend Weber’s
vision of different capitalisms as the project of different bourgeoisies and
expand Weber’s distinction between class and status (rank) to compare
precommunist, communist, and postcommunist societies. In the process,
however, they lose Weber’s critical insights: his iron cage view of capi-
talism, his tying of capitalist efficiency to bureaucratic domination, and
more generally his own disenchantment with Western rationalism.

Stark and Bruszt move away from Weber’s concern with the fate of
the individual to echo Durkheim’s concern with crafting institutions.’ Like
Durkheim they are very critical of both market and state pana-
ceas—markets require both underlying trust and supportive institutions
just as states can only supply coordination at a distance. Like Durkheim
they turn to intermediary associations as the fulcrum of an effective cap-
italism—only for Stark and Bruszt these associations are ownership net-
works among firms whereas for Durkheim they are occupational asso-
ciations. Just as Durkheim extolled the enabling power of constraints, so
Stark and Bruszt laud democratic accountability and policy coherence.
Yet, entirely absent is Durkheim’s trenchant critique of power inequalities
and of social injustice that for him, at least, marked the gap between the
pathological present and the ideal future. Indeed, Stark and Bruszt’s
repudiation of the very concept of transition, because of its implied ev-
olution toward a normative future, allows them to endow the present with
multiple potentialities. The past cannot be reborn, the future is uncertain,
and so the present is triumphant.

The use of “neoclassical” to describe the new research program suggests
parallels with neoclassical economics, and indeed parallels there are. Both
emphasize strategic action in the deployment of capital, only neoclassical
sociology extends the meaning of capital to include social and cultural as
well as economic resources.’ Both downplay oppression and social justice.
Both have optimistic assessments of the potentialities of capitalism as the
end of history. In one fundamental respect, however, neoclassical sociology
diverges from neoclassical economics, namely in replacing the latter’s
singular normative model of capitalism with multiple capitalisms derived
from different origins. But, as I shall argue, this last claim remains un-
proven, resting as it does on the diversity of superstructural manifestations
of capitalism (social origins of elites, property forms, and political de-
mocracy) rather than on an underlying diversity of economic forms of
production and corresponding class relations.

Ironically, in their earlier pioneering analyses of state socialism both
Szelényi and Stark were anything but “neoclassical” in their orientation.
To the contrary, they were heavily influenced by Marx—an influence that
has left traces in their accounts of postsocialist capitalism even though
economic processes, class relations, and alternatives to capitalism have
disappeared. Waving farewell to the now-calumniated socialism, which
magically and unexpectedly evaporated, they lose their critical sense to-
ward emergent, peripheral capitalisms. Even in their common appropri-
ation of Pierre Bourdieu, they deploy his theory as an all-purpose tool kit
for the analysis of resources (capital), dispositions (habitus), and strategic
action (in social space and fields), but in the process sacrifice the political
dimension of Bourdieu’s writings—the analysis of the reproduction and
mystification of class relations.® In a paradoxical twist of history, it is as
if it is not the beginning but the end of socialism that spells the end of
classes!

In what follows I discuss the move away from the study of subaltern
groups and class relations—so present in their early works—to the focus
on ruling elites, ownership patterns, and forms of democracy. I then in-
terrogate the conceptual basis for the research program into comparative
capitalisms, namely their origin driven analyses—whether this be Stark
and Bruszt’s path dependency, which starts with the breakdown of so-
cialism and highlights discontinuity between socialism and its aftermaths,
or Eyal et al.’s trajectory adjustment, which offers greater historical sweep
and continuity. I put both frameworks to the challenging Russian test and
show how their conceptualizations minimize the constraints on elites by
nonelites, politics by economics, the national by the global. I propose an
alternative approach, namely to suspend the study of origins for the study
of class relations in the present. As against neoclassical optimism I propose
a postsocialist theory, analogous to postcolonial theory, that restores a
critical focus based on the limits to change at the same time it recuperates
subaltern alternatives. So, finally, I propose not only a recovery of class
but also the excavation of embedded socialism.
THE ROAD TO NEOCLASSICAL SOCIOLOGY

Ivan Szelényi is the leading sociologist of the former Soviet world. He is
best known for the classic book, The Intellectuals on the Road to Class
Power (1979), which he wrote with Gyérgy Konrad in the middle 1970s
when both were under surveillance of the Hungarian state. State socialism,
they argued, had a special place for intellectuals as architects and legit-
imizers of the “rational redistribution” of resources in a planned economy.
Intellectuals formulated and justified the plan as serving the needs of all.
To be sure, intellectuals had not yet arrived at their appointed destination,
but they were a class in statu nascendi, a class opposed to the workers
in whose name they would rule and from whose labor they would organize
the extraction of surplus. From this two-class model of socialism much
else followed, not least its possible democratization through intellectuals’
responsiveness to the working class.

Szelényi (1983) concretized this theoretical framework in his study of
Hungarian urban inequalities, specifically the distribution of housing,
which showed that supervisors, technicians, white-collar workers, and
managers, in short the new class, had privileged access to subsidized
resources (apartments). This meant, he further argued, that under state
socialism the working class had an interest in the expansion of markets
so that they could bypass the biases of “rational redistribution” and engage
in entrepreneurial activity, such as obtaining materials to build their own
homes. Markets, he argued, countered the inequalities of the administra-
tive distribution of resources. He, thereby, laid the foundation of the tran-
sition debate two decades later: whether the market transition would
exacerbate or undermine previous inequalities of the socialist state.’

In the 1980s it seemed as though the ascendancy of intellectuals had
been halted. Working with his former Hungarian students, Szelényi dis-
covered a second new class making its way upward—peasant entrepre-
neurs who were able to take advantage of the opening up of the market
in the still-socialist Hungary. In Socialist Entrepreneurs Szelényi now
argued that the old bourgeoisie, whose life had been cut short by the
advent of communism and who had parked their resources in the edu-
cational system or in the party, were now exploiting the new opportunities
of Hungary’s mixed economy of the 1980s. Early communism, therefore,
marked a period of interrupted embourgeoisement that was now reas-
serting itself in late communism. However, once more history overtook
Szelényi’s theory. State socialism collapsed. Although there were elements
in the Hungarian Democratic Forum, the first postsocialist government,
that were attracted to the entrepreneurial Third Road, reality did not
treat indigenous capitalists too well. Certainly, they did not become a new
ruling class.

In his latest collaboration with Gil Eyal and Eleanor Townsley, Szelényi
returns to The Intellectuals on the Road to Class Power. Drawing on
surveys that oversampled elites as well as their own observations and
interviews, the authors argue that postsocialist Hungary, as well as Poland
and the Czech Republic, have spawned a new ruling elite, dominated by
the intelligentsia. In effect, Szelényi and his collaborators are returning
to the thesis of intellectuals on the road to class power, only now intel-
lectuals realize their mission after rather than during the period of state
socialism. This is what they call the second Bildungsbiirgertum, the second
arrival of a cultural bourgeoisie. The first Bildungsbiirgertum arose in the
19th century when Central European intelligentsia pioneered a modern-
ization project in partnership with professional civil servants. At the end
of the 20th century the intelligentsia again envisioned a capitalist utopia,
but this time in association with the socialist managerial elite—a coalition
of propertyless agents who thus “make capitalism without capitalists.”
Just as the first Bildungsbiirgertum was a reaction against the rank order
of feudalism, so the second Bildungsbiirgertum is a reaction against the
rank order of communism. Just as the first ascendancy of the intelligentsia
proved transitory, Eyal et al. argue, so will the second. Indeed, at the end
of their book they present new data, suggesting that a new economic
bourgeoisie may be in the process of formation.

Even though he seems to be returning to his earlier ideas, Szelényi’s
vision now lacks the critical perspective that so marked The Intellectuals
on the Road to Class Power. Konrad and Szelényi approached state so-
cialism from the standpoint of its exploited working classes, just as So-
cialist Entrepreneurs (Szelényi 1988) began with a study of peasant work-
ers. But the latest analysis has shifted away from class relations to the
“pacting” of elites. We can detect a similar shift in the work of David
Stark, whose pioneering Hungarian social research made important con-
tributions to the study of workplace politics. Like Szelényi, Stark began
his career with a focus on the working class, showing how shop floor
participation both contributed to and challenged the reproduction of class
domination. His 1980s research into Hungarian factory regimes exposed
the forging of all manner of informal arrangements as workers adapted
to the exigencies of an administered economy. In his most celebrated article
of that period, Stark (1986) showed how the development of internal
subcontracting systems acted as a pseudo-market within the socialist en-
terprise, compensating for the dysfunctions of the plan, just as in modern
capitalism the internal administration of labor countered the dysfunctions
of the external market. Hierarchies require markets, just as markets re-
quire hierarchies. Capitalism and state socialism were each other’s mirror
image. State socialism, therefore, could not be reduced to a totalitarian
model of a command economy but, at least in its mature form, required
all sorts of subordinate organizations operating along lines that contradict
communism’s dominant logic. This offered Stark (1989a, 1989b) the con-
ceptual tools for a richer, variegated portrait of state socialism.

Joining forces with the Hungarian political scientist Laszlé Bruszt,
Stark now transposes his earlier interest in the diversity of socialisms into
a plurality of emergent capitalisms. Curiously enough, however, Stark
and Bruszt connect postsocialist diversity not to diverse socialist legacies
but to the autonomy of the political, to choices made in the democratic
transition.’ In the first part of Postsocialist Pathways they chart the dif-
ferent paths of “extrication” shaped by the strategic interaction of (a)
hardliners and reformers and (5) ruling elites and the opposition. Thus,
Hungary developed the most perfect democracy in the region because the
opposition was weak while the ruling class was divided, whereas in Poland
the opposition, organized around Solidarity, was much stronger, thus com-
promising liberal democracy. Bulgaria, Romania, and Albania were at
the other extreme. There the opposition was so weak that communist
parties had merely to rename themselves to regain power. In the second
part of their book Stark and Bruszt link the different privatization strat-
egies of Germany, the Czech Republic, Poland, and Hungary to their
different paths of extrication—reunification in Germany, capitulation in
the Czech Republic, compromise in Poland, electoral competition in Hun-
gary. In the final part they drive home the thesis that, far from being
incompatible with capitalism, democratic deliberation and dense associ-
ation are its necessary conditions. Extended accountability, as they call
it, promoted a vibrant capitalism in the Czech Republic, whereas more
limited accountability produced weaker capitalisms in Hungary and
Germany.”

The underlying parallels between these two books are striking. Both
stress historical pathways or trajectories from past to present, so that
where we end up bears some relation to where we start out. The plurality
of origins gives rise to a plurality of capitalisms. To be sure, their histories
start at different points, and so they come to different conclusions about
the present, but both books take the commonsensical view that origins
matter. This may be common sense, but it is not necessarily sociological
sense. Classical sociology may have been interested in origins, but its
overwhelming theoretical thrust was to argue that modern capitalism was
so all-encompassing that it erased its origins. To understand modern cap-
italism, therefore, was to understand it as a system, made up of badly or
not so badly integrated parts. The crucial questions concerned the repro-
duction of a system of relations, especially the economic relations that
defined capitalism. In concentrating on origins, neoclassical sociology fails
to do what its classical forbears did so well, namely to study the new
order as a system of interdependent parts—relations of economy to polity,
of elites to nonelites.

For classical sociology—and here I am referring to Weber and Durk-
heim as well as to Marx—it was a mystery how capitalism survived its
internal tensions and contradictions, how it absorbed tendencies toward
dissolution and disruptive transformation. But for neoclassical sociology
questions of capitalism’s continuity are replaced by the study of origins.
It is as if, with the eclipse of the socialist alternative, there is no longer
a counterpoint, an external position from which to understand capitalism’s
defining systemic and contradictory character. Thus, Eyal et al. study the
formation of new elites out of old elites, while Stark and Bruszt, although
closer to a systemic analysis, nonetheless study the origins of ownership
patterns and corporate networks. Both books study the economy at a
distance, as a taken-for-granted abstraction and not as a concrete set
of productive relations. Whereas in their earlier writings they focused on
the ingenuity of the subaltern classes in coping with socialism, the way
workers and peasants challenged and transformed state socialism in the
microprocesses of everyday life, Szelényi and Stark now turn to the elites
engineering embryonic capitalisms. Their analyses exclude subordinate
classes, which in effect become the bewildered—silent and _ si-
lenced—spectators of transformations that engulf them."
world, the transition to capitalism and democracy can be mutually
reinforcing.

But where does this comparative advantage of postsocialism come from
if not from socialism itself? Indeed, that is exactly what Stark and Bruszt
suggest: postsocialist states have neither strong markets nor coherent
states but “they have decades of experiences with strong networks” (p.
122). These economic networks, they conjecture, provide the foundation
for the new form of capitalism that is neither market driven nor state
driven. To be successful—and now the measure of success has shifted to
policy coherence—these networks must be both deliberative and associ-
ational: that is, they must bind enterprises together in a process of joint
and extensive participatory decision making.” It turns out that Hungarian
networks are associational but not deliberative, German networks are
deliberative but not associational, while the Czech networks offer a su-
perior combination of association and deliberation.

The accuracy of these claims about novel arrangements concerns me
less than the theory of their origins. Given Stark’s earlier work, which
made much of the specificity of Hungarian socialism, one might have
expected the authors to trace the origins of postsocialist pathways to
divergent socialisms. Far from it. Instead they make a decisive analytical
distinction between the dissolution of the old order and the creation of
the new. On the one hand, they present the dissolution in a singular
fashion: the communist party state, based on “delegation by usurpation,”
spread its tentacles throughout society and eventually dissipated itself by
dissolving into its environment. It collapsed through overextension and
absorption. On the other hand, they stress the multiple paths of extrication,
which cannot, therefore, be explained by a singular past. Rather, they
argue, the diverse ways of reworking the past spring from diverse political
conjunctures in the moments of dissolution. In Hungary—the perfection
of its democratic consolidation notwithstanding—power is concentrated
in the executive, leading to policy swings that are disastrous for its econ-
omy. The Czech Republic is the most successful in developing a delib-
erative relation between the executive and parliament, and its economic
networks supposedly reflect this success. Again the empirical basis of these
connections is thin, but the argument is interesting. It is as if each country
started with the same (crumbling) foundations of state socialism but, for
complex political reasons, each designed and built very different houses
on those foundations. Once the scaffolding goes up, the trajectory is con-
strained. So path dependency is past dependency, it is just that for Stark
and Bruszt the “past” starts with the breakup of communism. As we shall
see through a brief discussion of the Russian case, this is too arbitrary a
starting point.

Stark and Bruszt pay virtually no attention to Russia in their com-
parative analysis, but it is worth testing out their scheme on this excep-
tional terrain. There can be no doubt about the importance of associational
ties among enterprises, even though these ties are less the product of
privatization and more a function of economic interdependence based on
barter or the links that bind enterprises into the so-called financial in-
dustrial groups. But are the associations “deliberative” in the sense of
being accountable to diverse actors? Like the Hungarian enterprise net-
works, only more so, the Russian networks are accountable to themselves
alone and insulated from external pressures. Like the Hungarian asso-
ciations, they are continually being bailed out by the state, leading to the
asymmetric distributions of assets and liabilities. The Russian state must
surely be regarded as the prototype of what Stark and Bruszt call the
“antidevelopmental state.”'* Indeed, turning to the political field one can
see in Russia’s so-called superpresidentialism an exaggeration of the Hun-
garian concentration of power in the executive.

It all fits very nicely—too nicely! No two economies diverged more in
the socialist period than those of Hungary and Russia, and yet we see a
postsocialist convergence—at least in terms of their network properties
and their political fields. Surely this demonstrates the importance of post-
socialist extrication? Yes and no. For all their supposed convergence, these
national economies are worlds apart: in the one a dramatic and unprec-
edented disintegration, while in the other stuttering growth; in the one a
retreat to primitive barter relations and subsistence existence, while in
the other the consolidation of a money economy; in the one criminalization
of the economy, while in the other the emergent rule of law; in the one
an enormous concentration of power in oligarchs who control media,
natural resources, and banking, while in the other a diversified economic
structure. So, if there are certain convergences that can be explained by
the paths of extrication from communism, at the same time there are
deeper and more significant divergences that go back much further in
time. In short, there may be path dependency, but where does the path
begin, which crystallizing event determines which future, how many such
events might there be? It is far from obvious that the most significant
divergence of historical paths begins when the party state is replaced by
the formal trappings of liberal democracy."

To be sure certain phenomena are affected by the mode of extrication
from socialism, but they may be only the more superficial ones. Ultimately
the data Stark and Bruszt offer to demarcate different capitalisms in
THE WEBERIAN REPRISE: MAKING CAPITALISM WITHOUT
CAPITALISTS

Making Capitalism without Capitalists takes a different approach to the
transition. First, its theoretical originality lies not in the analysis of in-
stitutions, their collapse, recreation, dynamics, and so on, but in the way
individuals adjust their trajectories to the exigencies of institutions. Sec-
ond, its empirical focus is not the variety of ownership patterns within
Central Europe but what Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic have
in common, namely a form of capitalism defined by the absence of a class
of proprietors. Without an economic bourgeoisie, so Eyal et al. argue, the
cultural bourgeoisie that formed under and in opposition to socialism
becomes the dominant elite in partnership with a managerial elite. Third,
the book’s comparative method lumps contemporary Central Europe into
a more or less homogeneous category to be compared with its communist
and precommunist past, as well as with alternate forms of capitalism.’
If their historical inquiry is breathtaking in scope, its arguments are less
falsifiable than Stark and Bruszt’s provocative claim that diversity within
Central Europe springs from the recent patterns of extrication from
communism.

In elaborating the argument for trajectory adjustment Eyal et al. take
over the now-familiar tool kit of Pierre Bourdieu that conceives of social
action as the strategic deployment of different forms of capital (economic,
social/political, and cultural) within a social space, governed by interests
and inherited dispositions (habitus). This leads them to map out the al-
liances among elites in terms of forms of capital in precommunist, com-
munist, postcommunist, and capitalist societies. Thus, precommunist elites
subordinate economic capital to social capital; under communism political
elites subordinate the increasingly important cultural elites; postcom-
munism subordinates economic capital to cultural capital. All these are
to be contrasted with Western capitalism, in which cultural elites are
subordinated to economic elites.'* The authors recognize that they leave
hanging the question of whether postcommunist capitalism will turn out
different from any other capitalism, despite its different origins (Eyal et
al., p. 190).

In order to comprehend the lasting influence of those different origins
we have to ask how Eyal et al. understand the relation between past and
future. How does communism continue to live so powerfully within post-
communist capitalism as to assert the latter’s lasting peculiarity? Post-
communist capitalism is the project of elites that originally formed in
opposition to communism, specifically the project of dissidents who re-
jected the political order in the name of civil society and reform com-
munists (technocrats) who rejected the economic order in the name of
monetarism. The question Eyal et al. pose in their most original chapter
(the book’s third) is how these two groups, occupying opposed positions
under communism, could form an alliance in postcommunism. Drawing
on the analogy of Weber’s elective affinity between the protestant ethic
and the spirit of capitalism, they show how self-denying dissidents and
capitalist-spirited technocrats shared a commitment to living within truth
and opposing communist mendacity, to establishing government from afar
and opposing state regulation of everyday life, and to supporting the rule
of law and opposing party despotism. In other words, new postcommunist
institutions originate from enduring “habituses” inherited from the past.

It is one thing for elites to have projects, it is another to realize them.
Eyal et al. recognize that emergent capitalisms are the product of nego-
tiated compromises. The dissidents and technocrats may be able to rec-
oncile their own differences, but they still need the support of managers
who run the economy. They, therefore, recompose their ideologies of civil
society and monetarism into a “managerialist ideology” that gives cohesion
to the new power bloc. The relative balance of managers, dissidents, and
technocrats, then, will determine the character and strength of the com-
munist legacy.

But why, one may ask, are compromises only struck among elites and
not between classes? It is just as plausible that the divergent postsocialist
trajectories have been shaped by the activist Solidarity movement with
its accentuation of “voice” or by the individualistic Hungarian working
class that “exited” into the second economy. Or if one wants to lump
Central Europe together, one might contrast its oppositional working clas-
ses with the Russian working class that, to overgeneralize, pursued a
strategy of “loyalty.”"’ Why are these interclass relations not as important
as the composition of the power bloc? Indeed, it could be argued that the
compromises struck between dominant and subordinate classes set the
prior conditions for alliances among the dominant classes.

Even if Eyal et al. do not take up the question of class relations, to
their credit they do take up the Russian challenge. If in Central Europe
they see the emergence of capitalism without capitalists, in Russia they
cleverly recognize a case of capitalists without capitalism. That is to say,
in Central Europe the institutions of capitalism exist without a bour-
geoisie, while in Russia there is a bourgeoisie, a class of owners recruited
from the former nomenclatura, but it is running amuck in the absence of
effective regulation. Here we witness neither revolution nor evolution to
be sure but involution—an imploding world in which a merchant bour-
geoisie forged from the old nomenclatura raided the economy to produce
primitive disaccumulation, a return to peasant society, a retreat to self-
provisioning, the expansion of petty commodity production and of prim-
itive barter. As the new bourgeoisie reaches for global hypermodernity,
they thrust the mass of the population into a premodern quagmire. Here
extrication from the past becomes, one might say, the revenge of the past.

The Russian catastrophe convincingly vindicates Eyal et al.’s argument,
contra Stark and Bruszt, that communist origins are critically important
to postcommunist outcomes. But there is a paradox. Precisely here where
the communist habitus was the most strong and the anticommunist in-
telligentsia most weak, the neoliberal vision has been the most vigorously
pursued through rapid liberalization, privatization, and then stabilization.
Of course, neoliberalism is here not an inherited habitus but a borrowed
ideology that is opportunistically deployed to justify new forms of ex-
ploitation and dispossession. But that is just the point. By focusing on
elites, Eyal et al. go only so far in appreciating the peculiarities of post-
Soviet Russia. They focus on the continuity of the old political class
transformed into an economic elite, but they miss the radical transfor-
mation of society. Trajectory adjustment, in looking for continuity, misses
the dramatic disjuncture in Russian society.

If now there are capitalists without capitalism, before, we might say,
there was socialism without socialists. By this I mean that Soviet society
was socialist in its redistributive economy and in its centrally organized
society—an elaborate and overweening social structure that governed
people’s strategies and rewards. People acted on the basis of their place
in society, not on the basis of a vision of the future. As a result, especially
in its last phase, there was no significant class of actors who believed in
a socialist future. Adhesion to socialism was more a ritual enactment, so
that when the system faced crisis it could turn either to despotism or it
collapsed. There were no “socialists” committed to restoring and rebuild-
ing the structure. One might say that Russia has moved from one extreme
to the other, from a society structured by positions to a society structured
by assets; from competition for privileged positions to competition for
asset accumulation; from a society in which individuals occupy places in
preexisting social relations to a society in which individuals are continually
constructing social bonds; from a world of social channels to one of social
anarchy. The constitution of class shifts from relations of vertical domi-
nation to networks of horizontal interdependence. One might think of
Russia today as the first truly “poststructural” society, rejecting admin-
istered visions and investments in the future and held together by a system
of personal ties. Reaction to the failure of the most modernist of projects
(the planned society) has led to the most postmodern, egotistical world.
While Bourdieu’s framework of strategies around convertible capitals
does indeed capture something about post-Soviet society, it is a mistake
to project this back into the past, to impose an asset-based theory on a
position-based society. By universalizing Bourdieu’s theoretical categories,
Eyal et al. miss its historical and critical import and thereby elide profound
differences between Soviet and post-Soviet orders.

I may now summarize. Both works focus on divergent paths to pre-
sumptively different capitalisms, but where the one traces this divergence
to individual habituses formed under communism and even precom-
munism, the other focuses on institutional solutions to the problem of
extrication from communism. Their measures of capitalism also differ.
The one looks upon capitalism in terms of ruling elites, the negotiations
among former dissidents, technocrats, and managers, while the other stud-
ies patterns of ownership, novel recombinant forms that belie conventional
models. Both, therefore, assess the phenomenal form of capitalism rather
than its underlying reality, its superstructures rather than its economic
base. Elites, ownership patterns, and politics may all diverge and trans-
form themselves while the social relations of capitalism remain the same.
Neither book comes to grips with the social relations of the economy that
define it as capitalist, above all with the relations between classes.
THE MARXIAN REPRISE: ENDURING CLASS RELATIONS

Karl Marx offers an alternative model for the study of transitions, one
that is not based on origins. While modern capitalism may have multiple
origins (and Marx offers different accounts in his various writings), once
established capitalism constitutes its own system of class reproduction
and dynamic accumulation. The systemic logic effectively wipes out or-
igins.'* Even though capitalism may diverge in its expression from sector
to sector, from country to country, from region to region, these divergences
are interconnected—the result of common underlying economic processes.
To study such sui generis economic processes, one must subordinate the
study of historical paths and trajectories to careful in situ analyses of
actual social relations. This calls for ethnographic data that will reveal
the day-to-day world of strategic action bound by changing con-
straints—the sort of detailed analysis that Marx extracted from the Blue
Books of government inspectors or the fieldwork that Engels conducted
in Manchester.

We already have examples of ethnographic research in post-Soviet so-
cieties that, instead of searching out the influence of origins, start out by
examining constraints in the present. For example, in her study of de-
collectivization in Romania, Katherine Verdery (1999) does not look for
the source of privatization but shows how property relations become the
object of struggle within her village. Political and economic relations,
inherited from the past to be sure, govern the unfolding dynamics of
property redistribution. The point of departure is the present, and it is
from this vantage point that the past is understood. The same applies to
Gerald Creed’s (1999) ethnography of the struggle over the liquidation of
agricultural cooperatives in Bulgaria. Peasants act here as a bulwark
against decollectivization, mobilizing the past in defending their lifeline
to collective and individual existence. Or take Slawomira Zbierski-
Salameh’s (1999) field research in rural Poland that shows how shock
therapy strengthened the hold of monopolistic organizations—
procurement centers, state farms, and banks—over the peasantry who,
in self-protection, retreated to closed-cycle subsistence production. Again
the focus is on the here and now of the transition, the struggle over the
interpretation and deployment of economic reform by different classes.
David Woodruff’s (1999a) close observation of Russian enterprises, sim-
ilarly, shows how local forces combine to defy punitive monetization by
resorting to barter as they contend with distant government edicts. If
these ethnographies of everyday life share any common conclusion it is
that the past becomes a terrain of struggle, manipulated by forces con-
tending in the present.

The past is an object and field of conflict, but it is also a reference
point against which to compare the present. Revisiting anthropological
studies of socialism is another possible technique of such before-and-after
evaluation of the transition. In May 1999, Janos Lukacs and I returned
to the sites of our Hungarian industrial ethnographies of the 1980s (Bur-
awoy and Lukacs 1992). What had happened to my fellow workers in
the 10 years after the Fall? I was surprised to discover that, despite the
retrenchment of all but a few thousand of the original 15,000 and with
the exception of our devoted shop steward, Gyuri, who had retired to his
home village, all members of the October Revolution Socialist Brigade
were still working in what used to be the Lenin Steel Works. Shaped
under late communism, their habituses had indeed endured the transition.
Csaba was still living and drinking with his father in their one-room
apartment. Béla, whose leg had been crushed under a steel girder, was
still grumbling, seemingly untouched by his upwardly mobile children.
As he had done so successfully in the 1980s, Karcsi was still exploiting
his handicraft skills and entrepreneurial talents to tide him over work
stoppages. Bandi and his wife (with friends and relatives) were exhausted
from building their new home, while Laci sat gloomily in his two-room
apartment with his unemployed wife and his two barely employed sons.
The steelworker habitus endured to be sure, but the overwhelming reality
was status degradation, deplorable working conditions, plummeting
wages, and imminent unemployment.

While workers were laid off, on the other side of the class divide a few
managers made a killing by spinning off their departments as limited
companies, charging the enterprise with overheads, taxes, transportation,
and so on. Here is the story Stark and Bruszt tell of recombinant own-
ership—the enterprise shell, under state ownership, was landed with li-
abilities while the satellites made off with the assets. No one wanted this
dinosaur. Through the 1990s it was buffeted by a series of makeshift
deals, until finally a Slovakian company went halves with the Hungarian
government in a pretense at resurrecting the mill. To Gabi, our earnest
young manager, however, it seemed that the Slovakians had only ab-
sconded with the cash. There was no sign of any new investment, just
another level of bureaucracy. Now, a year later, an American company
has taken over the Slovakian conglomerate. The mill could close tomor-
row, with the last human dregs poured into the street.

Contrast this with Egér’s Csepel Auto, a division of Hungary’s largest
truck enterprise, which was bought out by the Germany Corporation ZF,
one of the biggest gearbox manufacturers in the world. I gasped in disbelief
as I walked through the aisles of the spotless, silent glass house that had
been the grimy, dark, whirring machine shop. Young technicians, relaxed
and scarce, had replaced our oily brigades of ingenious, improvising, pet-
ulant operators. Tomas, the information systems manager who escorted
us, was one of the handful of Hungarians to have survived the transition.
The rest had been weeded out. Half the number of employees now pro-
duced 30 times the product! Property relations may be diffuse, but the
consequences are not. Neoclassical sociologists may celebrate indetermi-
nacy and uncertain futures, but for most this simply means insecurity.
Capitalism may be made without capitalists but certainly not without
workers—a small fraction upgraded, the majority disconsolate and de-
graded. To my fellow furnacemen, capitalism was but the immiseration
of socialism. It is not clear whether postsocialist capitalism is different
from any other, at least from the perspective of those who shoulder it.

As these examples reveal, not only communism but also the forces of
globalization haunt the present. Stark and Bruszt write how the neoliberal
programs sowed disillusion, shifted the prevailing winds from West to
East, from market panaceas to the elixir of the state. They claim that
both models were “decoupled” from the Central European reality—a re-
ality of deliberative networks that were neither markets nor hierarchies.
Stark and Bruszt are right to be skeptical of the inexorable power of
globalization, but “decoupling” becomes the conceptual excuse for ignor-
ing global factors altogether. Stark and Bruszt overlook the possibility
that “recombinant property” was as much a strategic hedge against com-
petition from or expropriation by international capital as it was a function
of the balance of forces at the time of extrication from state socialism.
Similarly, as Eyal et al.’s data show, “managerialism” is now in retreat
before the encroachment of foreign capital.

This is where the project of “comparative capitalisms” meets its greatest
sociological challenge. Russia and Hungary may diverge in remarkable
ways, but that divergence is as much a product of their differential in-
sertion into what is a singular world capitalist system as it is of their
communist origins. Or better, it is a product of the way global capitalism
combines with antecedent forms of production as these undergo market
transition. It is difficult to talk of independent national or regional cap-
italisms—as is implied in “comparing capitalisms”—when the global order
is so interconnected. We need to understand how the global, whether
through supranational institutions, transnational connections, or post-
national discourses, has mediated effects on what has come to be called
the “local.”

Just as ethnography offers a nuanced understanding of class constraints
in the present, so it also offers insight into the significance of the global.
Lynne Haney (2000), for example, has shown how the (neo)liberal model
of welfare was latched onto by Hungarian state managers and even so-
ciologists for the very real material benefits it offered them. Benefits to
the bureaucratic class, however, came at the expense of welfare clients
who in turn tried to reclaim their lost assistance by appealing to the
socialist universalism of the past. Like a lightening rod, the state trans-
mitted global pressures, creating a devastated population of women. But
the global can also strike outside the purview of the state. Zsuzsa Gille
(2000) shows that Hungary’s flimsy postcommunist democracy put up
little resistance to multinational incineration capital that would make
Hungary a backyard for dumping Western waste. The project had popular
support among villagers who competed for economic crumbs from burnt
ashes. They were located next to toxic waste that had been deposited by
Hungary’s biggest chemical factory. For many socialist years, this enter-
prise had been bribed to produce what was too dangerous to produce in
Austria. Those rural populations excluded from incineration profits were
easily mobilized by the Greens to oppose the project, but with little effect.
Contestation and negotiation there may have been, but the results only
augured badly for Hungary’s rural population.

These ethnographic studies offer a postsocialist antidote to neoclassical
optimism, recognizing the debilitating constraints of historical past and
global present even as they also recognize ingenuity and innovation. As
the few manage to reassert their control over property and profits, or-
ganizational and cultural capital, so the majority stave off increased in-
security and dispossession. The ethnographic eye exposes the seamy side
of capitalism—means testing, incineration, and unemployment. As the
joke goes, Soviet teaching may have been wrong about communism but
it was right about capitalism. Of course, Western ideologues have their
responses: the liberal reforms were introduced too slowly (or too quickly),
Stalinist managers sabotaged (or failed to comprehend) the market tran-
sition, the people are not ready for capitalism, they are too corrupted by
communism, and so on. In these perspectives the problem lies with the
executors of the vision rather than with the vision itself. Just as devel-
opment theory of the 1960s, which also blamed the victims for their
suffering, gave rise to dependency theory and then to postcolonial theory,
so we might expect neoclassical sociology to inspire new postsocialist
theorizing that moves from the limits of global capitalism to the contes-
tation of Western transplants by indigenous visions and alternatives.
ciation of the past, but it is not the only possible interpretation of the
contemporary plight. Eyal et al. might have drawn lessons from their
own account of the demise of the first Bildungsbiirgertum—the way Cen-
tral European intellectuals in the early 20th century turned away from
the capitalist project either to the radical right or to the radical left. Today
we might well ask, How long will it be before postcommunist intellectuals
reject those Western prescriptions they had so avidly embraced—liberal
democracy and free markets? How long will it be before neoclassical
theory, which condemns socialism and exonerates capitalism, gives way
to postsocialist theory, which takes a more critical approach to capitalism
in order to rescue the positive potential of socialism?

Postsocialist theory could follow postcolonial theory. Just as disillusion
with “national independence” led postcolonial theory to reject the very
goals of liberation as themselves too tainted by the oppressor’s ideology,
so disillusion could lead postsocialist intellectuals to contemplate alter-
natives to the imported Western models. Just as postcolonial theory turned
to subaltern studies and the search for opportunities and visions eclipsed
in the colonial or even precolonial world, so postsocialist theory will per-
haps exhume alternatives that were rapidly closed off when communism
began to teeter.'® Postsocialist theory might well return to the subterranean
alternatives that the youthful Stark and Szelényi did so much to un-
cover—be they the different market socialisms of the Hungarian second
economy or the mobilized society of Polish Solidarity. The standpoint of
such postsocialist critique is not some externally fabricated blueprint but
a concrete imagination that was not brought to complete fruition—what
Erik Wright, for example, has called a real utopia (see, e.g., Wright 2000).

It is probably too soon to revisit state socialism and the possibilities
that were never allowed to mature. Nonetheless, in time there will be a
revisionist history that, while not denying communist horrors, will rec-
ognize socialism’s potentialities. Capitalism’s early history was no less
horrific than communism’s, but it managed to cultivate its potentialities
and handle its contradictions by reconstituting itself. Socialism did not
have such a chance—for world historic reasons rather than internal
limits—to refashion itself before it was overrun. Capitalism had the op-
portunity to do what socialism never succeeded in doing, to contain its
barbaric tendencies—or, more precisely in capitalism’s case, to export
them to naive and expectant nations, most recently those freed from the
communist vice. The export package has not been the 20th-century mixed
economy of advanced capitalism but an early 19th-century market uto-
pianism that today implants a dependent development. After all, how
many advanced capitalisms can there be in the world? Neoclassical so-
REFERENCES

Burawoy, Michael, and Janos Lukacs. 1992. The Radiant Past. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Creed, Gerald. 1999. “Deconstructing Socialism in Bulgaria.” Pp. 223-44 in Uncertain
Transition: Ethnographies of Change in the Postsocialist World, edited by Michael
Burawoy and Katherine Verdery. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

Eyal, Gil. 2000. “Pastors and Prognosticators: The New Class and the Break-up of
Czechoslovakia.” Manuscript. University of California, Berkeley.

Fuller, Linda. 1992. Work and Democracy in Socialist Cuba. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press.

. 1999. Where Was the Working Class? Revolution in East Germany . Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.

Gille, Zsuzsa. 2000. “Cognitive Cartography in a European Wasteland: Multinationals
and Greens Vie for Village Allegiance.” Pp. 240-67 in Global Ethnography, edited
by Michael Burawoy et al. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Haney, Lynne. 2000. “Global Discourses of Need: Mythologizing and Pathologizing
Welfare in Hungary.” Pp. 48-73 in Global Ethnography, edited by Michael Burawoy
et al. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Konrad, Gyorgy, and Ivan Szelényi. 1979. The Intellectuals on the Road to Class Power.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Selenyi, Anna. 1999a. “The Foundations of Post-Socialist Legitimacy.” Pp. 131-56 in
Dilemmas of Transition: The Hungarian Experience, edited by Aurel Braun and
Zoltan Barany. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

.1999b. “Old Political Rationalities and New Democracies: Compromise and
Confrontation in Hungary and Poland.” World Politics 51:484-519.

Stark, David. 1986. “Rethinking Internal Labor Markets: New Insights from a
Comparative Perspective.” American Sociological Review 51:492-504.

. 1989a. “Coexisting Organizational Forms in Hungary’s Emerging Mixed

Economy.” Pp. 137-68 in Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism: China

and Eastern Europe, edited by David Stark and Victor Nee. Stanford, Calif.:

Stanford University Press.

.1989b. “Toward an Institutional Analysis of State Socialism.” Pp. 3-31 in
Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism: China and Eastern Europe, edited
by David Stark and Victor Nee. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Szelényi, Ivan. 1983. Urban Inequalities Under State Socialism. New York: Oxford
University Press.

. 1988. Socialist Entrepreneurs. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Verdery, Katherine. 1999. “Fuzzy Property: Rights, Power, and Identity in
Transylvania’s Decollectivization.”. Pp. 53-82 in Uncertain Transition:
Ethnographies of Change in the Postsocialist World, edited by Michael Burawoy
and Katherine Verdery. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

Woodruff, David. 1999a. “Barter of the Bankrupt: The Politics of Demonetization in
Russia’s Federal State.” Pp. 83-124 in Uncertain Transition: Ethnographies of
Change in the Postsocialist World, edited by Michael Burawoy and Katherine

Verdery. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

. 1999b. Money Unmade. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Wright, Erik. 1997. Class Counts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

____. 2000. “Reducing Income and Wealth Inequality: Real Utopian Proposals.”
Contemporary Sociology 29 (1): 143-56.

Zbierski-Salameh, Slawomira. 1999. “Polish Peasants in the ‘Valley of Transition’:
Responses to Postsocialist Reforms.” Pp. 189-222 in Uncertain Transition:
Ethnographies of Change in the Postsocialist World, edited by Michael Burawoy
and Katherine Verdery. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.
