Men and Women at Work: Sex Segregation and Statistical Discrimination
Author(s): William T. Bielby and James N. Baron

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 4 (Tan., 1986), pp. 759-799
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2779958

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:42 UTC
This article develops and tests hypotheses about the determinants of
sex segregation in occupations employing both men and women,
analyzing data on a diverse sample of California establishments. In
the few instances in which men and women perform similar work
roles, the jobs are typically done in distinct organizational settings,
and when an enterprise employs both sexes in the same occupation,
men and women are usually assigned different job titles. The
findings are consistent with the theory of statistical discrimination,
which posits that employers reserve some jobs for men and others
for women. However, little evidence is found that employers’ prac-
tices reflect efficient and rational responses to sex differences in
skills and turnover costs. Alternative explanations for gender segre-
gation within and among organizations are suggested and the re-
search necessary to develop a more accurate account of the sexual
division of labor in the workplace is outlined.
pervasive and resistant to change (in the short run, at least) and thus seek
to achieve pay equity by recalibrating the value of jobs women now
perform. Policies emphasizing improved educational and training oppor-
tunities for women, in contrast, involve quite different assumptions about
the sources of segregated work.

Though the sexual division of labor may not be inevitable, it is cer-
tainly persistent. Recent research has shown that the level of occupational
sex segregation has changed very little since 1900, despite changes in the
sex composition of specific occupations (England 1981). Roughly 60%-
70% of male (or female) workers would require reclassification across
detailed occupations to equalize the sexual division of labor, although this
percentage has declined somewhat over the past 20 years (Blau and Hen-
dricks 1979; Beller 1984). While this result implies that the occupational
structure is divided substantially along gender lines, it also shows that
occupational specialization by sex is far from complete. During any given
period, there are numerous occupations in which the sex composition is
balanced.

However, a recent study at the organizational level (Bielby and Baron
1984) portrayed sex segregation as much more pervasive than did previ-
ous occupation-level research, showing that men and women rarely share
job titles within establishments. Our present article seeks to reconcile
those results with findings based on census occupational data. We show
that men and women in the same census occupation are sorted into dis-
tinct organizations or are segregated by job titles within work settings.
One set of explanations for this segregation stresses the optimal choices of
employees and employers, sex differences in skills, and the technical
requirements of work roles. These factors, it is argued, not only produce a
sexual division of labor across occupations but also channel women into
specific types of organizations or job classifications, even within occupa-
tional roles performed by both sexes. The first section of the article sum-
marizes this explanation for sex segregation. The perspective is oper-
ationalized with a statistical model that predicts the sex composition of
particular jobs within occupations employing both men and women. Hy-
potheses about the parameters of that model are tested with data from a
diverse sample of work organizations in California.

Analyzing segregation within lines of work pursued by both men and
women reduces the impact of socialization, occupational choice, and
“supply-side” factors in general. That women are either pushed or pulled
into a narrow range of occupations is well documented, although the
causes of this “crowding” are still debated (Bergmann 1974; Polachek
1979; England 1982). We do not attempt here to explain differences in the
occupational distributions of men and women. Instead, we examine areas
IS ORGANIZATIONAL SEX SEGREGATION “EFFICIENT”? THE
STATISTICAL DISCRIMINATION PERSPECTIVE

No doubt sex differences in labor supply account for some of the segrega-
tion we observe, even within mixed occupations. That is, sex-based work
role specialization could exist, even within narrowly defined lines of
work. For example, women bus drivers may choose employment with
school districts because of the attractiveness of part-time work. Met-
ropolitan and intercity bus lines may offer more lucrative compensation,
but such benefits may not outweigh the disadvantage of longer hours to
women burdened with child care and other household responsibilities.
However, supply-side factors cannot fully account for the nearly com-
plete segregation we document below. There is too much overlap between
the sexes in the distribution of job-relevant skills and aptitudes for sex
differences to account for near-complete segregation within and across
organizations (Marini and Brinton 1984). Indeed, whatever sex differ-
ences in skills exist within representative samples of adults are likely to be
much weaker among the select group of men and women in the same
detailed occupation (Deaux 1985).

The model of statistical discrimination offers a compelling explanation
for the existence of extreme segregation despite considerable overlap be-
tween the sexes in workers’ attributes (Phelps 1972; Arrow 1973; Thurow
1975; Aigner and Cain 1977; Blau 1984). The model assumes employers
perceive that on average the marginal productivity of men and of women
differ for a given line of work. For example, within a specific occupation,
women may be more likely to quit their jobs. If an employer incurs
significant turnover costs due to the expense of finding and training new
employees, the expected net contribution of the average female job appli-
cant is less than that of an otherwise comparable male applicant. The
model also assumes that it is unduly costly to ascertain these differences
among individual male and female job applicants. For example, employ-
ers may be unable to devise any procedure for screening individual appli-
cants with respect to quit propensity or work commitment.

Given these assumptions, profit-maximizing employers will reserve
jobs with high replacement costs for the group with the greater expected
productivity. Group differences may in fact be small relative to variation
within groups; there may be many female applicants with lower quit
propensities and greater work commitment than the average male appli-
cant. But if employers are unable to obtain this information for individual
applicants, expected profits are maximized by segregating workers by
sex. Females will be allocated to jobs with low turnover costs. Conse-
quently, economically efficient behavior by employers who face uncertain
information about applicants can lead to extreme sex segregation across
and within organizations, corresponding to differences in the average
expected net productivity of male and female job applicants. Even when
women fill the same occupational roles as men, they are likely to be
concentrated in less demanding jobs or firms, where the turnover costs
are lower. Moreover, statistical discrimination produces inequities be-
tween men and women in wages and other career outcomes. Qualified,
highly committed women obtain work assignments with lower pay and
few opportunities for on-the-job investments in productivity-enhancing
skills, which limits future wages as well. Conversely, men with weak
work commitment are posited to receive the same favorable work assign-
ments as the average male.

The model of statistical discrimination avoids invoking bias, prejudice,
or “tastes” for discrimination, so long as employers’ perceptions of group
differences are accurate. In fact, economists argue that segregation would
not persist if employers’ beliefs were incorrect, since employers not shar-
ing those beliefs would gain a competitive advantage by hiring women to
perform tasks from which they are excluded in rival firms (Arrow 1973;
Aigner and Cain 1977). However, empirical evidence on sex differences
in turnover behavior is mixed. Recent studies show that quit rates are
indeed higher overall for women than for men but that these differences
disappear when worker, labor market, and job characteristics are con-
trolled (Viscusi 1980; Blau and Kahn 1981; Osterman 1982; Haber,
Lamas, and Green 1983; Shorey 1983). In other words, turnover behavior
differs little among women and men with comparable human capital and
job responsibilities.

We have highlighted explanations of segregation based on skill differ-
ences and rational employer responses to uncertainty for several reasons.
First, as noted above, we have already documented near-complete segre-
gation at the level of job assignments within organizations (Bielby and
Baron 1984), and the model of statistical discrimination purports to ac-
count for such findings. Second, that model is based largely on untested
assumptions about the technical features of jobs and firms staffed by men
versus women. Our data, based on detailed information about jobs in
diverse organizations, are well suited for testing these assumptions.
Third, alternative explanations of segregation emphasize subjective at-
titudes and intentions of employers and workers on the one hand and
power relations among men and women on the other hand. Comparative
information across organizations on those dimensions is difficult to
obtain, and our data in these areas are qualitative and suggestive at
best. Finally, the idea that workplace inequality reflects individual
choices, technical demands, and optimal decision making figures promi-
nently in economics, as well as in public opinion and social policy. It
implies a particular set of remedies for gender inequality, namely,
encouraging female workers to invest in certain vocational skills and pro-
viding accurate information to employers about the labor market be-
havior of men and women. The validity of such policies depends on
whether there is empirical evidence of the optimality of existing arrange-
ments.

In other words, many sociological and economic theories take for
granted either the truth or falsity of the view that sex segregation arises
from employers’ satisficing behavior. However, we know of few studies
that examine how consistent employers’ hiring practices and staffing pat-
terns are with the predictions of the statistical discrimination framework.
Consequently, we develop hypotheses from that approach, examining the
extent to which sex segregation within mixed occupations reflects: (a)
differences (perceived or real) in the traits and abilities of female versus
male workers and (b) differences in turnover costs confronting employers.
Our analyses clearly do not represent a definitive “test” of rational ac-
counts of segregation. They do, however, allow us to assess the extent to
which workers and employers act as if those accounts are correct, based
on the allocation of men and women within mixed occupations to specific
establishments and job titles. The next section describes our data, hy-
potheses, and statistical model. We then present findings on the extent
and determinants of sex segregation within and across organizations.
First, we describe how occupation-level studies of segregation obscure the
sexual division of labor by overlooking segregation within and across
organizations, even within occupations that appear integrated. Then we
report results from our statistical models that operationalize the efficiency
accounts of segregation reviewed above. The concluding section consid-
ers alternatives to the efficiency-based account of sex segregation and
suggests avenues for further research.
DATA AND METHODS

Our data on the sex composition of mixed occupations were collected in
290 economic establishments in California between 1964 and 1979 by the
California Occupational Analysis Field Center of the U.S. Employment
Service.’ This information is used primarily in preparing the Dictionary
of Occupational Titles (hereafter, DOT). Over half the establishments are
independent businesses; the rest are branches, regional divisions, sub-
sidiaries, or production sites. Although the establishments do not consti-
tute a probability sample from a distinct population, they reflect the
diversity of California’s work settings. Industries represented include ag-
riculture, aircraft manufacturing, electronics manufacturing, banking,
food processing, public utilities, eating and drinking places, hotels, and
medical services (among many others). Manufacturing establishments are
overrepresented, and major California industries not represented include
construction trades, trucking, department stores, insurance carriers, and
miscellaneous business services (see Baron 1982, chaps. 2, 3; Bielby and
Baron 1984).* About 40,000 males and 11,000 females are employed in
over 10,000 official job titles in the 290 establishments in our sample.
most restaurants employ either male waiters or female waitresses, but it is
unusual to find both in the same enterprise. Such patterns presumably
reflect differences among organizations in employment and reward prac-
tices, work arrangements, and labor supply, and these differences often
contribute to very different career prospects for men and women in the
same occupation. Second, men and women can do equivalent work
within an organization but hold distinct job titles. For example, male
“operatives” and female “assemblers” in separate departments of a manu-
facturing establishment may do virtually identical work, although their
similar duties may not be reflected in their paychecks or statuses. In
short, empirical research must attend to two distinct phenomena: segre-
gation among organizations, arising from gender-based differentiation of
occupational labor markets across enterprises, and segregation within
organizations, sustained by a differentiation of positions held by men and
women in the same setting. It is important to know how much our under-
standing of sex segregation is obscured by studies at different levels of
occupational detail.

Major occupational groups. —Government agencies that monitor com-
pliance with EEO regulations do collect data on the sex composition of
jobs in specific enterprises. However, government monitoring efforts are
based almost exclusively on measures of sex composition across highly
aggregated occupational groups. The EEOC requires private employers
to report employment in nine categories: officials and managers, profes-
sionals, technicians, sales workers, office and clerical workers, skilled
craft workers, semiskilled operatives, unskilled laborers, and service
workers (U.S. EEOC 1982). It is therefore of interest to determine how
much gender segregation is obscured by the highly aggregated scheme
used to monitor trends. Five of the nine EEOC categories can be readily
reconstructed from the DOT, but it is sometimes difficult to distinguish
professionals from technicians and semiskilled from unskilled laborers.
Consequently, we collapsed those categories to obtain seven major
groups. Males tend to be overrepresented in each of the two major groups
we combined (U.S. EEOC 1977) and therefore our measures of segrega-
tion across seven major groups should be comparable with those com-
puted from the nine-group EEOC classification scheme.

Detailed occupational categories.—Because the three-digit DOT
classification scheme used by the Employment Service differs consider-
ably from that of the Census Bureau (Cain and Treiman 1981), we have
taken two steps to improve comparability. First, unlike the Census
Bureau, the DOT does not distinguish between skilled craft workers and
operatives in manual occupations. Consequently, we divided each three-
digit DOT production classification into skilled and unskilled categories
on the basis of the DOT index of worker involvement with things.*
Within a three-digit manual category, job titles having a rating of zero,
one, or two (the three highest levels of technical complexity) constituted
the skilled subcategory, and all others represented semiskilled or un-
skilled jobs.

Second, several three-digit DOT categories are based primarily on in-
dustrial distinctions. As a result, some DOT production classifications
actually include both manual and nonmanual work; for instance, “miscel-
laneous transportation occupations, not elsewhere classified” includes
both ticket agents and truck drivers. After examining six-digit production
occupations in the third edition of the DOT, we discovered that titles
having simple involvements with things (complexity ratings of three to
seven) and moderate to high ratings on complexity with data (zero to four)
are almost always nonmanual occupations. Therefore, manual and non-
manual subcategories of three-digit titles were constructed accordingly.*
These two modifications of the DOT three-digit classification increased
the number of detailed categories in our sample from 455 to 645. Since
our scheme is more detailed than the Census Bureau three-digit taxonomy
(which included aboui 450 categories in 1970), segregation levels com-
puted across the more detailed categories will be somewhat higher as
well.

The first set of empirical analyses we report assesses aggregation biases
in occupational measures of segregation. We compute indices of segrega-
tion across: (a) the seven major occupational groups, (b) our 645 detailed
occupational categories, and (c) establishment job titles. Our measure of
segregation is the index of dissimilarity—the percentage of female (or
male) workers that would have to be reclassified to equalize the distribu-
tions of work roles by sex (Duncan and Duncan 1955).
Sex Composition of Jobs in Mixed Occupations

The second set of analyses attempts to account for variation in the sex
composition of jobs in “mixed” occupations. For our purposes, a detailed
occupational category is “mixed” if males account for no less than 20% of
employment (in our sample) and no more than 80%.° Of 645 detailed
occupational categories, only 84 were mixed according to this criterion,
accounting for 24% of employment in our 290 establishments.’

Since we are interested in the determinants of segregation across and
within organizations, we partition the sex composition of a job into two
components. We denote the percentage female in the ith job in occupa-
tion j within establishment k as p;;,. Averaging over jobs in one establish-
ment yields p;, and over jobs and establishments gives p,.. The sex
composition of jobs within a given occupation can be partitioned into the
sum of within- and between-establishment components:

(ijk — D5.) = yr — Dir) + Ose — Pz).

Below we test hypotheses about characteristics of jobs and organizational
context that explain why some establishments employ men while others
employ women in the same mixed occupation. That is, we account for
variation in the between-establishment component: (p ,, — ~,;). We also
examine why a given establishment assigns men to some job clas-
sifications and women to others within the same detailed occupation.
That is, we examine variation in the within-establishment component,
(Dijk — P jk).

For example, over 2,000 workers in our sample are employed in the
classification “packaging occupations,” and about 55% are women, giv-
ing the appearance of an integrated line of work. The workers are distrib-
uted across 106 establishments, and our analysis seeks to explain why
some of those organizations employ mostly (or exclusively) male pack-
agers while others rely on women. Twenty-eight of those establishments
Determinants of Sex Composition of Jobs in Mixed Occupations:
Hypotheses and Operationalization

Table 1 lists attributes of organizations and jobs that are hypothesized to
affect the sex composition of jobs in mixed occupations, according to the
efficiency-based accounts of sex segregation outlined above. Collectively,
these measures index the turnover costs, training requirements, and tech-
nical features of work roles that are assumed to influence staffing deci-
sions by employers and employees. Although some are more direct mea-
sures of theoretically relevant dimensions than others, there is ample
precedent in previous research for including each measure in table 1 in
our statistical model. Descriptive statistics are reported in table 2.

Organizational context.—Large organizations typically have formal
job ladders and other personnel procedures that facilitate on-the-job
training and reduce turnover costs. Oi argues: “The initial fixed invest-
ments in recruiting and training employees are likely to be greater in large
firms for two reasons. First, smaller firms with shorter, uncertain lives
have less opportunity to capture the returns. Second, training yields
higher returns when workers must be taught to conform with prescribed
production methods. Large firms are thus provided with more incentives
to design pay and personnel policies which can reduce labor turnover,
thereby increasing the returns to firm-specific human capital” (1983, p.
150). Empirical results on the relationship between establishment size,
job tenure, and personnel practices support Oi’s contention (Bielby and
Baron 1983; Oi 1983; Barth, Cordes, and Haber 1984; Pfeffer and Cohen
1984; Wholey 1984). Consequently, the efficiency-based perspective sug-
gests that within mixed occupations, women typically find employment in
organizations operating on a smaller scale. We measure scale (z,) as the
natural logarithm of total establishment employment.

Williamson (1981) argues that formal governance structures regulating
the employment relationship are implemented to economize on the cost of
turnover and job-specific training. Accordingly, we expect women in
mixed occupations to be underrepresented in organizations covered by a
union contract or formal job posting and bidding procedures. A binary
variable (z2) denotes the presence of such arrangements.

When production technology creates interdependence among workers,
they are less likely to be interchangeable and the costs of replacing work-
ers who quit should be higher. Such interdependence is characteristic of
TABLE 1

HYPOTHESIZED RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN JOB CHARACTERISTICS, ORGANIZATIONAL
CONTEXT, AND PERCENTAGE FEMALE IN JoBS IN MIXED OCCUPATIONS

 

 

Hypothesized Effect
Independent Variable Description on % Female

 

Organizational context:

Organizational scale -
Formal governance structures _
Process technology -

Specialization =
Training time =
Technical complexity =
Numerical skills -
Verbal skills
Motor coordination
Manual dexterity
Finger dexterity
Clerical perception
Spatial skills aa
Eye/hand/foot coordination =
Physical strength aa
Varied duties
Performance standards
Repetitiveness
Interpersonal skills
Direction or planning skills _

lt +

++
“Mojaq payodad s}[nsai uo pasiaaar uaaq aavy suzIC ‘sainseaur apnynde zYy3!a ay} uO S][FyYs Y3ry 0} puodsaizo9 saio9s MOTE

“mojaq payiodal s}jnsai uo pasiaaar usaq savy SUBIC “Ajxa]dwi09 YyBIy 0} puodsars09 sa10ds MOTE
MoJaq pamndwios s}nser uo pasiaaar usaq aAvy SUIS “UORezTTEDaIdS YBIY 0) puodsa1i09 sa109s MOTT,

“sa]QelIVA SNOWOJOY>IP Joy poy10dai JON,

 

 

 

8b Cn (ayewaz %) uottsodurod xas qof
ut IZ 1-0 qusweisduis} Suruueyd ‘jouos ‘uoNsaIIq.
ze 1-0 quauresaduiay ajdoad yum Sureaq:
9S" 1-0 quouresaduray ssauaayneday
6o° T-0 quowreseduis} sprepurys ooueUI0ji0g
€2° 1-0 quowreradura} sarynp pare,
La 1-0 ‘Sq SZ = Buns ‘yWuaNs yeotshyd
+ sb ST apnynde uoreurps0os yooy/puey/ahq,
s oe St apminde siirfs feneds
OT re st apnynde uondaosad pesuayy circ tects eens 6x
9 se oT apnynde Ayasoyxop 1oBuIg reeset eres ay
9° re St apnynde Ajuayxop yenuepy octets terete Ly
9° se oT apnynde uoreurpsooo rojo teeters Ox
6: ze ct apnande eq corti tcitecececttecterseseste eee sy
6 ee S- gopnynde jeuoumyy citer et erste eset ees by
6T 8s £0 H@uUNeI LOG) SBA YM JuaUIaAoAUT Jo AyxapduTo eee fx
a4 bb 6-1 puny Bummer, cotter ee teers ex
oT 00 s1ayI0M °B0r] juonenpepadg crit treet crest reset ee et eee seen eees ly
:sqof £66‘z Jo saInquNY
Lt ee ++ (g7euray %) uotsoduios xas feuoneziuesiQ
aor ir 1-0 ABopouyray ssavoag. etter fg
62° 1-0 syuamiasueiie BUIPpiq JO UOTUGQ, tess rss es eg
9ST 89° HatUKo|dwwa *3or7] ayeos TeuoryeztueBiQ, reer ee eters eee eee y
ssJuaUIYst]qeyse 06Z Jo saInqLNYy
xaS — ueay ou ainquny aqqeie,,

 

 

SNOILVdN990 AAIXIPL NI SAOf[ ANV SLNAWHSITAVLSY JO SALNGMILLY YO SOLLSILVLS AAILARIOSAG,

caTavL
sample, these ratings were obtained from Employment Service analysts’
on-site evaluations. Detailed job analyses were not performed for the
remaining jobs, and ratings were obtained from the published Dictionary
based on the nine-digit DOT classifications assigned to jobs.®

Our single direct measure of training time (x2) is the DOT rating of
specific vocational preparation (SVP). The scale ranges from one (“short
demonstration only”) to nine (over 10 years). The typical job in our sam-
ple from mixed occupations requires about six months’ training, and we
expect women to be overrepresented in jobs requiring little training.°

Technical complexity, like specialization, is assumed to be associated
with higher training and turnover costs and therefore an underrepresen-
tation of females. Our measure (x3) is the DOT rating of the job’s complex-
ity of involvement with things.

The next eight measures, x, through x;,, are based on DOT ratings of
job aptitudes, “the specific capacities or abilities required of an individual
in order to facilitate the learning of some task or job duty” (U.S. Depart-
ment of Labor 1972, p. 233). Each is measured on the following scale: (1)
the top 10% of the working population, (2) the ninetieth to sixty-seventh
percentile, (3) the middle third, (4) the thirty-third to tenth percentile, and
(5) the bottom decile.

Previous research has documented small but significant differences be-
tween men and women on traits corresponding to these eight aptitude
measures (Maccoby and Jacklin 1974; Marini and Brinton 1984), and
hypothesized signs in table 1 correspond to the directions of those differ-
ences. That is, we expect men to dominate employment in jobs requiring
numerical ability, manual dexterity, or spatial skills, but not verbal skills,
motor coordination, finger dexterity, or clerical perception.!° Since sex
differences across individuals are modest on these dimensions, however,
male-female aptitude differences alone cannot explain extreme sex segre-
gation across jobs; an efficiency-based account must also assume that
employers statistically discriminate based on these aptitudes. For ex-
ample, within a mixed line of work, it is difficult to explain why only
women would choose to apply for jobs requiring finger dexterity, when
many men also have the requisite skills. !1 However, if there is no reliable,
less expensive method of measuring whether applicants can accurately
manipulate small objects, employers are likely to reserve jobs requiring
such tasks for women.

On average, men have greater upper-body strength than women.
Strength is one of the few physical traits related to work roles for which
nontrivial sex differences exist (Maccoby and Jacklin 1974; Marini and
Brinton 1984). Our binary indicator (x12) is based on DOT ratings of the
amount of lifting required on the job (U.S. Department of Labor 1972,
pp. 325-27) and is coded one for jobs requiring lifting 25 pounds or more
(zero otherwise).

Our last five measures of job characteristics are based on dichotomous
DOT ratings of “temperaments,” defined as “the adaptability require-
ments made on the worker by specific types of job-worker situations”
(U.S. Department of Labor 1972, p. 297). The varied duties temperament
(x13) characterizes jobs requiring “adaptability to performing a variety of
duties, often changing from one task to another of a different nature
without loss of efficiency or composure” (U.S. Department of Labor 1972,
pp. 309-10). Within mixed occupations, such jobs are likely to have
lower turnover costs owing to lower firm- and job-specific skill content.
Consequently, we expect women to be overrepresented in jobs coded one
on this measure.

The performance standards temperament (x,4) denotes “adaptability to
situations requiring the precise attainment of set limits, tolerances, or
standards” (U.S. Department of Labor 1972, pp. 308-9. It should charac-
terize work that is sufficiently routinized that control is embodied in
technical standards of performance (Edwards 1979). Since training and
turnover costs should be lower, women should be overrepresented in jobs
characterized by this temperament. Similarly, within mixed occupations
women should be concentrated in jobs requiring the repetitiveness tem-
perament (x5): “adaptability to performing repetitive work, or continu-
ously performing the same work, according to set procedures, sequence or
pace” (U.S. Department of Labor 1972, p. 305).

Finally, we expect women to be overrepresented in jobs characterized
by the interpersonal or “dealing with people” temperament (x16) and
underrepresented in jobs requiring the direction, control, and planning of
activities (x17). The former is assigned to jobs requiring cooperativeness,
the ability to work in teams, and ease in working relations (U.S. Depart-
ment of Labor 1972, p. 304), interpersonal traits often thought to be more
characteristic of women than men (Marini and Brinton 1984). Con-
versely, the latter temperament corresponds to interpersonal traits more
often attributed to men (Deaux 1985).

Our model attempts to represent efficiency-based accounts of sex segre-
gation as accurately as possible, given the available data. Some variables
included in our model, however, also apply to other perspectives on
segregation. In some cases, other accounts suggest hypotheses about vari-
ables that are the opposite of those in table 1. For example, various
organizational theories argue that larger organizations are more visible to
and dependent on the state and are therefore more vulnerable to political
pressures to provide employment opportunities for women and minorities
(e.g., Salancik 1979). If so, women in mixed occupations should be over-
represented in large establishments, contrary to the hypothesis in table 1.
In other instances, competing perspectives on segregation suggest effects
similar to those hypothesized in table 1, but for different reasons. For
example, male-dominated unions might make deliberate efforts on behalf
of male workers to exclude women from more desirable jobs (Deaux and
Ullman 1983);!? we cannot distinguish that effect from the one hy-
pothesized above for formal governance structures merely on the basis of
our statistical model. We have opted to formulate a reasonably complete
representation of one dominant approach to segregation, the efficiency-
based account, rather than include weak measures from competing per-
spectives within a single statistical model. That is, we have taken the
statistical discrimination perspective seriously and operationalized it as
faithfully as possible. We rely on two kinds of evidence in evaluating how
well that perspective explains sex segregation within mixed occupations:
the estimates obtained from our statistical model and, in a later section
Statistical Model

We represent the determinants of percentage female in the ith job in
occupation j within establishment & as:

Pik = @ + by Xie + by Ze + Uj + Cie, (1)
where x,;, is a vector of job attributes (x, through «,, in tables 1 and 2) and
z» includes establishment characteristics (z, through 23 in tables 1 and 2).
The term u; represents all (unmeasured) occupational attributes that af-
fect the sex composition of jobs in that line of work, and e;;, is an orthog-

onal job-specific stochastic disturbance.
Averaging equation (1) across jobs in an establishment yields

Pie = 2 + Dy x je + byez + Uj + C 5p, (2)

and averaging equation (2) across jobs in all establishments for the jth
occupation gives
tional levels. Both OLS and GLS estimates of eq. (5) are biased to the extent that
relevant variables are omitted from x,,, and z, in eq. (1), but estimates for eq. (4) are
unaffected by omissions from z,. The OLS estimates reported here were computed
from pairwise present correlations, since DOT ratings of aptitudes, temperaments,
physical demands, and training time were missing for about 8% of the jobs in our
sample.

'4 Tn fact, we have two estimates of the coefficients that make up by, since b, appears
on the right side of both eqq. (4) and (5). We ignore estimates of b, from eq. (5) for two
reasons. First, those estimates can be biased because of omissions of relevant organ-
izational variables in z,, whereas estimates from eq. (4) are immune from that
specification error. Second, estimates of b; from the two equations will differ if there
are nontrivial “contextual” effects of job attributes. We have no substantive rationale
for hypothesizing contextual effects, so we do not interpret differences in the effect of
Xyz as estimated from eqq. (4) and (5). Instead, we assume that any apparent contex-
tual effects actually reflect omitted establishment characteristics in eq. (5).

'S In comparison, the index for the same seven groups among California establish-
ments that filed reports with EEOC in 1975 was 42.6 across all industries and 44.6 in
manufacturing (U.S. EEOC 1977). Our sample includes some small establishments
not covered by the EEOC, which are likely to be more segregated (Bielby and Baron
1984). Among establishments in our sample with at least 100 employees, the segrega-
tion index across major groups equaled 38.4. Note that this figure is smaller than that
computed from EEOC data, so it seems unlikely that our sample is biased toward
establishments and industries that are more segregated than average.
1°96 wel 609 sr oz Ooee SIOYIOM BITAIBG
£786 T'sg 691 £e 8 SOST ttt SI9HIOM Sates *
186 “9 yy9'7 16 ey SIVOD curt SIVYIOM [eID
6°96 9°89 909‘z 861 62 BOS PT sa9y10M UoNINposd
poyTHystues pue payrysuy,
6°86 68 098'T O61 ¥ belo siayI0M UOTNposd pays ”
0°98 y8r 209°T 0z 61 OLB s[efoyjo pue siaseuryl
+ ¥6 LOL Seo'T 6S os LOSE sIayIOM TeoTUYI2}
pure [euolssajoig
Sop. suonedns99, SUTLLL SNOILVdN990 FIVAI SuTyOM, dNOAD TWNOILVdN990 AOlv
qo waia-¢ 40 ‘ON 40 “ON, % 40 “ON,

ssouoy
NOLLVOTIOTS Y

 

SdNOAD TWNOLLVdND90 YOLVIA| Ad SATLIL, AOL GNV SNOILVdNDIO ONOWV NOILVOTANAS XIS

© GTGVL
reclassification across the 645 detailed occupations (bottom row, table 3).
This is slightly higher than the index values reported for 1970 census
three-digit categories (England 1981). The difference is not surprising,
since our classification scheme is more detailed, particularly among
highly segregated manufacturing occupations.

At the level of establishment job titles, sex segregation is nearly com-
plete. In our sample, over 96% of the women would have to be trans-
ferred to different job titles to equalize sex ratios. © Indeed, only 8% of the
workers in our sample shared job titles with members of the opposite sex,
and only 4% of the titles were mixed.

Nor is there much difference in job segregation across major occupa-
tional groups, despite modest differences at the level of detailed occu-
pations (compare the last two cols. of table 3). Administrative work
(managers and officials) seems modestly desegregated, but job-level
segregation is uniformly high (indeed, almost complete) in six of the seven
groups and only slightly lower among managers and officials. Men and
women may share occupational designations in a few lines of work; but
even then they almost always work in different organizations or hold
different job titles within an establishment.

Table 4 demonstrates how assessments of segregation within estalish-
ments are affected by aggregation. A classification scheme similar to the
one used by EEOC portrays 28% of the establishments as having segrega-
tion indices less than 40, and the same fraction has indices of 90 or above.
Yet only a handful of enterprises were even modestly desegregated at the
level of detailed occupations or establishment job titles.!” Indeed, only
42% of the 290 establishments had amy job titles to which both men and
women were assigned. An overwhelming majority of the work settings
were either completely sex segregated by job title or nearly so.

In sum, tables 3 and 4 demonstrate that occupational segregation in
specific establishments is typically much higher than segregation com-
puted from sex composition figures aggregated across establishments.
Consequently, for many detailed occupations there appears to be dis-
agreement across work settings about the sex label of specific occupa-
tional roles. Moreover, results reported in table 4 imply that even when
an establishment employs both sexes in the same (detailed) line of work,
men and women are usually assigned different official job titles. In the
oor 062 001 062 oor 062 0 ttrtttteretteess RI0oL

 

 

 

 

 

z L z L £ L * (ayeurey [T2) OOT = V
9 At 9 “1 9 ras “** @jew Te) OO1 = VV
os Set ve 06 6 $2 (pextw) OOT = VV
91 sb Wr ee s ST ttt ool > Vs 6
9 41 L oz L OT rrr: $6 >V = 06
8 zz I ee ot 62 tts 06 > V 508
8 +2 oz Ls €1 le seers 995 08 > YS 09
z L 8 4 IZ 19 09 >V = 0r
z s z L oz 6s Or > V = 02
a ' r ¢ 8 Sooo eee o>V
% syuauystiqeysy % syusulysyqeysy % squamystyqeisy TIATT NOILVOIAOTS
jo “ON jo on joon
SaILL of ssouov Vv SNOLL¥dN990 SSOUDV SdNOU‘) YOLVIA SSOMOV V

 

 

SHILI, dof NV
‘SNOILVdND9O GITIVLIG ‘SdNOYD TVNOILVdN990 AOlvI{ SSOUOV GALNdWOD NOILVOIAOTS AO STAAD] AP SLNAWHSITAVISY 10 SNOILAGIILSIG

valavs
Segregation in Mixed Occupations: Statistical Models

All but 24 of the 290 establishments in our sample employed workers in at
least one mixed occupation.'* However, only 144 enterprises employed
both men and women in mixed occupations. Roughly 12,000 workers in
our sample (24%) were employed in seemingly mixed occupations, and
over 4,000 of those were in organizations that did not hire members of the
opposite sex in their line of work. Working in the same job classification
with members of the opposite sex is even rarer. Of nearly 3,000 job titles
in mixed occupations, only 215 were filled by both men and women. Just
five establishments account for 85 (40%) of these mixed job titles.

In short, the majority of workers in our sample did not work in mixed
occupations, and those that did were typically engaged in routine admin-
istrative tasks (e.g., bookkeepers, production clerks), production work
(e.g., assemblers, packagers), or service jobs (e.g., hotel clerks, waiters,
and waitresses). Workers in mixed occupations occasionally labored in
settings where members of the opposite sex had similar roles, but men
and women were rarely assigned the same job titles in the same enter-
prise. Thus, even when men and women are not segregated occupation-
ally, they are often segregated organizationally.

Table 5 reports the effects of organizational and job characteristics on
the gender composition (percentage female) of jobs in mixed occupations.
The results modestly support the hypotheses we derived from efficiency-
based explanations of sex segregation. All but three of the hypothesized
effects are statistically significant; the strongest effects are associated with
physical demands, training time, specialization, and finger dexterity. For
example, consider two otherwise comparable jobs that differ on the bi-
nary variable denoting heavy lifting, that differ by one point on the finger
dexterity aptitude, and that are a standard deviation apart on specializa-
tion and training time. The expected difference in percentage female is
68, with the job that is less specialized, requires less training, involves
greater finger dexterity, and does not require heavy lifting likely to be
allocated to women.

However, the statistical model specified in equation (1) is at odds with
the empirical data in one important respect. The model assumes that job
TABLE 5

DETERMINANTS OF SEX COMPOSITION (% Female) OF WoRK IN MIXED OCCUPATIONS,
METRIC COEFFICIENTS FOR REGRESSION (N = 2,997)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Coefficient
Independent Variable Description Metric Estimate*
Organizational context:
By vee e cece ee eee Organizational scale Log employment ae ane
BD eee cence ee eeee Union or bidding
arrangements 0-1 — 8.8**
Process technology 0-1 Son at
Specialization Log workers? —6.5**
Training time 1-7 —6.6**
Complexity of involvement
with things 0-7° —3.8**
Numerical aptitude 1-54 —3.9*
Verbal aptitude 1-5 ese
Motor coordination aptitude 1-5 1.2
Manual dexterity aptitude 1-5 —2.4
Finger dexterity aptitude 1-5 13.3**
Clerical perception aptitude 1-5 7.4**
Spatial skills aptitude 1-5 —6.5**
Eye/hand/foot coordination
aptitude 1-5 ariel
Physical strength, lifting
2 25 lbs. 0-1 — 34.2**
Varied duties temperament 0-1 10.2**
Performance standards
temperament 0-1 Sede
Repetitiveness temperament 0-1 6.2**
Dealing with people tem-
perament 0-1 —14.3**
MAD cece eee eeeeene Direction, control, plan-
ning temperament 0-1 1.0
Between Establishments Within Establishments
Variance explained: @y» — P,) (Duk — P 5%)
.142 156

Adjusted R?
sex composition has a continuous distribution and varies in response to
marginal changes in organizational and job characteristics. In effect, the
model assumes that both the sex composition of the applicant pool and
the propensity of employers to hire females in mixed occupations are
distributed continuously. Given the distributions on the independent
variables and the coefficient estimates reported in table 5, nearly two-
thirds (63%) of the jobs in our sample are predicted to have between 20%
and 80% females. However, only 6% actually did; 54% of the jobs in our
sample from mixed occupations contained no women and 39% were
100% females. *®

Thus men and women differ much more in their job assignments
within mixed occupations than one would expect if segregation primarily
reflects labor supply. That is, the women in our sample of mixed occupa-
tions have already eschewed “female” work roles; consequently, it seems
unlikely that the vast majority of them would have chosen to be seg-
regated from men, either by organizational setting or by virtue of their
specific job classification. Nor does it seem very likely that their abilities
and aptitudes would be sufficiently different from their male counterparts
within the same work role to explain the pervasive sex segregation within
mixed occupations. Instead, the sharp discontinuity in the distribution of
sex composition among jobs suggests that statistical discrimination by
employers on the demand side has a far greater impact on segregation
within mixed occupations than do labor supply constraints. Suppose, for
example, that employers rank jobs with respect to their appropriateness
for female applicants based on their perceptions of requisite skills, train-
ing, and turnover costs. Then, using some type of mental discriminant
function, they classify jobs into one cluster reserved for males and an-
other reserved for females. Such behavior is consistent with the model of
statistical discrimination and with the dichotomous distribution of gender
composition observed in our job-level data.

To test this notion more adequately, we reformulated our statistical
model to account for whether or not women were excluded from a given
job. That is, we specify the gender mix of a job as a dichotomous (rather
than continuous) outcome, affected by the same factors that we suggested
above are weighed by employers. Accordingly, we respecified equation
(1) as a logistic model:

Onn = exp(a + bixie + b2Z,), (6)
where Oj;, represents the conditional odds that women are excluded from
the ith job in occupation j in establishment k. Estimates of logistic
coefficients are reported in table 6, along with the net effect of each
variable on the probability of female exclusion (Hanushek and Jackson
1977, p. 189). (Effects are evaluated with all independent variables set to
their mean values.)

The coefficients are comparable in relative size with those reported in
table 5. Women in mixed occupations are most likely to be excluded from
job classifications that are specialized; require heavy lifting; do not re-
quire finger dexterity, verbal aptitude, or clerical perception; or have
longer training requirements. Women are also more likely to be absent
from jobs that involve variable tasks, spatial skills, eye/hand/foot coordi-
nation; that are in larger establishments; or that are in enterprises with
unions or formal bidding arrangements.

The differences between tables 5 and 6 are informative. The predictive
power of the model in table 5 was quite weak, since it attempted to locate
jobs along a continuum of percentage female, when in fact most jobs had
values of zero or 100. The model explained just 14% of the variance in sex
composition of mixed occupations across establishments and only 16% of
the, variance in the sex composition of jobs within establishments.’° In
contrast, the logistic regression model in table 6 is remarkably successful
in predicting whether or not women are excluded from a job, correctly
classifying 82% of the 3,000 jobs.

In short, the statistical results suggest that employers do reserve some
jobs for men and others for women, based on their knowledge of technical
and organizational features of work and their perceptions (however accu-
rate) of sex differences in skills and work orientations. Technical features
of jobs in the same mixed occupation are similar in many respects, but
they are not identical. Our findings indicate that small differences in job
requirements get amplified into large differences in gender composition.
In the organizations we examined, the propensity to hire females in a
mixed line of work appears to be an all-or-nothing proposition. With few
exceptions, a job was either inappropriate for women or appropriate only
for women, regardless of the amount of overlap in the attributes of pro-
spective male and female employees.

As we noted above, economists often assume that such employment
practices are economically optimal and not based on bias or prejudice,
TABLE 6

DETERMINANTS OF LIKELIHOOD THAT WOMEN ARE EXCLUDED FROM JoBS IN MIXED
OccuPaTIONS, LoGIsTIC REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS (N = 2,997)

 

 

 

 

 

Coefficient Effect on
Independent Variable Description Estimate* Probability?
Organizational context:
Zee CCE EC eee Organizational scale .20** 05
BZ eee e cence Union or bidding arrange-
ments Soe 14
BZ eve e cece eee Process technology
Job characteristics:
My cece cece eeee Specialization‘ .60** 14
eee eee Training time .29** .07
HZ cece cece eeee Complexity of involvement
with things ee oer
Numerical aptitude? 33** -08
Verbal aptitude — .70** -.17
Motor coordination aptitude
Manual dexterity aptitude bee see
Finger dexterity aptitude aaPl el Sa —.26
Clerical perception aptitude — .58** —.14
Spatial skill aptitude .52** 12
Eye/hand/foot coordination
aptitude mS 2nd 12
Physical strength, lifting
= 25 lbs. 1.45** 32
Varied duties temperament — .27 —.07
Performance standards
temperament oer
Repetitiveness temperament — .39* —.10
Dealing with people tem-
perament
X17 Direction, control, planning
temperament

 

 

NOTE —Likelihood ratio x’ 1001.4 with 22 df; 82% of cases correctly classified.

*Maximum likelihood estimate of linear net effect on log odds of exclusion. Three dots denote
variables with insignificant effects in the full model and dropped from the final model.

> Net effect on probability of exclusion of a one-unit change in the independent variable, evaluated at
the mean.

© Sign reversed so that high scores correspond to more specialized jobs.

4 Signs reversed so that high scores correspond to greater aptitude.

* P < 085 (two-tailed test).

** P< ,001 (two-tailed test).
Is Statistical Discrimination Efficient? Anecdotal Evidence regarding
Employers’ Staffing Decisions

Employers’ practices regarding the placement of women in jobs requiring
strenuous physical effort are particularly difficult to reconcile with an
efficiency perspective on sex segregation. According to table 6, whether
or not a job required lifting 25 pounds or more was one of the strongest
predictors of the likelihood of excluding women from that job. Since an
individual’s ability to lift heavy objects seems neither difficult nor costly
to measure, it should be possible to devise more efficient screening mecha-
nisms for physically demanding jobs than totally excluding women who
are in that line of work.

Policies such as those summarized in Appendix A provide the context
for our statistical results and suggest alternative explanations for our
findings. Appendix A lists the observations of some Employment Service
analysts about employer policies toward female employment. This infor-
mation is compiled from narrative reports for 153 of the 290 establish-
ments in our sample.”! Physical demands of work are mentioned in 41%
of those reports, and Appendix A lists examples in which physical re-
quirements figured explicitly or implicitly in employers’ policies for as-
signing women to specific jobs.

The comments in Appendix A (and others we encountered like them)
underscore the diversity of organizational and industrial contexts in
which restrictions based on physical demands were invoked, such as
finance, transportation, utilities, and recreation, as well as light and
heavy manufacturing. Narratives for some establishments (e.g., the air-
line in App. A) mentioned state legal restrictions that, until struck down
by the California Supreme Court in 1970, restricted women’s lifting to 25
pounds. No doubt those restrictions provided the rationale for excluding
women from heavy physical work in many other establishments as well.
Nevertheless, our data contain numerous instances in which employer
policy cited heavy lifting as the reason for excluding women from specific
jobs, although detailed job analyses revealed that those jobs required no
strenuous physical exertion (see also Deaux and Ullman 1983). Thus, our
statistical model understates the impact of such policies on sex segrega-
tion, since it assesses only the extent to which women were excluded from
jobs that actually required lifting in excess of the (pre-1971) legal limit.

Since legal restrictions on lifting for women became unconstitutional
after 1970, we would expect rational, profit-maximizing employers to
cease using sex as an inefficient screen for that job requirement, instead
filling physically demanding jobs with workers of either sex who could
demonstrate the capability to perform the work. Indeed, policies restrict-
ing women’s employment based on physical demands were mentioned
less frequently in narrative reports after 1970. Although 45% of the 124
reports prepared between 1965 and 1970 mentioned such restrictions,
only 24% of the 29 reports prepared between 1971 and 1979 did so.

However, if employer policy—as articulated to Employment Service
analysts—changed after 1970, employer practices apparently did not. We
added two binary terms to our logistic regression model to test whether
the tendency to exclude women from jobs requiring heavy lifting declined
after 1970. The first was coded one if the establishment was studied after
1970, and the second was an interaction term coded one if the job re-
quired lifting 25 pounds or more and was studied after 1970. If anything,
however, women were more likely to be excluded from jobs requiring
heavy lifting in establishments studied after 1970. The logistic coefficient
for the main effect of physical demands (the effect for establishments
studied before 1971) was 1.1, but the sum of main and interaction effects
for physical demands (the effect for establishments studied after 1970)
was 2.6.7?

In short, strenuous physical effort appears to have justified excluding
women from specific jobs for some time after the legal rationale disap-
peared. On the one hand, these results suggest that employers persisted in
a practice for which they could be held liable under both state and federal
civil rights legislation. On the other hand, staffing patterns observed in
the 1970s partially reflect both job assignments made before the era of
effective EEO enforcement and inertia in women’s work preferences. For
all these reasons, organizational practices endure long after the circum-
stances that warranted them have disappeared (Stinchcombe 1965).

Although women are typically excluded from work perceived as physi-
cally demanding, they are often given exclusive access to tasks viewed as
routine and requiring attention to detail. Unlike the practices sum-
marized in Appendix A, policies regarding employment of women in
“detail” work have not been sanctioned by protective legislation and
regulations. Nevertheless, as the examples in Appendix B show, an em-
ployer’s beliefs about the work habits and skills of women can become
part of an organization’s personnel policy. A job in assembly or packag-
ing may be labeled “men’s work” or “women’s work” depending on
whether it is identified as physically demanding—and therefore suitable
only for men—or routine and requiring attention to detail—and thus
suitable only for women. For example, women worked as bottlers and
packers in several of the pharmaceutical enterprises in our sample,
whereas men did remarkably similar tasks in a brewery (where a union
refers job applicants to the plant).

The labeling of “men’s work” and “women’s work” for similar tasks
occurs within organizations as well. Table 7 reports staffing patterns in
packing jobs for a pharmaceutical establishment. An Employment Ser-
vice analyst classified each job into the same nine-digit DOT category of
“packager, machine.” The establishment, however, recognized 10 dis-
tinct job classifications for the eight men and 85 women performing this
occupational role, terming men “technicians” and women “operators.”
An establishment that processes sugar, studied in 1972, had a staffing
pattern for the same DOT category that was the mirror image of the one
in table 7. Over 120 male packagers were distributed across 15 job titles,
and 19 women were employed in three different job classifications. For
both establishments, our original statistical model in table 5, based on
measures of job requirements and organizational context, predicts that
each job would have between 30% and 50% female incumbents. How-
ever, these jobs were actually fully segregated by sex, as were many
others like them in our sample. In other words, the role of machine
packager has some characteristics of traditionally “male” jobs, such as
heavy lifting requirements, and of traditionally “female” jobs, such as
repetitive tasks, low training requirements, low spatial skills, and modest
finger dexterity. Thus, there appears to be no compelling technical
rationale for attaching a specific sex label to each particular job, yet
employers did so. Accounting for these gender distinctions among work
roles requires going beyond efficiency perspectives on organizations and
inequality, and we suggest some alternatives in the concluding section.
to mill, but the separation of male and female work was almost universal;
in most mills many rooms were staffed entirely by women. Thus the
separate realms of work for men and women remained undisturbed”
(1982, pp. 171-72). Sex segregation appears just as pervasive within and
across organizations in almost every line of work represented in our di-
verse sample of California establishments, even within seemingly inte-
grated occupations. Work done by both men and women is often done in
distinct organizational settings, and when enterprises employ both sexes
in the same occupation, they typically assign them different job titles.
Once established, sex labels of job titles acquire tremendous inertia, even
when similar work is done by the opposite sex elsewhere in the same
establishment or in other settings.

To be sure, differences in the allocation of men and women across
occupational roles, whether by choice or by constraint, do account for
much of the segregation we observe. For example, as recently as 1980,
men outnumbered women by more than two to one in managerial occupa-
tions, whereas the ratio was about one to three in clerical work. Women
still make up less than 3% of workers in the construction trades, whereas
less than 4% of all registered nurses are men (U.S. Department of Com-
merce 1983). But as we have shown, there is considerable sex segregation
within and across organizations, even within detailed occupational cate-
gories. This article focused on occupational roles that are filled by both
men and women, allowing us to reduce the impact of vocational choice on
segregation.

Within the mixed occupations in our sample, men tended to be em-
ployed in larger organizations and in establishments with unions or for-
mal bidding arrangements. They also tended to monopolize specialized
jobs with more complex tasks and firm-specific training requirements.
Physically demanding work was typically not performed by women,
whereas tasks requiring finger dexterity were rarely done by men. The
organizations in our sample utilized diverse technologies, drew from
many different labor pools, and ranged from small family businesses to
massive bureaucracies. Yet men and women were found in distinct job
classifications in almost every setting, even when their roles were so
similar that they belonged to the same detailed (nine-digit) occupational
classification.

Our research has several important implications for studying the sexual
division of labor. First, the aggregation biases we illustrate clearly under-
score the limits of occupation-level analyses. Second, our finding of al-
most complete job-level segregation by sex, even within seemingly inte-
grated occupations, suggests a structural basis for sex differences in
promotion opportunities, occupational status, and earnings trajectories.
Third, our regression results are consistent with models of statistical
discrimination, but they are difficult to reconcile with the view that such
decision making is rational or optimal. Our findings suggest two impor-
tant directions for future research: analyses of the role played by employ-
ers’ beliefs and perceptions and studies of the institutionalization of gen-
der-biased employment practices. Finally, our research demonstrates the
importance of attending to changes in job- and organization-level struc-
tures and processes in studying labor force trends. We discuss each of
these issues briefly.
confined to specific work settings, such as when driving school buses
becomes “women’s work” while intercity bus driving remains “men’s
work”; (2) increased employment of women in segregated job titles in
organizations already utilizing male workers, as appears to be the case in
some areas of data processing; or (3) transitory employment patterns as an
occupation’s sex label changes from “men’s” to “women’s work” (e.g.,
telephone operator and bank teller early in the century).*

Second, using major occupational groups to monitor segregation, as
EEOC does, seems virtually worthless. Biases in EEO-1 data have been
documented by Smith and Welch (1984). They find that establishments
that are covered by contract compliance regulations apparently have a
broad view of what constitutes a managerial job when classifying women
and minority workers. Moreover, these data are limited even when
classification into major groups is done accurately. In our data, establish-
ments that appeared integrated according to the major group clas-
sification were seldom desegregated by official job titles, which usually
form the basis for workers’ duties, pay, promotion opportunities, and
responsibilities. In short, what gets reported on an EEO-1 form may have
little to do with differences in work experiences and outcomes by sex.

Third, in addition to aggregation biases, contemporary research efforts
are limited because they restrict our understanding of the social organiza-
tion of work. For example, in an imaginative analysis of occupational and
industrial data, Bridges (1982) found that highly unionized industries
have lower levels of occupational sex segregation. Our finding that
unionized enterprises are more segregated by job titles (Bielby and Baron
1984) is not necessarily inconsistent with Bridges’s results. The prolifera-
tion of work rules, seniority systems, and detailed job hierarchies in
unionized settings might facilitate the pattern we observe: employment of
men and women in the same occupation but in distinct job titles (see
Aronowitz 1973, p. 131; Deaux and Ullman 1983). In any event, reconcil-
ing the two sets of results demands attention to organizational arrange-
ments. Work tasks, authority relations, personnel practices, and wage
determination are largely designed and implemented at the organizational
level. Nowhere is that more evident than in the way sex differences
become incorporated into work arrangements.

Segregation and job hierarchies.—If jobs are almost perfectly seg-
regated by sex, authority hierarchies and career ladders are likely to be
segregated as well. Preliminary analyses of our data on job hierarchies
show that women in positions of authority almost always supervised
other women, though it is also common for women to be supervised by
men. Women are much less likely to be in jobs with promotion opportuni-
ties, and career ladders are typically longer for men. The few jobs con-
taining men and women are mostly in entry-level slots at the bottom of
organizational hierarchies, and typically women’s promotion opportuni-
ties diminish almost entirely after moving a step or two beyond entry level
(Baron and Bielby 1984; Baron, Davis-Blake, and Bielby 1984).

Our data also provide numerous examples of men’s apparent ability to
circumvent formal promotion rules. In these cases, an entry-level position
was monopolized by women, and that position was listed as requisite
experience for promotion to the next level. However, all occupants of the
next highest position were men. Employment Service analysts were some-
times quite explicit in conveying such inequalities:

“(MOLDING MECHANIC] workers [three males] are usually ob-
tained from outside the plant. . . . Promotion from OPERATOR,
MOLDING MACHINE [to MOLDING MECHANIC] within the com-
pany is not normal since these workers are all female” (Job analysis
schedule 2909975, pen and pencil company, 1965). This recurrent pattern
underscores the political aspect of credentials, skills, and experience (Col-
lins 1979), Apparently, men can often substitute alternative qualifications
for those required and obtained in the internal labor market, but women
rarely enjoy this option.

Thus, job-level segregation affects the structure of organizational au-
thority and promotion, with dramatic consequences for the careers of
men and women. Indeed, our analyses are consistent with case study
results that document “rank segregation” as the basis of gender in-
equalities in job rewards (Malkiel and Malkiel 1973; Grimm and Stern
1974; Halaby 1979; Cabral, Ferber, and Greene 1981; Rosenbaum 1983)
and access to high-wage employers as an additional source of male advan-
tage (Mennerick 1975; Blau 1977; Talbert and Bose 1977). Future re-
search should examine how job structures were first implemented and
subsequently institutionalized and whose interests are currently served.

Limitations of efficiency-based accounts of segregation.—It is difficult
to reconcile our findings with supply-side accounts of sex segregation
within mixed occupations. It is of course possible that a given female
“invests” in becoming an assistant professor, but not an associate or full
professor; or in becoming a training representative, but only in firms
where that job is done exclusively by women. However, such extensions
of supply-side accounts of segregation require us to assume not only that
women “disinvest” in certain general lines of work (occupations) but also
that those who do pursue male or integrated work roles avoid certain
specific titles and organizational settings.

Our findings are consistent with the model of statistical discrimination
in one respect. Employers seem to reserve some jobs for men and others
for women in a manner consistent with their perceptions of sex differ-
ences in skills, turnover costs, and work orientations. However, gender
seems to be a very inefficient screen for attributes as easy to measure as
physical strength and finger dexterity, and these job requirements had
some of the strongest effects on the sex composition of jobs in our statisti-
cal models. In short, the end result—near-complete sex segregation
across organizations and job titles in mixed occupations—may be consis-
tent with the model of statistical discrimination, but there is considerable
qualitative evidence that appears to undermine the notion that such deci-
sion making is optimal.

However, we do not mean to imply that employers are simply irra-
tional, indulging their personal biases at the expense of profits. It is
possible that employer actions are a rational response to the interests of
male employees in excluding women from their job categories. For ex-
ample, in Becker’s (1957) model, given “tastes for discrimination” among
male employees, an employer must pay a wage premium to men in order
to induce them to work in an integrated setting. Under such circum-
stances, labor costs are minimized by employing either men or women
exclusively.

We cannot completely dismiss this explanation. The interests and at-
titudes of male employees almost certainly play a role in generating sex
segregation. Given the diversity of organizational and technical arrange-
ments represented in our sample, there is almost certainly variation
across jobs and establishments in the desire and ability of male workers to
exclude women. For instance, where production is highly interdepen-
dent, male workers may perceive the entry of women as particularly
disruptive to stable work group relationships. Similarly, employers in
competitive markets are least able to absorb the additional costs required
to induce male employees to work alongside women. However, even
within mixed occupations, we found that women were almost invariably
segregated from men by job title or organizational context. Thus, at least
some of the intraoccupational segregation that we observed probably does
not reflect the exclusionary interests and actions of male coworkers. We
hope that future theory and research will devote more attention to
specifying when male workers might have both interests in promoting
segregation and the means to realize those interests.
Statistical discrimination as a self-fulfilling prophecy.—Some econo-
mists maintain that statistical discrimination based on mistaken beliefs
should not persist in a market economy. In contrast, social psychologists
maintain that stereotypes are cognitive structures that are a normal part
of one’s perception of others, a shorthand invoked to conserve our limited
information-processing resources (Ashmore and Del Boca 1981, 1985).
Even employers must cope with bounded rationality (Simon 1972). If
workers’ performances are not exogenous but influenced by the social
context of work (Roethlisberger and Dickson 1939; Hackman and Old-
ham 1980), employer beliefs and perceptions might actually elicit the very
behaviors employers expect. That is, given their initial beliefs, however
accurate, employers might assign females to routine tasks and dead-end
jobs, in which a particular woman’s actual skills remain invisible to the
employer (Milgrom and Oster 1984). In response to such work conditions,
rational women may exhibit higher turnover and lower work involve-
ment, just as employers predicted. While some organizational research
has shown the substantial impact of expectations on worker performance
(Berlew and Hall 1966), the effect on subsequent employment policies
and practices has to date been documented only in case studies (e.g.,
Kanter 1977).

Another reason that statistical discrimination might not vanish in a
market economy is that individuals are more likely to attend to and retain
information that confirms their stereotypes and to ignore information that
does not fit expectations (Hamilton 1981). Employers are probably no
exception. Such “expectancy confirmation sequences” have been docu-
mented repeatedly in laboratory experiments (for reviews, see Berger,
Rosenholtz, and Zelditch 1980; Darley and Fazio 1980).

The institutionalization of gender-based job assignments.—Beliefs and
perceptions alone cannot account for the extent to which segregated ar-
rangements are built into the structure of work. We need to understand
how sex-based job assignments become standard organizational proce-
dure. For example, as noted above, laws against assigning women to
heavy manual work rationalized segregation by job title until the early
1970s. Case materials from our data repeatedly cited the California labor
code to justify excluding women from some jobs, but we found no evi-
dence of changes in job assignments after the laws were repealed. Thus,
understanding current personnel practices and staffing patterns requires
studying a legacy of interests that coalesced throughout this century in
support of protective legislation and learning how bureaucratic inertia,
cultural stereotypes, and contemporary interests sustain practices that are
now illegal.

Indeed, social histories of personnel practices in diverse lines of work,
such as Tyack and Strober’s (1981) study of the teaching profession, can
reveal how sex labels are assigned to jobs and formalized through organi-
zational procedures. A promising line of inquiry would be to study new
occupational specialties in rapidly growing fields to learn how definitions
and sex labels of job titles emerge and are translated into organizational
arrangements for personnel practices.

Monitoring labor force changes. —Our data do not capture very recent
employment trends as employers have responded to EEO pressures and
changing career aspirations. However, although gender segregation has
certainly abated during the decade or so since our typical firm was
studied, we should not overstate how much progress has occurred. Con-
sider, for instance, the data summarized in table 8, describing the gender
composition of jobs in the civil service personnel system of California at
the end of 1984. These data are of particular interest because they almost
certainly provide a lower boundary on the degree of job segregation in the
private economy. The vigor with which EEO has been pursued in this
state’s public sector and the greater ability of agencies to pass along the
costs of equality to customers (taxpayers) imply less job segregation than
in the private sector as a whole.

According to table 8, job-level segregation is less extreme than in our
sample but still pervasive. Even with the exclusion of the 798 jobs having
one incumbent, 66% of the jobs (employing 17% of state workers) are
perfectly segregated. Kanter (1977) and Pettigrew (1975) argue that the
psychological and social effects of tokenism become manifested when a
role or group has roughly 80% or more of its members in one category.
According to that criterion, over 64% of the full-time employees in the
state civil service system are in positions whose gender balance is severely
skewed. Also, male workers employed by the state are about three times
more likely than women to be in job classes with no members of the
opposite sex, suggesting that there are considerably fewer women doing
“men’s work” than there are men doing “women’s work.”

Moreover, unpublished statistics supplied by the California State Per-
sonnel Board document numerous instances of the same forms of intraoc-
cupational segregation encountered in our sample: sex-specific job titles
within the same occupation and the segregation of women from men in
mixed occupations across specific agencies or bureaus. In sum, notwith-
standing recent changes in the sexual divison of labor, the patterns docu-
mented in our research appear applicable to contemporary organizations.

In case after case, as EEO officials, corporate leaders, and reformers
try to effect (or avoid) changes in traditional employment patterns, they
encounter intransigent organizational structures and processes that sus-
tain the patterns of sex segregation documented in this article. Our
findings were consistent with the theory of statistical discrimination as
applied to gender segregation, but they are difficult to reconcile with
TABLE 8

GENDER COMPOSITION OF JOBS IN CALIFORNIA PERSONNEL SYSTEM, FULL-TIME
WoRKERS, JOBS WITH TWO OR MoRE INCUMBENTS: DECEMBER 31, 1984

 

 

 

 

 

   

% of Jobs % of Full-Time Workers
% female in job:

100 ......... 29.5 (28.8) 6.9 (7.0)
90.0-99.9 2.6 (2.4) 11.9 (11.9)
80.0-89.9 3.2 (2.9) 6.0 (5.9)
70.0-79.9 2.6 (2.4) 5.3 (5.3)
60.0-69.9 3.3 (3.0) 10.1 (10.1)
50.0-59.9 6.6 (6.0) 5.2 (5.2)
40.0-49.9 1.9 (1.7) 3.0 (2.9)
30.0-39.9 3.6 (3.3) 4.3 (4.2)
20.0-29.9 4.5 (4.1) 8.0 (7.9)
10.0-19.9 3.4 (3.1) 12.4 (12.3)

-1- 9.9 2.2 (2.0) 17.1 (17.0)

oO. 36.5 (40.3) 9.9 (10.3)

N 8,159 (8,957) 121,962 (122,760)
Gender mix:

No workers of opposite sex .. 66.0 (69.1) 16.8 (17.3)

< 10% workers of one sex... 70.8 (73.5) 45.8 (46.2)

< 20% workers of one sex... 77.4 (79.5) 64.2 (64.4)

< 30% workers of one sex... 84.5 (86.0) 77.5 (77.6)

< 40% workers of one sex... 91.4 (92.3) 91.9 (91.9)

 

NoTE.—When the same job class occurred in multiple agencies, each occurrence was treated as a
separate job in the table. Figures in parentheses include the 798 job classifications having one incumbent
each (632 men, 166 women).
ics and clerical classifications because of the physical nature of other jobs
(1964, natural gas utility).

Employment opportunities for women are limited in the production
sections due to the physical requirements of many of the jobs (1971, felt
goods manufacturing).

The nature of the work (medium to very heavy) does not lend itself to
employment in production of either women or the handicapped, although
these people are hired for office positions (1973, wire manufacturing).

Normally they [women] are excluded from jobs requiring heavy physi-
cal exertion such as DRIVER, PUTPOST INSTRUCTOR, and SWIM-
MING INSTRUCTOR. They are specified for the job of ARTS AND
CRAFTS INSTRUCTOR (1965, coeducational summer camp).

Women are hired for office work classifications in all divisions. Women
are also hired exclusively to fill HOSTESS, hostess supervisory, and
training and cabin cleaning positions. They are preferred applicants for
positions in reservations and counter sales. They are generally excluded
from the passenger service counter, cargo service, and terminal opera-
tions because of the physical labor involved. Women are not hired as
maintenance or flight crew personnel primarily because those jobs have
been traditionally filled by men and because workers are often required to
lift or carry objects in excess of the 25 pound limit set by state law for
women (1964, commercial airline).

Males are hired as FLOOR REPORTERS and females as CLERKS,
GENERAL. Both entry jobs are on the trading floor. FLOOR REPORT-
ERS stand and walk constantly and CLERKS, GENERAL stand and
walk about 50% of the time. . . . According to a stock exchange exec-
utive, the FLOOR REPORTER classification is a “training ground” for
young men starting a career in the securities business (1968, securities ex-
change).

Women are hired in clerical occupations and in other plant areas where
the physical requirements of the tasks involved do not preclude it (1968,
pharmaceutical manufacturing).

SouRCE.—Narrative reports prepared by U.S. Employment Service
Analysts for selected establishments.
REFERENCES

Aigner, Dennis J., and Glen C. Cain. 1977. “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in
Labor Markets.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30:175-87.

Aronowitz, Stanley. 1973. False Promises. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1973. “The Theory of Discrimination.” Pp. 3-33 in Discrimination
in Labor Markets, edited by O. Ashenfelter and A. Rees. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.

Ashmore, Richard D., and Frances K. Del Boca. 1981. “Conceptual Approaches to
Stereotypes and Stereotyping.” Pp. 1-35 in Cognitive Approaches to Stereotyping
and Intergroup Behavior, edited by David C. Hamilton. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

. 1985. The Social Psychology of Male-Female Relations. New York: Academic
Press.

Baron, James N. 1982. “Economic Segmentation and the Organization of Work.”
Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara.

Baron, James N., and William T. Bielby. 1984. “Organizational Barriers to Gender
Equality: Sex Segregation of Jobs and Opportunities.” Pp. 233-51 in Gender and
the Life Course, edited by Alice S. Rossi. New York: Aldine.

Baron, James N., Alison Davis-Blake, and William T. Bielby. 1984. “The Structure
and Location of Internal Labor Markets.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of
the Academy of Management, Boston.

Barth, James R., Joseph J. Cordes, and Sheldon E. Haber. 1984. “Employee Charac-
teristics and Firm Size: Are There Any Systematic Empirical Relationships?” Un-
published manuscript, Department of Economics, George Washington University.

Becker, Gary. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Beller, Andrea H. 1982. “Occupational Segregation by Sex: Determinants and
Changes.” Journal of Human Resources 17:371-92.

. 1984. “Trends in Occupational Segregation by Sex and Race, 1960-1981.” Pp.
11-26 in Sex Segregation in the Workplace, edited by Barbara F. Reskin. Washing-
ton, D.C.: National Academy.

Berger, Joseph, Susan J. Rosenholtz, and Morris Zelditch. 1980. “Status Organizing
Processes.” Annual Review of Sociology 6:479-508.

Bergmann, Barbara R. 1974. “Occupational Segregation, Wages, and Profits When
Employers Discriminate by Race or Sex.” Eastern Economic Journal 1:103-10.
Berlew, David E., and Douglas T. Hall. 1966. “The Socialization of Managers: Ef-
fects of Expectations on Performance.” Administrative Science Quarterly 11:207-

23,

Bielby, William T., and James N. Baron. 1983. “Organizations, Technology, and
Worker Attachment to the Firm.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility
2:77-113.

. 1984. “A Women’s Place Is with Other Women: Sex Segregation within Or-
ganizations.” Pp. 27-55 in Sex Segregation in the Workplace, edited by Barbara F.
Reskin. Washington, D.C.: National Academy.

Blau, Francine D. 1977. Equal Pay in the Office. Lexington, Mass.: Heath.

. 1984. “Discrimination against Women: Theory and Evidence.” Pp. 53-89 in
Labor Economics: Modern Views, edited by William Darity, Jr. Boston: Kluwer-
Nijhoff.

Blau, Francine D., and Wallace E. Hendricks. 1979. “Occupational Segregation by
Sex: Trends and Prospects.” Journal of Human Resources 14:197—210.

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1981. “Race and Sex Differences in Quits
by Young Workers.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 34:563-77.

Blauner, Robert. 1964. Alienation and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Bridges, William P. 1982. “The Sexual Segregation of Occupations: Theories of Labor
Stratification in Industry.” American Journal of Sociology 88:270—-95.

Cabral, Robert, Marianne A. Ferber, and Carole A. Greene. 1981. “Men and Women
in Fiduciary Institutions: A Study of Sex Differences in Career Development.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 63:573-80.

Cain, Pamela S., and Donald J. Treiman. 1981. “The Dictionary of Occupational
Titles as a Source of Occupational Data.” American Sociological Review 46:253-78.

Collins, Randall. 1979. The Credential Society. New York: Academic Press.

Darley, J. M., and R. H. Fazio. 1980. “Expectancy Confirmation Sequences.” Ameri-
can Psychologist 35:867—-81.

Deaux, Kay. 1985. “Sex and Gender.” Annual Review of Psychology 36:49-81.

Deaux, Kay, and J. C. Ullman. 1983. Women of Steel: Female Blue Collar Workers in
the Basic Steel Industry. New York: Praeger.

Duncan, Otis D., and Beverly Duncan. 1955. “A Methodological Analysis of Segrega-
tion Indices.” American Sociological Review 20:200-217.

Edwards, Richard C. 1979. Contested Terrain. New York: Basic.

England, Paula. 1981. “Assessing Trends in Occupational Sex Segregation, 1900-
1976.” Pp. 273-95 in Sociological Perspectives on Labor Markets, edited by Ivar
Berg. New York: Academic Press.

. 1982. “The Failure of Human Capital Theory to Explain Occupational Sex
Segregation.” Journal of Human Resources 17:358—70.

Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York:
Basic.

Grimm, James W., and Robert N. Stern. 1974. “Sex Roles and Internal Labor Market
Structures: The ‘Female’ Semi-Professions.” Social Problems 21:690-705.
Haber, Sheldon E., Enrique J. Lamas, and Gordon Green. 1983. “A New Method for
Estimating Job Separations by Sex.” Monthly Labor Review 106 (June): 20-27.
Hackman, J. Richard, and Greg R. Oldham. 1980. Work Redesign. Reading, Mass.:

Addison-Wesley.

Halaby, Charles N. 1979. “Job-specific Sex Differences in Organizational Reward
Attainment: Wage Discrimination vs. Rank Segregation.” Social Forces 58:108-27.

Hamilton, David L., ed. 1981. Cognitive Processes in Stereotyping and Intergroup
Behavior. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Hanushek, Eric A., and John E. Jackson. 1977. Statistical Methods for Social Scien-
tists. New York: Academic Press.

Judge, George F., William E. Griffiths, R. Carter Hill, and Tsoung-Chao Lee. 1980.
The Theory and Practice of Econometrics. New York: Wiley.

Kanter, Rosabeth M. 1977. Men and Women of the Corporation. New York: Basic.

Maccoby, Eleanor G., and Carol N. Jacklin. 1974. The Psychology of Sex Differences.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Malkiel, Burton G., and Judith A. Malkiel. 1973. “Male-Female Wage Differentials in
Professional Employment.” American Economic Review 63:693—704.

Marini, Margaret Mooney, and Mary C. Brinton. 1984. “Sex Stereotyping in Occupa-
tional Socialization.” Pp. 192-232 in Sex Segregation in the Workplace, edited by
Barbara F. Reskin. Washington, D.C.: National Academy.

Mennerick, Lewis A. 1975.“Organizational Structuring of Sex Roles in a Nonstereo-
typed Industry.” Administrative Science Quarterly 20:570-86.

Milgrom, Paul, and Sharon Oster. 1984. “Job Discrimination, Market Forces, and the
Invisibility Hypothesis.” Unpublished manuscript, Yale University, School of Or-
ganization and Management.

Miller, Ann, Donald J. Treiman, Pamela S. Cain, and Patricia A. Roos. 1980. Work,
Jobs, and Occupations: A Critical Review of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy.

Oi, Walter Y. 1983. “Heterogeneous Firms and the Organization of Production.”
Economic Inquiry 21:147-71.

Osterman, Paul. 1982. “Affirmative Action and Opportunity: A Study of Female Quit
Rates.” Review of Economics and Statistics 64:604-12.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. 1975. “The Racial Integration of Schools.” Pp. 224-39 in Racial
Discrimination in the United States, edited by Thomas F. Pettigrew. New York:
Harper & Row.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Yinon Cohen. 1984. “Determinants of Internal Labor Market
Arrangements in Organizations.” Administrative Science Quarterly 29:550-72.
Phelps, E. S. 1972. “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism.” American Eco-

nomic Review 62:659-61.

Polachek, S. 1979. “Occupational Segregation among Women: Theory, Evidence, and
a Prognosis.” Pp. 137-57 in Women in the Labor Market, edited by Cynthia B.
Lloyd, Emily S. Andrews, and Curtis L. Gilroy. New York: Columbia University
Press.

Reiss, Albert J., Jr. 1961. Occupations and Social Status. New York: Free Press.

Roethlisberger, F. J., and W. J. Dickson. 1939. Management and the Worker. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Roos, Patricia A., and Barbara F. Reskin. 1984. “Institutional Factors Contributing
to Sex Segregation in the Workplace.” Pp. 235-60 in Sex Segregation in the Work-
place, edited by Barbara F. Reskin. Washington, D.C.: National Academy.

Rosenbaum, James E. 1983. “Why Do the Rear Wheels Fall Further Behind? The
Impact of Jobs and Job Statuses on Women’s Earnings Gains from Affirmative
Action.” Paper presented at the National Research Council’s Seminar on Compara-
ble Worth Research, Hilton Head, N.C., October 7-8.

Salancik, Gerald R. 1979. “Interorganizational Dependence and Responsiveness to
Affirmative Action: The Case of Women and Defense Contractors.” Academy of
Management Journal 22:375—94.

Scott, Joan Wallach. 1982. “The Mechanization of Women’s Work.” Scientific Ameri-
can 247 (September): 166-87.

Shorey, John. 1983. “An Analysis of Sex Differences in Quits.” Oxford Economic
Papers 35:213-27.

Simon, Herbert A. 1972. “Theories of Bounded Rationality.” In Decision and Organi-
zation, edited by C. B. McGuire and Roy Radner. Amsterdam: Elsevier—North-
Holland.

Smith, James P., and Finis Welch. 1984. “Affirmative Action and Labor Markets.”
Journal of Labor Economics 2:269-301.

Snyder, David, Mark D. Hayward, and Paula M. Hudis. 1978. “The Location of
Change in the Sexual Structure of Occupations, 1950-1970: Insights from Labor
Market Segmentation Theory.” American Journal of Sociology 84:706-17.

Spenner, Kenneth I. 1980. “Occupational Characteristics and Classification Systems:
New Uses of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles in Social Research.” Sociological
Methods and Research 9:239-64.

Stinchcombe, Arthur L. 1965. “Social Structure and Organizations.” Pp. 142-93 in
Handbook of Organizations, edited by James G. March. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Talbert, Joan, and Christine E. Bose. 1977 “Wage-Attainment Processes: The Retail
Clerk Case.” American Journal of Sociology 78:962—74.

Thurow, Lester C. 1975. Generating Inequality. New York: Basic.

Tyack, David, and Myra Strober. 1981. “Jobs and Gender: A History of the Structur-
ing of Educational Employment by Sex.” Pp. 131-52 in Educational Policy and
Management: Sex Differentials, edited by Patricia Schmuck and W. W. Charters.
New York: Academic Press.

U.S. Department of Commerce. 1983. Detailed Occupation and Years of School Com-
pleted by Age, for the Civilian Labor Force by Sex, Race, and Spanish Origin: 1980.
Report no. PC80-S1-8. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1972. Handbook for Analyzing Jobs. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office.

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 1977. Equal Employment Oppor-
tunity Report—1975. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

. 1982. Equal Employment Opportunity Report—1980. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 1980. “Sex Differences in Worker Quitting.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 62:388-98.

Wholey, Douglas R. 1984. “Impacts of Firm Specific Skills and Organizational Demo-
graphics on Law Firm Internal Labor Markets.” Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Academy of Management, Boston.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1981. ‘The Economics of Organization: The Transaction Cost
Approach.” American Journal of Sociology 87:548-77.

Woodward, Joan. 1965. Industrial Organization: Theory and Practice. London: Ox-
ford University Press.
