Economic Segmentation and Politics

Author(s): Richard Apostle, Don Clairmont and Lars Osberg

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 4 (Tan., 1986), pp. 905-931
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2779962

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:51 UTC
Recent research, most of it American, has demonstrated the impor-
tance of segmentation theory for explanations of a wide array of
social and economic phenomena. This paper attempts to extend this
theoretical perspective by examining some of its implications for
political orientations and relationships. As many segmentation pro-
ponents are aware, conventional liberal and Marxist theories have
systematically underestimated the persistence of heterogeneous
political structures and processes in advanced capitalist societies.
Data gathered in the Maritime Provinces in Canada show that at
both the establishment and the worker level there are distinctive
political effects attributable to location in particular economic seg-
ments. The increasing range of segmentation theory raises impor-
tant questions for our dominant paradigms.
ties. Indeed, these segments are characteristically depicted as work
worlds, “organized around different rules, processes and institutions”
(Berger and Piore 1980, p. 2). The segments are, in turn, viewed as the
complex outcomes of the interaction of technology, economic constraints,
and power relations. There is a significant difference of opinion about the
nature of this interaction, especially about the centrality of corporate and/
or union power. Piore (1979) emphasizes the role of technology and the
desire for market stability, whereas Edwards (1979) stresses the capitalist
or managerial interest in dividing and controlling labor, and Rubery
(1978) and Freedman (1976) focus on the importance of worker resistance
and the creation of “job shelters.” However, regardless of the interpreta-
tive emphasis, all agree that the resulting segments differ substantially in
the process by which worker-level outcomes, such as wages, status, and
mobility, are determined. Specifically, the emphasis on the importance of
economic segment location as a causal agent in these processes provided
one structural alternative to neoclassical (“human capital”) models of
earnings determination (Apostle, Clairmont, and Osberg 1985); Beck,
Horan, and Tolbert 1978; Tolbert, Horan, and Beck 1980) and to func-
tionalist theories of status attainment (Tolbert 1982).

Virtually all segmentation-directed research has dealt either with ques-
tions of operationalizing the basic notion of segments or with workers’
economic outcomes and the processes determining them. On the basis of
what has been done to date, the value of the segmentation perspective is
still uncertain. There is much debate on the range and power of these new
ideas as regards both substantive and definitional/operational concerns
(Beck, Horan, and Tolbert 1980; Hauser 1980; Hodson and Kaufman
1981, 1982; Horan, Tolbert, and Beck 1981; Jacobs 1983; Zucker and
Rosenstein 1981). Indeed, some segmentation theorists have recently ar-
gued that the significance of segmentation processes in modern capitalist
economies is historically specific and that their importance has begun to
diminish in recent years (Gordon, Edwards, and Reich 1982). Though not
unusual in sociology, it is nevertheless premature and unwise to consider
as outmoded a theory that has generated interesting empirical results and
that continues to pose interesting questions.

In this article we explore the segmentation ideas on relatively new
terrain. Little research, save for that of Berger and Fiore (1980) and
Bonacich (1980), has examined the implications of segmentation for polit-
ical phenomena. We will first sketch some of the major implications of
segmentation theory for an understanding of political life in Western
industrial societies. We will then test some of the major propositions
concerning the political relationships and activities of both establishments
and workers using data gathered in the Maritime Provinces in Canada.
SPECIFIC THEORETICAL CONCERNS

Although it is not surprising that economists, as the chief contributors to
segmentation theory, have focused on markets in their research, the cen-
tral emphasis of the segmentation perspective has been on differences in
power and political efficacy. In early dual labor market writings, a paral-
lel was drawn between primary and secondary labor market location and
being “in” or “out” with respect to the societal mainstream. Piore (1975),
for example, depicted the secondary segment as basically peopled by
members of disadvantaged groups and doubted the applicability of eco-
nomic segmentation to the case of white males. In perhaps the most
theoretically elaborate statement of this interpretation, Gordon, Ed-
wards, and Reich (1982) have defined the primary or central segment in
terms of an institutional arrangement for capital accumulation fostered
by powerful elements in business and labor and reinforced by govern-
ment. Typically, the American advocates of the segmentation perspective
have highlighted the poverty and disadvantage of workers outside this
center of the economy. Attention has been directed to the “negative”
values and societal alienation induced by work experience there (Harrison
1972) and to policy issues related to the inclusion possibilities of the
central sector.

In the American literature, segmentation is seen as an accommodation
between large corporations and big unions. Unions are depicted as inter-
est groups, and the labor movement as fragmented and nonrevolutionary
in character. Europeans who advance segmentation models have placed
segmentation at the very center of the political struggle between capital
and labor (Bruno 1979). In Europe, segmentation is not seen as something
fostered by or even acquiesced in by strong elements of the working class.
Instead, it is viewed as a dynamic where powerful capitalist interests,
abetted by the state, try specifically to divide the working class and
reduce its revolutionary potential. For the European writers (Bruno 1979;
Gagliani 1981; Rubery 1978), segmentation is directed at reducing the
power of strong unions in the production process instead of maintaining
an accommodation with them. The main difference is that in the Ameri-
can version, segmentation represents the establishment of an institutional
arrangement between powerful capitalists and elements of labor, whereas
in the European one, it is a consequence of business efforts to avoid such
arrangements. Not surprisingly, then, the Europeans have stressed the
social organization of workplaces in the diverse segments and the cross-
segment linkages between them. In particular, attention has been di-
rected at the conservative political ambience of the secondary sector,
where family-operated subcontracting abounds. In contrast to American
researchers, Europeans have dealt more with “pre-market” values and
social ties (e.g., rural and regional ones) than with work-shaped orien-
tations.

Whatever the differences noted above, it is clear that the segmentation
perspective focuses on political solutions to basic problems of modern
capitalist economies and their consequences, especially for different ele-
ments of the working class. Presumptions about market power and polit-
ical orientations and efficacy lie at the core of the perspective. These
presumptions have been organized in terms of both Marxist and eclectic
frameworks and, for the purposes of this article, can be discussed at three
levels: society as a whole, the workplace or establishment, and workers.

Marxists have emphasized the role of corporate power in generating
segmentation and have characterized the latter as functional for mature
capitalism (Edwards 1979). Segmentation represents the structural out-
come of monopoly capital’s reorganizing its relation to labor to deal with
labor organization and militancy, changes in the production process, and
attendant implications for capital accumulation. Even though dividing
the working class may be a basic strategy for capital, segmentation as an
institutional arrangement may be seen as a particular kind of fragmenta-
tion that is more or less functional for capitalist society and more or less
acquiesced in by capital, depending on technological, economic, and
power factors. However, there is considerable ambivalence among Marx-
ists as to the significance of segmentation, the role of labor in its creation
and maintenance, and the permanency of the working-class division it
has spawned. Gordon, Edwards, and Reich (1982) have argued that
segmentation has become less functional for American capitalism and
that other basic processes affecting capital’s use of labor (e.g., homogeni-
zation, proletarianization) have become more crucial to capital accumula-
tion in the current phase of capitalist development. Some European
Marxists, on the other hand (Gagliani 1981), suggest that segmentation is
becoming more functional for their societies as corporate interests try to
circumvent institutional arrangements negotiated earlier with strong
unions and government.

While critical of the Marxists’ heavy emphasis on capitalist strategies
and their ambivalence concerning labor’s role, proponents of eclectic
frameworks of power and political efficacy (Berger and Piore 1980; Sabel
1979) argue that neither Marxists nor liberals sufficiently appreciate the
heterogeneity of mature industrial societies. Berger and Piore succinctly
convey the model of society presumed by this perspective: “Society is
composed of groups of very unequal power, with disparate assets and
objectives and with capabilities which, however considerable, can rarely
be decisive when deployed alone” (Berger and Piore 1980, p. 143). Fur-
thermore, they observe, “The nature of capitalism is not to create a
homogeneous social and economic world, but rather to dominate and to
draw profit from the diversity and inequality that remains in perma-
nence” (Berger and Piore 1980, p. 136).

Like the Marxists, the proponents of eclecticism argue that segmenta-
tion is functional for mature capitalism in the sense that the secondary
segment (e.g., small capital) provides goods and services unavailable
elsewhere and economic flexibility for a core sector that is dominated by
large-scale capital and powerful unions. Also, by virtue of the lower pay
scales and poorer working conditions typical of the secondary segment,
the level of union militance and the amount of labor organization are
reduced. The eclectic theorists recognize that these functions may be
achieved through different structural arrangements in different capitalist
societies (e.g., a traditional small-capital sector, diverse branch plants,
and the like) and also that the degree of segmentation can vary according
to prevalent social and economic divisions as well as market factors.

Although sociological theory kindred to this eclectic perspective can be
found in pluralist, center-periphery models of influence and decision
making (Dahlstrém 1969; Shils 1968), the neo-Weberian writings of
Janowitz (1976), Kreckel (1980), and Parkin (1974, 1979) are more perti-
nent. They direct attention to such themes as unequal market power,
intraclass interests, and corporatism. Janowitz, referring to the market-
place as a system of economic relationships based on the relative bargain-
ing strengths of different groupings or individuals, sees the politics of an
advanced society as “a reflection of its own system of inequality which is
characterized by intensive occupational and economic interest-group
competition” (1976, p. 75). Kreckel interprets segmentation in advanced
capitalist societies as contingent on “secondary asymmetries” within capi-
tal and labor. He suggests that the degree and persistence of segmentation
depend not only on the asymmetries within capital (e.g., market power,
affordability) but even more heavily on those within labor that limit social
power opposing such an institutional arrangement. Parkin (1974) resur-
rects Weberian concepts in discussing the processes of exclusion and sol-
idarity that operate between and within classes to yield economic segmen-
tation. He notes that “it is the contrast between productively central and
productively marginal groups that underlies those analyses of the current
situation in terms of a radical cleavage within the working class—
between those able to effect social closure and the new ‘pauper class’
unable to exert industrial leverage” (1974, p. 12).

Despite the fact that segmentation has origins in a variety of perspec-
tives and that it has been conceptualized as a middle-range sociological
theory, there is little depth to the segmentation literature concerning its
political correlates or implications at the level of firms/workplaces or
workers. This shortcoming is due only partly to the fact that segmenta-
tion proponents have focused on wage determination and other economic
SEGMENTED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: THE EMPIRICAL
IMPLICATIONS

The main studies of socioeconomic segmentation have carried out their
investigations with different units of analysis, ranging from industries
through firms to workers or occupations. Because of the constraints of
existing secondary data, the most common operationalization of economic
segments has been at the industry level, with analysts typically proceed-
ing to an examination of the effects of segment location on a number of
worker variables. However, given the relative strengths and weaknesses
of the differing approaches, a good case can be made for beginning with
the establishment or workplace in defining economic segments. The es-
tablishment represents a group of people in the same spatial location who
operate under common managerial authority. It is the best unit for ob-
serving alternate managerial styles and internal labor markets (Apostle,
Clairmont, and Osberg 1985a). Both areas of concern are crucial to a
segmentation perspective, and both suggest that similar jobs or occupa-
tions, when situated in separate economic segments, can have very differ-
ent consequences for workers. In other words, the establishment captures
a social reality generated by common managerial orientations to market-
ing and employment problems—a reality that frequently results in wage
increases, training programs, promotion opportunities, and benefit pack-
ages that employees share across the board.

An additional advantage of focusing on the workplace is that it permits
us to be more sensitive to the persistence of segmentation in the North
American economy. Since Berger is correct that the old middle classes, or
small, independent businesses, are a less important component of the
social order, we must, if the segmentation perspective is applicable, be
able to specify the functional alternatives that have evolved to meet the
needs for a traditional economic sector. The early dual labor market
literature tended to identify racial minorities, particularly blacks, as the
groups that filled this role, and more recent work has also suggested the
possibility that women generally constitute a “marginal” work force.
However, others have argued that racial minorities are not sufficiently
numerous to meet the overall demand in the system for secondary labor
and that the position of women in the occupational order is only partially
explicable in segmentation terms.” Thus, the system takes advantage of
the presence of racial minorities and women in the economy, but there are
some more general processes at work that involve a broader spectrum of
the work force. Given the increasing integration of the economy at the
level of the firm, or the growth of multi-establishment economic units, it
is the workplace that best captures the continuing diversities of our econ-
omies. Of course, for some considerations, possibly including political
correlates, the firm may be a more appropriate level of analysis. This
suggests the need to consider not only the segment location of the work-
place but also its degree of embeddedness in larger organizational struc-
tures.

Proponents of the segmentation perspective typically have emphasized
the greater political power, or “clout with government,” of the industries
and firms in the central or primary sector. Averitt (1968) and Galbraith
(1967) have discussed the close bureaucratic ties between core firms and
the government, whereas dual labor market researchers have differ-
entiated between core and periphery firms in terms of the relevance of
specific government policies and agencies. For example, periphery firms
especially relate to policies and agencies that deal with manpower recruit-
ment and training, whereas core firms are particularly concerned with
governmental sales and fiscal activity. Following Averitt’s work (1968,
p. 177), most segmentation theorists posit bureaucratic compatibility and
reciprocal policy aid. Employment and output concerns of government
policy are facilitated by core firms but may be hindered in industries
where there is periphery dominance.

Given a socioeconomic framework in which the establishment is the
focus of attention, what expectations might one have about the relations
between government and the economy? In terms of specific hypotheses,
the close association between central economic location and corporate
structures means that establishments in the primary sector or sectors
(“central work-world establishments”) will have close, positive ties to
government and that they will communicate frequently through interest
groups and meetings with government officials as well as through polit-
ical parties. In contrast, establishments in the secondary sector or sectors
(“marginal work-world establishments”) that have less control over their
environment will be less likely to utilize trade associations or informal
bureaucratic channels to communicate with government and will have
less influence in the formulation of relevant government policies. Thus,
one would anticipate that establishments at the core of the economy will
be more likely to have various sorts of connections to government, either
directly or through trade associations, that they will have greater in-
fluence with government, and that they will be more likely to benefit from
the general range of business-oriented programs. We would expect estab-
lishments on the periphery to be more concerned with government
policies on minimum wages, unemployment insurance, and welfare and
to try to shape these policies through reliance on formal political chan-
nels, particularly local ones.

These structural conditions probably also have effects at the level of the
individual worker. However, few specific hypotheses concerning political
values, attitudes, and behaviors among workers in different segments
have emerged from the segmentation literature. Parkin (1974, 1979) has
suggested that standards of distributive justice (e.g., support for more
egalitarian policies) would vary by segment. Gordon, Edwards, and
Reich (1982) hypothesize lower participation in established political in-
stitutions (e.g., lower voter participation) among those outside the pri-
mary or central segment. Typically, it is presumed that perceptions of
vulnerability (e.g., being without articulate spokesmen to advance one’s
interests) and feelings of alienation as well as political identification and
participation may vary by segment. Little evidence has been marshaled to
substantiate these hypotheses or presumptions.

A key issue concerning political variation is whether differences are to
be attributed to segment-specific work experience or to factors preexisting
and “independent” of it. Many dual labor market proponents, especially
those in the Marxist tradition (Gordon 1972), have emphasized that work
experience shapes attitudes and behavior. The argument here is as fol-
lows: the work environments of the periphery or marginal segments are
characterized by more capricious and direct authority relations, the ab-
sence of opportunities for advancement, job instability, and low wages.
This complex of factors neither provides the structural supports usually
associated with conventional political involvement nor encourages the
development of positive attitudes toward existing political institutions.
Thus, basic work conditions associated with involvement in the marginal
sectors lead us to anticipate that individuals located in such sectors will be
less interested in politics, less efficacious, more cynical about their polit-
ical representatives, and less politically active. We also anticipate that
segment locations will have some effects at the ideological level, with
workers in the relatively disadvantaged marginal segments being likely to
perceive governmental favoritism toward “big interests” or the powerful
and to support increased economic equality at a personal level.
Sabel (1979), Berger and Piore (1980), and others who emphasize the
heterogeneity of modern societies suggest cleavages in political orienta-
tions and ties that facilitate the institutional arrangement of segmentation
rather than being its by-product. They indicate that many workers out-
side the primary segment have a different orientation to work (e.g.,
“peasants”) and that it is this orientation rather than work experience that
accounts for their political motivation and style. Nevertheless, it is ac-
knowledged that at least some significant part of the nonprimary segment
shares the “mainstream” outlook; indeed, Berger, though a strong advo-
cate of the heterogeneity position, notes that “there is considerable evi-
dence that when better paying, more stable jobs are available, workers in
the traditional sector take them” (Berger and Piore 1980, p. 106). The
arguments of Sabel and Berger suggest the desirability of controlling for
commitment to industrial work (i.e., the “peasant” effect generalized to
include age and sex factors).
of employees provided by a representative subsample of 118 establish-
ments’ for information regarding their employment history, work condi-
tions, and family and household activities. We completed 1,513 inter-
views, for a 73.1% completion rate. Overall, the approximately 70%
completion rate for both establishment and workers was considered quite
satisfactory. No obvious bias was associated with the actual selection of
workers. In the case of establishments, a slight selection bias was created
by our greater success with getting universities to cooperate than with
other establishments of comparable size among the service industries.

The establishment-level variables that we chose to include in our initial
study were selected primarily to represent major conceptual areas that
had been emphasized in the existing literature (Averitt 1968; Beck, Ho-
ran, and Tolbert 1978; Hodson 1978; Oster 1979) and that we felt were
specifically applicable to the establishment as a unit of analysis. The basic
dimensions that we attempted to measure were size, technology and job
structuring, unionization, market control, industry demand characteris-
tics, and labor force outcomes. The particular variables utilized, as well
as our success in using them to characterize establishment structures, are
discussed in detail in the next section.

In 1981, we reinterviewed the establishments and workers that com-
pleted the 1979 surveys (mail backs from the establishments and tele-
phone interviews with the workers). The completion rate was 76.5% for
establishments and 78.9% for workers.® In neither instance were there
any indications of bias in the completed interviews.° All our political
data, save for worker questions on political efficacy and political activity,
were gathered in the 1981 follow-up surveys. Owing to resource limita-
tions, we asked only one-half of the worker respondents to answer polit-
ical questions in the follow-up survey. The political measures at the
establishment level (App. A) tap the following dimensions: business asso-
ciation, government and local political linkages, establishment influence,
dependence on government manpower and “marginal work-world”
policies, and financial connections to government. At the worker level,
the political measures (App. B) refer to standard concepts, such as party
identification and activity, political interest, and political efficacy. In
addition, we have followed Ornstein, Stevenson, and Williams (1980) in
DATA ANALYSIS

In some previous work (Apostle, Clairmont, and Osberg 19856), we used
a combination of factor and cluster techniques suggested by Kaufman,
Hodson, and Fligstein (1981) to analyze our establishment data. We have
demonstrated that the six conceptual areas in our data can be reduced to
five basic dimensions. The factors, as suggested in table 1, respectively
involve size, technology, and job structuring variables; market control
variables; union and worker protection variables; women and low-wage
variables; and demand stability and economic prospects variables.!° We
subsequently used establishment factor scores to cluster establishments
into economic segments. !!

In general terms, the information given in table 1 indicates that we
have a third cluster that consists of central establishments and first and
second clusters that contain marginal establishments that are differ-
entiated chiefly by labor force strategy considerations. '* The two clusters
containing marginal establishments are quite similar to one another and
significantly unlike the third cluster with respect to size of work force,
replacement value of capital, job structuring, and unionization; on each
of these variables the marginal clusters have low mean values. Addition-
ally, the marginal clusters are alike in their high mean dependence on
local sales. The two marginal clusters segment with respect to the propor-
tion of female employees and the proportion earning under four dollars
(zg) (ze) (Int)
(201) 9¢°T (112) 601 — (€0T) 9S"T vers" 9(%) JoxreUL URIPeURD “TT
(6e'1) (201) (91)
(101) 62 2 (p12) o9'T (POT) vO"? “77 9(%) JyTBUL saMIAET OT
(so"Ib) (e1'1¢) (66°68)
(GIT) 94°9S (122) 19°6L (BOT) ST°ZL veers = (%) [ROO] SaTeS 6
(os’) (8¢’) (ub’) sJorjuoD Jaye *Z
(S11) by (ze2) Le (111) z¢ . * andyno/sayes (8z’) (¢) (sb")
UL UoHELeA y>Ipaid 0} PAPE] ST (SIT) 16° (122) 78° (ort) €2 “++ yaouatiadxa snotaaid pan
(86 1) (61) (s8"1) (90°T) (opt) (821)
(oll) 92 € (otz) 6b'€ — (POT) LEE viruses spadsord orutouosg £1 (bII) e9°€ (12) $62 (BOT) vL'z “+ (%) steak + $ saafojdurg *y
(t1°2) (21-2) (€0°2) (96 ) Gry (1271)
(111) 98°€ (22z) €8°€ — (POL) I's sores ~ AGeIs puewaq 91 (ett) uz ¢ (612) 16€ — (GOT) sB"¢ vers oss ss" guotsyaauoo ‘T/¥ “9
sspadsoad ainjny aqqeig “s (49°¢08) (96 82) (s6°seT)
(88 6) (b9°81) (25°62) (11) €6 £42 (IZ) ESI (OTT) €v 6S verress ses esses" pazig:*g
(£01) 19° (061) 92 (BOI) Te “7 5" (%) 00'r$ JOPUA “ST (26°) (b6") (06")
(a1) (b2") (zs ) (S11) L6°2 (412) 68°T = (LOT) LET "ct" (%) syyauaq aBuly “b
(ett) z° (€12) 61" (ott) Ls" vores sss uguroas uoRrodoig $1 (v6) (£6") (¢6")
isoBem moj/uaWoM “y | (STI) LET (z¢2) +8 (111) $8" vrrresss sess Bupnjonays gof “¢
(92) (e9) (88°) (ub'2) (s¢°z) (60°2)
(11) oS T (82z) 89°2 (ITI) Shz ceestsss ss Gyo Ae] Wopaady “eT (86) €e'hT = (POT) POTTT «= (48) SST =" ** (UP aNTeA quauradeydas BOT “Z
(29°) (se) (ort) (ov) (8¢") (ur)
(STI) 69° (0¢z) 60°T = (801) 6ET . 3(%) paztuoruy) °2T (bIT) 09° (1€2) se (601) ze" vrrttt ss graynduros ssa00y “T
suonajord uot, “¢ :Butmjonys gof pue ABojouyay azig “1
quaur3ag quaui3ag, quauiZag 10798, quaui3ag, quaur8ag quawag 10198
Tenusg reuse, yeuasey, Tenuag jeusreyy yeuareyy,
saumureyy sowmueyy

 

 

 

 

LINAWSUS Ad SNVAJ ATAVIGVA

1 aTavL
“uorsanb duo ysea] 7 0} sax JaMsue Oo} pey JUatUYsT|qe}sa

ue ‘Yyty ards OF, “10}7e] BY} ATUO payse aiamM syUaUAYsTTGeISe 10}9aS adtAIas pue apeIL “rpesd 0} prey are yey} S10}9"J Jo asnedaq ArWA safes pue Ndjno Yjoq Jay;eyYM payse aiaMm
syuauYst]qeyse 10}0as SuLINoeINUBUT pue ATEWLI ,,"S9A = 1 ‘ON = 0 etBaX ay} BULINp ATEUEYsqns AIBA jndyno Jo safes Jo [PAg] S.IUAULYST]qeISE SY} S2OC],, :0} sasuodsal uo paseg y
« Peg Ataaypoos AraAa gquauystjqeyse sty Jo syadsoid ay} ayeI NOA pynom Moy 6 0} [ JO aes & UGQ,, 03 sasuodsai uO paseg ;
ed2quasun Apys1y/a}qeys ATYSIY—st Jey) pueulep sadey juaUUYsTqeyse sty} Jey) ABS NOA Pnom ‘6 0} | JO afe2s B UQ,, :0} Sasuodsal UO paseg ,
cal AIBA = ¢ ‘aay YeYMaUIOS = Z ‘9a1j AIBA JON = TI ‘Ife We 9aIJ JON = C eSeduBYO Jo Sys asay} ayRUI 0} aioy JUIWEZEULUL SI aI} MOH ‘s}UaWEBUEIE
AYUOTUAS JO SUOTITISAI UOTUN 0} aNp OS OP 0} ary SSI] IB SIAY}O ATTY 03 S19xIOM 39] 0} JO SjuaUAUIsse YOM aBueY) 0} day AJPATEIad aie siaKO|duta aUI0g,, :0} sasuodsa UO paseg y
b [%S7-%I1 = €!%OI-%I = 7 ‘%O = I :satwo8ajzwd ramsuy 3

 

“+ %0S = $'%0S-%9Z =

"$%OL = $'%SL-%IS = v '%0S—%9Z = €'%S7-%I = 7'%O = 1

«datqyssoduur

= § QInoygp Area = p YNdyIIP = ¢ ‘Asa = 7 ‘Asea AVA = [—UONIR Jo asinod e YoNs St ‘AIYsNpur ANO< Uy “UONNposd Zurseaidap NOY AM S}s09 10qe] asvaid—ap 0} Japs Ut quewidinba
yerdeo ut ysaaut 07 a[qiseay Ayjestuouosa pue Ayjestuyoa} WF Puy sesem ul asvasout jeNUEIsqns & YIM padey ase YOIYM sassauisnq ‘satzysNput aWIOs U],, :0) sasuodsa uO paseg ,
“SL6I Ul SaeXojdwia payer AjINOY pue PaLIEyes auIt}-[[Ny Jo ‘ou eBe1aAe sjuasaidoy »
"HHS = $ !%OE-WIZ = b !%OZ—-WIl = € %OI-%9 = 7 '%S—-®6I = I ‘satuoBayed amsuy 5

SQOf [le 10] ‘SAA = ¢ ‘sqof ysour 10 ‘sax = Z ‘sqof autos 0} ‘SAA = 1 ‘ON = CO cJUaUAYSTTqEISE SIyy UT ased ay} STY ST "[2AQ] YORE Ie Ayt[IqIsUodsar pu Led BurseasoUT YIM ‘UoTIsOd
yayZty 7xX9U ay} 0} UoToUOId 10} UOsiad v saredaid gof uo ut yuads aun yey} Os AuUeduIOD stay} UT sqof BuLINjONAYs Jo Adt]od B MOT[OJ sIao[dwa aurOS,, *0} sasuodsar uO paseg g
"SQA = 1 ‘ON = 0 :Sat10Za}e9 Jamsue paporoy

Payeinspes are sanyea ay} YoIyM Uo sase> Jo A’ ay} SI IYBII 0} sasayzuered ut JaquinNy “GS ey} st AQua Mojaq sasoyjuared ut raqUINN— "LON
per hour. The establishments in the first cluster have, on the average, a
large, low-paid female work force; those in the second cluster typically
have employees who are neither low wage nor female. In these specific
regards, the second cluster is somewhat similar to the central cluster,
though the latter consistently yields higher values for wages, fringe
benefits, and the portion employed for more than five years. In sum, then,
the three-cluster solution presented in table 1 may be seen as representing
two bifurcations, one focusing on gender and wage levels and the other on
the remaining variables (chiefly size, capital intensity, and unionization).

In descriptive terms, the three clusters may be labeled, respectively,
Marginal, Maritimes Marginal, and Central. The Marginal cluster’s es-
tablishments are the typically low-wage operations in trade, personal and
business services, and nondurable manufacturing found throughout
Western advanced economies. This cluster represents the small, very
competitive peripheral sector of the economy. In the Maritimes Marginal
cluster the establishments are typically relatively small wholesale, trans-
portation, and construction operations. This is an important part of the
Maritimes economy, since, lacking significant durable manufacturing,
the “hinterland” Maritime Provinces basically distribute and service
goods made elsewhere. Operations in the Maritimes Marginal cluster are
often, though not always, tied to large, powerful corporations. Finally,
there is a Central cluster, which is made up largely of establishments in
either the capital-intensive resource industries or the highly skilled service
sector. Our sample excluded the public sector, which in the Maritimes
would also provide central workplaces.

This establishment-level approach to segmentation proves quite il-
luminating concerning the connections between the government and the
economy. As is indicated in table 2, section A, the economic clusters are
associated with our major political measures. The work underlying the
table shows that compared with Marginal establishments, Central estab-
lishments have more ties with trade associations and government, per-
ceive themselves to be more influential with government, and are more
likely to receive assistance in recruiting and training workers as well as
financial support.’ Surprisingly, it is not the Marginal but the Maritimes
Marginal establishments, which are more likely to hire males and to pay
average wages, that have the least involvement with government and
business organizations. In the work leading to section A of table 2, the
Maritimes Marginal establishments had the lowest scores on all variables.
“PART 10" OY} Fe WLIYUBIS 4»

“PART SO" OY} Je JULSYTUBIS y

“uone}or [euy xeUULeA B PUL UOTRITIT YIM BuL0;zy [ediouLd jo uOTeUIquIOD v YnoIy) paonposd sas09s 10985 By[soduI0D ay} axe SAINSeOUT ISeYL g
“saoIpUuL asayy Jo UOKINI|SUOD ay} PUL SBUIPIOM Way ay} Jo UONdrDsap v 105 y ‘ddy 29g ,

 

 

(use) (use) (4s¢) (sse) (pre) (9se) (7s¢) "7" * Sased JO AT
£0" 80° so" 10° 80° 6 ao tess ap paysnfpy
00° 00° 0 90° — 0° — £0" TO ct + syadsoad ainqny afqeis
70° 90° KET" 00° 10 — 70° TO— rt saBea MOT/UaUIO
«9D #4 ST TO" 00° 60° all 60 sites uorpajoidsuorug
10° eet or- 10° £0° *@U GO. ttt ts yorquos yoxsePAT
+0" 10° 40° «oT #87" aa 8o" #4DE™ vrersss ss SZojouys2} pur zis
salto suonseuu0; SaxtOg PHONY sodeyury aouanguy, sosequry sadeyury gStOLOvg
qamodueyy yepueury -YIOM [eUIsIeyy sontod queurystyqeysg quaulusaAon uonebossy LINAIWHSITAVISY OISVG
quauru2A05 uo aouapuadaq [R207

uo aouapuadag,

 

2SAOIGN] ‘IVOILITO LNAWHSITEVISA

 

 

(syuatayjoo paziprepueys) SYOLOV LNAWHSITAVISY OISVG AHL NO SAOIGN] TWOILITOd LNANHSITAVISY FHL 40 NOISSAYOTY “g
In terms of what we have labeled “dependence on marginal work-world
policies” (i.e., minimum wage, unemployment insurance, welfare), the
Maritimes Marginal establishments are far less dependent than Marginal
ones on such policies and even less dependent than the Central ones. '*
Finally, there is no relationship between segment location and the utiliza-
tion of local political channels; establishments in all segments are equally
likely to tap this political resource. !°

Further insight into the relationships between political processes and
economic segments is provided when one regresses the political measures
on the basic economic factors that define our segments. In table 2, section
B, one can observe a general tendency for the size and technology dimen-
sion to be the only major predictor of affiliations between establishments
and trade associations, government, or local politicians, as well as of
perceptions of political influence. The larger, more technologically ad-
vanced establishments have the greater range of political ties. However,
on the question of dependence on specific government policies, one finds
different patterns. As suggested by the work underlying section A, table
2, the women and low-wages dimension is significantly related to depen-
dence on marginal work-world policies. In addition, establishments with
unions or other constraints on labor allocation tend to have more financial
connections with government and to be more reliant on government man-
power services. There are parallel, but weaker, effects for market control
on these two political scales. It is possible to speculate that there are
various niches or power bases within the economy on which symbiotic
relationships between government and business may be built. Central-
sector establishments have the obvious power resources associated with
size, technology, and unionization. The marginal segments present an
interesting specification, as the Maritimes Marginal establishments seem
to have stable economic niches, whereas the Marginal establishments’
survival depends on some government support.

At the worker level, there is also a multiplicity of political outcomes,
which demonstrates the strength of the segmentation approach. As
shown in table 3, our socioeconomic segment classification compares
JA2]_ TO" ay Fe IUROYUBIS 45

“PART SO 2} Je JUROUTUIS
Ajaarqvadsai ‘xts 0} JUO WOIT Pa10IS SEATIRAIASUOD 2AISSAIZOIg PUL ‘SIATBAIESUOD aAIssaIBOIg/s[eIaqry ‘spesaqry ‘spesaqry

ssyervowlaq, MAN ‘WpesD [eI90g ‘syeIIOMIAG] MAN YIM ‘FYB 0} ya] Woy yoddns 0} pus} syuapuodsal ay} yey} Satjted oy} pelepso savy am “($/61) UOSpuNWZO BUIMOTIOT 5

“sBurpiom xaput ayy 10} gq “ddy aag ,
“sireyap 403 (97-¢2 “dd ‘Qg61) B1aqsQ pue ‘uoWLTe[D ‘apjsody aag ‘sauNUe| ay} UT S1dyxIOM 3079aS-a}eALId Jo UOTJIaS sso1 aATVEJUasardar v Uasard 0} Payysom ore eyep
aun ‘os[y #19 Jo [dures wopues a[duns e jo uareamba ayy st ¢1¢‘T Jo a[dures [eNTUL Ino suBAUE STH] “9g ¢ Jo IDA]Ja UBISAp [[eI0AO Uv Jo3 om “Bupaysnyp 07 ooueLeA Uy aseaIdUt
ag se B SOUINSSe APPATBAIASUOD BUO JI PUL ‘9S"Z ST MOTVIYTIEAS 105 Ja]Ja UBIsap ay, “sfana] BouLoYTUBIS [eNzoe Jo SjuaUID}eISI9AO ayeJepow ae eouay pue a[dures wWopues afduus
B Jo aouaystxa ayy ‘saouaidg [eII0g ay} 1OJ aeyIeY [BONS ay} UTGIM ‘ouUNsse ‘sjaao| aouLdYTUBIs SuIpreSar suoyE|NoTeo uaNbasqns pur ‘sayy yey? poyou oq PINoys Ie

 

 

 

 

(ste) 20° x00" x70" 70" x40" 20° wav Ts Ayqenby,
(gt¢) *£0° £0" 10" £0" #x£0° *£0° axf0 7 Sysoraqut Sig,
(6sT‘T) £0" 410" x00" #490" xx10° 4x10" xxl 7 AMAT OR peoTTOg
(TLT‘T) 10° 00" £0" #420" 00" x20" xxI0" * Adeoygya TRO
(te) 20° 10° axl To gee TT TO geet TO TO. ‘cco + + ysaraqzur yeoypog.
(u18) 20" 0" £0" 90° #80" x80" xxbO os AMaypse Ayreg
(602) zo #480" 00° 20° «480° £0" x00 jUOTeIyTUEpT Ayeg
sasvo (7) (9) (s) () (s) (2 () @SSO1GN]

40 sseiD queusag ady pue sseIp quauisag (saqoyay quawisas ‘IVOILITO"D

y ‘(uy) auoduy. orm0Uu0sq /ay0g orm0u09"
“ SAIQEHPA {IW — /oaulg) sseIa 7

Burpnpouy uorssaasoy
Joy spay¥q anbwug,

Jo} (eUONIPPY

speqyq enbruq,

 

SyaJJq JOpIQ-0197,

~(WOpaary Jo saaiZaqy 10} paysn{py) GANIVIdXY AONVIUVA JO NOILAOdONd

 

SHIAVIV A OIHAVADOWACOINOS ANV ‘SSVTD ‘SLNEWOAS DIWONOIY NO SAIIGNY TVIILITOY JO NOISSAUOTY YO AONVIBVA AO SISKTVNY

© ATaVL
quite favorably with a conventional social class index!® in accounting for
variation on a wide range of political measures.!” The first two columns,
presenting the zero-order effects, suggest that economic segment location
is, when considered by itself, a good predictor of party-level phenomena,
such as party identification and activity, as well as of general ideological
measures concerning “big interests” and equality. Social class, on the
other hand, tends to have its greatest effects on questions that relate
specifically to government (political interest, efficacy, and activity) rather
than to party identification or ideology. These patterns persist when one
examines these measures relative to one another, as in columns 3 and 4.
When one repeats this comparison (in cols. 6 and 7), controlling for the
three sociodemographic variables (education, income, and age), the seg-
ment effects remain constant, where most of those for social class de-
cline. '* These findings clearly indicate that our segments have individual-
level consequences, particularly at the level of party and ideology, which
are not reduced when one controls for social class or other salient back-
ground variables.

In more substantive terms, there are some interesting associations be-
tween segment location and political processes. Central-sector employees
are well distributed across the political spectrum in terms of party
identification. Within this grouping, one finds roughly equal numbers of
Liberals and Progressive Conservatives. Also, the great majority of left
political identification—New Demographic party (NDP) support—is
found in this segment. Of the NDP support, 79% comes from workers
located in the Central segment establishments (only 19% of the total
sample tends to support the NDP). This pattern underscores both the
extent to which the Central segment is unionized and the integration of
the social democratic party into the institutional arrangement represented
by segmentation. Party identification among marginal workers not only
provides a contrast but also suggests a useful theoretical specification.
Maritimes Marginal workers disproportionately support the more
“Gdeological” Progressive Conservatives, whereas the Marginal workers
opt slightly more for the brokerage Liberal party.1?

As hypothesized, Central-segment workers tend to score higher than
Marginal ones for the governmental measures (political interest, efficacy,
and activity). Again, there is an interesting specification among Mar-
ginal-sector employees. Persons working in the Maritimes Marginal es-
tablishments have intermediate-level scores on the governmental mea-
sures, but they are the most likely to favor increased economic equality
and to oppose what they perceive to be general favoritism toward “big
interests.” This portrait is consistent with the small-capital character of
the Maritimes Marginal establishments referred to earlier. It seems quite
plausible that the workers there would be most likely to oppose, perhaps
with the concepts of classic small-business ideology, both large-scale or-
ganization and the increased economic inequalities that accompany it.
Finally, the Marginal-segment workers do not emerge here in any partic-
ularly distinctive way. However, their comparatively low scores on the
governmental measures and their seeming indifference to “big interests,”
favoritism, and inequality may well reflect the alienation hypothesized by
segmentation researchers.

The connections between worker and establishment data demonstrate
the relevance of the segmentation perspective for political analysis. They
also suggest a specification among marginal segments that incorporates
both European and American models of segmentation. Maritimes Mar-
ginal establishments and employees represent the secondary sector high-
lighted by the Europeans, with its low level of governmental ties (apart
from local politics) and conservative political ambience. The Marginal
establishments and workers, in contrast, reflect the secondary sector
highlighted in American research, with its establishments dependent on
governmental social policies and its workers characterized by political
alienation and ideological indifference.
DISCUSSION

In this article, we have tried to elaborate the implications of segmentation
theory to incorporate political dimensions in a more explicit fashion.
Using the key variables discussed in the segmentation literature, a factor/
cluster analysis yielded three segments. It may well be that if the input
variables were different, if a different society were chosen, or if the
operational level were the industry or firm rather than the workplace, a
different portrait of segmentation would have been produced. Never-
theless, the segments that were produced appear to be sociologically
meaningful, and it was possible to demonstrate the existence of het-
erogeneous forms of political orientations and activity, which segmenta-
tion theory postulates.

At the establishment level, one finds significant differences among eco-
nomic segments in the ways in which they relate to trade associations,
government, and major policy areas, which are compatible with theoret-
ical expectations. Furthermore, analysis of the underlying components of
segmentation specifies the nature of these connections. Controlling for the
embeddedness of the workplace in larger corporate structure could only
be done in a limited fashion with our data. However, the relationships
were more distinct when partialed for owner-managed status. At the
worker level, one finds reasonably strong workplace location effects for
party and ideology, which cannot be explained away by reference to other
important structural variables. Although our data did not permit, it
would have been interesting to control for what some eclectic-oriented
segmentation proponents refer to as “peasant effects” (i.e., differential
commitment to paid, regular work) by selecting out prime-age males.
Presumably, political correlates and consequences of workplace location
for such workers would have varied even more sharply.

Our investigation of the political aspects of segmentation processes
suggests the need for basic revision in our thinking about political life in
advanced capitalist societies and for further research. At a theoretical
level, our findings challenge both orthodox liberal and Marxist interpreta-
tions of Canadian politics. The prevalent liberal approach has been to
emphasize regional differences in explaining party allegiances, voting
behavior, and federal-provincial relations (Simeon and Elkins 1974).
Marxists have responded, quite successfully, to such theories by pointing
out that liberals have neglected the importance of class in understanding
ideological divisions among Canadians and by showing that regional
political differences reduce in many instances to ones between French
Quebecers and other Canadians (Ornstein, Stevenson, and Williams
1980). In contrast, our study both raises the possibility that structural
conditions other than class are important in constructing more adequate
theories and indicates that we may be able to use a segmentation view-
APPENDIX A
Item Wordings for the Establishment Political Indices?”

iG

The association linkage index consists of the summed scores on the

following items:

31. “Does your establishment belong to any business-related or-
ganization such as the Chamber of Commerce or the Board of
Trade or any industry associations such as the Meat Packers
Association? (no/yes)”

37. “How do you usually find out about government programs
which can significantly benefit or harm this establishment’s
business? Is it through:

e. Associations and groups in your industry? (yes/no) (re-
versed)”

The government linkage index consists of the summed scores on the

following items:

36. “In order to promote or protect their interests some businesses
consider it important to communicate with government leaders
or government agencies. Have representatives of your estab-
lishment engaged in any of the following activities in the past

two years?

a. Communicated with provincial political leaders. (yes/no)
(reversed)

b. Communicated with federal political leaders. (yes/no) (re-
versed)

c. Communicated with local politicians or party organiza-
tions. (yes/no) (reversed)”

The establishment influence index consists of the summed scores on

the following items:

32.b. “Do you feel that this organization effectively represents itself
in dealings with government? (no/yes)”

32.c. “How well does this organization represent your establish-
ment’s interests in dealing with government? (hardly at all/
moderately/strongly/very strongly)”

33.a. “Does this establishment have people to represent its interest
who have influence with government policymakers? (no/yes)”

The local politics linkage index consists of the summed scores on the

following items:

37. “How do you usually find out about government programs
which can significantly benefit or harm this establishment’s
business? Is it through:

a. Elected officials? (yes/no) (reversed)
b. Local party organizations? (yes/no) (reversed)”

The dependence on marginal work-world policies index consists of

the summed scores on the following items:

34. “How important have each of the following government pol-
icies been to your establishment over the past five years?

a. Minimum wage policy. (very important/important/not
very important) (reversed)

c. Unemployment insurance policy. (very important/
important/not very important) (reversed)

d. Welfare policy. (very important/important/not very impor-
tant) (reversed)

e. Regulations concerning overtime and holidays. (very im-
portant/important/not very important) (reversed)”

The financial connections index consists of the summed scores on the

following items:

35. “Increasingly government and business are connected. As far as
this establishment is concerned, how important is the relation-
ship or tie to government in each of the following cases?

c. Financial assistance for capitalization and development.
APPENDIX B
Item Wordings for the Worker Political Indices?®

1. The political efficacy index consists of the summed scores on the
following items from the 1979 General Segmentation Survey:

50.

“Now we would like to change the topic, and discuss your

opinions about current affairs in this country. As I read each

one, I would like you to tell me whether you strongly agree,

agree, disagree, or strongly disagree.

a. Generally, those elected to parliament soon lose touch with
the people. (reversed)

b. I don’t think that the government cares much about what
people think. (reversed)

d. People don’t have any say about what the government
does. (reversed)”

2. The political activity index consists of the summed scores on the
following items from the 1979 General Segmentation Survey:

51.

“I’m going to read you a list of the things people sometimes do
between elections to keep in touch with the government. Can
you tell me, for each of these things, whether you have ever
done such a thing (no/yes) when there was not an election cam-
paign going on?
a. Signed a petition directed to some government agency?
. Helped draft or circulate such a petition?

c. Attended a city council, school board, or similar meeting to
support or oppose some policy?

d. Worked with an organization of neighbors or other mem-
bers of your community to persuade government (such as
Department of Highways, the school board) to do some-
thing you feel ought to be done?”

The political interest index consists of the summed scores on the

following items from the 1981 General Segmentation Follow-Up Sur-

vey politics addendum:

1. “We have found that people sometimes don’t pay too much at-
tention to elections. How about yourself? Would you say that
you were generally interested in elections, fairly interested,
slightly interested, or not at all interested in it [sic]? (reversed)”

2. “We would also like to know whether you pay much attention to
politics generally. I mean from day to day, when there isn’t a big
election campaign going on. Would you say that you follow poli-
tics very closely, fairly closely, or not much at all? (reversed)”

3. “Some people do quite a lot in politics, while others find they
haven’t the time or perhaps the interest to participate in political
activities. I'll read you briefly some of the things that people do,
and I would like you to please tell me how often you have done
each of these things in recent federal or provincial elections:
often, sometimes, seldom, or never.

a. Discuss politics with other people. (reversed)”

The party activity index consists of the summed scores on the follow-

ing items from the 1981 General Segmentation Follow-Up Survey

political addendum:

3.d. “Attend a political meeting or rally. (reversed)”

3.e. “Spend time working for a political party or a candidate. (re-

versed)”

The “big interests” index consists of the summed scores on the follow-

ing items from the 1981 General Segmentation Follow-Up Survey

political addendum:

8. “If society is going to develop smoothly, do you think that the
government should pay special attention to the ‘big interests’ or
the powerful? (yes/yes, qualified/no) (reversed)”

9. “Do you think the government does in fact pay more attention
than it should to ‘the big interests’ or the powerful? (yes/yes,
qualified/no)”

The equality index consists of the summed scores on the following
REFERENCES

Apostle, Richard, Don Clairmont, and Lars Osberg. 1980. “The General Segmenta-
tion Survey: Methodology Report.” Project paper. Halifax: Dalhousie University,
Institute of Public Affairs.

. 1985a. “Segmentation and Labour Force Strategies.” Canadian Journal of

Sociology, vol. 10 (in press).

. 1985. “Segmentation and Wage Determination.” Canadian Review of Sociol-
ogy and Anthropology 22:30-56.

Averitt, Robert. 1968. The Dual Economy: The Dynamics of American Industry
Structure. New York: W. W. Norton.

Beck, E. M., Patrick Horan, and Charles Tolbert. 1978. “Stratification in a Dual
Economy: A Sectoral Model of Earnings Determination.” American Sociological
Review 43:704-20.

. 1980. “Social Stratification in Industrial Society: Further Evidence for a
Structural Alternative (Reply to Hauser).” American Sociological Reivew 45:712—
19.

Berger, Suzanne, and Michael Piore. 1980. Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial
Societies. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Bonacich, Edna. 1980. “The Creation of Dual Labor Markets.” Paper presented at the
Conference on the Structure of Labor Markets and Socio-economic Stratification,
Athens, Georgia, March.

Bridges, William. 1980. “Industry Marginality and Female Employment: A New
Appraisal.” American Sociological Review 45:58-75.

Bruno, Sergio. 1979. “The Industrial Reserve Army, Segmentation and the Italian
Labour Market.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 3:131-51.

Cuneo, Carl. 1984. “Has the Traditional Petite Bourgeoisie Persisted?” Canadian
Journal of Sociology 9:269-301.

Dahlstrém, Edmund. 1969. “Sociology and Society.” Acta Sociologica 12:85-93.

Edwards, Richard. 1979. Contested Terrain: The Transformation of the Workplace in
the Twentieth Century. New York: Basic.

Freedman, Marcia. 1976. Labor Markets: Segmentation and Shelters. Montclair,
N.J.: Allanheld, Osmun.
Gagliani, Giorgio. 1981. “How Many Working Classes?” American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 87:259-85.

Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1967. The New Industrial State. New York: Signet.

Gordon, David. 1972. Theories of Poverty and Underemployment: Orthodox, Radical,
and Dual Labor Market Perspectives. Toronto: Heath.

Gordon, David, Richard Edwards, and Michael Reich. 1982. Segmented Work, Di-
vided Workers. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Harrison, Bennett. 1972. Education, Training, and the Urban Ghetto. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.

Hauser, Robert. 1980. “On ‘Stratification in a Dual Economy.’” American Sociolog-
ical Review 45:702-12.

Hodson, Randy. 1978. “Labor in the Monopoly, Competitive and State Sectors of
Production.” Politics and Society 8:429-80.

Hodson, Randy, and Robert Kaufman. 1981. “Circularity in the Dual Economy: A
Comment on Tolbert, Horan, and Beck 1980.” American Journal of Sociology
86:881-87.

. 1982. “Economic Dualism: A Critical Review.” American Sociological Re-
view 47:727-39.

Horan, Patrick, Charles Tolbert, and E. M. Beck. 1981. “The Circle Has No Close.”
American Journal of Sociology 86:887-94.

Jacobs, Jerry. 1983. “Industrial Sector and Career Mobility Reconsidered.” American
Sociological Review 48:415-21.

Janowitz, Morris. 1976. Social Control of the Welfare State. New York: Elsevier.

Kaufman, Robert, Randy Hodson, and Neil Fligstein. 1981. “Defrocking Dualism: A
New Approach to Defining Industrial Sectors.” Social Science Research 10:1-31.

Kreckel, Reinhard. 1980. “Unequal Opportunity Structure and Labour Market Seg-
mentation.” Sociology 14:525-50.

O’Connor, James. 1973. The Fiscal Crisis of the State. New York: St. Martin’s.

Ogmundson, Rick. 1975. “Party Class Images and the Class Vote in Canada.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 40:506—12.

Ornstein, Michael, Michael Stevenson, and Paul Williams. 1980. “Region, Class and
Political Culture in Canada.” Canadian Journal of Political Science 13:227-71.
Oster, Gerry. 1979. “A Factor Analytic Test of the Theory of the Dual Economy.”

Review of Economics and Statistics 61:33-39.

Parkin, Frank. 1974. “Strategies of Social Closure in Class Formation.” Pp. 2-18 in
The Social Analysis of Class Structure, edited by Frank Parkin. London: Tavistock.

. 1979. Marxism and Class Theory: A Bourgeois Critique. New York: Colum-
bia University Press.

Pineo, Peter, John Porter, and Hugh McRoberts. 1977. “The 1971 Census and Socio-
economic Classification of Occupations.” Canadian Review of Sociology and An-
thropology 14:91-102.

Piore, Michael. 1975. “Notes for a Theory of Labor Market Stratification.” Pp. 125-50
in Labor Market Segmentation, edited by Richard Edwards, Michael Reich, and
David Gordon. Lexington, Mass.: Heath.

Piore, Michael, ed. 1979. Unemployment and Inflation: Institutionalist and Struc-
turalist Views. White Plains, N.Y.: Sharpe.

Poulantzas, Nicos. 1973. Political Power and Social Class. London: New Left Books.

Rubery, Jill. 1978. “Structured Labour Markets, Worker Organization and Low Pay.”
Cambridge Journal of Economics 2:17-36.

Sabel, Charles. 1979. “Marginal Workers in Industrial Society.” Pp. 170-85 in Unem-
ployment and Inflation: Institutionalist and Structuralist Views, edited by Michael
Piore. White Plains, N.Y.: Sharpe.

Shils, Edward. 1968. “Consensus.” Pp. 40-43 in A Dictionary of Sociology, edited by
Geoffrey Mitchell. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Simeon, Richard, and David Elkins. 1974. “Regional Political Cultures in Canada.”
Canadian Journal of Political Science 7:397—437.

Tolbert, Charles. 1982. “Industrial Segmentation and Men’s Career Mobility.” Ameri-
can Sociological Review 47:457-77.

Tolbert, Charles, Patrick Horan, and E. M. Beck. 1980. “The Structure of Economic
Segmentation: A Dual Economy Approach.” American Journal of Sociology 85:
1095-1116.

Zucker, Lynn, and Carolyn Rosenstein. 1981. “Taxonomies of Institutional Structure:
Dual Economy Reconsidered.” American Sociological Review 46:869-84.
