Cultural Mechanisms and the Persistence of Neighborhood Violence

Author(s): David S. Kirk and Andrew V. Papachristos

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 116, No. 4 (January 2011), pp. 1190-1233
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/655754

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:55 UTC
Sociologists have given considerable attention to identifying the
neighborhood-level social-interactional mechanisms that influence
outcomes such as crime, educational attainment, and health. Yet,
cultural mechanisms are often overlooked in quantitative studies of
neighborhood effects. This paper adds a cultural dimension to neigh-
borhood effects research by exploring the consequences of legal cyn-
icism. Legal cynicism refers to a cultural frame in which people
perceive the law as illegitimate, unresponsive, and ill equipped to
ensure public safety. The authors find that legal cynicism explains
why homicide persisted in certain Chicago neighborhoods during
the 1990s despite declines in poverty and declines in violence city-
wide.
ingly paradoxical coexistence of law-abiding and deviant cultural systems.
Indeed, a variety of ethnographic accounts since Whyte’s ({1943] 1993)
Street Corner Society demonstrates how residents of disadvantaged neigh-
borhoods navigate mainstream (read middle class) and deviant cultural
systems as they go about their everyday routines. Most residents of socially
disadvantaged neighborhoods believe in the substance of the law and
express little tolerance for violence and crime (Sampson and Bartusch
1998), yet many still engage in violations of the law despite these beliefs.
How, then, does one explain this coexistence of law-abiding beliefs and
law-violating behaviors? For the most part, neighborhood research over
the past 20 years has made few attempts to answer this question—or even
to ask it—largely because of the failure to incorporate contemporary no-
tions of culture in explanations for behavior. This neglect of cultural
explanations is puzzling because a concern with culture was once core to
theorizing in urban sociology. In particular, classic social disorganization
theory considered cultural transmission an essential mechanism in the
persistence of delinquency in disorganized neighborhoods (Park [1925]
1967; Shaw and McKay 1942). While in recent years research on neigh-
borhood effects has done much to advance our understanding of the social-
interactional and structural mechanisms of social behaviors (e.g., collective
efficacy and concentrated poverty), only a handful of studies, mainly eth-
nographies, consider the role of culture in explanations for crime or in
the study of neighborhood effects more broadly. This study aims to address
this research shortfall by injecting a cultural dimension found within the
ethnographic tradition into the quantitative study of neighborhood effects.
We argue that above and beyond social structural conditions such as
poverty and structural disadvantage, neighborhood levels of violence can
be explained by the presence of a specific cultural frame—legal cynicism.
Legal cynicism refers to a cultural orientation in which the law and
the agents of its enforcement, such as the police and courts, are viewed
as illegitimate, unresponsive, and ill equipped to ensure public safety.
Legal cynicism resolves the aforementioned paradox—while individuals
may believe in the substance of the law, antagonism toward and mistrust
of the agents of the law may propel some individuals toward violence
simply because they feel they cannot rely upon the police to help them
resolve grievances. Under such conditions, violence can serve as an ad-
ditional form of problem-solving behavior in one’s cultural repertoire
(Hannerz 1969; Black 1983), augmenting but not necessarily replacing
other types of problem-solving behaviors such as calling the police.
The conception of legal cynicism has received important theoretical
attention in recent years (Sampson and Bartusch 1998). By and large,
prior theorizing has utilized a definition of culture as norms and values.
For instance, Sampson and Bartusch (1998, p. 782) conceive of (and em-
pirically measure) legal cynicism in a normative manner—that is, as a
component of anomie, “a state of normlessness in which the rules of the
dominant society (and hence the legal system) are no longer binding in a
community.” Yet, our study theoretically and empirically departs from
prior work in three important ways. First and foremost, we seek to in-
tegrate theory and research from cultural and urban sociology (e.g., Small
2002, 2004; Harding 2007) by conceiving of legal cynicism as a cultural
frame. That is, legal cynicism is a lens through which individuals observe,
perceive, and interpret situations (Lamont and Small 2008). This distinc-
tion between norms and frames may be subtle but has important impli-
cations for our understanding of the sources of social behavior such as
interpersonal violence. As Lamont and Small (2008, p. 81) note: “The
norms-and-values perspective posited a cause-and-effect relationship be-
tween values and behavior, whereas the frame perspective tends to posit

. a constraint-and-possibility relationship. Frames do not cause be-
havior so much as make it possible or likely.” Thus, we contend that
violence results because people’s perception of their context leads them
to believe that they have few options to handle a conflict or to protect
themselves besides violence. Empirically, we measure legal cynicism using
indicators of resident perceptions of the legal system and the police, in
contrast to earlier work that measured legal cynicism using indicators of
social norms (Sampson and Bartusch 1998).

Second, while we contend, as do Sampson and Bartusch, that legal
cynicism originates as an adaptation to neighborhood structural conditions
such as concentrated poverty, we also argue that legal cynicism is cultural
precisely because individual perceptions of the law are augmented and
solidified through communication and social interaction among neigh-
borhood residents. In this way, residents arrive at a shared, though not
necessarily identical, meaning of the law and its viability (Hannerz 1969).
Once such cultural understandings emerge, cynicism exerts an influence
on neighborhood rates of violence independent of the structural circum-
stances that originally produced such cynicism. Thus, culture plays a more
important role in neighborhood violence that prior quantitative research
may suggest.

Finally, whereas prior theoretical and empirical work addresses the
sources of legal cynicism, our focus is directed toward the consequences
of cynicism for neighborhood violence. While we do consider how legal
cynicism emerges, the main empirical focus of this article is on how legal
cynicism influences levels of neighborhood violence. And while some prior
work has examined how views of the law influence an individual’s com-
pliance and disobedience to the law (e.g., Tyler 1990), our interest is in
exploring the social and cultural characteristics of neighborhoods that
explain differential rates of violence across space.’ By examining the re-
lationship between legal cynicism and neighborhood violence, this study
adds a dimension to a small yet resurging interest in identifying the cul-
tural mechanisms at root of the neighborhood effects on behavior (e.g.,
Small 2004; Sampson and Bean 2006; Harding 2007, 2009).

Drawing upon a unique assemblage of data on the sociodemographic,
social-interactional, and cultural characteristics for every neighborhood
in Chicago, this study seeks to answer the following questions about the
effects of neighborhoods on lethal violence: Is neighborhood violence the
product of a subculture that values such behavior? Or, is violence ex-
plained by legal cynicism, such that violence may be common in cynical
neighborhoods even if few residents value and tolerate acts of violence?
And, if so, does legal cynicism explain the persistence of violence in some
Chicago neighborhoods over time, even as structural conditions such as
concentrated poverty improved? Our findings reveal that tolerant atti-
tudes toward deviance and violence have little bearing on neighborhood
rates of violence. Legal cynicism, however, has both a near-term and
enduring influence on violence, net of neighborhood structural charac-
teristics and social processes such as collective efficacy. Neighborhood
culture is a powerful determinant of neighborhood violence and partially
accounts for why rates of violence remained stable (and even increased)
in some Chicago neighborhoods during the 1990s despite declines in pov-
erty and drastic declines in violence citywide.

The article proceeds as follows. We begin by describing our conception
of cultural frames and then focus attention on the sources and conse-
quences of legal cynicism. After that, we address three empirical objec-
tives. First, we examine the correlates of legal cynicism (objective 1).
Second, we examine the cross-sectional relation between neighborhood
violence and legal cynicism as well as the relation between neighborhood
violence and tolerant attitudes toward violence and deviant behavior
(objective 2). Third, through a dynamic investigation of neighborhood
change, we seek to determine whether legal cynicism predicts the change
FROM CULTURE IN VALUES TO CULTURAL FRAMES

While little recent theorizing has been directed toward the culture-crime
nexus, cultural explanations of crime do have a long tradition in sociology.
One prominent cultural explanation, generally thought of as the “culture
of deviance” model, explains differential levels of violence as the by-
product of a unique lower-class subculture whose main tenets diverge
from or come into conflict with the values of mainstream society (Sellin
1938; Cohen 1955; Miller 1958; Lewis 1966; Wolfgang and Ferracuti 1967).
This approach conceives of culture as something deep inside individuals
and social groups—a bundle of norms, beliefs, attitudes, and values that
provide a worldview and, more importantly as far as crime is concerned,
a motive for action (e.g., Parsons 1951). From this perspective, deviance
is conformity, albeit conformity to a set of values that diverge from main-
stream society (Sellin 1938).

A softer version of the culture of deviance argument is found in Shaw
and McKay’s (1942) classic social disorganization model, although the
cultural mechanism affecting behavior is still values.* For Shaw and Mc-
Kay (1942), the persistence of delinquency in the same neighborhoods
despite population turnover and ethnic succession results from both struc-
tural conditions (i.e., economic status, population heterogeneity, and res-
idential mobility) and a process of cultural transmission whereby the
character of a community is passed on to subsequent neighborhood inhab-
itants. Shaw and McKay’s argument follows directly from Robert Park
([1925] 1967, p. 5), who argued, “In the course of time every section and
quarter of the city takes on something of the character and qualities of
its inhabitants. Each separate part of the city is inevitably stained with
the peculiar sentiments of its population.” As the character of acommunity
persists and is transmitted, so too does the level of delinquency persist.
In particular, youth in high-delinquency neighborhoods are more likely
to encounter differential systems of values, such as those touted by youth
gangs, which thrive because weakened social institutions cannot fend
them off.

Of course there are very good reasons why the recent resurgence of
neighborhood effects studies has generally neglected the role of culture
despite the theoretical groundwork laid by Shaw and McKay and earlier
work in urban sociology. In particular, exploring a cultural explanation
for inner-city problems could be misconstrued as favoring a “culture of
poverty” interpretation of behavior. Relatedly, empirical research has
largely disproved the existence of a unique lower-class culture (Kornhauser
1978). Members of all classes, including those living in impoverished
neighborhood conditions, share uniform opinions of crime and subscribe
to so-called middle-class values (Short and Strodtbeck 1965; Liebow 1967;
Suttles 1968; Hannerz 1969).* Even if residents of disadvantaged neigh-
borhoods become socially isolated as a result of middle-class flight (Wilson
1987), it does not mean that they become culturally isolated and embedded
in an oppositional culture (Harding 2007).* In fact, research reveals that
residents of disadvantaged neighborhoods are no more likely to tolerate
violence than are residents of advantaged neighborhoods (Sampson and
Bartusch 1998, p. 796).

Why, then, do crime and violence proliferate in certain areas when such
courses of action are not valued? We suggest that the answer to this
question lies in a revised conceptualization of culture that views culture
not as values but as a repertoire of tools that ultimately serve as a guide
for action (Hannerz 1969; Swidler 1986). The core arguments of Hannerz’s
(1969) magnum opus, Soulside, reflect a fundamental shift in the socio-
logical notion of culture away from the view of culture as a system of
values. For Hannerz, ghetto dwellers are not necessarily engaging in be-
haviors they value; rather, they must often suspend their core values in
order to engage in behaviors necessary when faced with a given situation
and context. Through adaptation, ghetto dwellers develop a repertoire of
modes of action, which include both mainstream and ghetto-specific forms
of behavior. Similar to Hannerz, Kornhauser (1978) argues that it is not
the content of values that varies across neighborhoods, but rather the
strength of values. Accordingly, mainstream cultural values may be weak
or lack relevance in certain contexts (in Kornhauser’s terminology), yet
other cultural tools in one’s repertoire (e.g., frames) may provide a more
robust guide for action.
Swidler’s (1986) theory of culture as a tool kit has further guided the
intellectual shift away from “culture in values.” As Swidler (1986, p. 273)
notes, “The reigning model used to understand culture’s effects on action
is fundamentally misleading. It assumes that culture shapes action by
supplying ultimate ends or values toward which action is directed, thus
making values the central causal element of culture.” As an alternative
to this traditional view of culture, Swidler (1986, p. 273) suggests that
“culture influences action not by providing the ultimate values toward
which action is oriented, but by shaping a repertoire or ‘tool kit’ of habits,
skills, and styles from which people construct ‘strategies of action.’” In
other words, culture has causal significance not because it spells out the
desired ends of action, but rather because culture shapes choices for action.
In particular, culture provides a repertoire of evaluation schema, scripts,
and frames people use to understand their social context and to choose
courses of action.

In this study, we similarly conceive of culture as a tool kit for action,
and focus on one particular element of the tool kit that has bearing on
action, namely, cultural frames. The notion of cultural frames can be
traced to the work of Erving Goffman (1974). For Goffman, cultural
frames provide meaning to situations and contexts; in other words, in-
dividuals’ perceptions of the world are filtered through a particular frame.
Thus, the objective world may be different from the world an individual
subjectively perceives, and cultural frames serve to simplify the com-
plexity of the objective world by highlighting certain elements of reality
while excluding others (Lamont and Small 2008). In turn, cultural frames
provide a guide to action in a given situation. Quite simply, how people
act depends on how they cognitively perceive of themselves and the world
in which they live.

One illustrative example of the use of cultural frames for understanding
neighborhood organization and behavior is Small’s (2002, 2004) ethno-
graphic study of Villa Victoria, a housing project located in Boston’s South
End. Small finds that the type of frame residents use to give meaning to
their neighborhood directly influences the extent to which residents engage
in community participation. Even though the first (older) cohort of resi-
dents of Villa Victoria faces the same neighborhood structural conditions
as the later cohort, this first cohort is more likely to participate in the
community life of Villa Victoria because of the way it perceives the neigh-
borhood. The first cohort frames the neighborhood as a place of historical
significance, as a community created out of the struggle of activists in the
late 1960s to thwart impending geographic displacement in the face of
urban renewal initiatives. In contrast, the more recent cohort of residents
(both younger and more recent occupants) perceives of Villa Victoria as
“the projects”—a place characterized by disorder, disrepair, and disor-
ganization. These contrasting frames of the same ecological space explain
why some residents invest in the community through local participation
while others do not. For our purposes, Small’s work highlights (1) that
multiple frames can exist within the same neighborhood and (2) that
cultural frames are a driver of community action net of neighborhood
structural conditions.

The notion of cultural frames has only rarely been applied to explain
violence, most notably in the assertion that a southern culture of honor
explains regional variations in the prevalence of violence in the United
States. For example, Corzine, Huff-Corzine, and Whitt (1999, p. 46) con-
tend that “culture provides ways of organizing sensory experiences... . .
Culture’s primary influence on violence is through ‘definitions of the
situation,’ ‘frames,’ and/or ‘attributional styles’ that affect the likelihood
that an individual will define a situation as one in which physical assault,
perhaps with the intent to kill an opponent, is appropriate or even de-
manded.” Likewise, Nisbett (1993) argues that insults and threats are more
likely to lead to acts of aggression and violence when interpreted through
a culture of honor that is more pervasive in the South relative to the
North. The implication is that threats and insults are interpreted through
different cultural frames by southerners and northerners and, as such,
conflicts are more likely to be defined as situations requiring the use of
violence in the South.

The present study is concerned with a specific cultural frame—legal
cynicism—and how it relates to neighborhood levels of violence. We are
interested in how individuals frame the legitimacy of the law and the way
illegitimacy constrains individuals’ options for resolving conflicts. Cyni-
cism can be used to understand why some individuals use violence to
resolve disputes while others do not, and also to understand why some
neighborhoods have more violence than others. The next section describes
our conception of legal cynicism.
The Sources of Legal Cynicism

We suggest the legal cynicism is the product of two related influences: (1)
neighborhood structural conditions and (2) neighborhood variation in po-
lice practices and resident interaction with the police. Drawing upon pre-
vious work (Wilson 1987; Sampson and Wilson 1995; Anderson 1999), we
assert that cultural tools, in this case the frame of legal cynicism, originate
as an adaptation to neighborhood structural conditions. Cynicism, in turn,
is culturally transmitted through the interaction patterns of neighborhood
residents. In socially and economically disadvantaged neighborhoods, peo-
ple come to understand that the dominant societal institutions (of which
the police and the justice system are emblematic) will offer them little in
the way of security, either economic or personal (Wilson 1987; Anderson
1999). Self-reliance emerges as an essential adaptation to this alienation
from mainstream society, especially under conditions of racial segregation,
intense poverty, and deficient educational, economic, and employment
opportunity structures. Evidence of alienation and adaptation is seen viv-
idly in Anderson’s (1999) Code of the Street: “The inclination to violence
springs from the circumstances of life among the ghetto poor... .The
code of the street is actually a cultural adaptation to a profound lack of
faith in the police and the judicial system” (pp. 32, 34). This code consists
of a set of informal behavioral principles centered on the search for respect,
the use of violence as a status-conferring mechanism, and the perpetual
need to avoid victimization. In this case, individuals do not necessarily
value violence; rather, the code of the street represents an adaptation to
the deleterious conditions of inner-city life, which renders values irrelevant
and self-reliance mandatory: “The local streets are . . . tough and dan-
gerous places where people often feel very much on their own, where they
themselves must be personally responsible for their own security” (An-
derson 1999, p. 317). As such, knowledge of the street code is essential if
only to navigate potentially dangerous places and situations.

The emergence of street gangs is another oft cited form of cultural
adaptation to neighborhood structural conditions. Earlier studies of gangs
theorized that gangs form as the result of an attenuation process in dis-
organized and disadvantaged neighborhoods, as an ersatz way for youth
to fulfill status-seeking and peer group needs (Thrasher 1927; Shaw and

injustice frames resonates with our interest in legal cynicism. Through a legitimating
frame, individuals are guided by the legitimacy of authority figures. When authority
figures violate shared understandings of justice, “injustice frames” arise that provide a
reason for noncompliance to authority.
McKay 1942; Cohen 1955). Similarly, contemporary research considers
the persistence of gangs in disadvantaged neighborhoods a response to
massive shifts in economic and structural conditions since World War II,
but especially the deindustrialization of the economy (e.g., Hagedorn 1988;
Venkatesh 1997). Venkatesh (1997, p. 89) notes, “The contemporary street
gang is a product of postwar systemic factors that have deleteriously
affected the economic and institutional fabric of inner cities. Specifically,
the gang partially fills the void left by other community-based institutions.
Adaptation is the central trope.”

Most relevant for our argument, Sampson and Bartusch (1998), using
the same survey data that we employ in our study, find that neighborhood
variation in cynicism toward the law is not simply the product of resident
compositional differences across neighborhoods; rather, legal cynicism is
a product of neighborhood disadvantage. To the extent that neighborhood
disadvantage inhibits the upward mobility of residents because of social
isolation or restricted opportunities, such disadvantage breeds cynicism
toward societal institutions. Sampson and Bartusch (1998, p. 801) con-
clude: “Perhaps we should not be surprised that those most exposed to
the numbing reality of pervasive segregation and economic subjugation
become cynical about human nature and legal systems of justice—even
as they personally condemn acts of deviance and violence.”

A second root source of legal cynicism is the actions of the criminal
justice system, particularly law enforcement. While perceptions of the law
will not exactly mirror objective reality, they do tend to be correlated.
Matza (1964, p. 101) contends that cynical views toward the law are
produced by seemingly contradictory factors: an approval of the substance
of criminal law, yet an antagonism directed at the agents of the law. This
antagonism and the consequent cynicism are the product of police con-
duct, particularly harassing behavior, and insufficient and ineffective
crime control (Kubrin and Weitzer 2003). In short, the way justice is
administered influences legal cynicism.’

While the law manifests itself in numerous ways in our everyday lives,
perhaps the most visible and palpable symbol of the law is the police. A
growing body of literature demonstrates that police behavior varies across
neighborhood context and that the police have wide discretion to carry
out their functions (see Black and Reiss [1970] for an early examination
of police discretion). For instance, Smith (1986) finds that police are less
likely to file incident reports following a crime in high-crime neighbor-
hoods than in low-crime neighborhoods. In addition, Smith finds that
police are more likely to use coercive authority (i.e., to use or threaten to
use force against suspects) in nonwhite and racially mixed neighborhoods,
relative to predominately white neighborhoods. More recently, Terrill and
Reisig (2003) find that police contact is significantly more likely to result
in police use of force in disadvantaged neighborhoods, and Kane (2005)
finds that police misconduct is dramatically more prevalent in disadvan-
taged neighborhoods.

There are numerous potential reasons underlying the neighborhood
variation in policing, many of which contend that policing itself is a
product of the structural conditions of neighborhoods (Kirk and Matsuda
2010). A first explanation is ecological contamination, a process whereby
every person encountered in a “bad” neighborhood is perceived by the
criminal justice system to embody the “moral liability” of that neighbor-
hood (Werthman and Piliavin 1967; see also Smith 1986). Thus, char-
acteristics of the neighborhood where police-suspect contact occurs influ-
ence the outcome of the contact (e.g., use of force, arrest), independent of
the characteristics of the criminal event that led to the contact. To manage
risk and ensure public safety, the police may be more likely to use certain
tactics in one neighborhood versus another. Second, and related to eco-
logical contamination, Klinger (1997) argues that the level of crime in a
given neighborhood profoundly affects police behavior. While police ad-
ministration does to some extent attempt to balance workloads and re-
sources across police districts in a city, it is typically still the case that
higher crime districts have greater call-to-officer ratios and therefore fewer
resources to devote to any particular incident than in low-crime districts.
Consequently, a smaller proportion of criminal incidents will be investi-
gated—and arrests made—in a high-crime neighborhood than in a low-
crime neighborhood. In addition, Klinger notes that it is well understood
by police officers that victims of crime oftentimes have been offenders
previously (see Lauritsen, Sampson, and Laub 1991; Lauritsen and Laub
2007). Thus, in high-crime areas, proportionally more victims are prior
criminals, and, consequently, the police are more likely to perceive victims
as deserving of the crime committed against them (Klinger 1997; see also
Stark 1987). For our purposes of understanding legal cynicism, the root
causes of neighborhood variation in police behavior are not as conse-
quential as the possibility that variation in policing may, in part, account
for differentials in legal cynicism across neighborhoods.

Empirically, research validates the argument that legal cynicism is a
product of direct experience with the justice system. For instance, re-
spondents from Brunson’s (2007) study of youth experiences with the
police mentioned frequent personal instances of police harassment and
Transmitting Legal Cynicism

While we argue that legal cynicism has roots in neighborhood structural
conditions and direct interactions with law enforcement, it is important
to emphasize that culture is relational, not merely adaptive (Hannerz
1969). Individuals acquire culture relationally, through their interactions
in social networks. Direct experiences with harassing police may influence
an individual’s cynicism, but this cynicism becomes cultural through so-
cial interaction. In this sense, individuals’ own experiential-based per-
ception of the law becomes solidified through a collective process whereby
residents develop a shared meaning of the behavior of the law and the
viability of the law to ensure their safety.

Harding (2009) provides an illuminating discussion of the ways in which
neighborhood disadvantage and violence provide constraints on the types
of social networks available to adolescents, which, in turn, influences their
exposure to alternative cultural models. Harding observes that in violent,
disadvantaged neighborhoods in Boston, many male adolescents adapt to
their surroundings by staying close to home and avoiding interaction with
males from other neighborhoods. Consequently, because of a limited num-
ber of same-age peers within the bounds of the neighborhood and because
of frequent use of public spaces, adolescents in these violent neighbor-
hoods are more likely to come into contact with and associate with older
peers than would adolescents in less violent neighborhoods. While even
in the most disadvantaged neighborhoods many adult residents work or
go to school, those older peers available in the neighborhood to socialize
youths are often those residents with idle time, including the unemployed
or individuals employed in the underground economy. These older peers
expose adolescents to alternative cultural models related to romantic re-
lationships, education, and strategies for handling violent confrontations.
In the case of an older youth named Marcus, Harding (2009, p. 457)
observes that one message adolescents receive from older peers is that the
police are a source of harassment. In this sense, perceptions and injustices
of the past become part of a legacy that is transmitted to new generations.
It is not surprising then that youth in violent, disadvantaged neighbor-
hoods often would not even consider the police a viable resource for
protection. Our main point, though, is that while culture is rooted in
neighborhood conditions (e.g., economic disadvantage and violence), it is
transmitted and collectively shaped through social interaction.

As we earlier suggested, residents’ cynical views, while collectively
shaped, will not be uniform within a neighborhood. Even in the most
violent, disadvantaged neighborhood, many residents will hold favorable
frames of the law. Thus, a key component of the cultural transmission of
legal cynicism is the frequency of exposure to cynical perceptions. Hannerz
(1969, p. 185) argues, “Cultural transmission . . . is most likely to be
efficient when a mode of behavior is encountered frequently and in many
different persons.” Consider that in certain neighborhoods, it can be quite
risky for residents to express pro-police views and to cooperate with the
police (Anderson 1999; Kane 2005). Thus, even in a neighborhood with
an abundance of both positive and negative views about the law and the
police, residents may still encounter relatively more legal cynicism than
optimism.

In sum, residents of a neighborhood share a common existence and are
subject to the same ecological constraints. From this shared existence, as
well as direct and vicarious experiences with the police, emerges a culture.
Resident experiences, with the police and with structural conditions, co-
alesce to produce a cultural frame. To be clear, we are not arguing that
legal cynicism among neighborhood residents is static; rather, it is shaped
and reshaped by neighborhood conditions and direct and vicarious ex-
periences with agents of the law. And while we do not deny that indi-
viduals within the same neighborhood will vary in their extent of cynicism,
our core argument is that perceptions of the law and legal institutions
are collective.
protecting oneself because individuals are more likely to presume that the
law is unavailable or unresponsive to their needs. In the face of such
constraints, individuals may choose to engage in their own brand of social
control because they cannot rely upon the law to assist them.

To illustrate the mechanism, take, for example, a situation where a
neighborhood resident is faced with a threat of violent victimization.
Individuals have a range of potential strategies of action for handling the
situation: they can avoid violent individuals and hazardous places, seek
protection from older neighborhood peers, travel in groups to dangerous
locations, call the police for protection, or resort to violence to resolve a
conflict.’ These strategies are dependent upon each other—legally cynical
individuals may view reliance on the police as an ineffective strategy for
handling the conflict, thus making it more likely that individuals will
solve the dispute through violence. To be clear, cynicism toward the law
does not directly cause neighborhood violence yet makes it more likely
because mistrust of the agents of the law opens up the possibility that
individuals will resort to illegal violence to redress a problem instead of
abiding by the letter of the law. As Hannerz (1969, p. 186) argues, “Man
is not a mindless cultural automaton . . . when people develop a cultural
repertoire by being at the receiving end of cultural transmission, this
certainly does not mean that they will put every part of it to use.” In this
sense, culture is not a deterministic force; rather, by constraining the
available choices for avoiding victimization—because reliance upon the
police is not perceived to be a viable option—legal cynicism makes vio-
lence more likely.

Roots of our argument are found in the work of Black (1983) on self-
help and social control. Black (1983, p. 34) defines self-help as “the ex-
pression of a grievance by unilateral aggression such as personal violence
or property destruction,” whereby violence becomes the vehicle through
which such grievances are resolved. Black makes the case that violence,
in both traditional and modern societies, has often been used as a form
of social control, to induce others to conform in some manner. For our
purposes, the key point is that this aggression as a form of dispute res-
olution is more likely to occur in the absence of the law. When the law
is unavailable to someone—or in our argument, when he perceives that
it is unavailable—that individual has to help himself. One important
means for avoiding victimization is to protect oneself using any available
means, including violence.

Anderson’s (1999) observations from Philadelphia support such a view
CONCEPTUAL MODEL

Figure 1 translates the foregoing arguments into a conceptual model. We
contend that negative interactions with the police and other institutions
of the law as well as neighborhood structural conditions such as concen-
trated poverty lead to legal cynicism. These conditions structure how
individuals perceive the functioning and relevance of the law. Through
communication and interaction, experiences with the law and neighbor-
hood conditions coalesce so residents form a shared perception of how
the police will operate in a given context. In turn, legal cynicism fosters
violence by constraining the available strategies to resolve disputes and
ensure personal safety. The perceived inadequacy or illegitimacy of formal
institutions of social control means that individuals may no longer regard
the use of formal control institutions as an option to mediate their griev-
ances. In other words, calling the police will not solve their problems or
remedy disputes and victimizations (Carr et al. 2007). In the face of such
a constraint, the use of violence as a form of self-help or social control
may become a situational response to legal cynicism (Black 1983; see also
Anderson 1999; Jacobs and Wright 2006). When the law is unavailable—
or when the law is perceived to be unavailable—individuals may choose
to disperse social control by their own means, thus increasing the prob-
ability of violence.”
aprsrwo0H
2OIUD[OLA,
pooysoqysion

 

<+—_

uoyoy

jo
$9189}B.S

 

+

Mey oy
pur ao1fod YI
suonjde.19jUy

wis1audZd [eso]
‘Surely
[eanjjnD

spooy.s0qysian
Jo saunjeag
eanjan.yg
DATA AND RESEARCH DESIGN

Data used in this study come from three sources: the Project on Human
Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN), the Chicago Police
Department, and the U.S. census. The PHDCN is an interdisciplinary
project that focuses on understanding the causes of juvenile delinquency,
adult crime, and violence, among other outcomes. Indicators of neigh-
borhood cultural and social mechanisms come from the 1994-95 PHDCN
Community Survey. Survey questions include items about legal cynicism,
tolerance of deviance, and the social organization of neighborhoods, in-
cluding an emphasis on the cohesiveness of ties among neighborhood
residents and their willingness to engage in social control (i.e., collective
efficacy). For the purposes of the PHDCN, neighborhood boundaries were
operationally defined by combining all of the census tracts in Chicago
into 343 neighborhood clusters, constructed to be “as ecologically mean-
ingful as possible, composed of geographically contiguous census tracts,
and internally homogeneous on key census indicators” (Sampson et al.
1997, p. 919). These census indicators include socioeconomic status, race/
ethnicity, housing density, and family structure. An average of 8,000 res-
idents comprises each of the 343 neighborhood clusters. The Community
Survey yielded a probability sample of 8,782 Chicago residents situated
within the 343 neighborhood clusters. Our unit of analysis is the neigh-
borhood cluster defined in the PHDCN data.
Variables

Legal cynicism.—We conceptualize legal cynicism as a frame through
which individuals interpret the functioning and usefulness of the law and
its agents. To measure legal cynicism, we combine three items from the
PHDCN Community Survey. Respondents of the survey were asked the
extent to which they agree with the following: (1) laws are made to be
broken, (2) the police are not doing a good job in preventing crime in this
neighborhood, and (3) the police are not able to maintain order on the
streets and sidewalks in the neighborhood." Details of our scaling strategy
are presented below.

Tolerance of deviance.—This measure, which has previously been de-
veloped by Sampson and Bartusch (1998), serves as an indicator of res-
idents’ views about the morality of engaging in certain forms of deviant
behavior, including violence. Four items are used to construct the scale,
which all concern “how wrong” it is for a 13-year-old to engage in various
behaviors: (1) smoke cigarettes, (2) use marijuana, (3) drink alcohol, and
(4) get into fistfights. Higher scores equate to higher levels of tolerance
for these behaviors (i.e., belief that these behaviors are not wrong).

Collective efficacy.—Our measure of collective efficacy is identical to
the scale developed by Sampson et al. (1997) and represents a combined
measure of neighborhood social control and social cohesion and trust.
Neighborhood social control refers to the willingness of residents to in-
tervene in the following situations: (1) children were skipping school and
hanging out on a street corner, (2) children were spray painting graffiti
on a local building, (3) children were showing disrespect to an adult, (4)
a fight broke out, and (5) the fire station closest to the respondent’s home
was threatened with budget cuts. The measure of social cohesion and
trust is based on the level of respondent agreement to the following survey
statements: (1) people around here are willing to help their neighbors, (2)
people in this neighborhood can be trusted, (3) people in this neighborhood
generally get along with each other, (4) this is a close-knit neighborhood,
and (5) people in this neighborhood share the same values.
Following the measurement strategy of Sampson et al. (1997), we con-
struct the legal cynicism, tolerance of deviance, and collective efficacy
scales, respectively, via a multilevel item-response model using HLM (hi-
erarchical linear and nonlinear modeling). In this model, item responses
to each of the survey questions are nested within a respondent, and re-
spondents are nested within neighborhoods. From this item-response
model, we output a neighborhood specific empirical Bayes (EB) residual
to use as our scale. These scales represent the average level of legal cyn-
icism, tolerance of deviance, and collective efficacy across residents of
each given neighborhood.

Homicide.—To assess the consequences of legal cynicism for neigh-
borhood violence, we use rates of homicide as a dependent variable. The
use of homicide data in studies of violence has several advantages over
the use of data on other crime types. In contrast to other forms of violence,
there is a close match between known homicides and the true number of
homicides. Furthermore, homicide is less susceptible to the definitional
problems an investigating officer or detective may face when determining
exactly which type of crime was committed.

Incident-level homicide data were obtained from the Chicago Police
Department (CPD). Address information from each incident was used
to geocode the location of the homicide to the corresponding PHDCN
neighborhood cluster. To address the second objective of our study—to
examine the influence of legal cynicism on neighborhood violence—we
use homicide data from 1996 to 1998. Given that homicide is a rare event,
it is a common practice to construct rates based on three-year averages
(see, e.g., Morenoff, Sampson, and Raudenbush 2001). For our measure
of homicide from 1996 to 1998, we calculated the average yearly homi-
cides. We then computed an empirical Bayes homicide estimate with an
unconditional Poisson model (controlling for population exposure), which
produces an estimate of the neighborhood-specific homicide rate that is
a weighted average of each neighborhood’s homicide rate and the grand
mean across the city.'* We import this EB estimate as the dependent
variable in our regression models to address objective 2. This procedure
reduces the extreme skewness of the homicide rates and makes the mea-
sure suitable for spatial regression modeling.

To address our third objective—to determine whether legal cynicism
explains changes in neighborhood violence net of structural changes—we
use a measure of the residual change in homicide. This measure is con-
structed by regressing the 2000-2002 yearly average on the 1991-93 ho-
micide rate, again with a Poisson model in HLM. We then output the
EB residual following estimation. These residuals represent the unex-
pected change in homicide after accounting for prior levels of homicide."®
By using a residual change score, our measure of change in homicide in
the 1990s is uncorrelated with initial levels of homicide (i.e., the rate in
1991-93). For theoretical reasons, we find the use of a residual change
score to be more advantageous than a raw change score. Specifically,
residual change scores are useful for identifying neighborhoods that
changed more or less than expected as homicide declined in Chicago in
the 1990s, where the expected change is a function of citywide changes
in homicide. In equation form (Cronbach and Furby 1970), it can be seen
that the residual change score for a given neighborhood j, (R,), is a function
of the observed change in homicide from time 1 to time 2 (D, = X,, —
X,,) and the average observed change citywide (D):

[R, = D,-D ~ By x,(X,— X).
The residuals used in analyses are positive when homicide declined less
than expected (or when it increased). Residuals are negative when ho-
micide declined more than expected.

Neighborhood structural characteristics —Neighborhood structural
data come from the 1990 and 2000 U.S. censuses. Consistent with the
social disorganization thesis and recent work in the tradition (e.g., Bursik
and Grasmick 1993), we use four measures of neighborhood structure:
concentrated poverty, residential stability, immigrant concentration, and
the proportion of youth in the neighborhood. In the analyses, we use the
1990 measures, as well as measures of the residual change from 1990 to
2000."" Scales for concentrated poverty and residential stability for both
1990 and 2000 were created via factor analyses. Specifically, we pooled
data from both years into the same data set (i.e., each neighborhood had
two observations). By doing so, the factor loadings for each of the census
items do not vary across the two time points, thus ensuring comparability
across time. The two resulting factors are based on the following six items:
(1) concentrated poverty: the percentages of families below the poverty
line, of families receiving public assistance, of unemployed individuals in
the civilian labor force, and of female-headed families with children; (2)
residential stability: the percentage of residents five years old and older
who lived in the same house five years earlier and the percentage of homes
that are owner occupied. Immigrant concentration is measured as the
percentage of foreign-born residents in the neighborhood, and the pro-
portion of youth is measured as the proportion of the neighborhood pop-
ulation under the age of 18.

Individual-level characteristics —In models of legal cynicism (objective
1), we adjust for a number of respondent characteristics derived from the
PHDCN Community Survey: age, gender, race and ethnicity, socioeco-
nomic status (first principal component of education, income, and occu-
pational prestige), marital status (single, married, separated or divorced),
home ownership, residential mobility (number of moves within the pre-
ceding five years), years in the neighborhood, and violent victimization.
Violent victimization is a binary indicator of personal victimization oc-
curring specifically within the respondent’s neighborhood derived from
the following survey item: “While you have lived in this neighborhood,
has anyone ever used violence, such as in a mugging, fight, or sexual
assault, against you or any member of your household anywhere in your
neighborhood?”
purposes of temporal ordering, we chose this time period because it falls
just after the period in which the PHDCN Community Survey was ad-
ministered and legal cynicism was measured (1994-95). Per our argument
that violence proliferates in certain areas even when such courses of action
are not valued, we hypothesize (hypothesis 2a) that neighborhood-wide
attitudes toward deviance and violence are unrelated to neighborhood
rates of homicide. In contrast, we hypothesize (hypothesis 2b) that legal
cynicism is positively associated with neighborhood rates of homicide. We
test these hypotheses with spatial regression models (described to follow).

In the third set of analyses, we seek to determine whether the influence
of neighborhood culture, in the form of legal cynicism, explains the per-
sistence of violence in certain neighborhoods over time. We hypothesize
that legal cynicism is significantly and positively associated with the un-
expected (residual) change in homicide during the 1990s, net of structural
changes to Chicago neighborhoods (hypothesis 3). For this analysis, we
use rates of homicide from the early 1990s (1991-93) and the early 2000s
(2000-2002) to model the residual change in homicide.

Spatial regression.—Spatial regression models are used to test hypoth-
eses 2a, 2b, and 3. We maintain that neighborhoods are interdependent
ecological units, such that the conditions in one neighborhood are influ-
enced by the conditions of spatially proximate neighborhoods. Relatedly,
Morenoff et al. (2001) argue that a focus on internal neighborhood ex-
planatory factors will not fully explain neighborhood variation in ho-
micide levels, and that spatial proximity to homicide must also be con-
sidered. Theoretically, there are several reasons to model homicide as a
spatially dependent process. First, murder is an interaction between two
parties, and most of the time these two parties know each other (Papa-
christos 2009). Based on this interaction, acts of violence in one neigh-
borhood may, through diffusion, lead to retaliation and retribution in
proximate neighborhoods. For instance, Harding (2009) observes that
much of the serious violence in disadvantaged Boston neighborhoods is
the result of neighborhood rivalries. As another example, Papachristos
(2009) shows that acts of lethal violence between rival gangs resemble an
epidemic-like contagion, creating a temporal and spatial pattern of conflict
as gangs battle over turf and dominance. Second, because offenders typ-
ically commit acts of violence near their homes, geographic proximity to
these offenders and the neighborhood conditions that fuel their behavior
may increase violence in a focal neighborhood (Morenoff et al. 2001). In
this sense, legal cynicism in proximate neighborhoods may prompt ho-
micide in a focal neighborhood. Theoretically then, accounting for spatial
dependence is crucial for understanding the causes and nature of homicide
in a focal neighborhood. Empirically, ignoring spatial dependence may
Spatial error dependence arises from the omission of spatially correlated
independent variables, while a spatial lag is said to be indicative of a
diffusion process whereby homicides in one neighborhood are predictive
of, or influence, homicide in proximate areas (Anselin and Bera 1998;
Baller et al. 2001). Past studies (Baller et al. 2001; Morenoff et al. 2001)
have concluded that a spatial lag specification is more appropriate to
model homicide. We use a Lagrange multiplier test to assess spatial auto-
correlation and to assess the exact form of spatial dependence (Anselin
and Florax 1995; Anselin et al. 1996). We find evidence of spatial auto-
correlation with respect to homicide and that a spatial lag model is most
appropriate for modeling our homicide measures.

While we noted that a spatial lag model (eq. [3]) is considered a diffusion
model, the interpretation is not so straightforward for several reasons.
First, as Morenoff and colleagues describe (Morenoff et al. 2001; Morenoff
2003), diffusion implies a process that occurs over time. With largely cross-
sectional data, we are not actually modeling diffusion as a longitudinal
process. Second, the coefficient p captures the effect of homicide in con-
tiguous neighborhoods on the focal neighborhood, as well as the effect of
RESULTS

To situate our analysis, it is important to point out that homicide declined
dramatically in Chicago during the 1990s, the time period of our study.
Figure 2 displays the trend in homicide rates from 1965 to 2005. Homicide
rates in the early 1990s were considerably higher than at any point since
1974. Yet, by the start of the new millennium, homicide was lower than
it had been at any point during the previous 30 years. As we will illustrate
in our analyses, however, the decline in homicide, and violence more
generally, was not distributed evenly across Chicago (e.g., Papachristos,
Meares, and Fagan 2007). This fact becomes important when we consider
the structural and cultural factors that influence the stability and change
in homicide.

Table 1 displays a descriptive summary of the social, cultural, and
sociodemographic characteristics of Chicago neighborhoods. Several in-
teresting findings emerge from this table. In accord with Sampson and
Bartusch’s (1998) analysis, we find little relation between tolerant attitudes
toward deviance and concentrated poverty. However, results reveal a
substantial, positive association between concentrated poverty and legal
cynicism (.66). We also find a sizable positive correlation (.67) between
v00T 1007 8661 S66T 7O6T 6861 986T €861 086T LLOI Lol TL6I 8961 S961
Lott t tp ppp tp pp pp tp pp tp pt tp et dd ddd
“(4S9}_ P2TLEI-O-MI) TOO > A xsee

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

TO’ > dx
“SO > dx
“(Modiry a1ey,.CQ sapnpdxe) Zpg = A— ALON
aenOP aaah — OD FO" eae 8S" 70" 90° — xaOT — el — xed exe bl PO LTS 00" OLTr SZ°S€ “"* (€6-T66T) AeA epLHIWOH °Z7
x00 — eelZ— PO eel” 80° kh T — seee6D— TD ee ST eex99° PTT LL T— 900" ~ wistoruds [eS9T “TT
10° 90° ae — CO eee FP ace ST £0 — eID — xxxZ9— CL LTE 97 OBE AdwIYA BATID[OD “OT
se SE eee TE — eenOT’ — ek ZP — ex BT — £0°— xxx OT — 40— 07T Os” (an . SOURIASP Jo auRIZOL, “6
00" aah a OE ae th 9D ee £o'— OV 9r— FO 00° a (0002-0661)
yinok “doad aBueys prsoy °g
af eb T ee TT OT eat 98 PO" OO eT yanod worjrodoig */
00 207 TO — xT £0 STT 9@I- se 00 (0002-0661)

Ayytqeas “sar aBueyp “prsay “9
_ _ Aamaeas Tenuapisay *¢
. ~ (0002-0661)
‘QUOD “SIU asULYD “pIsoy “p

welZ) x67’ — aoxx OT ax9D— 812 99'7— ZOT £0
00° TO" xxx€Z— LT 17— £0 00°

 
 

 

aal — xxalb— $9" 00" ) duos JURIBIUW] “¢
oo =80T €zI—- of 00 (0002-0661)

AysoAod ‘2u0d aBuvyd ‘pisoy ‘7

sb SeT— LOT +0 Ayraaod payenuaouog ‘1

 

a IL ol 6 8

9

 

+
-
a

W UN CS Ue

 

 

SUALSATD GOOHYOAHSIAN OOVOIHD ‘SATAVIAVA TAAD'T-COOHYOPHSIAN JO SNOILVIANNOD AACUOQ-OAAZ ANV SOILSILVLS AALLATMOSA,
T AaTaVL
proportion youth and legal cynicism, a finding that is consistent with prior
research (e.g., Sampson and Bartusch 1998; see also Hindelang 1974;
Decker 1981). Legal cynicism is generally more common among adoles-
cents and young adults than older neighborhood residents, which reflects
the fact that youths are more likely to have negative personal or vicarious
interactions with the police than adults.

We find a significant, yet modest, negative association between legal
cynicism and tolerance of deviance. In contrast, we find a strong, negative
association between legal cynicism and collective efficacy (—.69). We main-
tain that cynicism toward the law deters neighborhood residents from
collectively acting to control crime. While somewhat novel, this finding
is unsurprising. A basis for the movement toward community policing
programs over the past two decades is that positive views toward the law
and its enforcers will empower neighborhood residents to assist in the
crime-fighting process (Silver and Miller 2004). If there are widespread,
cynical views toward the law in a neighborhood, then residents may be
unwilling to intervene to thwart local crime because of the absence of
police support (Tyler and Fagan 2008; Kirk and Matsuda 2010). There
are potential risks to intervening to prevent crime, and neighborhood
residents are more likely to take those risks if they perceive to have the
support of a responsive police force. While our focus in the ensuing anal-
yses is on the direct association between legal cynicism and homicide, the
strong association between legal cynicism and collective efficacy is sug-
gestive of an indirect relationship as well.
Model 2 reveals significant differences across demographic and familial
characteristics in legal cynicism. Black and Latino respondents are more
likely to perceive the law cynically than white respondents. It can also
be seen in model 2 that cynicism varies inversely with age and socioeco-
nomic status and that women report less cynicism than men. Controlling
for compositional differences across neighborhoods in model 2 explains
more than half of the between-neighborhood variability in legal cynicism,
yet there is still significant variation left to explain.

Model 3 includes a measure of violent victimization. If victimized, res-
idents may perceive that the police are unable to ensure their safety or
that of others. As expected, victimization appears to have a rather dra-
matic effect on levels of cynicism; victims of a violent crime have much
more cynicism toward the law than nonvictims.

Model 4 assesses the association between neighborhood structural char-
acteristics and legal cynicism. Results reveal that mean levels of legal
cynicism are higher in neighborhoods characterized by concentrated pov-
erty, residential instability, and greater proportions of youth. Related to
our conceptual model in figure 1 as well as hypothesis 1, we find support
for our assertion that legal cynicism is an adaptation to neighborhood
structural conditions.
sex OVO" sve see OPO" ose’ * UONRZIWUTIIA JUSOLA,
z00° 200° 200° £00" #700" £00" “++ pooysloqysiau ur savy,
PTO" T£0" ab lO" $70" b10" TZ0" a ** SOAOUL [ET UIPISOY
spo” 800° sro" 60° — 9r0" Oro" — “ auoy UMO
spo" 8h0'— spo Lv0°— 9+0" ££0°— “7 padtoarpypoyeredag
Oro" 9£0°— Oro" bro — Tr0" bro — “ poLueyAy
100° 700°— 100° 700° — +100" £00°— co aBy
see 910" SPT — sks STO" 69T— sexe STO" BOP nner sas
xbeO° blo — xbeO" 990° — xbeO° £90°— * gyeway
aah LO" 7st sea SLO" BL7 ae SLO" Le  AOrUYyQe/aIVI WYO
aex090" esc sea LO" eee aeaex 190" bie . ouneT
4890" sre’ sere 190" ces’ e790" OTS ies Pela

ssr'L = N) PAe-Tenpratpuy

aeaexOPO" OLE xxx ZPO" OLT7 xxx ZPO" QLTT xe OSO" Istc 7" — “+ ydaosayuy

as q as q as q as q Loddag GAXI]

> TACO ¢ TACO 7 TACO I Taao0|

 

 

(S6-7661) ATAYAS ALINAWWOD NOCHd ‘WSIOINAD ‘IVDS’T JO THAR] NVA HL JO SALVIEAAOD

caATaVL
“(4S8}_ PI|fE}-9UO) 100" > d sesese

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘TO > d xx
“SO > dx
%O'6L %L09 OLS poureydxa % aoue
see EV ESD 980° ak 8 ESP sor sence SOOT ost sek O6 CLOT 6c “HBA pooyloq ysleu-uaeayog
bev IT Mv - ves paureldxa %
seex00'99POT PSS" axxIT ESOL b6S" sex 86'PLS'OT 709° xe L6'L79OT O19" souBLTeA PooyLoqysau-UIyIM,
x “duiog x ‘duiog xX “duiod x ‘duiog poyja wopury
aourLe, aoueLIeA, aourLie, aoueLIeA,
100° 000° “* (€6-L661) eyed aplorwo py
seek” £9S'7 “+ yynok uopsodorg
aca VEO" 880° — aa “ AUIGeys [eUEpIsay
687 elt aan “)-QuU09 JURIST
+£90° err ue vos Ayraaod ‘ou0D

AZPE = N) [Aa]-pooyroqusion
“(9897 Pa[fey-9U0) TOO" > d sex

TO > d xx
“SO > dx

“(uodiry are],Q sepnyoxa) zpe = N—ALON

 

sexex000° 700° (€6-166T) eprormozy
080 L8T— — see€80° FOZ — AowoyyJa 9AT}D9105
Ooze 190° ose £20'— 68¢° 900'— (aoueLTeA) WSTOTUAD [esa]
$€0° 090° *9€0° 60° x €€0" £60" x €€0" £60" (ueaut) wistotUAs [eBay
#S€T L727 OPT’ 98T" Tel 11Z Tel Iz oer IT aoueIAap JO aoUBIOTOL,
zie 19¢" sze Ore” L7e 88e Eze 68e xbI€ 719° «cle €8S° yynod uons0dosg
xlZO €bO° 220’ Sb" 1zo” 7ze0° 1z0 z¢0° zo’ 810° 610° 710° Ayyiqeys [en uapisoy
6€T 88 — SPT’ OSz’— bel’ L8T— bel’ L8T— bel’ P9T— trl Sgt— “quod uRAsTUNWUT

abEO E10 xxab EO PET eeEEO” TST kee €€O TST xax€€O° TOT xxx EO" OOT™
aexeS PO OFF xexObO SPP xex6PO SPP xex6PO SPP xed bO 88h xed S8h"

Aysaaod ‘su0d
Bey eneds

 

 

098 68s ele 86° 6rl he — xIbl eb7— Itt Tez — #40" 7ET— ydassaqyuy
as q as q as q as q as q as q
9 THO § TAGOTL > TACO € TAGOTT 7 TAGOTL y Taaoyl

 

 

(g6-9661) SHALSATD GOOHAOMHDIAN ODVOIHD “ACIOINOH{ AO TACOJ OV’ ‘TVILVdS
© ATaVL
of disadvantaged areas tend to hold mainstream values, but these values
lack relevance when confronted with particular situations (Hannerz 1969;
see also Liebow 1967; Suttles 1968; Kornhauser 1978). Thus, we posit
that there is little direct relation between tolerance of violence and de-
viance and the neighborhood homicide rate. As hypothesized (hypothesis
2a), model 2 demonstrates that this particular type of value has little
relevance for explaining neighborhood violence.

We add the legal cynicism measure to model 3 and find, as expected,
that the addition of this measure partially mediates the effect of concen-
trated poverty on homicide. One reason why homicide tends to cluster in
neighborhoods characterized by concentrated poverty is because such
neighborhoods have more cynical views of the law than advantaged neigh-
borhoods. Similarly, legal cynicism mediates the association between the
proportion of youth and homicide, suggesting that homicide clusters in
youthful neighborhoods because youth are more cynical than adults. Most
important for testing our conceptual model, model 3 reveals a positive,
significant association between legal cynicism and homicide. This finding
supports Hypothesis 2b. Neighborhoods where the law and the police are
seen as illegitimate and unresponsive have significantly higher homicide
rates than in neighborhoods where the law is viewed more favorably.

While between-neighborhood differences in mean levels of legal cyni-
cism are associated with differences in homicide, it is important to consider
the nature of the underlying distribution. It might be the case that there
are a few extremely cynical individuals in a neighborhood, thus pulling
the mean of the distribution to the right.”’ For instance, moderate mean
levels of legal cynicism in two different neighborhoods could be produced
by two very different distributions of survey responses. One neighborhood
could have uniformly moderate levels of cynicism while the second neigh-
borhood is composed mostly of residents with positive views of the law
but with a microgrouping with extremely cynical views. These two dif-
ferent distributions could have different consequences for homicide. It
could be the case that the neighborhood with uniform views has little
violence while the neighborhood with dispersed views has numerous ho-
micides because of the actions of a few cynical individuals. In this scenario,
the within-neighborhood heterogeneity of legal cynicism may be a sig-
nificant predictor of homicide, in addition to or instead of the mean level
of cynicism.

In order to provide an accurate depiction of the relationship between
legal cynicism and homicide, in model 4 we include both a measure of
central tendency of legal cynicism (as in the previous models) as well as
a measure of dispersion.”’ Results reveal that the mean level of cynicism
in a neighborhood is associated with homicide but not the within-neigh-
borhood variability in cynical views. Thus, what separates violent from
nonviolent neighborhoods is not that violent neighborhoods have a het-
erogeneity in cynical views about the law, but rather that violent neigh-
borhoods have more cynicism, on average, than nonviolent neighborhoods.

Given the strong association between collective efficacy and neighbor-
hood rates of violence demonstrated in prior research (Sampson et al.
1997; Morenoff et al. 2001; Papachristos and Kirk 2006), we next seek to
determine whether results concerning legal cynicism hold once accounting
for the influence of collective efficacy on homicide. Consistent with prior
research, the results from model 5 reveal a negative association between
collective efficacy and homicide. The relation between legal cynicism and
homicide is attenuated once controlling for collective efficacy, though the
association is still statistically significant. As we posited earlier, negative
cultural frames toward the law deter neighborhood residents from col-
lectively working to control crime. Accordingly, legal cynicism operates
both directly and indirectly through collective efficacy to affect the like-
lihood of neighborhood violence.

To account for the possible confounding effects of prior homicide, model
6 includes a control for the average yearly homicide rate from 1991 to
1993. It could be the case that residents in neighborhoods with high prior
levels of violence become quite cynical. As we saw in table 1, prior ho-
micide is positively related to legal cynicism (.488; p < .001). In model 6
of table 3, we find that prior homicide is a significant predictor of the
rate from 1996 to 1998, yet the association between legal cynicism and
homicide remains virtually the same when controlling for prior homicide.
In sum, we find that the mean level of legal cynicism is positively asso-
ciated with neighborhood rates of homicide, and this relationship holds
when accounting for neighborhood structural conditions, social-interac-
tional mechanisms, and the confounding effects of prior violence. Values—
in this case, related to a tolerance of violence and deviance—have little
bearing on neighborhood violence.
e.g., Weisburd et al. 2004; Papachristos et al. 2007; Braga, Papachristos,
and Hureau 2010). To motivate our analysis of legal cynicism and the
temporal changes in neighborhood violence, we chart the geographic dis-
tribution of homicide changes across Chicago. Figure 3 presents a map
of homicide residuals representing the neighborhood change in homicide
from the early 1990s (1991-93) to the early 2000s (2000-2002), where the
residuals are grouped into quartiles. The 1st quartile represents neigh-
borhoods where homicide declined the most during the 1990s, while the
4th quartile depicts neighborhoods where homicide stayed roughly the
same or even increased over the course of the decade despite the fact that
homicide declined drastically citywide.

The neighborhoods depicted in the map inset comprise the Grand Boul-
evard and Douglas community areas of Chicago. This area of Chicago is
more commonly known as Bronzeville and is at heart of the “Black Me-
tropolis” so vividly described in the seminal work of Drake and Cayton
(1945). The promise of prosperity, employment, and a better way of life
brought substantial numbers of black residents from the South to this
part of Chicago during the first part of the 20th century. Yet starting in
the 1940s, Bronzeville began a long spiral of decline; segregation, insti-
tutional racism, the development of high-density public housing, black
middle-class flight, and the decline in manufacturing in the Midwest all
contributed to the demise of this historic neighborhood (Hirsch 1983;
Wilson 1987; Hyra 2008). Violence, drug use, and crushing poverty all
became commonplace. Yet after decades of economic and physical decline,
Bronzeville began gentrifying near the turn of the twenty-first century
(Hyra 2008). This recent period has been marked by rising home values
and substantial increases in income and home ownership.”

Despite drastic changes in the 1990s and early 2000s to this historic
area of Chicago, Bronzeville still had unexpectedly high homicide rates.
In fact, in the four full subsections of Bronzeville depicted in the map
inset, homicide increased from an average rate of 59.5 homicides per
100,000 residents in the early 1990s to a rate of 94.6 in the early 2000s.
Bronzeville

 

 

esidual Change, Homicide

14st Quartile

2nd Quartile
previously, the residual change score is interpreted as the unexpected
change in homicide, where residuals are positive when homicide dropped
less than expected, and residuals are negative when homicide declined
more than expected.

In table 4, we see that tolerance of deviance is unrelated to the change
in homicide. As hypothesized, we find that legal cynicism is positively
and significantly associated with the unexpected persistence in homicide
in Chicago neighborhoods, even after accounting for neighborhood struc-
tural changes from 1990 to 2000. Legal cynicism, at least partly, accounts
for why rates of homicide remained stable in some neighborhoods such
as Bronzeville, despite structural changes and a citywide decline in ho-
micide.

To conclude our analysis, in figure 4 we use the standardized coefficients
from table 4 to compare the effects of concentrated poverty, proportion
youth, tolerance of deviance, collective efficacy, and legal cynicism on the
persistence of homicide. Through this analysis, we seek to determine
which among these correlates of homicide are crucial for understanding
why homicide persists in some neighborhoods over time. The bars dis-
played in this chart represent the association between homicide in a focal
neighborhood (in terms of standard deviations) and each respective mea-
sure in the focal neighborhood.”* Not surprisingly, the proportion of youths
in a neighborhood in 1990 strongly predicts the persistence of homicide
from the early 1990s to the early 2000s. Homicide statistics show that
young adults (ages 18-24) have the highest victimization and offending
rates by a large margin (Fox and Zawitz 1999, 2004). Thus, if we assume
that neighborhoods with high proportions of youths (under 18) in 1990
subsequently had high proportions of young adults (18-24) over the course
of the ensuing decade, then such neighborhoods would be exposed to
heightened risks of homicide victimization and offending because of the
age distribution of the neighborhood population.

Most crucial for our core arguments, figure 4 reveals quite vividly the
importance of legal cynicism for explaining the persistence of neighbor-
hood violence. Even more so than collective efficacy, legal cynicism ex-
plains why rates of homicide remained stable in some Chicago neigh-
borhoods (e.g., Bronzeville) during the 1990s when homicide declined
dramatically citywide.
SLO-

~ OL'0-

 

s0'0-

 

wsioluAD
e607

Aoeolyya
BA93|10D,

uno,
uolodoig
be 000
@0uR!Aeg Ayanod
Jo s0UeBJ9/0) payesjusou0d,

soo

 

O10

 

sto

 

 

020

 

lenpisey aplojwoH ul aBueyo uojelAeq psepueys
in comparison to the usual suspects such as economic disadvantage and
social capital. While structural and social-interactional factors are crucial
for understanding neighborhood violence, cultural mechanisms are vital
for understanding why neighborhood conditions such as disadvantage are
associated with violence (i.e., because of adaptation) and for understand-
ing why violence and other neighborhood-based outcomes may persist
even as neighborhoods change structurally.

There are very good reasons why the recent resurgence of neighborhood
effects studies has generally neglected the role of culture. In particular,
for too long, academia conceived of culture as values despite an accu-
mulating volume of ethnographic research that demonstrates that values
become attenuated in the face of societal structural conditions, and play
but a minimal role in guiding individual action. Thus, in order to explore
the role of culture as a determinant of neighborhood violence, the theo-
retical challenge is to reorient discussions away from the “culture in val-
ues” framework and toward a more nuanced understanding of cultural
mechanisms. Accordingly, this study examines the consequences of one
particular cultural mechanism—legal cynicism. Legal cynicism is a cul-
tural frame that structures the way residents perceive the legitimacy of
the law, and the utility of the law as a guide for behavior.

In regards to our empirical objectives, the findings presented in this
article reveal (a) individual-level perceptions of legal cynicism vary as a
function of neighborhood conditions such as concentrated poverty and
residential stability (hypothesis 1), (b) that homicide is unrelated to resident
attitudes toward deviance and violence (hypothesis 2a), (c) that neigh-
borhood rates of homicide are positively associated with legal cynicism
net of structural and social factors (hypothesis 2b), and (d) that legal
cynicism explains the unexpected (residual) change in homicide in Chicago
from the early 1990s to early 2000s (hypothesis 3). We assert that when
the law is perceived to be unavailable—for example, when calling the
police is not a viable option to remedy one’s problems—individuals may
instead resolve their grievances by their own means, which may include
violence (Black 1983). In this sense, cultural frames have a constraining
influence; cynicism constrains choice if individuals presume that the law
is unavailable or unresponsive to their needs, thus pushing individuals
to engage in their own brand of social control.

While our results provide valuable information about the importance
of considering both cultural and social mechanisms when examining
neighborhood violence, study limitations provide ample opportunities for
future research. For one, we assess whether legal cynicism explains the
persistence of homicide in certain neighborhoods over time and find the
legal cynicism does explain the residual change in homicide. In our view,
this finding gives credibility to the argument that culture is more than a
mere adaptation to structural circumstances—culture exerts an indepen-
dent causal force on neighborhood rates of behavior. Yet, while we as-
sessed whether the influence of legal cynicism explains the persistence of
homicide, we did not assess whether neighborhood legal cynicism itself
persists as neighborhood structural conditions are changing. In our view,
legal cynicism is not static, but it may persist for some time—that is, a
cultural lag—even if the factors that led to its promotion somehow vanish.
We intend to take up this issue of cultural lag in future research. Thus,
our present findings provide an initial test of what arguably should be
modeled as a dynamic relation between social-structural conditions, cul-
tural mechanisms, and violence.

Urban ethnographies have for decades revealed the seemingly para-
doxical coexistence of law-abiding beliefs and law-violating behaviors in
disadvantaged neighborhoods. Our findings suggest that cultural frames
such as legal cynicism go a long way toward explaining this paradox.
Legal cynicism emerges not as some monolithic set of values but as an
adaptation to neighborhood structural conditions and interactions be-
tween neighborhood residents and the law, especially the police. Once
emerged, cynical perceptions of the law become solidified through social
interaction, whereby neighborhood residents develop a shared meaning
of the behavior of the law. In addition to supporting much of the findings
of urban ethnography, our quantification of legal cynicism further allows
us to compare and contrast the impact of such cultural frames and more
traditional structural determinants of neighborhood violence. The strong
effect of legal cynicism, net of structural conditions and neighborhood
social processes, suggests that “neighborhood effects” research needs to
consider both social-structural and cultural mechanisms in order to fully
understand the bases of neighborhood rates of homicide. More traditional
structural analyses of neighborhood behavior would do well to bring
culture back into deeper theoretical and empirical consideration.
kins. 2001. “Structural Covariates of U.S. County Homicide Rates: Incorporating
Spatial Effects.” Criminology 39:561-90.

Black, Donald. 1983. “Crime as Social Control.” American Sociological Review 48:34—
45.

Black, Donald J., and Albert J. Reiss Jr. 1970. “Police Control of Juveniles.” American
Sociological Review 35:63-77.

Block, Carolyn Rebecca, Richard L. Block, and Illinois Criminal Justice Information
Authority. 2005. “Homicides in Chicago, 1965-1995.” http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/
cocoon/NACJD/STUDY/06399.xml.

Braga, Anthony, Andrew V. Papachristos, and David Hureau. 2010. “The Concentra-
tion and Stability of Gun Violence at Micro-places in Boston, 1980-2008.” Journal
of Quantitative Criminology 26:33-53.

Brunson, Rod K. 2007. “‘Police Don’t Like Black People’: African American Young
Men’s Accumulated Police Experiences.” Criminology and Public Policy 6:71-101.

Bursik, Robert J., Jr., and Harold G. Grasmick. 1993. Neighborhoods and Crime: The
Dimension of Effective Community Control. New York: Lexington.

Carr, Patrick J., Laura Napolitano, and Laura Keating. 2007. “We Never Call the
Cops and Here Is Why: A Qualitative Examination of Legal Cynicism in Three
Philadelphia Neighborhoods.” Criminology 45:445-80.

Carter, Prudence. 2005. Keepin’ It Real: School Success Beyond Black and White.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Chicago Fact Book Consortium. 1995. Local Community Fact Book: Chicago Met-
ropolitan Area, 1990. Chicago: Academy.

Chicago Police Department. 1999. For the Record: Homicide Continues to Decline in
Chicago. Chicago: Chicago Police Department.

. 2005. 2005 Murder Analysis. Chicago: Chicago Police Department.

Cohen, Albert K. 1955. Delinquent Boys: The Culture of the Gang. New York: Free
Press.

Corzine, Jay, Lin Huff-Corzine, and Hugh P. Whitt. 1999. “Cultural and Subcultural
Theories of Homicide.” Pp. 42-57 in Homicide: A Sourcebook of Social Research,
edited by M. Dwayne Smith and Margaret A. Zahn. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

Cronbach, Lee J., and Lita Furby. 1970. “How Should We Measure ‘Change’—or
Should We?” Psychological Bulletin 74:68-80.

Decker, Scott. 1981. “Citizen Attitudes toward the Police: A Review of Past Findings
and Suggestions for Future Police.” Journal of Police Science and Administration
9:80-87.

Drake, St. Clair, and Horace R. Cayton. 1945. Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro
Life in a Northern City. New York: Harcourt, Brace.

Edin, Kathryn, and Maria Kefalas. 2005. Promises I Can Keep: Why Poor Women
Put Motherhood before Marriage. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Fox, James Alan, and Marianne W. Zawitz. 1999. Homicide Trends in the United
States. Bureau of Justice Statistics Crime Data Brief. Washington, D.C.: U.S. De-
partment of Justice.

. 2004. Homicide Trends in the United States: 2002 Update. Bureau of Justice
Statistics Crime Data Brief. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.

Gamson, William A., Bruce Fireman, and Steven Rytina. 1982. Encounters with Unjust
Authority. Homewood, Ill: Dorsey.

Goffman, Erving. 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Hagedorn, John M. 1988. People and Folks: Gangs, Crime, and the Underclass in a
Rustbelt City. Chicago: Lakeview.

Hannerz, Ulf. 1969. Soulside: Inquiries into Ghetto Culture and Community. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Harding, David J. 2007. “Cultural Context, Sexual Behavior, and Romantic Relation-
ships in Disadvantaged Neighborhoods.” American Sociological Review 72:341-64.

. 2009. “Socialization of Adolescent Boys in Disadvantaged Neighborhoods: The
Role of Older Peers.” American Sociological Review 74:445-64.

Hindelang, Michael J. 1974. “Public Opinion regarding Crime, Criminal Justice and
Related Topics.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 11:101-16.

Hirsch, Arnold R. 1983. Making the Second Ghetto: Race and Housing in Chicago,
1940-1960. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Hyra, Derek S. 2008. The New Urban Renewal: The Economic Transformation of
Harlem and Bronzeville. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jacobs, Bruce A., and Richard Wright. 2006. Street Justice: Retaliation in the Criminal
Underworld. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Kane, Robert J. 2005. “Compromised Police Legitimacy as a Predictor of Violent Crime
in Structurally Disadvantaged Communities.” Criminology 43:469-98.

Kennedy, Peter. 1998. A Guide to Econometrics, 4th ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Kirk, David S., and Derek S. Hyra. 2010. “The Velocity of Home Foreclosure and the
Impact on Community Crime.” Paper presented at the 2010 American Sociological
Association annual conference, Atlanta.

Kirk, David S., and John H. Laub. 2010. “Neighborhood Change and Crime in the
Modern Metropolis.” Crime and Justice 39 (in press).

Kirk, David S., and Mauri Matsuda. 2010. “Legal Cynicism, Collective Efficacy, and
the Ecology of Arrest.” http://ssrn.com/abstract = 1576059.

Klein, Malcolm W., and Cheryl L. Maxson. 2006. Street Gang Patterns and Policies.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Klinger, David A. 1997. “Negotiating Order in Patrol Work: An Ecological Theory of
Police Response to Deviance.” Criminology 35:277-306.

Kornhauser, Ruth. 1978. Social Sources of Delinquency. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.

Kubrin, Charis E., and Ronald Weitzer. 2003. “Retaliatory Homicide: Concentrated
Disadvantage and Neighborhood Culture.” Social Problems 50:157-80.

Lamont, Michéle, and Mario Luis Small. 2008. “How Culture Matters for the Under-
standing of Poverty: Enriching our Understanding.” Pp. 76-102 in The Colors of
Poverty: Why Racial and Ethnic Disparities Persist, edited by Ann C. Lin and
David Harris. New York: Russell Sage.

Lauritsen, Janet L., and John H. Laub. 2007. “Understanding the Link between Vic-
timization and Offending: New Reflections on an Old Idea.” Pp. 55-75 in Surveying
Crime in the 21st Century: Commemorating the 25th Anniversary of the British
Crime Survey, edited by Mike Hough and Mike Maxfield. Monsey, N.Y.: Criminal
Justice Press.

Lauritsen, Janet L., Robert J. Sampson, and John H. Laub. 1991. “The Link between
Offending and Victimization among Adolescents.” Criminology 29:265—91.

Lewis, Oscar. 1966. La Vida: A Puerto Rican Family in the Culture of Poverty—San
Juan and New York. New York: Random House.

Liebow, Elliott. 1967. Tally’s Corner: A Study of Negro Streetcorner Men. Boston:
Little, Brown.

Matza, David. 1964. Delinquency and Drift. New York: Wiley.

Messner, Steven F., Luc Anselin, Robert D. Baller, Darnell F. Hawkins, Glenn Deane,
and Stewart E. Tolnay. 1999. “The Spatial Patterning of County Homicide Rates:
An Application of Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis.” Journal of Quantitative Crim-
inology 15:423-50.

Miller, Walter B. 1958. “Lower Class Culture as a Generating Milieu of Gang Delin-
quency.” Journal of Social Issues 14:5-20.

Morenoff, Jeffrey D. 2003. “Neighborhood Mechanisms and the Spatial Dynamics of
Birthweight.” American Journal of Sociology 108:976-1017.
Morenoff, Jeffrey D., Robert J. Sampson, and Stephen W. Raudenbush. 2001. “Neigh-
borhood Inequality, Collective Efficacy, and the Spatial Dynamics of Homicide.”
Criminology 39:517-60.

Newman, Katherine S. 1999. No Shame in My Game: The Working Poor in the Inner
City. New York: Knopf, Russell Sage.

Nisbett, Richard E. 1993. “Violence and U.S. Regional Culture.” American Psychologist
4:441-49.

Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission. 2002. Census 2000: Summary Tables of
Social, Economic, and Housing Data for the 77 Community Areas in the City of
Chicago. Chicago: Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission.

Papachristos, Andrew V. 2009. “Murder by Structure: Dominance Relations and the
Social Structure of Gang Homicide.” American Journal of Sociology 115:74-128.
Papachristos, Andrew V., and David S. Kirk. 2006. “Neighborhood Effects on Street
Gang Behavior.” Pp. 63-84 in Studying Youth Gangs, edited by James F. Short Jr.

and Lorine A. Hughes. Walnut Creek, Calif.: AltaMira.

Papachristos, Andrew V., Tracey L. Meares, and Jeffrey Fagan. 2007. “Attentions
Felons: Evaluating Project Safe Neighborhoods in Chicago.” Journal of Empirical
Legal Studies 4:223-72.

Park, Robert E. (1925) 1967. “The City: Suggestions for Investigation of Human Be-
havior in the City.” Pp. 1-46 in The City, edited by Robert E. Park, Ernest W.
Burgess, and Roderick D. McKenzie. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Parsons, Talcott. 1951. The Social System. New York: Free Press.

Paternoster, Raymond, Robert Brame, Ronet Bachman, and Lawrence W. Sherman.
1997. “Do Fair Procedures Matter? The Effect of Procedural Justice on Spouse

ault.” Law and Society Review 31:163-204.

Phillips, Scott. 2003. “The Social Structure of Vengeance: A Test of Black’s Model.”
Criminology 41:673-708.

Raudenbush, Stephen W., and Anthony S. Bryk. 2002. Hierarchical Linear Models:
Applications and Data Analysis Methods, 2d ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

Sampson, Robert J. 2008. “Moving to Inequality: Neighborhood Effects and Experi-
ments Meet Social Structure.” American Journal of Sociology 114:189-231.

Sampson, Robert J., and Dawn Jeglum Bartusch. 1998. “Legal Cynicism and (Sub-
cultural?) Tolerance of Deviance: The Neighborhood Context of Racial Differences.”
Law and Society Review 32:777-804.

Sampson, Robert J., and Lydia Bean. 2006. “Cultural Mechanisms and Killing Fields:
A Revised Theory of Community-Level Racial Inequality.” Pp. 8-36 in The Many
Colors of Crime: Inequalities of Race, Ethnicity and Crime in America, edited by
Ruth D. Peterson, Lauren J. Krivo, and John Hagan. New York: New York Uni-
versity Press.

Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas P. Gannon-Rowley. 2002. “As-
sessing ‘Neighborhood Effects’: Social Processes and New Directions in Research.”
Annual Review of Sociology 28:443-78.

Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Stephen W. Raudenbush. 2005. “Social
Anatomy of Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Violence.” American Journal of Public
Health 95:224-32.

Sampson, Robert J., Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls. 1997. “Neighborhoods
and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy.” Science 227:918-24.

Sampson, Robert J., and William J. Wilson. 1995. “Toward a Theory of Race, Crime,
and Urban Inequality.” Pp. 37-56 in Crime and Inequality, edited by John Hagan
and Ruth D. Peterson. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Sellin, Thorsten. 1938. Culture and Conflict. New York: Social Science Research Coun-
cil.

Shaw, Clifford R., and Henry D. McKay. 1942. Juvenile Delinquency and Urban Areas.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Short, James F., Jr., and Fred L. Strodtbeck. 1965. Group Process and Gang Delin-
quency. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Silver, Eric, and Lisa L. Miller. 2004. “Sources of Informal Social Control in Chicago
Neighborhoods.” Criminology 42:551-83.

Small, Mario L. 2002. “Culture, Cohorts, and Social Organization Theory: Under-
standing Local Participation in a Latino Housing Project.” American Journal of
Sociology 108:1-54.

. 2004. Villa Victoria: The Transformation of Social Capital in a Boston Barrio.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Smith, Douglas A. 1986. “The Neighborhood Context of Police Behavior.” Pp. 313—
41 in Communities and Crime, edited by Albert J. Reiss Jr. and Michael Tonry.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Snow, David A., E. Burke Rochford, Steven K. Worden, and Robert D. Benford. 1986.
“Frame Alignment Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Participation.”
American Sociological Review 51:464-81.

Stark, Rodney. 1987. “Deviant Places: A Theory of the Ecology of Crime.” Criminology
25:893-909.

Suttles, Gerald D. 1968. The Social Order of the Slum: Ethnicity and Territory in the
Inner City. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Swidler, Ann. 1986. “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies.” American Sociological
Review 51:273-86.

Terrill, William, and Michael D. Reisig. 2003. “Neighborhood Context and Police Use
of Force.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 40:291-321.

Thrasher, Frederic M. 1927. The Gang: A Study of 1,313 Gangs in Chicago. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Tyler, Tom R. 1990. Why People Obey the Law. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press.

. 2004. “Enhancing Police Legitimacy.” Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science 593:84-99.

Tyler, Tom R., and Jeffrey Fagan. 2008. “Why Do People Cooperate with the Police?
Ohio Journal of Criminal Law 6:231-75.

Venkatesh, Sudhir A. 1997. “The Social Organization of Street Gang Activity in an
Urban Ghetto.” American Journal of Sociology 103:82-111.

Weisburd, David, Shawn Bushway, Cynthia Lum, and Sue-Ming Yang. 2004. “Tra-
jectories of Crime at Places: A Longitudinal Study of Street Segments in the City
of Seattle.” Criminology 42:283-322.

Werthman, Carl, and Irving Piliavin. 1967. “Gang Members and the Police.” Pp. 56-
98 in The Police: Six Sociological Essays, edited by David J. Bordua. New York:
Wiley.

Whyte, William F. (1943) 1993. Street Corner Society, 4th ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Wilson, William J. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass,
and Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wolfgang, Marvin, and Franco Ferracuti. 1967. The Subculture of Violence. London:
Tavistock.

‘Young, Alford A., Jr. 2004. The Minds of Marginalized Men: Making Sense of Mobility,
Opportunity, and Future Life Chances. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
