On the Concept of Face

Author(s): David Yau-fai Ho

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 81, No. 4 (Tan., 1976), pp. 867-884
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2777600

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:27 UTC
The renowned Chinese writer Lu Hsiin once wrote, “But what is this thing
called face? It is very well if you don’t stop to think, but the more you
think the more confused you grow” (1934, p. 129). Although everyone
appears to have some notion of what face entails, a precise definition of it
proves to be a most difficult task. Lin Yii-tang felt that face was “impossible
to define” (1935, p. 202); he said of face that, “abstract and intangible,
it is yet the most delicate standard by which Chinese social intercourse is
regulated” (p. 200).

The concept of face is, of course, Chinese in origin, and the term is a
literal translation of the Chinese lien and mien-tzu (cf. The Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary [1944]; Webster’s Dictionary [1958]). Hu
(1944) makes an important distinction between two Chinese concepts of
face, lien and mien-tzu, based on two distinct sets of criteria for judging
conduct. Mien-tzu “stands for the kind of prestige that is emphasized in
this country [America]: a reputation achieved through getting on in life,
through success and ostentation” (p. 45). Lien, on the other hand, “repre-
sents the confidence of society in the integrity of ego’s moral character,
the loss of which makes it impossible for him to function properly within
the community. Lien is both a social sanction for enforcing moral standards
and an internalized sanction” (p. 45). It should be pointed out, however,
that the concept of mien-tzu is not altogether devoid of moral content.
Furthermore, the meanings of lien and mien-tzu vary according to verbal
context and in addition are not completely differentiated from each other
in that the terms are interchangeable in some contexts. Consequently,
although the distinction between the two sets of criteria for judging face—
based on judgments of character and, broadly, of the amoral aspects of
social performance—is justified, it cannot be anchored to a linguistic dis-
tinction between the two terms, lien and mien-tzu, as proposed by Hu.
However, we may continue to use these terms in the senses that Hu has
defined.

The concept of face has not, to date, gained general acceptance as a
technical term in the social sciences. It is not, for example, listed in A
Dictionary of the Social Sciences edited by Gould and Kolb (1964) or in
the Dictionary of Behavioral Science (Wolman 1973). Goffman (1955,
p. 213) defines face as “‘the positive social value a person effectively claims
for himself by the line others assume he has taken during a particular
contact. Face is an image of self delineated in terms of approved social
attributes.” Thus, he seems to treat face as situationally defined, meant
to refer only to the immediate respect a person expects others to show in
each specific instance of social encounter. He interprets what he calls “face-
work” as a subtle style of interpersonal encounter, found in all societies,
calculated to avoid personal embarrassment, or loss of poise, and to
maintain for others an impression of self-respect (Goffman 1955; 1956;
1959). Stover (1962), however, finds the common interpretation of face
s “other-directed self-esteem” to be insufficient for his theory of Chinese
social interaction. According to this theory, given the hierarchical structure
of Chinese society with its built-in permanency of statuses, social exchange
occurs essentially between unequals. Face is “the [Chinese] social ideology
which legitimizes status rectitude” (p. 375). More recently, Agassi and
Jarvie (1969, p. 151), like Lin Yii-tang, treat face as a “standard of
behavior.” However, without regard for consistency or precision, these
authors also refer to face as “status plus something else, like dignity”
(p. 139) (see Ho [1972] for a criticism of their study).

Other writers, taking the meaning of face for granted, have failed to
clarify their use of the term. Thus, one finds in the literature that face has
been variously confounded with an assortment of sociological as well as
nonsociological concepts, such as status, prestige, dignity, honor, and the
like. Since a scientific term is rendered superfluous if it can be shown that
other terms suffice to describe, explain, or account for the phenomenon in
question, in the interests of parsimony “face” should not be added to our
AN ANALYSIS OF FACE
Quantitative versus Qualitative Aspects of Mien-tzu

A man of high social standing is said to be yu mien-tzu (having mien-tzu) ,
while mei yu mien-tzu (not having mien-tzu) may be used to express
having a humble status, or it may be taken to mean that mien-tzu has been
lost. How much mien-tzu a person has is, in general, a function of his social
status. But the quantity of a person’s mien-tzu usually varies according
to the group with which he is interacting. Thus, a leader in the Chinese
Triad society has mien-tzu within the underground, but such mien-tzu
should not be given recognition, at least under proper circumstances, by
law-enforcement agents; a military officer should have mien-tzu before the
men he leads, but may have little mien-tzu in the company of a group of
intellectuals; again, an academic may have mien-tzu among his colleagues,
but this mien-tzu may not be of much utility in the business community.
How much mien-tzu a person has, therefore, is not fixed in amount but
varies largely according to the social situation in which he is interacting.
In losing or gaining mien-tzu, too, the group making the judgment must be
specified: the loss or gain will vary according to the audience. Only
national heroes, scholars who have made lasting contributions to human
knowledge, poets of time-honored repute, and the like, come close to
having nation-wide mien-tzu, unrestricted to specific groups.

Mien-tzu can be characterized, furthermore, not only in quantitative
terms but also in qualitative terms. For the claim to mien-tzu may rest on
a variety of grounds. The status on which mien-tzu is based may be as-
Losing Face versus Gaining Face

Both losing face and gaining face refer, of course, to important changes in
the status of one’s face; but these changes are not to be construed as
simple quantitative ones and, furthermore, must be specified as being
relative to the level of what is expected, that is, to the amount to which
one is originally entitled. In other words, face is lost or gained only when
the changes constitute a departure from the quality or quantity of the
individual’s claim.

Previous writers on face have treated losing face and gaining face simply
as if they were opposite outcomes in a social encounter and have thus
failed to notice the basic difference between two social processes that are
involved. In the first instance, while it is meaningful to speak of both losing
and gaining mien-tzu, it is meaningful to speak only of losing lien. One
does not speak of gaining lien because, regardless of one’s station in life,
one is expected to behave in accordance with the precepts of the culture;
correctly conceptualized, exemplary conduct adds not to one’s lien, but to
one’s mien-tzu.

In the second instance, assessments of social performance leading to
losing or gaining face are not made according to criteria which fall on the
same unidimensional continuum. It is simply not sufficiently accurate to
say that face is lost through unsuccessful social performance and gained
through successful performance. Face can, of course, be gained in recogni-
tion of what one “deserves,” through a diversity of routes such as exemplary
behavior, superior performance in some role (as in demonstrating one’s
competence, trustworthiness, or superior knowledge—particularly when
done in modesty), or enhancement of status (as through ostentation or
formal promotion to higher office). In all of these, social performance goes
above and beyond duty, expectations, or requirements. On the other hand,
face is not necessarily lost as a result of unsuccessful or inferior perform-
ance.

Strictly speaking, the opposite of gaining face is a process of erosion,
distinguishable from what is called “loss” of face. Decrements in face
remain dormant, and social intercourse continues as if the individual were
still in possession of his face, until a single incident arises in which his
face is put to the test and he fails to protect or “save” it. A physical
analogy might help to make this clearer: adding weights to a ship will
lower its level at sea, but it will not sink until the overloading goes beyond
a critical point—or until the ship meets with a storm beyond its capacity
to withstand. “Losing face” is an expression which, properly used, refers
only to public, discrete events, as do the Chinese expressions tia mien-tzu
(losing mien-tzu) and tiu lien.

A decrease in the amount of face due the individual need not mean
losing face. As a common example, we may cite the case of someone whose
status is lowered on account of circumstances beyond his control and in
which no personal disgrace is implied. A man who turns from rich to poor
due to some misfortune will have less claim to mien-tzu, but he does not
lose face in the process. Face may be lost when conduct or performance
falls below the minimum level considered acceptable or when certain vital
or essential requirements, as functions of one’s social position, are not
satisfactorily met. To investigate the conditions under which face is lost,
therefore, one must delineate which expectations placed upon the indivi-
dual are regarded as the vital or essential requirements, that is, as the
prerequisites or imperatives. The individual has no choice but to satisfy
these requirements. For failing to do so would reveal basic incongruities
between the individual’s social inaptitude or unworthiness and the social
recognition he claims to deserve.

Thus, face is not lost merely on account of a failure to gain it, but face
must be protected from being lost precisely because of the demoralizing
repercussions which otherwise follow. At stake is nothing less than the
effective maintenance of one’s standing in society. And face which has
been lost may be regained, through compensation, corrective actions,
making up for one’s shortcomings, etc.; but regaining face does not consti-
tute gaining face—it is merely a restoration to the individual of what
ought to have been due him in the first place.

It is profitable, in this connection, to relate face to the psychological
concept of defensiveness. Face behavior takes on a defensive quality when
the individual appears to be excessively concerned with protecting his
face—relative to the objective requirements of the situation in his
cultural context. This is more likely to occur when at some level he senses
danger signals (which may be exaggerated) that his face is being threat-
American Journal of Sociology

ened and that he does not have the resources to protect its integrity. In
any event, the more defensive the individual is, the more awkward and in-
effective he is likely to be in his face-protection maneuvers. That the
concept of defensiveness is not directly relevant to the dynamics involved
in gaining face is another illustration of the fact that losing face and
gaining face are not simply opposites of each other.

Now it seems to me that the social dynamics involved in losing face are
more deserving of our attention than those involved in gaining face—in
terms of both the knowledge that can be derived with respect to social
demands and prerequisites and the seriousness of the implications for the
one whose face is under judgment. Not everyone is eager or needs to gain
face; but everyone who cares for maintaining a minimum level of effective
social functioning must see to it that his face is protected from being lost.
Whether face is gained or not does not in itself bring into question one’s
social aptitude, decency, or adequacy, but whether face is lost or not does.

While losing face is, as has been stated, a discrete event, it need not be
an all-or-none phenomenon. There are gradations in the severity of losing
face, gauged according to the consequences. It is the extent to which a
particular person’s social functioning is adversely affected that constitutes
the true measure of what losing face means to him. The notion of social
adequacy is of particular relevance here. An individual’s face, and hence
his social adequacy, is maintained, relative to his social position, to the
extent that he is able to satisfy the minimum requirements society has
placed on him; his social adequacy is not maintained, or at least it is
questioned, to the extent that he has lost face as a result of his inability
to measure up to expectations in his social performance. Since different
facets of one’s social functioning may be affected, the extensiveness of
losing face can be construed to lie on a continuum ranging from adverse
consequences affecting only a circumscribed area of social life to the total
question of one’s fitness as an acceptable member of society. Failures to
maintain one’s social status, to function adequately in a given role, or to
safeguard integrity of character in one’s general conduct will all make
the loss of face a likely possibility, but to varying degrees of seriousness.
Thus, losing face must be understood with respect to the facet of social life
affected—which in turn must be tied to the different sets of expectations
placed upon the individual—if we are to have an idea of how serious the
implications are to the person concerned (see Ho [1974] for a further
discussion of this issue).

Another way of viewing the severity of losing face is to consider the
temporary-permanent or reversible-irreversible dimension. In most in-
stances, face lost can be regained. However, the loss of face may well be
permanent in cases where the misconduct is serious and in direct contra-
diction to role-imperatives and/or taboos. Examples of such cases are a
The Reciprocity of Face and Social Control

Since social expectations are reciprocal in nature, potential conflicts arise
when there is a discrepancy between what a person expects or claims from
others and what others extend to him. The possibility of losing face can
arise not only from the individual’s failure to meet his obligations but also
from the failure of others to act in accordance with his expectations of
them—that is, not only from the individual’s own actions, but also from
how he is treated by others. Moreover, the individual’s face may be
threatened by actions which are not aimed directly at him: a lack of
deference shown by others to his friends, relatives, or subordinates, for
instance, could also be interpreted as depriving him of face. (The indi-
vidual would not, however, interpret a lack of deference shown toward
his superior as a direct challenge to his own face, although he too may
lose face if his superior does.)

A man who has mien-tzu is in a position to exercise considerable in-
fluence, even control, over others in both direct and indirect ways. At
the same time, however, he is under strong constraint to act in a manner
consistent with the requirements for maintaining his mien-tzu as well as
for reciprocating a due regard for the mien-tzu of others. Thus, the con-
cern for face exerts a mutually restrictive, even coercive, power upon each
member of the social network. Much of the time the individual’s actions,
far from being directed by his own wishes, are in effect dictated by the
necessity of meeting the expectations of others.

A clarification should be made with respect to face and its relationship
to social control. Control over others on the basis of mien-izu is different
American Journal of Sociology

from that based on authority. First, a person occupying a position of
authority certainly has mien-tzu, but a person who has mien-tzu need
not have authority, at least not formal authority. Control based on author-
ity is legitimate control, whereas that based on mien-tzu, even when derived
from authority, often extends beyond the realm of legitimacy. For in-
stance, insofar as an employee is performing his duties as specified by his
job, he is obligated to follow the instructions of his employer; but it may
well be out of a consideration for the mien-tzu of his employer that he
complies with a request which goes beyond the formal requirements of
duty, for example, accompanying his employer to social functions, or
doing things of a personal nature for him. Second, whereas face is attached
to persons, authority, or institutionalized power, as Bierstedt has argued
(1950), is always attached to statuses, not to persons. Third, authority
relationships may be either unilateral or bilateral, depending on the amount
of power that one party may exert on the other. Authority is unidirectional,
and it is possible to specify clearly which individuals in a social domain
are under one’s control. By contrast, social control based on face is invari-
ably reciprocal in nature.
Questions of face arise, not in the private process of self-evaluation, but in
social encounters where the evaluations by others of oneself are perceived
to be of significance to the maintenance of one’s standing in society. Face
is not a personality variable: it is not invariant with respect to all situa-
tions. That is, face is not an attribute located within the individual;
instead, it is what others have recognized and extended to him. Of course,
face may be enhanced or lost, as I have indicated, on account of one’s
personal qualities—but only when these qualities are manifest, given
notice by society, and where there is a consensus in judgments of them.

That face is not a personality variable has been recognized by both
Goffman (1955) and Stover (1962). Goffman states that “the person’s
face clearly is something that is not lodged in or on his body, but rather
something that is diffusely located in the flow of events in the encounter
and becomes manifest only when these events are read and interpreted
for the appraisals expressed in them” (p. 214). As expressed by Stover,
“One’s face is somehow really one’s location in a social system, not a
personal attribute” (p. 367).

Face, ming-yii (reputation) ,? and prestige all differ from personality
in that they comprise not the individual’s characteristics themselves
but the consensus of the collection of judgments passed upon him by
others. A concern with face, ming-yii, or prestige is indicative of other-
directedness, that is, having a sensitivity to how one appears in the eyes
of others and a tendency to act in ways which meet their approval.

The theoretical distinction made between face and personality has im-
portant methodological implications. Face is not to be regarded as a con-
struct pertaining to personal qualities inferred from behavior. Accordingly,
any measurement of face should not be based upon a direct study of the
individual himself; rather, a person’s face should be ascertained by
conducting enquiries on the opinions that others have of him. Stated
simply, a person’s face is assessed in terms of what others think of him;
the assessment does not include what a person thinks of himself, but may
include what he thinks others think of him. Of course, misjudgments
concerning one’s own face can be made; that is, one’s subjective assessment
of one’s face may be at variance with that of the group. Such misjudgments
will act as a source of strain in one’s interpersonal relationships.

In viewing face as being external to the individual and hence not as a
personality variable, I have treated face in this paper as a sociological,
rather than psychological, construct. The psychological sequel to a loss of
face is the experience of shame.* But one must be careful not to conclude
that the reaction of shame is inevitable. Whether or not shame is ex-
perienced depends on the subjective definition of the situation by the
individual concerned. Among other things, the degree of ego involvement
is a major factor in the definition. It is possible that the individual may
play the game of face with emotional detachment, particularly when it
involves an area of social functioning having to do with such things as the
ostensible display of one’s standing in society rather than with what would
reflect upon him as a person. In any case, losing lien is more likely than
losing mien-tzu to be accompanied by the reaction of shame. The relation-
ship between losing face and shame can be further clarified. One does not
Face Is Not Status, Dignity, or Honor

Status relationships possess properties of their own which can be character-
ized independently of the individuals occupying the respective statuses.
A status, relative to other statuses, defines the location of the person
within the social system, regardless of what his individual personality may
be. It functions as a major determinant of how much mien-tzu a person
has. Nevertheless, face is not directly attached to statuses, but to persons
occupying them.

Webster’s Dictionary defines face as “the outward appearance or
semblance of dignity or prestige” (1958, p. 906). The connotative meaning
of dignity differs from that of face in that the inner qualities of the
individual are emphasized. Dignity is what one strives to attain through
leading a way of life superior in quality to that of merely keeping face.
Lien is, however, more basic than dignity in the sense that having lien
is a prerequisite for achieving dignity.

Face is a more inclusive concept than honor as well as dignity. Honor
may be viewed as a special kind of face that is claimed by certain elitist
groups in society. Membership in these groups entitles the individual to
special privileges and honor and yet, at the same time, obligates him to
observe a set of well-prescribed stringent requirements (i.e., a code of
honor) that go far above and beyond those for the masses. For the Con-
fucian scholar-officials of traditional China, the knights of medieval
England, and the samurai of Tokugawa Japan, honor was, at least ac-
cording to ideology, more important than life.

Lin Yii-tang (1935, p. 200) asserts that “To confuse face with Western
‘honor’ is to make a grievous error.”” He explains the difference between
face and honor by means of specific examples: “In the West, the man who
is slapped on the cheek and does not offer a challenge for a duel is losing
‘honor’ but not losing face. On the other hand, the ugly son of a taot’at,
who goes to a sing-song girl’s house, is insulted and returns with a company
of police to order the arrest of the sing-song girl and the closing of the
house, is getting ‘face,’ but we would hardly say he is guarding his ‘honor’ ”
(p. 201). The quotation above illustrates simply that different standards of
behavior are involved in judgments of face versus Western “honor,” made
in different sociocultural contexts (though one could seriously question
Face Is Not Prestige

Among the sociological constructs, prestige appears to come closest in
meaning to face. Prestige may of course be earned or ascribed. However,
for the sake of the following analytic exercise, I shall focus only on the
distinction between face and earned personal prestige. Personal prestige
may be defined as the amount of respect and confidence invested in the
individual by the group; if earned, it is through having a commonly
acknowledged performance record of demonstrated competence, expertise,
trustworthiness, integrity of character, and other valued personal qualities.
Defined in this way, prestige is more closely associated with the individual
rather than directly with his rank or office.

In making a distinction between authority and prestige, Simmel wrote
(1950, p. 184), “prestige leadership stems from pure personality, even as
authority stems from the objectivity of norms and forces.” In a similar
vein, Bierstedt argued that prestige should not be identified with power.
He wrote (1950, p. 731), “knowledge, skill, competence, ability, and
eminence .. . are all components of, sources of, or synonyms of prestige,
but they may be quite unaccompanied by power.” It can also be said that,
whereas prestige is essentially rooted in public judgments of the personal
qualities of the individual as they are manifest in his social performance,
status judgments can be made on the basis of some objective criteria
which differentiate individuals hierarchically within the social order quite
independently of their personal qualities. (Status judgments, however,
can be made subjectively and are thus dependent upon the value hierarchy
held by the person making them as well as upon his own assessment of the
one being judged [cf. Goldhamer and Shils 1939, pp. 171-82]. In this case,
the criteria for judgments of prestige and status need not be dissimilar.)
As mentioned by Linton (1936, pp. 113-19), among the irreducible bases
for the determination of status are age, sex, and occupation. The first two
of these are determinants of ascribed statuses, and as such they are ob-
viously not directly relevant to judgments of personal prestige. The last,
occupation, may be included among the determinants of prestige: but
even here, how the person obtained his job (whether through ascription or
achievement, and whether through jen shih kuang-hsi [personal relations]
or on the basis of qualification) and especially the record of performance
can be of greater significance to the determination of prestige than the
nature of the occupation itself.

What I want to argue is that the correlation between changes in the
amount of face and that of personal prestige is not a perfect one. The
bases for status judgments, and hence of face, are more inclusive than those
for judgments of prestige. Whereas judgments of earned prestige (and of
ming-yti as well) involve only personal factors, judgments of face include
nonpersonal as well as personal factors, as has already been pointed out.
Face is thus more encompassing than ming-yii or prestige.

Accordingly, it is altogether possible that a person may have face but
not personal prestige or vice versa. Like those of face, prestige judgments
depend largely on the audience involved. An official of high rank certainly
has face, but not necessarily prestige; a poor scholar may have prestige,
but not much face; the son of a prominent man has face, but, unless he has
demonstrated himself to be worthy in some respect, he may have little or
no prestige; but the man of social prominence, who has also earned the
respect of the community, has both face and prestige. In sum, it may be
said that prestige is one of the sources of the claim to face, but the con-
verse of this proposition cannot be made unequivocally without doing
injustice to the distinctiveness of the two concepts as delineated above.

Bearing in mind the distinction between the dynamics involved in
gaining versus losing face, I shall keep the analysis of their respective
relationships with prestige separate. The interaction of “losing versus
gaining” and “face versus prestige” results logically in a matrix of four
specific relationships which I shall discuss one by one. It would appear,
though, that as compared with the relationship between losing face and
losing prestige, that between gaining face and gaining prestige involves
social processes which are less dissimilar.

1. When prestige is gained, face is gained—though not necessarily
proportionately.

2. When face is gained, prestige is not necessarily gained—as when the
face is gained through an ostentatious display of wealth.

3. When prestige is lost, there will result a corresponding (though,
again, not necessarily proportionate) decrease in the amount of face, or
at least an erosion of the basis for one’s claim to face. But one must be
careful not to conclude that face is necessarily Jost concomitantly with a
loss of prestige. We are reminded of the conditions for losing face which I
have mentioned earlier, namely, when performance is judged to have fallen
below the minimum acceptable level or when certain essential expectations
placed upon the individual are not met. Herein lies the secret of how the
mechanisms differ in the loss of face versus the loss of prestige. Prestige
may be lost gradually; the process is continuous, and the effects are cumu-
lative. The entire past record of performance is taken into account, how-
ever imperfectly, in prestige judgments.

4. When face is lost, prestige is lost, but the effect is most serious when
face is lost on account of manifest flaws in personal qualities. Also, one
can certainly think of events in which face is affected without a correspond-
American Journal of Sociology

ing effect on prestige, in particular, events for which the person concerned
can be hardly held responsible. An unfortunate loss in family fortune, for
instance, will result in a decrease (not a loss) of the amount of one’s face
in the community—but one does not lose prestige in the process.

Two more distinctions deserve emphasis. First, the claim to prestige is
clearly not an inalienable right, but everyone, regardless of his station in
life, is entitled to the claim of /ien—unless it is forfeited on account of his
own unacceptable conduct. One can live quite comfortably without prestige,
but can hardly do so without lien; to strive to preserve one’s face is a
prerogative.

Second, the individual alone is held accountable for his conduct and
hence how much prestige he deserves; but a person’s face can be lost or
gained as a result of the behavior of someone else (particularly someone
with whom he is closely related). Furthermore, one’s actions can affect
someone else’s face—even that of one’s ancestors. For instance, among the
Chinese, “My face is totally lost because of you” is an accusation that the
offending party’s action has resulted in an injury to one’s face. In par-
ticular, the individual’s face and the good name of his family (his chia
sheng) were virtually inseparable in traditional Chinese society.

It might be objected that the distinction I have just made is not intrinsic
to the two concepts of prestige and face, and that the basis for this dis-
tinction rests on an inconsistency—in that I have applied the Western
individualistic model to prestige judgments, and the Chinese social-behavior
model of mutual dependence to face judgments. Surely it can be argued
that, given the high degree of mutual dependence in Chinese interpersonal
relations, not being held solely accountable for the fate of one’s own face
is to be expected. Moreover, the behavior of closely related persons is
included in the evaluation of one’s prestige. Thus, the prestige of a
scholar-official suffers as a result of his son’s misconduct.

The objection raised above is a valid one, and it may be said that the
distinction between prestige and face (with respect to the differing weights
of the effects of someone else’s behavior on judgments of them) is only a
relative one. However, it should be pointed out that in Chinese society
prestige is affected by the behavior of others only when there is a tacit
implication that one is not to be absolved of responsibility for this behavior.
One loses prestige via someone else’s misconduct only if it reflects on one’s
own failures. In the example of the scholar-official above, the son’s mis-
conduct is taken to be a reflection of the father’s failure to educate the
younger generation properly. Like his son, he is guilty of unfiliality—in
having brought disgrace to the family and hence to the ancestors—and
this, of course, is damaging to his prestige. The conclusion, therefore, is
that personal responsibility is inevitably involved, however indirectly, in
judgments of personal prestige but not necessarily in judgments of face.
FACE AS A UNIVERSAL

One of the points of contention concerning face centers on the question
raised in the beginning of this paper: does the concept of face have
universal applicability? To put the question differently: is face behavior
distinctively Chinese, or at least more prominent by far in Chinese society
than in other societies?

The controversy concerning whether or not face is a universal arises
partly from the level of generality at which the concept is defined. In the
preceding analysis, face was treated in terms of its general significance to
adequate social functioning, which is, of course, a matter of universal con-
cern. Throughout the writing of the present paper, I have been conscious
of the fact that the presentation of self vis-a-vis others is a basic problem
that no one, in any society, can avoid. It must have occurred to many
readers that, outside of the Chinese social context, social encounters which
may indeed be regarded as instances of face behavior can be observed—
even though they are typically not described or interpreted in such terms.
Most of the illustrations I have used above are not specific to the Chinese.

Not to embarrass people in public may be cited as an example of liu
mien-tzu (saving someone else’s mien-tzu). “Keeping up with the Joneses,”
games of “one-upmanship” (popularized by Stephen Potter [Goffman 1959,
p. 191), and the challenges to gun duels in the 19th-century American
West are more aggressive forms of face behavior. In diverse cultural con-
texts, men continue to perform daring feats which may cost them dearly,
including the loss of their lives, for fear of the consequences of losing face.
Of late, the face of males vis-a-vis females (or what has been referred to as
the “male ego”) is being seriously challenged, and is perhaps undergoing
changes, with the advent of the women’s liberation movement. Codes of
honor, to which elitist groups in many societies are bound, constitute a
special kind of face. Thus, among the European aristocracy challenges
to a duel had to be accepted to avert the stigma of cowardice, even though
the one challenged might well know in advance that his chances of survival
were grim. And anyone who is skilled in the negotiation of disputes knows
very well that face is a factor to be reckoned with, aside from the more
obvious issues of self-interest of the parties concerned. Indeed, face is
immanent in human conflicts, both in their avoidance and resolution (see
Ho [1974] for a discussion of face and its relationship with conflicts).

The point is that face is distinctively human. Anyone who does not wish
to declare his social bankruptcy must show a regard for face: he must
claim for himself, and must extend to others, some degree of compliance,
respect, and deference in order to maintain a minimum level of effective
social functioning. While it is true that the conceptualization of what con-
stitutes face and the rules governing face behavior vary considerably across
American Journal of Sociology

cultures, the concern for face is invariant. Defined at a high level of
generality, the concept of face is a universal.

Now, the Western mentality, deeply ingrained with the values of indivi-
dualism, is not one which is favorably disposed to the idea of face. For
face is never a purely individual thing. It does not make sense to speak of
the face of an individual as something lodged within his person; it is
meaningful only when his face is considered in relation to that of others
in the social network. Thus, in social encounters, the question of face
frequently arises beyond the realm of the individual’s own responsibility—
that is, not only from his actions, but also from (a) the actions of people
closely associated with him which have a bearing on his face, and (5)
how he and people with whom he is closely associated are treated by
others. Reciprocity is the key to the understanding of face behavior: to
extend face to others is no less important than to safeguard one’s own.

The analysis of face behavior thus leads to a more explicit recognition
of how the roles of individual responsibility and subjective volition are
circumscribed in social interactions. This would appear to have the effect
of diminishing the stature of man as an individual who seeks to gain
mastery over the environment and over his own psychic life and destiny.
I submit, however, that the portrayal of man under the ideology of in-
dividualism represents only one idealized version of his social existence. It
does not reflect the true state of affairs—namely, that much of the time
man is subject to the impact of social actions beyond his control and
responsibility and that his subjective volitions are constrained by the
necessity of having to meet the social expectations of others, to a greater
extent than individualism would lead us to appreciate. I do not wish to
imply that the expectations of others toward oneself are excluded from
consideration in the ideology of individualism. Rather, others’ expectations
are existent insofar as they have been incorporated into the individual’s
own subjective frame of reference, that is, into his own definition of their
significance for his own action. The individual, and not the reciprocity
between individuals, remains the focal point of concern. In relegating the
concept of face to the status of having only particularistic, rather than
universal, applicability, or in saying that face behavior is of minor signifi-
cance in Western societies, the individualism-dominated social sciences fall
victim to one of their blind spots. To be sensitive to the variations in which
face behavior is manifest in the daily lives of men under a diversity of
cultural conditions would give fresh ammunition to the social sciences
toward a major breakthrough from their present intellectual encapsulation.
On the Concept of Face

now prepared to advance a definition of this complex concept. Face is the
respectability and/or deference which a person can claim for himself
from others, by virtue of the relative position he occupies in his social net-
work and the degree to which he is judged to have functioned adequately
in that position as well as acceptably in his general conduct; the face
extended to a person by others is a function of the degree of congruence
between judgments of his total condition in life, including his actions as
well as those of people closely associated with him, and the social expecta-
tions that others have placed upon him. In terms of two interacting parties,
face is the reciprocated compliance, respect, and/or deference that each
party expects from, and extends to, the other party.

In the course of attempting to achieve a conceptual clarity for face, it is
also necessary to clarify the relationship between it and other sociological
concepts. In this paper, I have treated face as a key concept that ties
together a number of separate sociological concepts, such as status,
authority, prestige, and standards of behavior. Face is a concept of central
importance because of the pervasiveness with which it asserts its influence
in social intercourse. It is virtually impossible to think of a facet of social
life to which the question of face is irrelevant. The desire to gain face, to
avoid losing face, and to save face when it is threatened is a powerful social
motive. The study of face dynamics promises to elucidate the subtleties of
social interaction—and if face is a complex concept, it is so because social
interaction is itself a highly complicated affair. It is probably on account
of its potential to reflect the complexities of social interaction that the
study of face is rendered intriguing to students of human behavior.

The distinction which I have made between face on the one hand and
personality and personal prestige on the other is a basic one with great
theoretical import. It reflects two fundamentally different orientations in
viewing human behavior: the Western orientation, with its preoccupation
with the individual, and the Chinese orientation, which places the accent
on the reciprocity of obligations, dependence, and esteem protection. These
two orientations need not, and should not, be regarded as mutually ex-
clusive. Rather, they are’ complementary. Neither, when taken alone, is
capable of yielding a complete account of the total complexity of social
phenomena.
Goffman, Erving. 1955. “On Face-Work: An Analysis of Ritual Elements in Social
Interaction.” Psychiatry 18 (August): 213-31.

. 1956. “Embarrassment and Social Organization.” American Journal of Sociology

62 (November): 264-71.

. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Doubleday.

Goldhamer, Herbert, and Edward A. Shils. 1939. “Types of Power and Status.”
American Journal of Sociology 45 (September): 171-82.

Gould, Julius, and William L. Kolb, eds. 1964. A Dictionary of the Social Sciences.
London: Tavistock.

Ho, David Yau-fai. 1972. “Field Studies in Foreign Cultures: A Cautionary Note on
Methodological Issues.” Psychologia: An International Journal of Psychology in the
Orient 15 (March): 15-21.

. 1974, “Face, Social Expectations, and Conflict Avoidance.” Pp. 240-51 in
Readings in Cross-cultural Psychology: Proceedings of the Inaugural Meeting of the
International Association for Cross-cultural Psychology Held in Hong Kong, August,
1972, edited by John L. M. Dawson and Walter J. Lonner. Hong Kong: Hong Kong
University Press.

Hu, H. C. 1944. “The Chinese Concepts of ‘Face.’” American Anthropologist 46
(January-March): 45-64.

Lin, Vii-tang. 1935. My Country and My People. New York: Reynal & Hitchcock.

Linton, R. 1936. The Study of Man. New York: Appleton, Century, Crofts.

Lu, Hsiin (Chou, Shii-jen). 1934. “On ‘Face.’” Translated by Hsien-yi Yang and
Gladys Yang. Pp. 129-32 in Selected Works of Lu Hsiin. Vol. 4. Peking: Foreign
Language Press, 1960.

Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. 1944. 3d ed. London: Oxford University Press.

Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Translated and edited with an
introduction by Kurt H. Wolff. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Stover, Leon E. 1962. “ ‘Face’ and Verbal Analogues of Interaction in Chinese Culture:
A Theory of Formalized Social Behavior Based upon Participant-Observation of an
Upper-Class Chinese Household, together with a Biographical Study of the Primary
Informant.” Doctoral dissertation, Columbia University. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Univer-
sity Microfilms, No. 62-5199.

Webster’s New International Dictionary of the English Language. 1958. 2d ed., un-
abridged. Springfield, Mass.: G. & C. Merriam.

Wolman, Benjamin B. 1973. Dictionary of Behavioral Science. New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
