Culture Wars and Opinion Polarization: The Case of Abortion

Author(s): Ted Mouw and Michael E. Sobel

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 106, No. 4 (January 2001), pp. 913-943
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/320294

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:23 UTC
Recent observers have pointed to a growing polarization within the
US. public over politicized moral issues—the so-called culture wars.
DiMaggio, Evans, and Bryson studied trends over the past 25 years
in American opinion on a number of critical social issues, finding
little evidence of increased polarization; abortion is the primary ex-
ception. However, their conclusions are suspect because they treat
ordinal or nominal scales as interval data. This article proposes new
methods for studying polarization using ordinal data and uses these
to model the National Election Study (NES) abortion item. Whereas
the analysis of this item by DiMaggio et al. points to increasing
polarization of abortion attitudes between 1972 and 1994, this ar-
ticle’s analyses of these data offers little support for this conclusion
and lends weight to their view that recent concerns over polarization
are overstated.
gerous escalations in levels of social conflict (Hunter 1991, 1994; Bennet
1992; Gitlin 1995; Hochschild 1995). This same concern is echoed in the
lay literature on contemporary politics (e.g., Shor 1986; Bolton 1992; Ja-
coby 1994; Bloom 1992; Gates 1992; Hartman 1991), as well as in the
press. The Washington Post reported that between 1993 and 1996 there
were approximately 1,500 articles in the media referring to contemporary
American “culture wars.” Apparently, the public also believes that Amer-
icans are culturally fragmented, with 86% of the respondents to a 1995
Newsweek poll agreeing that Americans share fewer common values now
than in the past.

Others claim the concerns above are overblown, arguing that public
opinion data indicate that the majority of people do not hold “extreme”
views on divisive social issues (Brint 1992; Dillon 1996). For example,
most national surveys about abortion show that the majority of Americans
think abortion should neither be strictly legal or illegal in all circumstances
(Blake and Del Pinal 1981; Gallup Poll News Service 1998). However,
this does not address the basic question posed by the culture wars hy-
pothesis: while public debate in America has always been contentious, is
there something special about the contemporary “culture wars” that makes
Americans more polarized now on important social issues than they were
in the past? To address this hypothesis, it is not sufficient to measure
polarization at a single point in time—we need to model trends in po-
larization over time.

In an important recent article, DiMaggio, Evans, and Bryson (1996, p.
693) argued that polarization as a state “refers to the extent to which
opinions on an issue are opposed in relation to some theoretical maxi-
mum,” while polarization as a process “refers to the increase in such
opposition over time.” To investigate polarization in the latter sense, they
examine the change in variance and kurtosis of opinion items over time,
with increasing variance and declining kurtosis taken to evidence polar-
ization. Using time series of items from the General Social Survey (GSS)
and National Election Study (NES), spanning the period 1972-94,
DiMaggio et al. find no evidence for polarization of attitudes concerning
crime and justice, gender, race, and sexual morality. They do find that
attitudes toward abortion polarized over this period. However, their con-
clusions are suspect because they apply statistical methods appropriate
for interval data to data that are nominal or ordinal. For example, to
study trends in the binary GSS abortion items, they create a scale by
summing the scores for each item and treating the resulting scale as in-
terval (in general, scales created in this fashion are not even ordinal). To
analyze the four-category ordinal NES abortion item, they score the re-
sponse categories 1, 2, 3, 4, and treat the resulting data as interval (see
app. B, table B1). However, it is misleading to treat ordinal data as interval
data because the scores assigned to the categories are arbitrary—only the
relative ranking of the categories is known.

Our article makes several contributions. We develop appropriate meth-
ods for studying polarization in ordinal variables, using these to model
trends in attitudes toward abortion and to ascertain whether or not po-
larization is increasing. We proceed as follows. First, we discuss the rel-
evance of the abortion issue to the literature on culture wars and review
previous work on trends in abortion attitudes. In the data and methods
section, we describe the ordinal NES abortion item analyzed by DiMaggio
et al. (1996) and several problems with their analysis, subsequently ex-
positing (in context) the generalization of the cumulative probit model we
developed to make inferences about trends in latent attitudes toward
abortion. (A general discussion of the model and its implementation—in
the Stata software package—is given in app. A.) We treat the observed
NES item as an ordinal variable, making the usual type of assumption
that responses to this item are the result of quantizing a normally dis-
tributed latent attitude, and we develop models that are consistent with
this assumption. Using the models, we find no evidence for an increase
in polarization between 1972 and 1980. While several other models offer
some support for the view that polarization increased between 1980 and
1994, our best-fitting models, derived from theoretical considerations, do
not support this view; a number of other considerations also suggest the
superiority of these models over those that give evidence of polarization.
Thus, as abortion is the exemplar issue in much of the culture wars
literature, our findings suggest that the concerns expressed therein are
overstated.
is especially difficult to resolve given the lack of common ground between
opposing viewpoints. Instead of a substantial number of moderates who
can work toward compromise, the spectrum of opinion is increasingly
polarized into irreconcilable viewpoints. Unable to negotiate between
these competing moral views, debate thereby ceases to be an attempt to
convince the opposition with reason and becomes instead a struggle for
the power to impose a particular moral order. For these reasons, the new
moral divisions in U:S. society create polarizing tendencies (Hunter 1991,
p. 43). Furthermore, even if the majority of the population is “middle of
the road,” it is argued that people will adopt more extreme views over
time (Nolan 1996). According to Hunter (1991), this sort of discord is
especially dangerous because it is antidemocratic—each side’s position is
seen as a fundamental right that transcends the democratic process. He
argues that the metaphor “culture wars” should be taken literally: “Vio-
lence? The suggestion that violence can occur is not made lightly: culture
wars always precede shooting wars. It is culture, after all, that justifies
the use of violence. We are truly in the midst of a culture war of great
social and historical significance” (1993, p. 30).

Moreover, the divisions between competing moral visions are so deep
“there is no resolution to the culture war in America” (Hunter 1996, p.
253). If culture wars lead to increasing opinion polarization, then the
decline in the proportion of people with moderate views makes it difficult
to resolve politicized moral issues and may increase the likelihood that
advocacy groups will resort to violence to impose their views.

The dispute over abortion rights appears to epitomize the foregoing
arguments (Hunter 1994), as witnessed by a number of recent books whose
titles call attention to the presumed irreconcilable viewpoints of the parties
to this conflict: Abortion: The Clash of Absolutes (Tribe 1992), No Neutral
Ground: Abortion Politics in the Age of Absolutes (O’Connor 1996), The
Abortion Dilemma (Claire 1995), and Between Two Absolutes: Public
Opinion and the Politics of Abortion (Cook, Jelen, and Wilcox 1992). In
an ethnographic study of abortion activists, Luker (1984, p. 2) argues that
pro-choice activist women “share almost no common premises and very
little common language” with antiabortion activist women; in particular,
the worldviews and conceptions of motherhood held by the two different
groups of women are antithetical. Hunter (1994) argues that activist or-
ganizations further contribute to opinion polarization by conducting “sym-
bolic warfare” with their opponents. According to him, activists on both
sides of the abortion dispute attempt to coerce consent by relying on
rhetorical distortions and emotional appeals, with the modern media ex-
acerbating matters by encouraging superficial and confrontational dis-
course. Thus, the debate over abortion is reduced to a struggle over in-
flammatory images that limits the possibilities for compromise: the coat
hanger for pro-choice groups and grisly pictures of aborted fetuses for
pro-life groups. A pro-life activist interviewed by Hunter (1994, p. 67)
states, “This is a visual war we’re fighting here [because of] the 30-second
sound-bite society we live in.” Hunter concludes that the outcome of this
sort of discourse is a “thinning out” of the middle ground, reducing the
chances for democratic compromise.

Others do not view the abortion dispute as a clash between irrecon-
cilable views. Ginsburg’s (1989) study suggests that although pro-life and
pro-choice activists come to hold different opinions on abortion, there are
also significant commonalities in their views, with both types of activists
emphasizing the importance of nurturance, for example. Dillon (1996)
argues that the public opinion literature indicates that Americans have
complex and nuanced views about abortion that are not readily under-
stood using a simple orthodox/progressive dichotomy. She also argues,
from her work on the language of the abortion debate, that the level of
rhetorical complexity featured here is similar to the level encountered in
political discussions of other issues. According to her, activists on both
sides of the fence use arguments that attempt to engage those with op-
posing views, as opposed to summarily dismissing the contrary view out
of hand. If this is the case, then the abortion dispute, while heated, does
not differ from other forms of reasoned democratic discourse, implying
that the concerns of writers on “culture wars” (at least on the abortion
issue) are misdirected.

Nonetheless, Hunter’s concern that increasing polarization portends
outright civil violence should not be taken lightly. As table 1 shows,
abortion violence and protest appear to have escalated in the first half of
the 1990s, culminating in the murder of five abortion providers in 1993-94.
These acts of violence and social protest, widely reported in the media,
constitute the public face of the conflict over abortion and provide prima
facie evidence for the concerns of Hunter and others who worry that the
divide in U.S. society does not permit a peaceful resolution. However,
some caution is in order. First, the level of violence associated with the
abortion issue seems “small,” perhaps reflecting the actions of isolated
individuals or fringe groups. Second, much of the increase in abortion
protest appears to be picketing, and this type of activity cannot be viewed
as antidemocratic. Thus, to use the type of evidence in table 1 to suggest
that polarization in the U.S. public is spiraling out of control, as some
sociologists and journalists have done, seems unwarranted. Further, even
were the prima facie evidence stronger, it has been argued (Ginsburg 1998;
Risen and Thomas 1998) that in the wake of this violence both pro-life
and pro-choice groups adopted more moderate positions in an attempt to
distance themselves from extremists. Therefore, it is conceivable that re-
cent violence will generate a decline in polarization. Finally, and most
TABLE 1
INCIDENTS AGAINST ABORTION PROVIDERS, 1977-94

 

 

1977-83 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994

 

 

 

  

Violence:
Murder ................ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 4
Attempted murder ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 8
Bombing . 8 18 4 2 0 0 2 0 1 3
Arson 13 6 8 7 4 4 6 4 10 16 9 6
Protest:
Picketing . 107 160 139 141 77 151 72 45 292 2,898 2,279 1,407
Clinic blockades . 0 0 0 0 2 182 201 34 41 83 66 25
Blockade arrests ..... 0 0 0 0 290 11,732 12,358 1,363 3,885 2,580 1,236 217

 

SourcE.—National Abortion Federation.
important, no matter how tempting it is to do so, it is simply incorrect
to infer the existence of increasing opinion polarization from the very
outcomes such polarization is held to predict; social psychologists inter-
ested in the relationship between attitudes and behavior learned a similar
lesson many years ago.

In short, it seems clear that in order to ascertain whether or not opinions
are becoming more polarized, as argued by Hunter and other writers who
speak of “culture wars,” it is necessary to directly examine opinion data.
Using this type of evidence, Brint (1992) and Dillon (1996) argued that
the proportion of persons holding extreme views on the abortion issue is
not large enough to evidence polarization. However, there are several
problems with these conclusions. Most important, these authors do not
examine time trends, as would be required to ascertain whether or not
levels of polarization are increasing. Second, even if interest resided in
polarization at a single point in time, the definition of an extreme response
is subjective, and these authors offer no criteria for assessing the extent
of polarization. Having concluded that it is necessary to examine trends
in abortion attitudes to assess the validity of the culture wars hypothesis,
we now examine previous work on temporal trends in abortion attitudes.
berg 1980; Cook et al. 1992). Third, the level of support for abortion has
been fairly stable since the Roe v. Wade decision. While the level of support
increased substantially from the early 1960s to the early 1970s, there was
little change throughout the rest of the 1970s and a slight decline in the
early 1980s (de Boer 1977; Glenn 1987; Gallup Poll News Service 1979;
Granberg and Granberg 1980; Gillespie, Vergert, and Kingma 1987; Page
and Shapiro 1992). By 1985, the net result was that the level of public
support for abortion in the 1972 and 1985 GSS data is almost identical
(Glenn 1987). Recent opinion data show some fluctuation in the support
for abortion. According to Gallup survey data, between 1975 and 1998,
the percentage of people who thought that abortion should be legal in all
circumstances rose from 21% in 1975 to 29% in 1989 and 34% in 1992,
but has since declined to 23% in 1998 (Gallup Poll News Service 1998).
The remarkable thing about this trend is that, despite these fluctuations,
support for legal abortion is about the same as it was 20 years ago.

However, as Hunter (1994) and DiMaggio et al. (1996) note, aggregate
measures of support for a particular issue—that is, the “average” opin-
ion—fail to measure attitude polarization. To see this, simply imagine the
case where the “average opinion” is temporally stable, with individuals
on both sides of the center moving steadily toward the extremes. While
the average opinion is unchanged, the variance is increasing; substan-
tively, increased variability may make compromise between opposing
views more difficult to obtain.

To address the issue of opinion polarization in abortion attitudes,
DiMaggio et al. (1996) used two sources, the NES and the GSS. The NES
is a biennial survey in which respondents were asked, beginning in 1972,
to express their opinion about abortion on a four-point ordinal scale.
The abortion item was not asked in 1974, but was asked in 1976,
1978, ..., 1994. DiMaggio et al. scored the categories 1-4 and treated
the resulting data as interval data, calculating (at each time point) the
sample mean, variance, and kurtosis of the item responses; they then
regressed the series of means, variances, and kurtoses against time. In
1980, the NES response codes were changed, but a subset of 1,320 of the
respondents in that year were asked to respond using both the old and
new response codes; for this year, they used only these respondents, de-
fining the respondent’s score as the average of the responses to the old
and new items. Their analysis suggests that, over the study period, the
variability in opinions increased and the kurtosis decreased, evidencing
increasing polarization.

There are two major problems with DiMaggio et al.’s analysis of the
NES data. First, because the NES item is ordinal, it is not appropriate
to calculate means, variances, and the kurtosis of the item. Second,
DiMaggio et al. (1996) pieced the NES data into a single series combining
the old NES item (1972-78), the average of the old and new items (1980),
and the new NES item (1982-94). We discuss these problems further in
the next section and present appropriate statistical methods for assessing
polarization in ordinal opinion items.

Using six binary items on abortion from the GSS, DiMaggio et al. also
constructed a time series (with 14 points) spanning 1977-94. Each item
was initially scored 1 or 2, and the item scores were added, resulting in
a scale value for each respondent. The resulting scale was treated as
interval data, and the data were analyzed as above. According to the
authors, opinion was already sharply divided at the onset of the series in
1977, and polarization increased over the study period, as evidenced by
increasing dispersion and declining kurtosis, with the decrease in kurtosis
leveling off by the mid-1980s. This analysis is also problematic, as scales
constructed in such a fashion need not even be ordinal, and even if the
items are “unidimensional,” that does not mean that a scale constructed
in the manner above is interval. To analyze these data properly, it would
be necessary either to examine the trends in each item separately or to
construct a probabilistic model of the response process with an underlying
latent attitude toward abortion.

Because the methods we present for analyzing polarization using an
ordinal item are not necessarily appropriate for analyzing the GSS items,
these data are not analyzed in this article. Although we do not accept the
conclusions DiMaggio et al. reached using these data, the reader should
note that it is possible that the GSS data, were they are analyzed properly,
might still suggest that attitudes toward abortion polarized. We return to
that issue in the discussion.
trends. To address this important issue further, we use the 1,320 NES
respondents who answered both the old and new abortion items in 1980.
Table 3 contains the percentages, means, and variances for both sets of
questions. Table 4 contains the cross-classification of responses to both
sets of questions. If these items measure the same latent attitude and the
relationship between the latent attitude and observed responses is the
same for both items, the marginal distributions (see table 3) of the two
items will be identical. If the two marginal distributions are not identical,
either (1) the two items do not measure the same latent variable, in which
case it is not appropriate to combine the years 1972-78 with the years
1980-94, or (2) the relationship between the latent attitude and the ob-
served response is not identical for the two items, in which case assigning
identical sets of scores to the two items and examining trends over the
full period 1972-94 almost certainly confounds the item change in 1980
with any possible true attitudinal change. Inspection of table 3 suggests
that the 1980-94 question elicits a lower level of response in category 2
and a higher level of response in category 4; further, the null hypothe-
sis—that the two marginal distributions are identical—is rejected.’ There-
fore, the two items should not be combined into a single time series, as
was the case in DiMaggio et al.

To understand the effect of the change in question wording on the
conclusions drawn by DiMaggio et al., we need to compare their analysis
(described previously) with an analysis that adjusts the series of means,
variances, and kurtoses for this change. To perform these adjustments,
we (see table 3), used the 1980 data on the 1,320 respondents who an-
swered both the old and new NES items, treating these data as interval
data, as was done in DiMaggio et al. (1996). The means of the old and
new items are, respectively, 2.638 and 2.811, which yields an estimate of
the effect (on the mean) due to the change in wording as 2.811 —
2.638 = .173; we therefore added .173 to the means for the pre-1980 data.
For the data from 1980-94, we used the mean calculated from the new
item. The variance series and the kurtosis series were adjusted similarly,
using .983 for the variance of the old item and 1.140 for the variance of
the new item, and —1.198 for the kurtosis of the old item and —1.319 for
the kurtosis of the new item.

Without adjusting the data for changes due to wording, DiMaggio et
al. (p. 716) regressed their series of means, variances, and kurtoses on
time, leading them to conclude that, between 1972-94, attitudes toward
abortion become more liberal, but also more polarized, as evidenced by
increasing variability and decreasing kurtosis. Using the adjusted mean
series, the estimated slope is .008 (SE = .003; P = .011), slightly smaller
than the estimated slope in DiMaggio et al.; For the variance series, the
estimated slope is .003 (SE = .0009; P = .009); although the estimated
slope is now substantially smaller than that reported by DiMaggio et al.,
note that it is still significantly different from zero at the .05 level, indic-
ative of increasing polarization. For the kurtosis, the estimate is —.004
(SE = .003; P= .163); in DiMaggio et al., the slope is —.013, significantly
different from zero at the .05 level.

Our calculations suggest that when the ordinal NES item is adjusted
for the change in item wording, but still inappropriately treated as interval
data, there is still evidence (although not as strong as before) of increasing
polarization. Similarly, our calculations suggest that attitudes became
more liberal, but not to the extent suggested by DiMaggio et al. However,
these calculations do not bear on the implicit assumption that the old and
new NES items measure the same attitude.

Because the old NES item makes no reference to the legality of
abortion—and therefore seems to tap personal beliefs, while the new NES
item refers to legality and therefore seems to tap something other than
purely personal beliefs—we do not believe it is reasonable to think the
old and new items measure the same attitude. Therefore, in this article,
we model the old NES abortion item using the data from 1972-78 and
the respondents who answered the old item in 1980, and we separately
model the new NES abortion item using the data from 1980-94. We ask
whether polarization increased between 1972 and 1980 (using the old item)
and whether or not polarization increased between 1980 and 1994 (using
the new item).
Vio = we + bin, (1)

where p, is the mean response for time ¢, and ¢,, is a normally distributed
error with mean zero and variance o’. The relationship between Y,7 and
the observed variable Y,"(the response on the four-point scale) is assumed
to be of the form Y, = 1 if ¥i<7, ¥, =2 if .<Vi<z, Y, = 3 if
7,< Yj; <17,, and Y, = 4 if Y,‘>7,, where ¢,, ¢,, and t, are the category
cutpoints. As is well known, not all the parameters (7,,7;,7;,07,4,, ¢ =
1,..., 7) of the cumulative probit model are identified, and two restrictions
must be imposed to set the location and scale of the latent attitude Y*.
Typically, the restrictions 7, = 0 and o* = 1 are used, although other
identifying rules may be more useful in particular applications, as herein.
A graphical interpretation of the model can also be given (see fig. 1).
Respondents with fewer than 7, = —1 units of the latent attitude Y* an-
swer the NES item using response category 1, while respondents between
7, = —1 and 7, = 0 units choose response category 2, and so on.

The usual cumulative probit model cannot be used to model opinion
polarization because the variance of the latent attitude is constrained to
be the same at all time points in this model. We remove this deficiency,
allowing the variance of the latent attitude to depend on time (see Sobel
[1998] for closely related material). In addition, we allow for the possibility
that one or more of the cutpoints may change over time; this feature is
demonstrated in our empirical analysis. In previous work, Terza (1985)
allowed for variable cutpoints in the cumulative probit model, and
McCullagh and Nelder (1989) discussed extensions of the proportional
odds model where the variance is allowed to depend on independent
variables. We also note that the kurtosis of any normal distribution is
zero. Were we, following DiMaggio et al. (1996), to argue that declining
kurtosis evidences bimodality and is therefore also necessary for estab-
lishing increasing polarization and were our model to fit the data, the
null hypothesis of no increase in polarization would be accepted (even if
the variance was increasing). There are two problems with such an ar-
gument. First, kurtosis does not indicate bimodality (Balanda and
MacGillivray 1988). Second, in our view, bimodality does not necessarily
evidence polarization; just consider the case where the modes are “very
close.” However, in our view, it is intuitively clear that an increase in the
variance of normally distributed random variable evidences increasing
polarization.

Under our model, the parameters of substantive interest are p, (the
mean at time ¢) and o/ (the variance at time ¢),t = 1,..., T. To identify
the model, we set 7, and 7, to zero and one, respectively (for all time
periods). In a number of the models considered later, the cutpoint 7, is
allowed to change over time. Using these identification rules, a mean
#4, >0 indicates that more than half the respondents at time ¢ respond
using category 3 or category 4, while fewer than half the respondents use
these categories if »,< 0. The variances are also not identified, but fixing
the cutpoints identifies the scale of the latent variable. As a result, the
absolute magnitude of the variance is not meaningful herein, but the
relative sizes of the variances are identified; that is, the variances can be
compared over time. We test the culture wars hypothesis that polarization
FINDINGS
Old NES Item, 1972-80

We begin by analyzing the old NES item for the years 1972-80 (see table
2). For comparative purposes, we first note that DiMaggio et al. would
have found no trend in the variance (slope = .003; SE = .004) of the
old NES question between 1972 and 1980 by inappropriately treating the
data in the upper part of table 2 as interval data and regressing the series
of variances on time.°® Table 5 presents model evaluation statistics for a
number of the models we fit to these data (models H,-H,). The Bayesian
information criterion, or BIC (Raftery 1995) is calculated here as L, —
df x In(N of cases). Lower levels of BIC indicate preferred models. In
this article, we use L’ to assess the model fit, and we use BIC as a secondary
selection criterion.

First, we considered model H,. In this model, the cutpoint is constant
across years, but the means and variances are allowed to differ in each
year. To insure that the cutpoint 7, > 0, we parameterized the model using
In(7,); similarly, we estimated In(o/). To obtain the residual degrees of
freedom for this model, note that nine parameters are estimated: one
cutpoint, 7,, and two parameters for each of the four time points—the
mean p, of the latent variable and the variance o/. In addition, at each
time, the response proportions must add to one, imposing four additional
constraints. Thus, the number of constraints on the 16 proportions is 13,
hence there are 3 df. The degrees of freedom for the models subsequently
considered can be determined analogously. It is evident that H, fits the
data adequately; the P-value associated with L’(H,) is .87. That is, our
latent variable model accounts for the distribution of the observed NES
item.

We now ask whether or not the variances increased over the study
period, considering model H,, in which the variances (but not the means)
New NES Item, 1980-94

Next, we model the new NES item between 1980 and 1994. If DiMaggio
et al. (1996) had analyzed this series by inappropriately treating the
1980-94 data in table 2 as interval and regressing the series of means,
the natural logarithm of the variances, and the kurtosis series on time,
they would have concluded that there is strong evidence that attitudinal
variability increased between 1980 and 1994 (slope .004; SE = .001), and
somewhat weaker evidence suggesting that attitudes may have liberalized
over this period (slope .009; SE = .005). For the kurtosis series, the slope
is —.0013 with standard error .004.’

Table 5 presents model evaluation statistics for a number of the models
we considered. Under model M,, the means and variances are allowed to
vary across survey years; however, the cutpoint 7; does not vary by year.
It is evident that this model does not fit the data adequately (P < .001).
However, before concluding that the data are incompatible with the hy-
pothesis of a normally distributed latent attitude toward legalized abor-
tion, we reexamine the assumption in model M, that the cutpoints are
constant from 1980 to 1994. It is important to note that by allowing all
the cutpoints to vary freely over time, the proportions in table 2 can be
reproduced exactly. That is, a model with variable cutpoints can always
be obtained that will fit these data, whether or not the model correctly
describes the underlying process generating the data. Consequently, we
believe that models with variable cutpoints are useful only when theo-
retical considerations strongly suggest their use, and we would further
argue that hypotheses about cutpoint changes should be empirically
testable.

To begin our reexamination, note that for categories 1 and 2 in table
B1, the language in the NES abortion item clearly specifies the circum-
stances under which the law should permit abortion, but this is not the
case for category 3. Whereas the phrase “permit abortion for reasons other
than rape, incest, or danger to the woman’s life” demarcates response
category 3 from category 2, the circumstances that constitute the clear
establishment of a need for an abortion are not fixed by the item, leaving
respondents to demarcate the choice between categories 3 and 4. Signif-
icantly, the item also does not say who establishes the “need” for an
abortion. Is it the woman and her doctor, or is it the state? As a result
of this ambiguity, we believe that there are good reasons to suspect that
changes in the public discourse on abortion rights caused this point of
demarcation to change after 1989 as the result of media and activist
organizations’ response to the 1989 Webster decision. In July 1989, the
Supreme Court, in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, rendered the
most important legal ruling on abortion since Roe v. Wade in 1973. The
Webster decision ruled that restrictions on access to legal abortions were
not unconstitutional, upholding a Missouri statute prohibiting the use of
public facilities to perform abortion and requiring physicians to test for
fetal viability after 20 weeks of pregnancy (Cook 1998).

The Webster ruling indicated that states could now attempt to restrict
abortion access (Garrow 1994), and as a result, the abortion issue was
thrust into the political arena as state legislatures proposed legislation
restricting public funding for abortions, requiring parental consent, and
testing for fetal viability (Saletan 1997). Subsequently, the Supreme
Court’s willingness to approve restrictive legislation in Webster was sup-
ported by the 1992 Planned Parenthood v. Casey decision, which upheld
the constitutionality of restrictive legislation in Pennsylvania that required
a 24-hour waiting period for abortions, parental consent, and reports on
abortions performed in publicly funded institutions. Currently, 29 states
have passed legislation requiring parental consent of minors’ abortion
decisions, 14 require a delay following state-directed counseling, 13 restrict
private or public insurance coverage, 34 restrict Medicaid coverage, and
26 restrict postviability abortions.*

Although most people may not understand the intricacies of the Webster
decision (see Hunter [1994] for a depiction of the public’s poor under-
standing of Supreme Court rulings about abortion), we argue that the
public discourse on abortion after Webster affected respondents’ inter-
pretation of the NES abortion item. In particular, we argue that the public
discourse affected the semantics of category 3 of the NES question (see
app. B), which stresses the legitimacy of abortion under the subjectively
defined circumstances of “clearly established need,” by associating it with
increased government control over what is and is not a legitimate abortion.
Even though the proposed restrictions of the Webster decision may not
prohibit most women from obtaining abortions, many pro-choice organ-
izations viewed them as a direct threat to the Roe v. Wade framework.
The National Organization for Women, for example, has argued that
although late-term abortions constitute only a tiny fraction of all abortions,
bans on late-term and partial-birth abortions are worded ambiguously
and “are intended to restrict access to all abortions.” In a review of the
politics of abortion rights, Saletan (1997) argued that the Webster case
galvanized the pro-choice movement to reframe its defense of abortion
rights. For example, the National Abortion Rights Action League
(NARAL) adopted the new slogan “Who Decides—You or Them?” Saletan
(1997, p. 118) argues that the value of this slogan was that it could appeal
to a broader audience: “Voters with conservative instincts who shied away
from the outright prohibition of immoral behavior could embrace
NARAL’s new message as a rejection of big government. In the minds
of these voters, ‘them’ meant nosy, corrupt politicians and bureaucrats;
‘you’ meant families and communities.”

Before the Webster decision, many NES respondents may have assumed
that establishing the “need” for an abortion was the result of a private
decision between a woman and her doctor. At the time, support for abor-
tion in cases where the desire for an abortion was established in consul-
tation with a doctor was high. For example, before the Webster decision,
a CBS/New York Times survey in April 1989 indicated that 72% of those
with opinions said that “if a woman wants to have an abortion and her
doctor agrees to it,” she should be allowed to have an abortion (Dionne
1989). However, the abortion discourse post-Webster encourages respon-
dents to think that state governments will increasingly intervene in the
doctor-patient relationship by placing additional restrictions on abortions
that weaken the original legal framework of Roe v. Wade. In other words,
who will decide when the need for an abortion has been “clearly estab-
lished”—the woman and her doctor or the state? As a result, respondents
may now associate the ambiguous language of the third category of the
NES abortion question with increased state control over what constitutes
a legitimate need for abortion. We argue that, as a result, the cutpoint
separating categories 3 and 4 decreased post-Webster.

The rationale for the foregoing argument can also be seen from figure
1. Respondents whose latent attitude toward abortion (Y*) is less than —1
respond that the law should never permit abortion. Similarly, respondents
with values of Y* between —1 and 0 respond that the law should permit
abortion only in cases of rape, incest, or danger to the mother’s life. In
both of these cases, the circumstances under which abortion is permissible
are clearly specified by the item, and thus there is no reason to hypothesize
a change in cutpoints pre- and post-Webster. Now consider two hypo-
thetical respondents. Suppose that while the first respondent would en-
dorse abortion in circumstances other than rape, incest, or danger to the
mother’s life, he/she also favors restrictive legislation requiring fetal vi-
ability testing, parental consent, or bans on public funds for abortions.
In terms of figure 1, this respondent’s value of Y* is between 0 and ¢,,,
where ¢,, represents the dividing line between those who agree or do not
agree with increased state control over what constitutes a legitimate abor-
tion. In contrast, suppose the second respondent does not agree with these
proposed restrictions, but also does not think abortion should be legal in
every situation. In terms of figure 1, this respondent’s value of Y* is
between ¢,, and ¢,. If the NES item analyzed here were administered to
these two respondents prior to 1989, both will answer the item using
response category 3.

However, as argued above, the discourse on abortion rights after 1989
may cause the cutpoint ¢, to decrease because the phrase “clearly estab-
lished need” is now associated with the threat of increased state con-
trol—fetal viability tests, parental consent laws, bans on public funding
etc. How would this affect individual responses to the NES abortion
question? After the ruling, the first respondent will still answer using
response category 3 despite the shift in the third cutpoint, because he or
she agrees with the proposed restrictions. In contrast, however, the second
respondent is now forced to choose either category 4, requiring him/her
to endorse abortion under a wider range of circumstances than he/she
would ideally want to permit, or to choose category 3, which is now
associated with increased state control in regulating a woman’s “need”
for an abortion. Presumably, if the second respondent’s value of Y* is
“very close” to t;,, he/she will choose category 3, and if this value is “very
close” to t,, category 4 will be chosen. Thus, it is reasonable to hypothesize,
as herein, that there is a point t,,, between ¢,, and ¢, such that respondents
with more than ¢,, units of Y* choose category 4, while respondents with
between 0 and t,, units of Y* choose category 3. t,, is not the same as the
hypothetical cutpoint ¢,, because ¢t,, represents the dividing line between
respondents based upon the hypothetical division of category 3 into two
distinct categories (resulting in a total of 5 categories). In contrast, t,,
represents the shift of the cutpoint dividing categories 3 and 4 in the case
where there are only 4 categories. In other words, after the Webster de-
cision, the third cutpoint shifts to the left from ¢, to t,,.

In light of this hypothesized effect of the abortion discourse after 1989
on the NES item, we modified model M,, allowing the cutpoint separating
categories 3 and 4 to change in 1990 and subsequent years. The resulting
model (M,) fits the data very well (P = .41), and the estimated cutpoints
(standard errors in parentheses) for the first and second time periods are,
respectively, .495 and .364, consistent with our hypothesis that the cutpoint
is smaller in 1990 and thereafter. To test whether or not there is a sig-
nificant difference between the two cutpoints, recall that we estimated
the natural logarithms of these quantities; on this scale, the difference
between the two maximum-likelihood estimates is In (7,) — In (7,,) = .305
(SE = .057). Hence a one-tailed test of the null hypothesis that the cut-
points are identical versus the alternative that the second is smaller leads
to rejecting the null in favor of the alternative at the .001 level.

We now ask whether or not the variance of abortion attitudes increased
over the period 1980-94. To address this issue, we consider model M,, in
which the variance is constant and the means are unrestricted. This model
also fits the data adequately (P > .05), consistent with the conclusion of
no trend in the variance. However, the conditional likelihood ratio test
of M, versus M, (L’[M,] — L’[M,] = 13.77;df = 7) has P value of .055,
suggesting possible heterogeneity in the variation across years. DiMaggio
et al. (1996) fit a linear model to the variance estimates in their data,
claiming the variance increases over time. In model M,, the logarithms
of the variances follow a linear model: In(o/) = a@ + B(¢ — 1980). From
table 5 it is clear that the data offer no grounds for preferring M, to M,,
as there is almost no improvement in L’ at the cost of one degree of
freedom (L’[M,] — L’[M,] = 0.33;df = 1); that is, the null hypothesis of
no linear trend in the variance is not rejected.]

Figure 2 plots the estimated means and variances under model M,
against time; recall that because these parameters are identified only up
to location and scale, only comparisons amongst the means and the var-
iances are of interest. The estimated o/ fluctuate irregularly, consistent
with the hypothesis that the variation does not increase between 1980
and 1994. However, although there is no obvious trend in these estimates,
it also appears that the variance may be larger in 1986 or 1992 than in
the other years; similarly, the variance may be smaller in 1990 than in
the other years. Ex post facto, this suggests considering models where the
variance may be smaller (larger) in a given year than in other years, testing
such models against M,. There are eight such models, each adding a single
parameter to M,. If we had a priori substantive reasons for focusing on
pre specified years, then it would be legitimate to estimate a subset of
these models, but as this is not the case, all eight models should be con-
sidered, which raises the issue of overfitting the data. Therefore, to test
the null hypothesis of constant variation against the alternative of non-
constant variance, we test each model against M, using a significance
level of .05/8 (Miller 1981). Of the eight models considered, the best fitting
(M,) allows the variance to differ in 1986. However, the likelihood-ratio
test of M, versus M, is not significant at the .05/8 level, and the BIC
statistic (Raftery 1995) suggests that M, should be preferred to M,.

To this point, the results suggest selecting either M, or M, as the pre-
ferred model; importantly, neither of these suggests that attitudes toward
legalized abortion have polarized over the period 1980-94. Of course,
many models other than those considered here are nested between M,
and M,. However, because we think it unlikely that the conclusions about
polarization one would draw from M, or M, would change by choosing
such a model, we limit our selection to these two models, choosing M,
over M, on the basis of the BIC statistic.

Having established that the variance did not increase between 1980
and 1994, we now turn attention to modeling the means, using M, as a
baseline model. We first compare model M,, in which the means are
constant, with model M,; the conditional likelihood-ratio test (L’[M,]| —
L’(M,| = 26.97;df = 7;P <.001) suggests some heterogeneity. Following
DiMaggio et al. (1996), we model the means as a linear function of time
in model M,; the model does not fit the data as well as M, (L’[M,]—
L’|M,] = 25.03;df = 6;P <.001), and the fit is virtually identical to that
of M,.

Figure 2 suggests the mean is larger in 1992 than in the other years;
therefore model M, allows the mean to differ in this year. Note that model
M, does not fit better than M, (L’[M,] — L’|M,] = 4.34; df = 7;P = .74)
and that if the BIC statistic is used to select between these models, M,
is preferred. Note also that M, is preferred to the more parsimonious M,
on these grounds. Finally, although M, does not fit the data uncondition-
ally at the .05 level, the difference L’(M,) — L’(M,) = 22.63 on one degree
of freedom suggests a large improvement, and even though the contri-
bution from M, does not have a chi-square distribution, the chi-square
distribution for differences between L’ values is often approximately valid
in such cases; assuming the validity of this approximation, the P value
is less than .001, substantially less than .05/8.

Our results thus lead to selecting model M, to describe the data; table
6 reports the estimated variance, the two estimated means (u, is the mean
for all years except 1992), and the two estimated cutpoints. The estimated
cutpoint prior to the Webster decision is .491, while the estimated cutpoint
for 1990 and later is .369. As before, the ordering is consistent with our
a priori expectations, and the differences between the estimates is signif-
icant, on the basis of a 1 tailed test, at the .001 level of significance.
Although we cannot explain why attitudes are more favorable to legalized
abortion in 1992 than in the other years, the evidence does not support
the hypothesis that Americans are becoming more favorable to legalized
abortion over the study period. Finally, recalling that the variance is
constant and that the kurtosis is also constant because the latent attitude
is normally distributed, the data offer no support for the hypothesis of
increasing polarization.

Our substantive conclusions about the 1980-94 period are obtained
using models for ordinal variables in which the cutpoint separating the
third and fourth categories of the NES item changes after the Webster
decision. The models fit the data well, whereas models that do not allow
this cutpoint change do not fit the data. We have also given good reasons
to expect such a change and correctly specified the direction of this change.
Further, the empirical impact of this change seems reasonable; using the
preferred model M,, in 1990, 14.4% of the respondents are predicted to
fall in category 3, 41.5% in category 4. If the pre-Webster cutpoint were
used instead, 4.6% of the respondents would be reallocated from category
4 to category 3. In addition, the best-fitting model with a cutpoint change
occurs at the time point we identified a priori; no model with a cutpoint
change in another year fits the data at the .05 level. For the model with
a cutpoint shift in 1982, L’ = 35.3 (df = 6; P < .001). For 1984 L’ =
33.4 (df = 6; P < .001), and for 1986, L’? = 23.3 (df = 6; P < .001). For
the model with a shift in 1988, L’ = 11.89 (df = 6; P = .06); the near
fit of this model is explained by its similarity to M,. For the model with
a cutpoint shift in 1992, L’ = 28.0 (df = 6; P < .001); for the model with
a shift in 1994, L’? = 31.3 (df = 6; P < .001). Despite the strong justifi-
cations we have given, a critic could always attack our conclusions, ar-
guing that the assumptions used to construct the statistical model are
faulty or that our use of L’ to measure both goodness of fit and aid in
the model selection process is misguided; for example, obviously one could
argue that instead of a cutpoint change, the latent variable follows some
unspecified distribution other than the normal after 1988. Similarly, as
the model parameters are not identified (see eq. 2 in app. A), conclusions
about the variability of the series can depend on the parameterization of
the model. Although we believe our parameterization offers the most
plausible representation of the behavioral process pre- and post-Webster
respondents might have employed in responding to the new NES item,
a critic could always reject our line of argument. We cannot address all
these potential criticisms, nor can we handle all of these within the mod-
eling framework proposed herein, and even were we to construct a more
general framework, untestable assumptions used in the model construc-
tion process would still be a target for criticism.

Although we believe our analysis is compelling, it is simply less defin-
itive than would be the case were the NES item measured at the interval
or ratio level. For the sake of completeness and so that the reader may
judge all the evidence for him or herself, we now report the findings we
would have obtained had we confined attention to models without a
cutpoint change. In that vein, recall that under model M,, the means and
variances were allowed to vary over the survey years, but the cutpoint
was the same in all years; we rejected this model because it did not fit
the data at any reasonable significance level, using L’. However, given
the large sample size, one might try to argue that model M, provides a
reasonable description of the data (this is not an argument we would
endorse, but it is not an uncommon type of argument). Were we to proceed
along such lines, a natural model to consider next is M,; this is a special
case of model M, in which the logarithms of the variances change linearly
over time. Were we to accept the results from model M, at face value,
the trend coefficient is significantly different from zero at the .05 level
(.023; SE = .005). However, if we use the conditional-likelihood test, M,
is inferior to M, (L’[M,|— L’[M,] = 13.75;df = 6;P = .03), which sug-
gests that a linear trend does not adequately capture the temporal change
in attitudinal variability. In addition, the variances were modeled using
polynomials up to order 3 with no improvement. Next, inspection of the
variances estimated under model M, suggested model M,,, in which there
are three distinct variances (o; for 1980, 1984, and 1988; 07 for 1986; and
o; for 1990, 1992, and 1994). Under this model, o; is greater than of (using
the .05 level), suggesting (with the exception of 1986) that polarization is
higher in the 1990s than the 1980s. A similar pattern shows up in model
M,,; this model is obtained from M,, by constraining the means (except
for the mean in 1992) to be identical.

The ad hoc models M,, and M,, do not support the hypothesis that
polarization is monotonically increasing over time, but they do suggest
Sociologists and journalists have argued that recent “cultural wars” over
politicized moral issues have resulted in rising levels of attitude polari-
zation and social conflict. According to these writers, the level of polar-
ization and fragmentation among the public as a whole is so irreconcilable
that democratic compromise on these issues is increasingly difficult, posing
a strong threat to the viability of American political institutions. The
controversy over abortion exemplifies the concerns of these writers, who
often use this as the leading example with which to make their case.
Typically, however, no empirical evidence of increased attitudinal polar-
ization is presented; rather, the purported increase is indirectly inferred
from the outcomes with which such polarization is (in theory) associated.
In an important contribution, DiMaggio et al. (1996) examined temporal
trends in public opinion data to assess this thesis, finding little evidence
of increasing polarization, with opinions about abortion constituting the
major exception. In general, however, their conclusions may be misleading
because they analyze nominal and ordinal opinion items using methods
designed for interval measurements. In particular, DiMaggio et al. in-
appropriately analyze both the GSS data and the NES data on abortion.

We develop new methods for studying opinion polarization using or-
dinal data. In our model, a generalization of the cumulative probit model,
the latent attitude toward abortion follows a normal distribution at each
time point. In contrast to DiMaggio et al., our results do not suggest an
increase in polarization. Interestingly, with respect to abortion, one of the
most controversial public issues, our results suggest support for the more
general conclusion in DiMaggio et al.: public opinion has not polarized
much over the last 25 years. Nonetheless, two caveats are in order. First,
because our model is not appropriate for analyzing the GSS data on
abortion, our conclusions are based solely on the analysis of the NES
item; it is conceivable that an appropriate analysis of the GSS data would
find evidence of increasing polarization. Second, the latent variable in our
analysis is assumed to follow a normal distribution, and in our analysis
of the 1980-94 data, we allowed the cutpoint separating categories 3 and
4 to change after 1988. Although we offered both theoretical and empirical
support for this analysis, because we are using ordinal data and must
therefore make assumptions that cannot be fully tested, our analysis will
always be open to criticism by those who want to maintain that polari-
zation in abortion attitudes has been increasing. However, at this point,
we believe that our analyses are strong enough to place the burden of
proof upon the would-be critic. In future work on this topic, we intend
to extend our model to include distributions other than the normal, and
we intend to develop appropriate methods for studying polarization when
multiple items are used to measure the underlying attitude (as is the case
in the GSS).

Do the culture wars exist? Proponents of the culture wars hypothesis
claim that America is becoming increasingly divided over politicized
moral issues. Abortion is an issue where the debate is particularly divisive.
Hunter (1991, 1996), for instance, argues that because of the sound-bite
society we live in, special interest groups and political organizations at-
tempt to inflame public opinion about abortion and undermine their op-
ponents rather than participate in genuine debate. This contributes to a
“hollowing out” of the possibility of achieving consensus and raises the
specter of violence as a means of imposing one’s beliefs upon others.
However, our results show that there is no evidence that Americans as a
whole became more divided over abortion rights between 1972 and 1980
nor between 1980 and 1994. In the lag between submission and publi-
cation of this article, new NES data have become available, and we have
extended the 1980-94 analysis to 2000. In addition to models analogous
to those considered in this paper, we designed new models to ascertain
whether polarization had increased during the 1990s. Our results indicate
no increase in polarization in abortion attitudes between 1980 and 2000
(complete results available from authors on request). While the contem-
porary culture wars have been portrayed as a threat to democratic in-
stitutions, our evidence suggests that, at least with respect to the debate
over abortion rights, the American public is no more divided now than
in the past.
where ® denotes the distribution function of the standard normal distri-
bution, and for all x,7)(x;0) = —%,7,(x;0) = %. As
T(x; 9) — wx; 8) «Lr (x; 8) + AT — (wx; 8) + AQT

30658) = a(x; 0) ~ K,0(x; 0)

 

» (A2)

it is evident that at each level of the covariates, the parameters p(x; 0)and
o(x; #)are identified only up to location and scale. In the usual cumulative
probit model, it is assumed that neither the cutpoints 7;(x;@) nor the
variance o’(x;6) depends on x. Therefore, only two restrictions need be
imposed to identify the model; the restrictions 7,(x;0) = 7, = 0 and
o°(x;0) = o* = 1 are conventionally used, though other restrictions could
be used and might be more desirable in certain types of applications.

We now briefly discuss maximum-likelihood estimation of the extended
model. We assume the parameter vector @ is identified (as is the case for
the models considered in this paper).

Let (x;,y;),2 = 1, ..., , denote the observed data (hereafter D), and,
forj = 1,...,J, let y, = lify, = j, otherwise. The log likelihood is

n J
InL(@6;D) = >) dV y,nInprob(Y = j|X, = x)In

i=1j=1

= > Dy, ln (Glz\(x; 0] — Gz,_,(x; I, (A3)

i=1j=1
To estimate the parameters and their standard errors, a modified Newton-
Raphson algorithm using numerical derivatives for (A4) and (AS), imple-
mented in the Stata package, was used. For further details, see the de-
scription of the linear form routine in the section on maximum-
likelihood estimation in the Stata reference manual (StataCorp 1997). The
code used to implement the model in Stata is available online from the
authors.

Because our covariate (X) is discrete, we (in order to avoid computing
the log likelihood for each individual observation) maximized the equiv-
alent grouped data log likelihood:
REFERENCES

Adamek, Raymond. 1994. “Public Opinion and Roe v. Wade: Measurement Difficulties:
The Polls—a Review.” Public Opinion Quarterly 58:409-18.

Agresti, Alan. 1990. Categorical Data Analysis. New York: Wiley.

Amemiya, T. 1985. Advanced Econometrics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press

Balanda, Kevin P, and H. L. MacGillivray 1988. “Kurtosis: A Critical Review.”
American Statistician 42:111-19.

Bennett, William J. 1992. The De-Valuing of America: The Fight for Our Culture and
Our Children. New York: Summit Books.

Blake, Judith, and Jorge del Pinal. 1981. “Negativism, Equivocation, and Wobbly
Assent: Public ‘Support’ for the Pro-Choice Platform on Abortion.” Demography 18:
309-20.

Bloom, James D. 1992. Left Letters: The Culture Wars of Mike Gold and Joseph
Freeman. New York: Columbia University Press.

Bolton, Richard, ed. 1992. Culture Wars: Documents from the Recent Controversies in
the Arts. New York: New Press.
Brint, Steven. 1992. “What If They Gave a War . . . ?” Contemporary Sociology 21
(4): 438-40.

Bumpass, Larry L. 1997. “The Measurement of Public Opinion on Abortion: The
Effects of Survey Design.” Family Planning Perspectives 29 (4): 177-80.

Claire, Miriam. 1995. The Abortion Dilemma. New York: Plenum Press.

Cook, Elizabeth, Ted Jelen, and Clyde Wilcox. 1992. Between Two Absolutes: Public
Opinion and the Politics of Abortion. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Cook, Kimberly J. 1998. Divided Passions: Public Opinions on Abortion and the Death
Penalty. Boston: Northeastern University Press.

Davis, Nancy, and Robert Robinson. 1996. “Are the Rumors of War Exaggerated?
Religious Orthodoxy and Moral Progressivism in America.” American Journal of
Sociology 102:756-87.

de Boer, Connie. 1977. “The Polls: Abortion.” Public Opinion Quarterly 41:553-64.

Dillon, Michele. 1996. “The American Abortion Debate.” Pp. 115-32 in The American
Culture Wars, edited by J. L. Nolan, Jr. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

Dionne, E. J., Jr. 1989. “Poll on Abortion Finds the Nation Is Sharply Divided.” New
York Times, April 26, pp. 1, 13.

DiMaggio, Paul, John Evans, and Bethany Bryson. 1996. “Have Americans’ Social
Attitudes Become More Polarized?” American Journal of Sociology 102:690-755.
Gallup Poll News Service. 1979. The Gallup Poll: Public Opinion 1978. Wilmington,

Del.: Scholarly Resources.

. 1998. Opinion Poll. January 16-18. (MRDF) Gallup Poll News Service.

Garrow, David J. 1994. Liberty and Sexuality. New York: Macmillan.

Gates, Henry Louis, Jr. 1992. Loose Canons: Notes on the Culture Wars. New York:
Oxford Universtiy Press.

Gillespie, Michael, Elisabeth Vergert, and Johannes Kingma. 1987. “Secular Trends in
Abortion Attitudes.” Journal of Psychology 122:323-41.

Ginsburg, Faye. 1989. Contested Lives: The Abortion Debate in an American
Community. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Gitlin, Todd. 1995. The Twilight of Common Dreams: Why America Is Wracked by
Culture Wars. New York: Metropolitan Books.

Glenn, Norval D. 1987. “Social Trends in the United States: Evidence from Sample
Surveys.” Public Opinion Quarterly 51:5109-S126.

Granberg, Donald, and Beth Wellman Granberg. 1980. “Abortion Attitudes,
1965-1980: Trends and Determinants.” Family Planning Perspectives 12:250-61.
Hall, Mimi. 1998. “Polls: Shift in Support for Abortion.” USA Today, January 21, p.

1A.

Hartman, Geoffrey H. 1991. Minor Prophecies: The Literary Essay in the Culture
Wars. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Hochschild, Jennifer. 1995. Facing Up to the American Dream. Princeton, N_J.:
Princeton University Press.

Hunter, James D. 1991. Culture Wars. New York: Basic Books

. 1993. “Covering the Culture War: Before the Shooting Begins.” Columbia

Journalism Review, July/August, pp. 29-32.

. 1994. Before the Shooting Begins. New York: Free Press.

. 1996. “Reflections on the Culture Wars Hypothesis.” Pp. 243-56 in The
American Culture Wars, edited by J. L. Nolan, Jr. Charlottesville: University Press
of Virginia.

Jacoby, Russell. 1994. Dogmatic Wisdom: How the Culture Wars Divert Education
and Distract America. New York: Doubleday.

Jaffe, Frederick S., Barbara L. Lindheim, and Philip R. Lee. 1981 Abortion Politics.
New York: McGraw-Hill.

Luker, Kristin. 1984. Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
McCullagh, Peter, and John A. Nelder. 1989. Generalized Linear Models. New York:
Chapman and Hall.

Miller, Rupert G., Jr. 1981. Simultaneous Statistical Inference, 2d ed. New York:
Springer-Verlag.

Nolan, James L., Jr., ed. 1996. The American Culture Wars. Charlottesville: University
Press of Virginia.

O’Connor, Karen. 1996. No Neutral Ground? Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Page, Benjamin I., and Robert Y. Shapiro. 1992. The Rational Public. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Raftery, Adrian E. 1995. “Bayesian Model Selection in Social Research” (with
discussion). Sociological Methodology 25:111-95.

Risen, James, and Judy L. Thomas. 1998. Wrath of Angels: The American Abortion
War. New York: Basic Books.

Saletan, William. 1997. “Electoral Politics and Abortion: Narrowing the Message.” Pp.
111-23 in Abortion Wars, edited by Rickie Solinger. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.

Shor, Ira. 1986. Cultwre Wars: School and Society in the Conservative Restoration,
1969-1984. Boston: Routledge.

Sobel, Michael E. 1998. “Some Log-Linear and Log-Nonlinear Models for Ordinal
Scales with Midpoints, with an Application to Public Opinion Data.” Sociological
Methodology 28:263-92.

StataCorp. 1997. Stata Statistical Software: Release 5.0. College Station, Tex.: Stata
Corporation.

Terza, J. V. 1985. “Ordinal Probit: A Generalization.” Communications in Statistics
(Theory and Methods) 14:1-11.

Tribe, Laurence H. 1990. Abortion: The Clash of Absolutes. New York: W. W. Norton.

Wuthnow, Robert. 1996. Christianity and Civil Society. Valley Forge, Pa.: Trinity
Press International.
